 You stayed there 12 years then as a carpenter? 11 I think it was. And you liked it there apparently? Yeah, we liked it. We did all right there. Well, until they had been in Sweden, then my wife's shoes were in the carpentry. And I was a carpenter. She wanted to come up here in Alaska again. One night when I came home from work, she said, how about setting the house up for sale and take a trip to Sweden? So we did. I had to spend a little money on it. I did it myself. And I had to pay for the carpentry. I had to spend a little money on it. I did it myself. So when I bought it, I asked $2,700 for it. But I used them down to $2,200. And I paid $200 down and $16 a month. So that was a good deal then? Yeah. And then I worked there for a long time for Swedes. Mostly Swedes I worked for, or Swedes bosses. And we went to Sweden. And then after we had been there, when we came to Sweden, I know my dad, he didn't like it because I hadn't taught the kids Swedish. You had one child with the Swedes then? Two of them. Both of them? Yeah. One was five, and you were five, and I was ten. And he didn't like that I hadn't taught him Swedish. So like your wife now, did you talk Swedish to each other when you met in the 1930s? No. It was all English? Yeah. I had been there for ten years then. And you had no reason to use the Swedish? No. She can talk Swedish, and you know all the Swedes. But you didn't... No, I didn't have to. So your dad, he reminded you that you had two Swedish children there, and they couldn't speak Swedish? Right. You were in trouble. Yeah. So what did you say? Well, I don't know what to say. What could I say? I couldn't say anything. Just have to sit on and swallow. Did they learn any Swedish then, how do you say, about the Kremlin? No, but boy, he learned Swedish after he told her dad. He spoke Swedish all the time. Oh, her dad? Yeah, out there on the farm. He married a girl from Sweden, and they all spoke Swedish. So he knew quite a bit, but he's forgotten it now, I guess. He came back from Sweden. We stayed here on the farm for a while, and then we went out again. I had a car waiting for me here in the Vlaska, in Salzburg. So we set out for California again. We came out there, and then we had a place to stay. You couldn't hardly get a place to stay. You couldn't get a place to stay. Well, it was a Russian California at that time then. I don't know what it was, because you couldn't get a place to rent or nothing. They didn't want the kids. Oh, I see. But she had changed her mind, then, your wife, of going or staying here. Well, no, I don't know. We both got, I don't know, we didn't know what we wanted. She didn't want you to be a farmer out in Strasbourg. There's good land, you know, there. No, I didn't want to do that. You didn't care about farming? No, no, no. But you could have started a farm then if you wanted to, though. Oh, maybe I could have. You didn't know how to do it. Oh, yeah. No, I didn't know how to do this farming in this country, because I never worked on a farm here in this country. Yeah, but you watched your father-in-law, though. He worked his farm. Yeah, well, but you know, he worked it there from here and then he was doing Sweden. But didn't he have broken you in for a while there, a couple of years? He never came out. What else would I know? So you went out there? Went out there, yeah. We stayed. We didn't like it, going to Sweden. We had seen so many pretty places. So we got discussed that in California there's nothing in California that I think is pretty. In the summertime, everything is burned up. You discovered it after you visited Sweden? Yeah. Well, I don't know if I discovered that, but anyway. It was a fact the second time. So we went back. We stayed over the winter, because the kids had to get to school. Spring came, we went back to, it was in 1948, we went back out to Omaha. It took us five days to come back again. And we went up here in Keystone. Do you know where Keystone is here in Omaha? Yes, it's up there. Yeah. Yes. And... It's on the... That's a nice place up there. It's the northwest side, isn't it? Northwest, yeah. Northwest. Yeah. Of Omaha. Yeah. And about an acre of ground there, and about a mile of house. I had a little money, I guess, then, and wanted to spend it. Well, you still had money left. Oh, yeah. Even I had a friend in Sweden who had a little money. We paid $2,000 for the lot, for the acre. It sounds expensive at that time. It was a good piece of land then. Yeah. It was, no, of course, this is 50 years ago. No, that's not 50, that's 40, about 40 years ago. It was an acre. An acre, yeah, about an acre. And you were ready to build a house. I built a house, too. Yes. I built it in, we were staying with people because we put an ad in the paper that we needed a place to stay. And there was a Danish couple, she was Danish, wasn't she? Yeah. That answered our ad. They were going to go on a vacation to Colorado, and they needed somebody to stay in the place. So they took us in. I was down on 27th and married it, I think it was. I used to have 27th and I can't think of it. Ames. Ames, yeah. You know where Ames is? Yes. So we stayed there, but they were on a vacation. I built my house. I built a house. And I had a roof on and everything, but I hadn't finished the inside. I had the doors on and outside doors on. So we moved in there among the tuba floors. And I went to work. It was a big living room. Well, it was partitioned off. So you didn't have regular work at the time? I didn't want to work. I wanted to build it, get it up anyway. As soon as I got on the roof so I could move in there, I looked for work. And the one that built my foundation, he was a Swede too, Carlson was his name. He did work for a contractor by the name of Timmons in Omaha. And he wanted somebody to run the work. He told me about me. He came out to me. The contractor came out to me and asked me if I wanted to go to work for him. And I did. Stayed with him for ten years as a foreman. Made pretty good money. And then you finished up your house? I finished that in my spare time. It took me four years to finish it the way I wanted it. So then you had clear sailing? Then you had clear sailing to stay in Omaha? Yeah. Then we couldn't move around then. Because your children were getting bigger then and they went to school. Oh yeah. Started to leave home. So, and here we are now. I don't know if there's anything else to say. So how did you, so you didn't work in any place then when you had labor problems like factories and different shops and so on. You always worked as a carpenter outside? Here in this country, yeah. And you belonged to the union? Yeah, like I said, I was lucky too. I had luck with that, I could join the union as a flood-fledged carpenter, which I wasn't at that time. They didn't check you out either? Well, I used to have to make them believe that I was. But there was no test to be taken or anything? Not, not, no. There was on the union, on the union if I had worked as an apprentice, if I had joined as an apprentice, they would have had to take a test. But this way I joined. You were like a flood-fledged carpenter? Yeah, because the boss on the job, the contractor, he paid our union dues to get in there, to join. I was lucky in a way that way. So he actually told you to join, wasn't it the other way around? Right, yeah, because they had trouble, we didn't know then at that time. How was Omaha in the 30s and 40s? Was it a strong union town in all kinds of places? No, no it wasn't. No, no. It was not like Chicago then, for instance, they were not strong unions. Yeah, but they busted up during the Depression. They went to pieces. Yeah, I couldn't keep up my union dues either. What happened then? Did you have to join again? After, yeah, after the times got better, started building and all that, I joined the union again. The same unions as I... So was that the last time you visited Sweden with your wife in 1941? No, no, no, I've been there twice after that. I've been there three times back and forth now. Were some of your brothers there? I was there when I was 80 years old. My daughter, you met her down there? Yes. And my wife, they went to Sweden in 77. My daughter, she wanted to go to Sweden and meet her cousins there, because she has a lot of cousins there. She asked her if she wanted Mom to go with her, because she couldn't take them to Sweden. She couldn't, well now she can, a little. And she did, she wanted that, so they went in 77. I went in 78, took her with me. So she's been there, how many times has she been there? Three. Four times. So how has Sweden changed now in your eyes, leaving it in 1926 and being here in Omaha? Oh, that changed a lot. But you know, my impression, and I forgot to tell that during the course here now, my impression of this country, coming to this country, riding the train here to Omaha, it was nothing to brag about. I would have gone back the next day if I had money. Because in the country, the farm, they were not painted or nothing. You see the farms in Sweden, they're painted and everything is nice. So there was a different kind of... My impression didn't... Didn't impress you? They didn't impress me at all. I should have told that long before. That's a good point, you know that. So, there were Swedish organizations now, like Viking and Vasa and the church. Did you join the First Covenant church there? No. My uncle, he took me down to the Viking hall here in Omaha. In the Swedish auditorium. In the Swedish auditorium and had me to join the Viking and take out $1,000 insurance, which was nice, which was right. Was that in the 1940s? No, that was in 1926. That early? You joined right away? Yeah. $1,000 insurance? Yeah, because he had to protect himself in case of a... Which was all right, I didn't kick him. He was your uncle? Yeah, he's my uncle. Because he's dead and gone, I'm both dead and gone. Could you afford to pay that premium every year? I paid a premium on it for so long, as long as I stayed here in Omaha. But after I got back to Rockford, I stayed there for four years. I dropped out during the Depression. So I didn't pay. Then I had to join again. I joined the Viking not too long ago, but 16 years ago. But otherwise... All the insurance was gone then? Oh, yeah. And 1926 they met down in the Swedish auditorium? Yeah, they did. My uncle took me there and had me to join. I had to go through the doctor's examination at that time. Now they don't have to. But not until you married and you joined the cavalry shirts? No, I didn't join the cavalry. We were doing shirts. Oh, you were doing shirts? In California, we joined it. Oh, in Oakland? Yeah, we joined in Oakland. No, we didn't. Yeah, sure we did. When we came back here, we joined Augusto. So your children were born out there? Yeah. How did they like to move back to Nebraska again from California? Did they like it out there? Well, they weren't old enough to understand. No. The boy was, I guess. He didn't trust us about it, I don't think. He went to school here and went to college. He knew she was going to college. My daughter, she never did go to college, but she went to high school. She had done pretty good. She'd been there for 23 years while she was working there. What kind of company is that? A paper company. Envelope company. So now Omaha is going to be your last stop? Well, I don't think so. They will be moving six feet down again next time. I don't know if there's anything else to it. If you want to ask me something. I want to ask your wife now to verify what you have said, if it's right. Well, you can do that. So you, Mrs. Olson, you were born in Stroudsburg, Nebraska. That's right. And you grew up there on a farm. Was there a special name on this farm? No. It belonged to my dad's uncle. And he farmed it for a couple of years. And then he moved and got another farm. He always was a farmer. I see. And he came from Sweden. And your dad and mother too. Your dad came from Vina and your mother from Markarys. That's right. She was 18 years old when she came to this country. And your father was a little bit... He was a little older. I think he was my age. Yeah, I think he was about 28 or 29. I see. So there was a lot of Swedish folk in Stroudsburg then when they came together. So they met, your father and mother, out there? No, they met when they came from Sweden. They landed in Pennsylvania in Ludlong, Kane. And there they stayed for about three or four years. Did they come together? No, they met in Ludlong. And then they got married. And then my dad's uncle persuaded him to come to Stroudsburg to farm his farm. That's how come they came to Stroudsburg. How long did they stay in Ludlong and Kane area before they moved out here? I don't remember. Did he work anything out there? Yeah, he worked as a plumber. And my mother, when she first came to this country, she worked in a laundry. Got a dollar a day. In Ludlong? Yeah. So he didn't work in any tanneries then? No. Plenty of them out there in Sheffield and Ludlong and Wilcox. So he persuaded them to move to Stroudsburg. Yeah. So they came here in what year, do you think, to Stroudsburg? Nineteen... Nineteen... No, they came here about 1905. Because my two oldest brothers, they were born back in Pennsylvania. Then they came here to Stroudsburg, so I think it was about 1905 when they came to Stroudsburg. So they must have come there about four or five years earlier then, if you had two kids or your sister was born out there. They did. They stayed there for a while. But they came west end to farm. And he was turning away from the plumbing business and... and to farming. He wished he had stayed in Pennsylvania because he was doing real good. He had done better there than he did on the farm. He said that? Yeah. So he was a little bit... Disappointed. Disappointed, yeah. So how did it turn out then? He took over his uncle's farm or... No, he just farmed it and then he got disgusted because his uncle wasn't fair to him. And so then he rented a farm from somebody else. Schlechte der Wäsche, he said. Yeah, that's right. You heard the expression before? Yeah. They used to say in Strasbourg also, schlechte der Wäsche. Yeah. Why is it like that, do you think? Do they expect more of the young people than the older ones? Or why does it turn out very often, this situation? You know, they like to have them to do more and put in more hours and work harder. I know it. I don't know why. But it seems to be that trend. Yeah. Like your husband, you know, he had to work an extra day there the 46th of October. That was the bonus he got. Yeah. So, but you were born then on this farm. How big was it? It was about, I think it was an 80 acre. 80 acre. It wasn't very big. But it was enough to take care of a family. Yeah, you could live on it then. There was corn and wheat and all at that time. Yeah. Was it a dry place when he came here, then there was no irrigation? No, there was no irrigation. It wasn't unheard of? No. So, if you look at the farm now today and 80 years ago, there was a different story. There sure was. The corn was shorter. Sometimes it didn't even come up, I suppose, in the dry years. No, there was many times when we didn't even raise anything. You mean it didn't... No, it just burned up in the summertime because the weather was so hot. The wind from the south. Yeah. I see. So, what did they do then? I mean, they... They were on barbeque. Well, we had to live on pork and potatoes. I ate so much pork that I got sick and tired of pork. Well, you're still here. Yeah. Then it must have been good to you. I guess. So, they had some pork that they slaughtered in the fall and they lasted until... Yeah, they'd fix it down so it'll last all summer long. In the summertime too? Yeah. The pork? No beef? Yeah, we used to can that. You can beef? Yeah. You didn't smoke anything? Yes, we smoked the ham off of the pigs. But we never went hungry. Oh, you always had enough to eat. And you raised your own potatoes? Yeah. What did you keep the leg of ham or the roast smoked? In the oatmeal? They had a little... They had a wash house outside and they'd hang it up there and it was hanging there all winter long. I see. And they also smoked ham? Yeah. But, you know, things... And it was hard times too because when I went to school, we all were the same way. We had to wear our brother's overcoats and that. We didn't... We were all poor farmers. So you grew into it? Yeah. So I know what the depression was. You were right in it there. Yeah. But you didn't go to school during the depression though. You were married then more or less in the depression. Yeah, I was. You were married in the depression. But you remember it was a tough time. Yeah. So down there in... Do you remember the three big brother Johnsons? Yeah. There was two of them that froze to death in the blizzard. Yeah, I know it. They got lost. They got lost and they found them frozen to death. Yeah. Was that during your... After you were born or was it before your time? No, it was after I was born because I remembered it. You were married then? Yeah, we were married. That would not happen. What? There was an empiric then? Yeah. Oh, I see. So did they live far from your place or...? They lived down in Stroudsburg, I think, those Johnsons did. Around Stroudsburg some place. They said they were three heavy fellows. They scaled over a thousand pounds. Yeah. They must have been husky fellows. Well, they were. And they lived on a farm? I don't know if they lived on a farm or what, but I know they lived around Stroudsburg. So talking about blizzards, you remember a lot of cold winters then. We sure did. Snowing and drifting. Walked to school and all them snowdrifts that was maybe four or five feet tall. We walked to school and we had about two miles to walk. There was no school bus picking you up? No. But you went to school every day? Yeah. In a one-room schoolhouse? Yeah. The teacher, now, did she have a Swedish background? No. American? Yeah. And she had to listen to all this Swedish talk? She had to listen to me talk Swedish. So you didn't know any English then? I didn't know any English when I started school. I was seven years old. All I knew was Swedish. But how about your classmates? They weren't the same fit as...? Yeah, the Swedish ones, they were the same. Same mold. Yeah. Everybody was brought up by Swedish. Did you talk much Swedish after you started school? Yes. Dad, he wouldn't talk English. He talked broken Swedish till he died. He did? He wouldn't go completely in English, but Mother did. So your mother was 17 and they made a difference then? Yeah. And how in the school work, did your mother help you when you came home from school? No, she didn't know how. So you had to...? We had to struggle for ourselves. And you were the third in line? Yeah. How about your older sister? Was it two brothers? Two brothers. Did they help you with the school work? Yeah. That's where I learned my English was from them. But they still used the Swedish as well as the English. So your father, he put up a fight when it came to English. Did he become a citizen after a while? No, neither one of them. Mother wanted to become a citizen, but he didn't. What was the reason for that, do you think? Well, he took his first papers out and somebody told him that he was a citizen, but he wasn't. He was supposed to have took some more papers out. That was the first intention, though. So he didn't vote then? He didn't bother about being a Republican or Democrat? No. Did he discuss any politics? Well, he thought he was a Republican. He went and voted, but that didn't count because he wasn't a citizen. But he went to vote anyway. Won the Scottish vote. So there were all Republicans out there in Strasbourg? Most of them. Very few. Who were the Democrats, by the way, now? Were they the Swedes? Well, the ones that lived in town, they were, but most of the farmers were Republicans. Some businessmen? They were Democrats. But most of the businessmen in Strasbourg, they were Swedes. Yeah. The bakery men and the grocery men. Yeah. And you had your own lawyer there and doctor and dentist. Yep. So you were self-sufficient at the bank? Yeah, we had two banks. Two banks? Yeah. Were they both Swedish? Yeah, they were Swedish people. Running it? Yeah. So you have a nice town square there in Strasbourg, don't you? Yeah. It's really nice there now. They've done a lot of work up there. It's really beautiful up there now. Is it different today? No, they claim to be the Swedish town, the capital of Nebraska. But then you have Warsaw up here, and you have... Stanton. Stanton, and... what's that? Stanton? No, that's in Iowa. There's a Stanton in Nebraska. Is it? Oh. This is in Iowa. Oh. And then you have Haldrige. Yeah. That's a Swedish town. But Strasbourg is the one that likes to be the capital for it. Yeah, Oakland wanted to. Oakland and Warsaw. Oakland and Warsaw, yeah. They wanted to be. They're Swedish towns. How was it years ago when you were a little girl, for instance, or 15, 16, or 20s? Was it Swedish at that time too, so you could see the difference? Yeah. You had decorations in the windows at the Christmas time? Yeah. How about festivals now, like Lucia Festival? Did you hear that? No. You didn't hear that when you were growing up? How about Midsummer? No. No Midsummer festivals? Smell of gold border in the church. Oh, yeah, they had that. And they served for the public like they do today? Yeah. So you belong to the Lutheran Church in Strasbourg? Salem Lutheran Church in Stransbourg. How about the one out there at Friends Home, or as they call it, in Sweden Home, I mean? It's further away, though, isn't it? Yeah, that's quite, that's, I forget how far it is from Strasbourg. About 15 miles? Something like that. So you didn't go to that one? No, went to the one in Strasbourg. So how did they, and there's also a Covenant Church in Strasbourg. Yeah. And a Baptist one. Yeah. And there was also a... Methodist. Oh, Methodist, Swedish Methodist. And then once upon a time they had a seminary, they had a Baptist seminary, you remember that? When you were too young, it was probably 1905, something like that. You never heard anything about that? No. After school? No. But that's all history. Yeah. You didn't hear anything about it. So, like your family now, were they religious active? Yes, they were. They were, both of them? We never missed church. No? Church every Sunday? You went to Sunday school? Got confirmed. In Swedish? They wanted me to, but I didn't want to because the rest of the girls didn't want to be confirmed in Swedish either. So I didn't want to be. So that was in 19... 1921? 1919? You got confirmed? I was 15 years old. 15? So 1919 then? Yeah. So at that time the girls started to rebel against the Swedish, they didn't want to be part of it? No. How about the boys, did they take any Swedish? No. None of them. So what did the pastor say then? He didn't say anything. How many confirmants were you at the time? I think I was about, we were about ten in my class. So you went all summer, did you go during the wintertime? We had to go to confirmation all winter long and then... Yeah, that's when we got confirmed. Yeah, that's when we got confirmed. Did you still sing Swedish hymns at that time when you were confirmed? Yeah. In Swedish? Yeah. But the test itself was taken in English? Yeah. So, but your classmates, there were ten girls there, there was also boys. Yeah. Were they able to convert between Swedish if they wanted to at that time? Well they could, but we didn't want to. You avoided? Yeah. So when your parents talked to you, did you talk back in English then? Yeah, we talked back in English and they'd talk Swedish to us. So your father didn't want to ask you to talk in English, he understood what you said though? Yeah. But he didn't want to speak to himself? No. Yeah, but he got to have... didn't he have to use English sometimes when he went to his doors for instance? Well, his Swedish was mixed with English and Swedish and everybody got a kick out of listening to him because they got so used to his talk. It was mixed with Swedish and English together. So he didn't notice it himself then? No. Then when I was 21 years old I came into Omaha and I worked for families. Well before that you had gotten a farm or? Yeah. And your mother. So how many children were you in the... Six. We had to work... my youngest sister and I, we had to work out in the fields in the summertime. You were husband gone to then? Yeah. How many bushels did you... Sometimes my brother and I, we would take in maybe 100 bushels a day. That was pretty good. We thought that was good. And you had the husky hooked up? Yeah. This is the right way? With a wagon and the horses. How many corn ears was done each dog at that time when you were husking the corn? I don't remember. But there was more than one though? Oh yeah, there were two or three of them. Were they big ears? Yeah, they were big ears. So and then you let the corn start stand there until it... how did they cut it off? They cut it off for fodder to feed to the cattle. I see. Was that... there was nothing in your time? No. It was loose weight. Yeah. So the cattle used it in the wintertime then? Yeah. So you have been husking corn? Yes. Shock and wheat. Shock and wheat. That was terrible in the hot summertime. Well it was hotter then. The corn was all right because it was in the fall. Yeah. And the wheat was in the summertime when it was hot. Well about this time. Yeah. I had a shock of wheat and I got stuff and stick you and everything else. They didn't have any wheat killers at that time. They had pistols and... Yeah. And morning glory and everything mixed in with it. So you had a combine then, in other words, to bind it together. Yeah. What do you call it? No, not the combine. You call it the binder? Binder. Binder, yeah. Yeah. And McCormick or John Deering? John Deering, but Deering, McCormick, the horse, the name of it. I think that's what it was. So how many horses did your dad have then on this farm? Well he had, I think, about eight of them. Eight horses? Yeah. So there was a team for you too then? And then we milked about eight to ten cows. And the separator was going in there? Yeah. So there was always something to do? We were taught to work. So you had your own team of horses too and... and often a field with... With my brother. With your brother. Yeah. So you worked together as a team? Yeah. In the hot sun? Yeah. So you were 21 then when you finally left? Yeah. You said this is enough? Yeah. What was the deciding factor for you to leave? I didn't want to be on the farm. I thought it was too hard work. How about your other friends down there? Did they use the same kind of work, I mean, to make a living before they left? They done the same thing. Until they got married? Yeah. Were you looking forward to get married to a farmer down there in Sturnsburg? No. You didn't? But when you went to church on Sunday, that was all there was. There was farmer's boys. I know it. So you didn't date the farmer then? No. You behaved all the way to Omaha. Then I found him. So that was your lucky break? Yeah. So you came in at Omaha to work there as a... What kind of work? A maid in a home. A maid in a home. How was that work compared to being on the farm? It was a lot easier. Was it too easy? Well, it was hard work, but it was still better than on a farm. You had to do a lot of washing, a lot of cooking? Yeah, I done everything. But the farm work was... Too hard. Backbreaking. Yeah. But that wasn't a free feeling, though, when you were on the farm. You could suit yourself. In other words, the horses go... Yeah. But still, you had to keep many hours of the sun. Sure did. And in the wintertime, what were you doing then, before you left the farm? You had mother in the home then to... Well, we had to... We used to go to school, and when we'd come home, we had to do our own ironing. We had to iron our own clothes and things like that. We always had to work. Uh-huh. So, what, after you went... You were finished with the school and the confirmation, when you were 17, 18, and 19, what were you doing then in the wintertime? You helped your mother then to... Yeah....wash. Yeah. There was a lot of baking going on. Yeah, they baked everything. They had a lot of bread for the dinner. Yeah. Every meal, there was bread. That's right. So, and your parents, they used their own wheat? They used to take the wheat to a mill and have it grinded into flour. That was done... So you had it for a couple of months? Yeah. At the town that was named there, they had a mill that would grind the wheat into flour. And Dad would take so much, and then he'd come home maybe with four or five sacks of flour. And it would last so long. And there was also always a happy time when you got the... Yeah....fresh flour to work with. There was. Was there a cold season, I mean from one year to another? Uh-huh. Was it tough? Sometimes did it have to last? No. We never did go hungry. Maybe we didn't have a lot, but we never went hungry. Do you remember if anybody from Sweden came at that time when you were growing up on the farm? Some new immigrants coming into Strasbourg? Was it too late already? I think it was too late. There were a lot of them. All the neighbors around us were Swedish people, Swedish farmers. But no new ones came in? No. They didn't like your husband, and they stayed in Omaha and in the bigger cities. They had enough of the farms. Yeah. So this farm, your dad bought another farm, you said? No, he didn't buy it. He just rented it. He just rented the farm. And how about your brothers? Did they become farmers? One of my brothers, he became a farmer, and the other one, he left and he worked for my uncle in a carbon black factory down in Texas. How about during the Depression? A lot of farmers left Nebraska at that time. They sure did. Did they leave also from the Strasbourg area? There were some that left and they went out to California, but then they got stuck out there because they couldn't find any work out there. Did they return then again? They came back. So there was a tough time. There was. Do you remember that one? Yeah. There was the blowing dust there as well as other places. Yeah. And it was more open fields then at that time. There was no break in between. It was just blowing, blowing, blowing. But you know now, you go out in the country, the farmers, they're not living as close together like they used to. Farm seven, eight, nine hundred acres of land each farmer to make a living. They have to do that nowadays. So many farms in between are gone. Yeah. Were there farmers that retired or quit farming or moved out? No, there were a lot of them that was retired. So you saw some very rough years then even in the 20s was pretty tough going to be a farmer. It was. So you didn't see any incentive to stay on there or even think about making a living out there? No. But it's a pretty area though. I know it. Out there in the, if you're in the summertime, in the wintertime it's a little bit chilly. But also cold wind. Yeah. All the way from Saskatchewan. Yeah. How did you, now you said you were living so close to all the farmers and they were all Swedes. What did you do now for gatherings outside the church? Did you have a Swedish lodge out there? No, the farmers used to go together on Sundays and we'd have maybe supper together and we kids would play our games. That's the way we entertained ourselves. And there was a couple of neighbors then? Yeah. And then you traded, in other words, traded off another week another farmer had it and. Yeah. So what kind of games were you playing at that time? Oh, drop the handkerchief and tag and. Kids would wash you? Yeah. So that was too hard for the kids to do though? Yeah, that was. But the older people now, what did they do in the summertime when they came together for picnics? They just sat there and visited. They were tired. No activities on Sundays? No. They said Sunday was a day of rest. And then they were talking about the crop and the. They didn't do like they do now. They never did work on Sundays because they said that was a Sabbath day so you're supposed to rest. And all observed that. They observed that day. They didn't work like they do now. Now they work on Sundays or any time. There's no schedule at all now? No. So how about the pastor now? Was he close to the family? Did he come out to some of the. Yeah, they used to come out and visit a person. When he was sick or even when he was. Yeah. Healthy too. Yeah. He was asking for more money to the church? No. Who would take care of the fundraising for the church for instance? Was that the deacons or trustees or. Deacons and that. But you know, we. After we got confirmed, we gave $12 a year for a membership. As a family? No, each one of us. We gave $12 to each one of us for a year. Even you as a girl? After we were confirmed. That wasn't very much, $12 a year. It was a lot of money to make the exit. I know it. How much did your dad pay you for husking 100 bushels of corn? He told my brother and I that if we could go out and husk 100 bushels of corn in a day, he would give us $30. And boy, we thought that was something. So boy, we sure stuck with it too. And we did make 100 bushels. And he paid you $30? Yeah. And $12 went to the pastor? Yeah. Only $3 left for yourself. What do you think then? Not very much. But there were no organizations then outside the church in Stearnsburg? Not that I. No. You don't remember that? No, they didn't have that. How about insurance now? Like your husband said that he joined the Vikings in 1926 for the insurance policy of 1,000 bucks. Well, they had insurance, that Lutheran Brotherhood. That your parents could join and even you could join? Yeah. Did you join that? No. Did most of the people join it or what do you think? Not too many. There was an extra outlay they couldn't afford? They couldn't afford it. They took a chance on it. Yeah. So what happened if something happened to a person out there, if you get sick, broke a leg or who paid for it? The farmers owed the doctors money. There were some doctors went broke, they didn't have anything. The farmers couldn't pay them. So the farmer, he broke not only his own leg, he also broke the doctor's. So he was in bad shape. Yeah. Same thing with the dentist. But I suppose the people, they didn't go too often to a doctor. No. There was only when they were really... Really sick. In need for it. Yeah. So what were the home remedies now? Was it curicure or any kind of... When we used to have a cold, my mother used to fry onions and she'd put it on flan and cloth and put it on our chest just as hot as it could be. That was to break the cold. Even on the children? Yeah, on us kids. And it did break it? Yeah. And we took some kind of liniment, Watchkins liniment, in water for when we had a cold or if we had a stomach ache. And that helped us. You didn't go to the doctor like you do here now. No yearly checkup? No. Did you, do you remember if you went to the doctor that night? When you were growing up? Yeah, no. Just the dentist. Dad used to pull my teeth, he used to pull our teeth, he used to put a string around with our baby teeth and pull them out. For your dad? Yeah. But other teeth now, did you go to the dentist to decay? Yeah. Yeah. So, how about hairdressers? Did you go to a hairdresser when you were younger? No. There was not a customer at that time? We had long hair and we had a bun or something in the back of our head. All the girls had it like that? Yeah. So there was no curlers in the hair then? No. When you were going to a party? You braid your hair and then it got curly. So there was a difference. And there was no makeup and lipstick? No. There was none at all? They didn't even have it then. That eye shadow and everything that they use now. But you certainly needed eye shadow to watch the corner of your head at 96 degrees. Yeah. Or shocking the wheat. Yeah, shocking the wheat, that was the worst. That was the worst time of the year? Yeah. What kind of hair did you make? They didn't build the hairdressers today? They built the hair. In your time too? They built the hair? No, when I was growing up it was just loose. Just loose without being built. Wasn't there Mr. Bogdano in the... Yeah. There was also in the heat. Oh, no. But over the years do you remember the summers were very good and warm then? They didn't ruin that crop in any way? No, there was a lot of summers where we raised good crops. So there was always a cry for rain? Yeah. Nobody said it rained too much in the summer? How about grasshoppers, do you remember any? Yeah, grasshoppers and potato bugs, well we used to have to go and pick. They didn't use all that kind of stuff to kill the bugs. We had to go out there and pick off all the potato bugs. By hand? By hand. And you put them in the oil or something? Yeah, I used to kill them. You killed them? Yeah. There was a different harvest. There sure was. But they didn't show up every year though? No. Dad used to raise potatoes, he'd have a whole wagon load of potatoes and that would last us from when we harvested until the next summer when we had new potatoes. That was the way you had to do it, and just the same thing with pork. They used to butcher in the wintertime and salt it down and smoke it. There was one farmer who had a smokehouse and he used to smoke it for people. And then the beef, we always canned that. It was good. Like we said, we never went hungry? No. We always had something to eat. And during thrashing time we had all those men to cook for. They thrashed a wheat. Ten, twelve men? Sometimes maybe eighteen men. They were hauling it in by horse, right from the shacks? Yeah. How long did they last, the thrashing? A couple days? A couple days for each farmer. And then they'd go to... Then they'd go to somebody else and thrash. So your dad, did he save that grain or did he sell most of it immediately after thrashing? He saved it and then just sold it the way he wanted them. He didn't sell it right away. He kept it and provided it? Yeah. Was it mostly wheat then or corn? Well, they raised oats and wheat and corn. No soybeans? No. I never heard of soybeans when I was growing up. What about sunflowers? I never heard of that either. Well, they still don't have sunflowers down in your farm. Yeah, I read in the paper that up there, some farmer is raising some sunflowers and he sells the seeds. Yeah, they got them all north in South Dakota. Yeah, up in Minnesota they have it too. So did you travel far when you were on the farm? I mean, you went to Omaha, I suppose. That was the biggest town. Yeah. How about Lincoln? Yeah, once in a while. Once in a while. How about west? How far west did you go before you were 20 years of age? Not any further than Sweet Home. Sweet Home. It was down there. Yeah. And then there was another town we used to go fishing, and that was where they had this flour mill, and that was named Thayer. That's all further we went. Oh, we went to York. How about Malmo? No, I never heard of that before I come to Omaha. You never heard of it? It was completely unknown. There's a Swedish town too, you know. I know. Swedish bank and churches. So you didn't go there. No. So is there something that particularly you remember from that time? They always talk about hard and tough times, of course, and you probably went through it, working on the farm, both inside and out. But when you look back, how do you look at it? I mean, was it a miserable job? No, I didn't think anything of it. I just thought there was something we had to do. We never questioned. We never complained that it was hard work. We just decided that we had to help. Did you ask your mother sometimes to change the ideas that she had of things, to do things, like washing? Yeah. What did she say then? Well, she let us do it. Oh, you could do that? Yeah. If it was a better way? Yeah. How about your father? Did you tell him to change his ideas of running the farm at any time? No. How about your brothers? They didn't either. They just did it the way they were? They just done it the way Dad did. And none of your grandparents came over here to this country? No. And you went back to Sweden in 1947? Yeah. It was the first time. And your mother, she never returned to Sweden? No, and my dad never did either. And they stayed there in 1947? Yeah. What did they tell you then when you visited Sweden? Did they ask you to look at certain things and bring back some? My mother, she wanted me to go to, that we should go to Markerud, where she was from, and we hunted that town up. Then we brought some things back to them. Did she have any sisters or brothers in that, in Markerud? She had a brother there, but he died when he was 50 years old, and he had five children, and they're still living. Oh, she had three brothers that came to America, and a sister. And then the one brother, he stayed in Sweden. So what did they ask you when you came back, if they visited Sweden? They wanted to know all about it. They didn't want to go on with you? No. They thought they were too old or? Well, they didn't have the money. We just had enough for our own trip. So you were happy you didn't become a farmer in Sturnsburg? No. You picked the right man. And it was in Sweden. Yeah. What did your parents say then when you came home with the? Oh, hun? What did your parents say then when you came home with Axel? Oh, they were just thrilled because I was the only one that picked a Swede. The rest of them married German. They were from, their parents were from Germany. Well, there's a German band out there, isn't there, of people? Yeah, there is. It's west of Sturnsburg, isn't it? Or is it south of it? Crete, I think the name is. They were Germans? Yeah. But they were Lutherans, though, those girls. Yeah. So they were not too bad anyway, I would think. No. So your father, now, didn't he ask Axel to become a, to inherit his farming tools and implements and? No. Reapers and binders? No. No tankers? No. Do you have had enough? Yeah. And he worked on the farms in Sweden and he thought there was more than one man. That was enough. Yeah. Okay.