 And then the, when he took out his citizenship paper, it said up here, see the doctor was called at night, and I was born during the night. And his records, his office call was the 13th, and I was born during the night. And so, yeah. So he gave you the 13th or the? So they had the 13th there, but my parents always, in my baptism, everything's the 14th. So you got your birthday cake on the 14th then? But then you had legally, you had to have your 13th. From now on, I've always had it the 14th, till now when he did that, you know. Oh, I see. And so, see, they said, now I said, well, what do I do? Do I change it? They said, no, but you just mark the 13th if it's anything very legal that you have to. Otherwise, you can have it like you always used to have it, because all the other certificates and everything is the 14th. Yeah, I'm sitting together with Alice Dorothea Christina Johnson in Jamestown, New York. And you were born 1904, October 13th in Jamestown. And this July 17th, 1985. So your parents now, they came from Sweden. What was the reason for it, do you think? Did they tell you about the... They just wanted to come over. The father and the two older boys went over first and started to work and got work, and then they came back and got the mother and the two girls and the younger son. And they settled over here. And of course, my father, he came over all on his own. He was a teenager. He was, there were four boys and he was the only one that came over. The others all stayed over there. But he had an uncle that talked him into coming and so he came. And they came from farming communities? Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. And small one. Karlstorp, Vimarp, Karlstorp, Klakenholt, and Vetlanda around in there. So about what time did they come over to the United States? So they arrived to North America, moved away 1880, April 16th. And the whole family came two years later, June 14th. And he was, as they say, murare. And they was from Ökna in the city, Växjö Stift. So and they came here directly to Jens, wasn't it? To Jens, yeah. So what did they start to work with here then at that time? Well, they worked in Jersey Shore at first. I think they did bricklaying and, you know, like that. And then my uncles went in on railroad some, too. So one was bricklaying. But then he went into farming, my grandfather. He bought a farm. And he had a, yeah, in Pex Element up here. Oh, there? Uh-huh. Two miles from where I was born. I see. So that was still farmland then at that time? Mm-hmm. Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. It still is. It's still farmed there. Oh, I see. There's no housing development going on there then? No, it's just... Like the farmland? Uh-huh. Not too. And how big of a farm did he... Oh, not too big. A couple of cars? Three, four cars? Yeah, just about, I guess. But could he live there with his family without extra income or... Yeah, he did, I guess, as far as I remember. He didn't work in town or in the factories? No, he just... My dad worked in the factory. My dad worked in the Atlas. Now it's Crawford Furniture. In the furniture business, then? Mm-hmm. Do you remember your grandparents? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. So you grew up with them then? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. Oh, yes. I knew them. Did they talk Swedish all the time? Oh, yeah. I did, too. While you were growing up? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. We talked that at home all the time. Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. And anybody visiting the family, they was all Swedish, wasn't it? It was all Swedish, and I was confirmed in Swedish. First Lutheran or... No, in the First Mission Church. Oh, Mission Church. Mm-hmm. Yes, the one that's located on Spring Street today. Now. Mm-hmm. But it was on Chandler... It was on Chandler Street next to the Lutheran Parsonage. First Mission. I see. Mm-hmm. So your grandparents, then, they were covenantors from Sweden, then, when we found Sweden? Yeah, they went to the Lutheran a little while, and then they went to the Mission later. And so my mother was confirmed in the First Lutheran, but the rest, I guess, were confirmed in the Mission. I was confirmed in the Mission. In Swedish. Mm-hmm. So did you start out early to work after you were confirmed, and what did you do then for... Well, when I graduated from high school, then I started at Crescent Tool Company. As a secretary or... Mm-hmm. In the office? Mm-hmm. I see. And I worked there until, let's see, 1926, then I went down to Crawford and worked two years, and then we were married in 28, and then I sort of helped out the first year between the Crescent and the Atlas. And then our oldest girl was born, so then I didn't work until our youngest one was in junior high, then I started working in the school system. And then I worked as a secretary in the library department for all the ten elementary schools in the city. I see. You had a full-time job then. Oh, yeah. I ordered all the books and mended them and checked them off and assisted the teachers, did inventory and stuff like that. So you got married, you said, in 1926? 28. And it was Mr. J. Elaw Johnson. Mm-hmm. So your husband, Elaw Johnson, he came in 1925 from Sweden, that was from Sweden. Mm-hmm. And he lived with his two brothers, a little with one, with the other, Ed and Fritz Johnson. They had been there earlier than the... Yeah, Ed had been here quite a few years. He came as a teenager, and then Fritz, he'd been here quite a few years, too. I don't remember what time, when they did come. And only the boys came over. The sisters all stayed in Sweden, so they never came over. And the parents also stayed in Sweden? Mm-hmm. His mother was 97 when she died, but his father died when he was 35. I see. So he was... Right after we were married, he passed away. So his brothers now, were they working in the furniture industry? Uh-huh. Ed was working in the Marvel, so then he went to work with him. And then his other brother was working at Crescent Tool. But he worked in the furniture factories, and then he started selling Hoover Sweepers, vacuum cleaners. Was that before the 30s? He was in 28, he started that, 29, 1929, the vacuum, Hoover vacuum. Was there a new gadget then in the household, the vacuum cleaner at that time? No, but they went house to house then. So he sold on commission from house to house. And learning the English language, he thought that was a good way... See, he was in the factory, and that was at the war, so they laid off so many people. He worked a little bit in the... Oh, Marlon Rockwell, ball bearing plant too. But then they were all laid off, and he worked at Norquist too. But then when he was laid off, it was right after we were married, and so then he thought, well, that would be a good chance to learn the language too, so he started selling from door to door. In 1928? Uh-huh, December 5th. Uh-huh. December 20... No, December 5th. 1928. So they started to get bad times then in 1928? Oh, that was all the whole depression then. Did you continue to work though in the office where you were working? Well, our daughter was born the next year in December. Oh, I see. So then I worked until September that year, then she was born in December. I see. And then we had seven children, and we lost two premature shortly after birth, but we have the five, and they're living. So you lost all of the five at home then? Oh, yes. What happened in most cases when they married, the two young people? Did the wife quit the work then and stay home? Usually, quite often they did. So they don't come back today then? No, not as much. They started to then, but not as much as what they do now. Of course, now they go right away and start, but then they usually stayed home a while, and then, of course, it was just, well, 17 to 21 months between each of ours, so that I stayed home until the youngest girl was in junior high. And that was in the late 1930s then? Mm-hmm, 19. So how was the Depression time? That must have been tough then to settle there. It was bad, very bad. Were there any sales made? I mean, people had a few dollars and cents to spend. I know, but it was very, very bad. So he had the Jameson, the town of Jameson then? Well, not all. There were four or five salesmen. In the city of Jameson? Oh, yeah. So he walked down from door to door? Oh, yes, he just went from door to door. And went to the back and cleaned it with him? Uh-huh, he had his car with him, and he'd go and make appointments and then go in and demonstrate them either then or in the evening. So he called them? So he went, either stopped at the house or called them and demonstrated them, and it was strictly commissioned. I know one week there, it went nine weeks, he never sold one. Then he sold about seven or eight, and so you never knew, you know, from week to week what it was like. So how many did he have to sell then to make a living in a month? Well, I don't know. I can't remember that. Because they didn't cost too much, I suppose, at that time? No, well, they were around in the 70, 80. And it was the upright? Of course, they kept getting new ones each year, different models. But they had vacuum cleaners in their homes before he came there? Oh, yes. So that was not a new thing then? No, but they didn't carry them to stores. And Bigelow's had it, and then they changed and went to Clark, and Clark Hardware was the only one that carried them. So you couldn't get them unless you got them through the salesman. But you see, then, after the Depression, then they brought them into all the stores. You can get them anywhere. And then he did the service, and then he had charge of it one while, but he didn't like that. And so then he went back to just the service, the service and the selling. And then he, I don't remember what year it was, he started his own business. Then he got, well, that must have been in, let's see, 30, in the 40s, probably. Then he started, he rented a place on Pine Street and started his own business, a sales and service. What kind of service was that? Cleaning, servicing the cleaners. Oh, I see. They were the only ones that did them. You couldn't get them serviced unless you went to the, they had a service place at Clark Hardware. But then he started his own. In the late 30s, he also started to take schooling in preaching? No, he didn't take any schooling in that. He had an uncle that used to go around and preach in Sweden, and he'd go with him. And lots of times he'd ask him to help or give a testimony, and he would. And he started and he did preaching off and on there. And, of course, they had an hour of Bible study in the schools all the time. And his home was, the pastors came and stayed, and they had services there. He grew up really with that environment, you know, because his family was a very religious family. And so when he came over here, then they had this little group. Some had belonged to the mission, some had belonged to the Lutheran. So they called it the Lutheran Mission, Evangelical Lutheran Mission Association. And there were just a few. There was one group in Wisconsin and one in Chicago, one in Rockford, and one in Kansas, and there was one other place. I've forgotten. And so then they had him go out. It was in 1928. It was right after we were married. The fellow that was preaching in the little church down there on Buffalo Street, that was all Swedish. And, of course, that's all he could preach was Swedish. And he would oftentimes preach if the other pastor couldn't. And he was over 80, so he wanted to quit. So then they asked him if he would take over. And he enjoyed speaking and preaching, so he did. And he used to speak at different organizations in town, you know. He was called on quite often to ladies' aides in different places. So he took over and did that on Sundays and that. So that was sort of part time between his sweeper. So that was right after, because I was at the hospital when he came up and said they had asked him if he would take it over. Evangelical Lutheran Mission Association in America. That was organized in 1903. I don't remember when it was organized. 1903. And was there actually a church here in Jamestown then? Yes. What was that church? On Buffalo Street, right next to the Ring School, that little shingle church. On 2nd Street or 3rd Street? No, it should go up Buffalo Street, just past Faulkner Street. You know where the water works, the light is there, that shingle church. It was a little one-room schoolhouse, and they used to meet there. We met some in the homes, but then they had that little... And there was a group, so the Swedish fellows used to go there, and then he would preach. And they were some that had come from the different Lutheran churches and the Mission church here in town. So they were offspring and offshoots from... Was they closer to the Mission Covenant, you think, or the Missionist Vandals and the Lutherans? Were they more free, or how did they... They were free, yeah. So people could... Oh, yes. So they were different from the Lutherans then? Yes. Yeah, it was a regular preacher. Did he perform baptism? Yeah, then in... Let's see, it was in May 1930. Then he went to Osage City to the annual convention. And then they ordained him, or gave him the license to... They called it ordained. So he could baptize and marry and have funerals and give communion and preach if he had the foe. Do the whole thing. Yeah. So he started then. And we had some conventions here. There was a Reverend Carl Anderson, his picture's in there, in Chicago. And Reverend Vadim, he baptized our youngest daughter, our oldest daughter. He was from Stockholm, Wisconsin. Then there was some Carlsons in Rockford. And then there was a Stainbook. I don't know if he was in Kansas. I don't remember where he was from. But I remember meeting him once. So there was a membership then at this church? Oh, yes, there was a membership. How many members could you have then, 125 or... Oh, around that, around 100. And they had members? They had a missionary group, and we had quite a big Sunday school. I have pictures here of the... So you helped out too then with the Sunday school services? Uh-huh. So then he did the preaching Sundays and whatever was needed. And he had confirmation classes. And it was all in Swedish? All in Swedish. He never used English? Uh-uh. I see. All in Swedish. And how many years did he continue to do that at that church up there? That was, I think it tells here, 1930 to 1942. And then you see our children were being confirmed. And there were so few down there that they, you know, then they sold it to another church, and then we went into the First Lutheran then. Dr. Miller, well, he baptized our twins. And then, let's see, Pastor Johnson, I guess, Constance Johnson was here then. But our kids had been going to the Lutheran Bible camp up here. So that's why they seemed to want to go with them and be confirmed with some of their friends there. So then we joined the First Lutheran Church. And this was the only Evangelischlutherska missionsföreningen in this area then, in Jamestown? Yeah. There was nothing in Caine or Warren or Sheffield or anything? No, no, no. The only one in the east? The only one in the east. How many were there? No, there was one in Massachusetts, Attleboro. Attleboro? Uh-huh, Pastor, what's his name now? In Attleboro. And they also dissolved later on then? Uh-huh. And then there was more in the west? Uh-huh, in Chicago and Osage and Rockford and Stockholm. And did they dissolve also after a while? Uh-huh, they finally did. So there's no Evangelischluther? No, there is none now. What happened to their records once they dissolved? Well, he had some here from the church here. I went down and looked today, but I didn't see them. I don't know, and I can't remember. I don't know what did become of them. See, Pastor, and Carlson, I think, was the last one. There was Carl Anderson in Chicago. So the headquarters then was in Osage or in Chicago? Well, I don't know really where the headquarters were. See, he went to Osage. That's where the conference was that year when he was ordained. But Anderson and the dean, the one in Stockholm and the one in Chicago, were really the ones that were in charge of it. Here's Anderson. It shows his... Yes, I saw that. Mm-hmm, there, right there. That's him. And he was from Sweden. Is anybody of the people mentioned here now in this Oterjud living, you think? They're all gone. So your husband, Eilidh Johnson, was one of the last remaining pastors. As far as I know. You never had any contact with anybody from that time? The son to that Carl Anderson is living. He's an organist in St. Charles, near Chicago. I know, yes. Organist in one of the Lutheran churches? No, in the Presbyterian church. He was the last I knew. That's the only one that I know of that's... There might be some out in Massachusetts still living. I don't know. They don't have them all, do they? There were Truetsens and some of those out there that might be. I don't know. How was the cooperation with other churches in that time, the Notaries? Was there a binding line between the Lutherans and the Covenants and the Christenalliansen and the Baptists and Methodists? Well, of course, for a while there, there were sharper lines between the Lutheran and the Mission. But I know those from all different churches came down to ours because we knew the different ones from there and were with them some. And he went and spoke in all the different churches. He was asked to speak in the different churches. So there wasn't that big a line then, but years before there had been. But after I grew up, we started going around to different churches. And then when our kids grew up, they belonged to a prayer group, and that was all the different churches. They were Mission and Lutheran and Methodist and all the different ones. And they're thinking of having a reunion now next year maybe. There's a group of them that have gotten together, and quite a few of those went in the ministry. Our son went in the ministry, and they were all very active. They had a radio program on Saturday. They met Saturday night for prayer, and then they had a radio program 15 minutes on Sunday mornings. And the children, they gave the program. And they went over Jamestown and surrounding areas. Mm-hmm. So how was the service now conducted in your church? Very free, like the Mission is done. You had an organist playing the organ? Mm-hmm. Yeah, we had an organist. What kind of hymnal was used? Well, we had this started in. They'd had a men's choir, and then they started in on that Swedish Society. And of course, they asked him to take that over. And he always enjoyed speaking, you know. And be together with people. Mm-hmm. He has an interesting way of taking people. Oh, yes. He liked people. So this Nordens Budskap, that was the hymnal of the church, and it was called the Svenska Evangeliska. I've got several of those if you want one. Please, I'll be happy. And there was the Swedish Evangelical Lutheran Mission Association in America. Mm-hmm. And these songs now, the leading songs, they're all Swedish. Nothing in English. No, nothing was English. And were they taken from Swedish writing, or did they write them over here? Do you know some of the authors? Like Svensk Folkmelodia, Kärnande. Mm-hmm. So they took some. So this church was not organized in Sweden? It was organized in Sweden? Well, it was really from the Försterlandsstiftelsen in Sweden. And Bibla Trugnavänner, that's what it was the outcome of. Because there they belonged to the Bibla Trugnavänner and the Försterlandsstiftelsen. So here you have Martin Luther and you have Nils Frickman, is one author. I was confirmed by Andrew Frickman, Nils' son. Son? Oh, he was the pastor in the first covenant? Mm-hmm. And here you got some, though, in Lina Sandell also. Oh, yeah, there's a lot of Lina Sandell. Here you have one by Fanny Crosby. Mm-hmm, yeah. Quite a few of hers. But the title is Swedish. Mm-hmm. Lina Sandell, yeah, there's quite a few there. And here is one, Lovabjørn Emil K. And there's Ilo K. So this one was used, and you used an organ for the music. Mm-hmm. See, that was a little one-room schoolhouse, and then they built on. They did pretty good there, and they built on a little bit, put all those papers on. So how did the service start out then? Well, usually. It was 10 o'clock on a Sunday morning. Yeah, we had Sunday school, and then we had the service. And, well, usually there was Bible reading and a song and prayer, and then he would speak, and then a song. And it was just informal, just like you have any informal service. What kind of altar did they use? Did they use some picture or some, like the... It was a regular altar. They had a regular pulpit there, and they're railing around. I see. And they gave the nattvården, or what do you call it? We passed that. Used to pass that. Or small cups. Mm-hmm. No. We passed the one cup, I think we did, at the time. Oh, I see, from member to member. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And then the pastor gave the bread. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. In the benches, or did you go up to the... No, at the benches. In the benches. Uh-huh. And it was once a month? No, not any particular time, I don't think. I can't remember if it was once a month or not. That I've forgotten. More seldom, perhaps, or...? Well, it might have been that, once every month or every other month or something. It was, you know, several times. And then he read all the Bible, the... Mm-hmm. And then he just spoke. He had nothing, notes or nothing. No? Mm-mm, he just preached. All was free. And it was from the pulpit. Did he have a predikstude, as you call it? Oh, yes, uh-huh. Uh-huh. And he spoke then for about an hour or 45 minutes? Oh, no, he never spoke more than half an hour. Oh, I see. So he was shorter than the Lutherans then? Oh, yes, uh-huh. Uh-huh, because some people were reluctant to go to church because they were... Uh-huh....wet asleep, they said. Uh-huh. But with him... No, no, he comes to the point and he... I don't think he ever went over a half hour. Oh, I see. And they had quite a bit of singing and reading and so... And then some of the members in the church, could they also speak and... If they wanted to, they could. Did they read something out of the Bible? Well, not at the regular service, they didn't, but... They were the pastors. And then, yeah, he usually did. Well, if he called on one of them or wanted to, any Sundays, they, you know, instead of him, they could. But... So he continued there all from 1930 up to 19... 42. 42. And that was the end of the church. How about the baptism? Did he baptize them in the church? Either in the church or at home, but either way. Went to the funeral. Yeah, either way. And funerals, were they conducted in the church? Either at the church or at the funeral home or at the home, wherever. So... And the same at the weddings, too. Church weddings, too? Mm-hmm. Either way. We did some at the house. Some came and knocked on the door and wanted to get married, and he married them. And if they came to the church or they wanted to have it in the church and have a regular big wedding, that was all right, too. Did they knock on the door without reservation for everything? A couple times we had some that did. So he had to be ready? Yeah, I remember once I was getting supper and someone came and knocked on the door and wanted to get married. You had to be the witness, then I thought. So that was what happened. And the cemetery, was that shared with others? This is page number two. It's a continuation of an interview with Mrs. Alice Johnson, Jamestown, New York. She died on July 17, 1985. So he only practiced in Swedish, then? That's all. That's what he knew. And you had no trouble to understand it, then? People in the church, they knew every line. So they felt comfortable then. How about now when someone who was an old-timer died later on in life in the 50s and 60s and also up in the 70s, because he performed, I suppose, funerals at some occasions. Or how about sick hearts now? Did you also visit them in their homes at the hospital? Of course, we weren't that many. You know, it wasn't that much. But the old-timers, they wanted to hear the Swedish budskap. From the Nordens budskapen, Lina Sandell's song, Tryggar kan ingen vara. Which one in this book now was the most asked for? Oh my, I don't know. Did they have any particular one they liked to sing? You could hear by the singing in the church, they really put their mind into it. Do you remember any special one? I don't know. No, I'm not very musical, so music to me isn't, you know... Your husband, could he play? Oh, he could sing, he could play. He played by ear, and he had a very good voice. He sang a lot. And he did solos and everything. So he... I don't know, there's several that we're used to, but... It's a big book, and it was used every Sunday. And it was the only one they used. They didn't reprint it or make it... They changed it, like the Lutherans, the Covenants, they changed it every ten years. They didn't... No, no. They stayed with the same one. Yeah, they had the most that I remember. That's the only one I remember of us having. Was there no talk about going into English at that time with the servants and singing? Well, they did towards the... But then we were so few, you know, that they didn't think that they really... You know, they would start going to other churches too. And some came there, and then they would belong to other churches too, you know. And we got to be after the... Swedish went more and more away. Because the people started not coming over after the immigration quit, you see. Then they weren't coming. And so pretty soon there weren't too many. So most of those that were there knew the English and didn't know the Swedish. And those that were growing up, well, they'd had it, they understood it. But now our children, they understood most of it, but they didn't speak it. You mentioned, Mrs. Johnson, that you spoke Swedish all the time in your home with your grandparents. Most of the time, uh-huh. So when you married Elope in 1928, on December 5th, did you also exclusively use the Swedish language? We did quite a bit when we went together. That was... We switched. He was trying to learn the English, and we were trying to teach our children Swedish. And we were sort of struggling with both languages. But finally with his work with the Hoovers, and with the children going to school, and that, it finally turned over to the English, so we kind of lost out on the Swedish. So your kids now, you had how many? Five. Five of them. Three boys and... Four girls and one boy. We lost two boys. How did they react now with this language question? I mean, they could hear you speak Swedish. Did they answer you back in Swedish? No, English. But they understood. We could talk to them in Swedish. They would answer us in English. And we had a babysitter. She would not talk English. She had been here for many years, but she made up her mind she was not going to learn English. And she stayed here until she died. And she talked to our kids in Swedish all the time. And they... Oh, yes. She was in her 80s, 70, 80s. She never spoke English. Never spoke. And she helped her son. He had a soft drink company. You know, he sold pop, all kinds of pop, soft drinks. And she weighed on people and everything. She would not speak English. And she understood it. The kids would talk to her in English. She would answer them in Swedish. And they would talk to her in Swedish. Or she would talk to them in Swedish. And they would answer her in English. And you never heard her speak in English? Never. She never would say in English. But how could she persist in the society? She did. So she stuck with the world. What was her name? Mrs. Hornell. Hornell. She was from Sweden, of course. Oh, yes. What was the kind of idea she got to... I don't know. Because the children, of course... Her children here and her grandchildren. But it made no difference to her. She just talked to her Swedish and that was it. So that was an idea. Did she attend your husband's school? Oh, yes. She came with us. And she was in our home much. And so... And she attended the whole time she was around. You had good help with her to be a good Swedish teacher. You could depend on her. Oh, yes. So I think what our children learned in Swedish, they learned more from her. Because after we got married, we taught when the children started coming, we started in English. And from then on, it was English all the time. More and more. Because he needed it in his work. And the children were using it in school. And so we just... English took over. Now when they went over to Sweden, they were wishing they had learned the Swedish more than they did. So do they still understand it? There isn't much you can say but what they know what you're talking about. But they don't want to express themselves in Swedish. Well, two of them took a little bit in school. But not enough to really... They can say a little now and then. When people talk, they know. But they don't... They can't carry on a conversation. The oldest girl, I think, can. When Ela's sister was here, she took her uptown and went shopping. And she could... You know, things in the store, she knew. And could tell my sister-in-law what they were. So after this church disbanded, the whole family went into the first children. And then he started... He was actually the founder of the Swedish society. Well, Mr. Sanborn had it before. It was started before then. A short time before. But then he continued on there for 41 years. Then he continued, 41 years. He was in charge of it. So he had a tremendous interest. And a lot of members were taking it. You had a big membership. We had up to 560 for a while. But then you see, now no one comes over. And now not as many use Swedish. So now our meetings even, our minutes are in English. The last two years. Is that because of impossible to get any Swedish... Can't get any speakers and secretaries. Greta was the last secretary we were able to get. But now the last one is gone. So you can't... You had to transfer over. So what did you discuss at those meetings in the 1940s and 50s, for instance? What kind of project did you have? To teach the young ones Swedish and customs? We just had good devotional programs. We had music, singing and speaking just like what we had at church. So that was the first Lutheran Church auxiliary, so to speak, then? Well, not auxiliary really. It was just... You see, they had ladies' aides and they had missionary groups and Lutheran leagues. It had been a brotherhood. And then it went into the Swedish society because they got to be more or less. So you had 500 members. You took in Baptists and Methodists. It doesn't matter what... Oh, no, we took in anyone. And you had monthly meetings? Except January. Then we always set up the whole program. And so we didn't... Usually, you see, we met the first Tuesday of the month and that was prayer week. And so we... And in a big church like First Lutheran, there were so many conflictions that it was hard to get another Tuesday. So we just... And with getting the program set up and everything, we just decided that we wouldn't have the January meetings. So we met all the other months except January. So he devoted most of his time to this group, then, you would say? Oh, yeah. He spent a lot of time. That was really his life, the Swedish society. And then, of course, he had his sweeper. He had his own business. He still continued? Oh, he continued. See, he started on his own with that, and he had his own shop for many years. So that became a pretty good business, then? Oh, he did a very good business in the... His sales and service. Still Hoover? And he stuck right with the Hoovers. And, yeah, he rented a place up there on Pine Street, and then he went down on 2nd Street, and then he moved over another place on 2nd where they tore up and did that urban renewal now. And that's where he had his last shop there, and he did very good at that. People still have been calling. Even the last year he was alive, they were calling, wanting to know. And he had retired in 1970. He sold off then? Uh-huh. He sold out. So what year or period of time was the best sales period? Was it after the war or during the war? After. It was after, yeah. People got more money? Oh, yes. It was pretty hard all during the war. It was a real depression. Yeah. I know even with our five kids, all of us, sister-in-laws and some, we would switch, you know, we'd send the clothes when one child grew out of them. If the next family, my cousins, and we'd give the others, and we'd send them around to each other to get along. So it was a tough time. It was tough, really. Yeah. But after that it picked up, and he really, after he went on, while he was in with the Hoovers, he didn't do as good, but after he went on his own, he did very good. And, of course, people respected him, and he did good work, and he was well-known and well-liked, and he liked people. So he did very good. And you also went back to work after your last child went on, when you arrived. They could take care of themselves. Do you still have the Swedish nursemaid to help you out in the home and so on? The one that only spoke Swedish, you said. Oh, no. No, she died. Yeah, she passed away when our, let's see, when our middle girl, the third girl was born. She was just a few months old when this lady passed away. Then we had another older lady that was Swedish, too, that used to take care, and then she passed away here, oh, maybe ten years ago. So how was the language now? There's always been a problem. Some like to hang on to it. Some churches hang on to it too long, they said. Yeah, we had quite a time in both Lutheran and Missionary, you know. So then they dropped all the young ones. See, when I was confirmed, then they were starting to have the English after that. I went to class after I was English, and then from then on they had English. And the services, you know, they didn't know which to have, and finally it was very confusing. So they dropped out more and more, and that was when we had to close up because we had to give up the Swedish. But this lady you were talking about now, that refuses to speak English, she had no trouble to go to church and listen to an English sermon, though. She could— Well, they talked Swedish then. At that time. They still had a— If she had gone, for instance, to an English church, she would understand what they were talking about. I imagine she could understand. She wouldn't answer. No, sir. She just would not learn English. She wouldn't speak English, then. No, sir. She wouldn't even talk to our children in English or anyone. She never mixed words either? Never mixed. She kept it. Did people do that much when you were growing up? No, no. She didn't speak Swedish? We had neighbors on our side, and on one side I would talk Swedish to the man and English to the lady. On the other side I'd talk Swedish to the—just the reverse. If I was talking to one, I'd talk Swedish. If I turned to the other one, I'd talk English. You had no trouble? I just never thought. Just automatic. Just like that, automatically? It was just that way. It was so automatic that on one side of our street they were all Swedish, but one was Catholic family. The other side were all Catholic, but one was Swedish. And all of us Swedish kids, of course, were— and when we went to each other's houses, sometimes we'd talk Swedish to their parents, sometimes English. And whichever one we talked Swedish, the one parent would talk—learn English more. We'd talk English to them, and if they talked Swedish better, we'd talk Swedish to them. Us kids never—we just—it was just automatic. You never thought about it? They never gave us—sometimes—and even I know when Nilo would be up and he'd speak, all of a sudden he'd say something in English and Swedish, and I'd say, this is Swedish, they'd say, and then he'd forget that he was saying something in English. Oh, they were very particular at first, that he not use any English, but then little by little, it crept in. How about the Swedish, like, or the people that came from Sweden, like Elof Jansson there, and especially those who were older people, up in the 30s and 40s, they had trouble, though. Didn't they mix Swedish any? They said, Stolten— Oh, yeah, they got to doing that, you did more or less. They had a rough time to get hang of it. But when you went to school, you had no difficulty. You never thought about the difficulties? No. You could do the English in school and— Yeah, uh-huh. I was just so used to doing it Swedish at home, and then I, well, I didn't talk much English until I started in school, of course, with the neighbor kids, a little of that. Were they all Swedish around your neighborhood? Most of all, the one side of the street was Swedish, and the other was English, but there was, so they used Swedish in the home so much then, that, you know, and in the relatives, when the relatives got together, they used Swedish. So, you know, in our own circle, we used Swedish, but then if we got out, why, we used the English. And, but that, I don't know, it just came natural. How about company now? Did they go together, like in Sweden, they had a custom, you know, to come together for elvakaffe, you know, and— Yeah. Did they do that here too, continue? Oh, yes, they used to. The ladies came together, you mean? Oh, yeah, they used to. They did? My aunts and grandmother and them. How often did they do that? Oh, every now and then, you know. Oh, they had to make an excuse? Oh, several times during the week, you know, the neighbors would. And, of course, my aunts, every names day and every birthday, or anything, they always— They were involved. To get an excuse to get together. Uh-huh. So, and then they were talking Swedish, of course. Oh, yeah. No English people invited? No, well, if they were— Did they gather with the neighbors, though, of non-Swedish? Oh, yeah. They did? Uh-huh. There were no Italians living close to where you lived? No, there weren't any on our street. But there were in the factory where Elif worked, where my dad worked. How was the cooperation between the workers of different— Oh, fine. There were no skirmishes, or— There were Italians and Albanians. I know there was one Albanian that was very friendly. And even when he went to Albania, he brought a gift back for me, to my dad, you know, to give to me. I was just a little tot. And, of course, when I started school, I walked to school with the— Well, there were Italian and Jewish kids down the street, that I walked to school with all the time. And you never thought about the different nationalities when you were growing up then? That never bothered us any. You never entered the— Yes, but how about when you started to get older, to date boys? Oh, well. What did your mother say then? Well, I didn't date any that weren't— Who gave you the idea? My mother died when I was 13. Oh, I see. So she never— How about your grandma? Was she still living when you were older? Yes, but— What did she teach you, your grandma? Well— Did she sit down and talk common sense with you, what you should do here and you should watch out for— No, she didn't bother. She let my mother— Take care of you? Uh-huh. She died, though. Did she get responsible for that? Yes. Well, no. My aunt was more than my grandmother to me. My grandmother lived a couple miles from there. And, of course, she came—she would come up now and then. But at 13, I was pretty well on my own. My dad took over. He was like a mother and a father, both. And he didn't marry or— Uh-uh. I see. So did you take care of the household then? Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. I baked bread for one school. And he taught me to cook and bake. But my mother hadn't taught me. And so— So you had to learn earlier how to bake. Yeah. How about washing? Did you— Oh, yeah. I did the washing with a scrub board. Was it a big family, though? No. I was just—I was the only child. Oh, in your family. I see. Uh-huh. So— That's right. And then my grandmother and—well, my grandmother didn't move up until later. See, we had a two-family house, and we rented the upstairs. And she moved up later. See, she moved up the year before we were married, I believe, because my grandfather died, and she moved up later. And that's why you started to work quite early then, too? Uh-huh. At the— Well, I started after I got through high school. I was going to go to college, but I didn't. So I started to work at a job at Crescent Tool. And there was an office, you said? Uh-huh. How did you get that job? Through some friends or your father or— I think I went to the employment. So what were you able to do then, perform at that time? What kind of work? Were you type? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I did typing in short end. In school? Oh, yeah. In high school. Oh, short end also? Uh-huh. Yeah, I had typing in short end in high school. So I worked first in the advertising there and then in the— in the orders department and parcel post department. And then when I went to the Atlas, then I did— well, I did payroll and orders there. Was Crescent and Atlas unionized at that time? No. No, but I just—well, I don't know. I guess they were. I guess they were. You didn't feel the unionization? No. We're having a reunion tomorrow night, the Crescent Tool girls, and the one down the hall. We started school in first grade together. And we graduated together, got work together, and we could interchange our jobs, work together, switch our jobs, and we worked the whole time together. And she was my bridesmaid. Now we're living on the same building, on the same floor. So you have a lot of memories, though. So— To share them. So you mentioned that Crescent Tool, now that was Carl Peterson's work. Yeah. You remember him, of course. Oh, yeah. He was in the office there. What kind of a guy was he? Was he soft-spoken, sweet, or—? Uh-huh. Very, very pleasant. Very friendly and pleasant. A little tiny guy. Very nice. Yeah, he was a very nice guy. So you get this idea about the Crescent Tool industry. Did he invent it somehow himself, or—? I suppose he did. I don't know too much. I think it tells in that saga. But it was a big company. Oh, yeah. That was a big company. We were—oh, we were 20 or 30 in the office. In the office. We were two floors, two floors of office. And it was in the 20s. Yeah. Because I quit there in 20—well, in 26, and then I went down to Crawford. Our Sunday School superintendent was one in the office down at Crawford, and my dad wasn't too well, so I was kind of wanting to get down there, and he needed secretaries, so he asked if I'd change and get down there. So then I went down and worked there. And that was just below the hill from where we lived, so I could get home at noon and everything. And I'd be right there where my dad was working. He worked on the bus planer in the machine shop. Elif worked in the factory quite a while, too, before he started selling. But the hard times then drove him up the streets to sell. So you remember the Depression then in the— Oh, yes, very well. It was a tough time. Very tough. There were a lot of people. Who suffered the most, do you think the families or the single person that wasn't married? Well, I don't know. We just got married, and I know it was tough for us. Because the married couple now, which they couldn't very well move away from Jamestown because they didn't know what they were getting into. But the single guy— Yeah, they could move around. They moved away to Pittsburgh and Cleveland. Yeah, different places. Did they come back to Jamestown later on, the one that moved out in the 30s? I don't know. Some probably did and some didn't. They made a further move. And all the organizations, Horsa, Viking, and Brotherhood, they all— We never belonged to any of those. You didn't belong to those? We didn't belong to any. You didn't belong to any church? We belonged to the church, and that was it. That was his whole life, and that had always been mine. And we were just active in the church, and that was it. And that's the way our children have been. Were they—you mentioned your one of the sons— He's a pastor, and I sent him on as a pastor. What church denomination is that? Lutheran. Lutheran. Yeah, he went to Augustana. I see. So he is a pastor. Yeah, he's been—he interned in Texas, and then he was fully—he was ordained. He was called to Dallas, and so they had just—they met in a little—in a school, in an auditorium of a school, and he worked that up, so they built a new church, and they were over a thousand. And then, of course, now they've gone down a few years. Now, five years ago, he started a new mission in Garland. That's about 30—20, about 30 miles from there. And he—now he's got about 350 in his new congregation. He started knocking on doors and didn't know a soul. Went on 5,000 homes. He's got about 350. And so he—oh, I've got it. So he's—yeah. So I suppose his dad was proud of him, of his son, following the ministry. But your husband, he took over Fjellstedt and Rosenius. He always read Rosenius every day. Oh, he did? Uh-huh. Not Fjellstedt or the others, but Rosenius, he always read that. What did he say about Waldenstrom? Well, Waldenstrom, Fjellstedt, I don't know. They were— He didn't stress that much. He didn't stress much either, those, but Rosenius, he did. He's got that—what do you call it? This thing here, too. Yeah, in Christendom. There he had it framed, yeah. But he has that book, and he used to read that and that in his Bible every day. So he was active all the way? Very. He always studied that, always had, and always did. Did he go back to Sweden at any time to visit? Well, he went when his mother died. Let's see. Yeah, when his mother died. Well, he went when his father died the year before we were married. And then when he came back, then we got married. And then his mother lived to be 97. And then, see, he went home and settled up everything for— and the mother moved in with one of his sisters, and then she lived to be 97. And then we went over in 1964, the first time I'd been over there. And then in 1970, we went over and took our youngest daughter with us. And then in 1974, we went again alone. And then our children went two years ago. The son that's a pastor and his wife and youngest son, and then our daughter here that's a nurse and her youngest daughter, and then our youngest daughter that's in Dallas. They all went over and visited. So they have met the— They have met all— —the cousins and all. I'm glad that they have met them now, so now they correspond with them and know them. You see, that was how we met was because our family were neighbors. And he came with greetings to my dad when he came over, his brother, and he came down with greetings, and that was when I got to know him. And, of course, he was interested in the church, and I was active in the young peoples. So then he went with me to the— First Covenant. —to the First Covenant. We got to going there, and then we started going together. We found out later on that way back we're cousins, way, way back, three, four generations. I see. So you were instead there for about three years before you married? Yeah. So he went to the Covenant Church then. Did he talk about starting another church then? No, he would go to this other little church too, you know, and we went to the mission. But then they needed someone, and then we would go there too, and then when they needed someone to take over, when they asked him, we just went there.