 Well, as far as the, when I was confirmed it was in Swedish and we had a memorized Lutheran catechism and we had a public examination one Sunday. The next Sunday we'd have communion, our first communion. And nowadays I think maybe they try to teach qualities of good living. I don't know, they certainly don't, as far as I can understand, teach the fundamentals. But maybe they'll, I haven't been in to witness the confirmation classes, but I think it's a general discussion of right and wrong and trying to be responsible church members. I don't know how much they really stick to teaching the creed. I question that. Some pastors use the, they give them the cassette to listen, you know, whatever they feel like. Yes, that's right. How could that be a good learning tool? Because you know kids, they like to listen to TV instead and take it the easy way. That's right. So we'd have to, every, in fact from the time we were in class one, the kindergarten on up through Sunday school, we'd have certain parts of the catechism we'd have to learn and then the next part and the next part and then finally when we were ready for confirmation it would be a grand review of what we had been going over and it would, every time I know that we'd meet the minister would have a certain section that he'd quiz us on that we'd have to re-remember, recall everything we had learned and rattle it off and then bawd-ay-ah-dep and then we'd have to rattle that off. I don't know that we learned maybe an awful lot because many times I don't think we knew what the words meant. Oh I think that's true with all of them. In fact one good Catholic told me herself, she says she, there's certain words there that she didn't know what they meant until about 20 years later. So I think that's been true in other churches too. So they are still perfecting it, the religion in other words. They have been trying to improve and improve. Yes. Do you think it has gone like Aspyrn, Hasselquist, Allan Carlson, Norelius, even your father, what would they say if they go to a service you think or sit in a meeting for instance? I don't think they'd like it. You don't think so? No I don't. Because they were brought up that way and I don't think they would feel that it was thorough enough. Maybe what they would see of today they would approve of but I think they would feel that the basic need had been left out. That's my guess. So. Well they used to have a Hus for Hood or two. And I know my grandfather had that. He'd go around to their room and then he'd remind them, you know, and then he'd line up the family and then go through the door. Don't you think they scared people a little bit though? Yes. My mother told me that the women used to cry and sometimes they had forgotten the lines and the minister would come along with vodder dip and the house mother, the mother of the household would have to come along with saying it and she had forgotten it, you know, and she'd weep. We don't have that today but we had the driver's license to take. Yeah we had the driver's. Well I suppose people are different. Some say they didn't mind the Hus for Hood. In other words they thought it was fun, people come together and they had coffee and cookies after and cake and everything. But some were really mentally disturbed. Well Aunt Lydia told me that many of the older women especially would cry. Yes. Aunt Lydia told me that. There was too much respect for religion in other words without the feeling of insecurity. Well if they couldn't rattle off everything why then it was bad. I think anybody when he comes to a final examination of anything experiences a certain amount of tension and they would experience that tension when they would be called to come back and explain. The pastor was a bad one to meet. Well they didn't have Hus for Hood all the time. No I suppose they didn't. No. But the pastor was respected, the person in the community. Very highly. Yes he was. How about the pastor's wife? Well I know my grandmother was considered quite a help when anybody needed any kind of help. She usually, say in sewing they buy a bolt of material and she'd cut the material for the dress goods. And also she was supposed to have general idea as to household remedies for sickness. She was supposed to be able to help. Who helped with that? What did she learn? Did she read a lot of papers? I don't know where she learned it. Chances are, well maybe she knew more than the rest of them, I don't know. But perhaps she read about it, but it maybe just general cleanliness and some of these household remedies, you know, they were worthless. But anyway that's what the saying was, to use this and to use that in case of such and such. So you're home now, you have access to a lot of different publications because through the college I understand. Oh yes. Your father brought home. Yes. And what did they read now? Did you read the Swedish American Tribune for instance? Yes. And then Kittnäna Hemmet. Yes. And in fact practically everything put out by Augustana Synod was in Swedish except of course the English version for the companion. And Abrahamsson would rule of course with the Swedish. Yes, I didn't know his name. Abrahamsson. And then later on came in then of course with the English. But it was essentially Swedish in everything. And I know whenever we had the ministers in general who would meet in our house between meetings, they preferred to use Swedish. No, they changed it almost every quarter. In publications they shifted around and they had new ideas and brain sessions they called it. But when you were growing up then publications from the hand of Abrahamsson and Ernest Ryden or Rydin, did they go in the same rut all the time or did they change abruptly sometime? No, I think whatever change was made was made by the man that entered the office, that succeeded. Now for instance Lindahl, SBA Lindahl had that Augustana. And then maybe if there would be a change when Abrahamsson came in, maybe fundamentally he'd have some ideas so the change would be made by the person and that would be consistent while he was there. It wasn't any upheaval. So there was no personal input then of those editors, do you think? I don't think so. Because he had to have their approval from the Senate and they were stern. Oh yeah, I think he watched that feeling in the Senate all right. Because he could have been out of a job if he tried to get a little too liberal. So the layman's input into those publications was minimal? I think so. As the pastors? That's right, I'm sure it was. In fact, Hassequist always saw too that whenever anybody was, when the Senate was going to meet why he would exhort the minister to see too that the lay delegates were of the proper mind and agreeing with Hassequist of course. So they stay on a long time then, Hassequist and Carlson? That's right. And Abrahamson was there for a long time. So those people were happy people then when they passed away in other words of what they had done. Not as much as Hassequist and Carlson, they had done a good day's work and they could see the fruit of it. But they wouldn't agree to anything what they see today. What happened, your father didn't go through the joining the Germans and the Danish and the Finnish in 1962 to form the Lutheran Church? They talked about many mergers. Even in your father's lifetime? Yes, we were having conversations or dialogues with the Presbyterians. I remember my father talking about it and they felt that there was a lot of agreement between the Presbyterians and the Lutherans and so that's about as far as they came, except the element I think of communion. And we had dialogues with the Episcopalians and found much agreement. And I know my father saying, and I think about it every time I'm in church on Sunday, when they would say the Holy Catholic Church and the Augustana people didn't like that word Catholic because they felt it would be maybe giving problems to other people and the Episcopalians declared that they had found no such problem. I remember my father talking about that. Only there was a discussion of mergers. But I remember there were discussions that I heard with the Presbyterians and with the Episcopalians. Not with the Covenants, your father? Not to my knowledge and I know when I talked about it with my brother who was then a minister, I said they were talking about mergers and he says, I think it would be a good idea for the Lutherans to merge first before we merge with any other. He says we Lutherans ought to get together. Well that's been happening now, except of course the Missouri Lutheran Church, they're just holding their nose up high against us. They are too orthodox in their thinking. I don't know what it is and I have some good friends who are Missouri Lutherans but they all seem to think that we're way beneath them. Why wouldn't you say that the Covenants though are very close? We are Swedish here, most of them, and they never think about going together. Because we really were together in the first place. Well maybe they will someday. But according to your knowledge you never heard that discussion? I never heard it. They never mentioned it? I can't say that it didn't happen but I'd say that I didn't hear it. Yes. I never heard it either. No. It sounds like it's impossible to even think about it. It's part of the question. So how was this, they took a long time, that was during Dr. Bergendorf's reign of course, when he was the president of the college. They were still at the theological seminary then and there was pros and cons for it. He was one that was against the merger, wasn't it? He went in both directions. I think he was in favor of their separating at one time. When he was still in the seminary. And I know my father felt that definitely the seminary should be part because it was the idea of having a graduate school. And he wanted to separate. And my father afterwards said, who can deconrad talasel? And he was very much disappointed. And then after a while, he seemed to think it was all right. So I don't know what, I think he went back and forth. Some say that the pastors were the driving force because they could get better pensions and so forth. And the people who left. Well, as far as their arguments were concerned, I don't know. My father definitely felt when he got the seminary building erected, which is now Founders Hall, that he had at least stopped this movement. But there was still, I know, Reverend Peterson, Peter Peterson, he was always talking about separating, separating. And my father could not see it. It was definitely against my father's idea. To him, it was the graduate school, of which he hoped to have many more in time. So that was nationally embracing the whole nation. Because they had 1,248 pastors at one time. Every state was represented, more or less. There was one question that I wasn't sure that you were clear on last time. I'm sure maybe you are, but I wasn't sure about it. We speak about Augustana College and Theological Seminary, which was the child of the Augustana Synod. Now, all the other schools that appeared were definitely the children of the conferences. And the Synod had nothing to say about these conferences and their schools. Well, the Synod did have something to say about Augustana College, because it owned it. And the situation was bad for Augustana, because when all these conferences, especially those that had schools of their own, would come to the Synodical meeting, they'd vote down anything that came up for Augustana. Because they said, we got our own school to take care of. So Augustana became a stepchild, in a way. And these conference schools were free to do according to the directions of that conference. And for example, maybe I made it clear last time, that the Reverend L.A. Johnston became president of the Synod. He told my father, there'll be no dramatics at Augustana. He was against the theater in every sense of the word. And I'd been looking forward to the fact that I would, as soon as I got to be a freshman, I was going to take part in those dramatic clubs. That was ruled out. And so I didn't get any of that experience that I'd been looking forward to all the time. And while in the conference school, they could, if they chose, have plays and things like that. So Dr. Johnston had no jurisdiction over the Augustana Telfer? No, because they were children of the conference. And so he couldn't directly boss them, but he felt he could boss Augustana. And well, my father tried to be diplomatic, because he was very much in favor of dramatics. And in fact, in his early days, he did all he could. We had Tegnere, and we had Shakespeare, and oh, and quite a lot. And nowadays, they even have some of these plays on Sunday. So I've held that against L.A. Johnston every... So he had power enough then to tell the rest of the board to work with him? Nothing doing with any plays. In fact, when he was a pastor in Rockford, they bring it out in their books about how the women of the church, they were having some kind of a program, and they were having a kind of a little playlet. When he found out they were having a playlet, he came down there, there wouldn't be anything like that. But two of his sons were interested in dramatics, and went out to California and became quite active in dramatics in the movie field. That's a strange... I know! But I remember Johnston, and as I say, I still hold it against him, because I was so deeply disappointed. So they can have a devastating ending. So they continued all the way as long as he was the president? Yeah, and as soon as he was out, I... You made sure he came in again? Well, I was gone from the college at that time, and I thought it was very narrow. And in the story of Rockford and the First Lutheran Church, why they bring that up about his peculiarities, and have this story of his being so against theater. That was a sin. But here is one thing I want to ask you now. Bilder from Jubeltesten. By Ina, Anna Olsson. Have you seen that? No, I haven't. It's very asky, sir. That's Ola Olsson's daughter. Oh, Mia? Yeah. Well, she called her Ina sometimes, and sometimes she called her Mia, I think. She writes... You know, that's like a comic. I know. But how could they take that to Augustana? The student pastors and presidents of the synod and everything. She says in here that the bishop came with a gold... Well, she says about the rector for Uppsala came, for the University of Uppsala. And she says that he was so smart that he couldn't teach her any more. That was the end of it. But then she talks about the bishop gave out stars, and her father dreamt the same night he was giving him a star, too. And then some pastors say they can't read it properly, you know, by the Jesus followers. They never got a star for doing anything. So they wonder, why did the Swedish pastor get something? But you never read this book? No, I have never read it. You never heard your father discuss it either? I mean, her writing? The book she wrote about? We usually laughed about it, and many of her writings. You know her personally? Oh, yes. And she had a tender humor, and maybe would poke fun a little bit at the misconceptions of the translation. And I think that's what they enjoyed, and maybe would tolerate a lot. She would say that maybe they wouldn't agree with... I'm surprised she couldn't get a printed, as far as I'm concerned. It was printed, I was not a bookworm. Well she worked, as far as I'm concerned. Well, she did. Yeah, she had a regular office there, and would go there every day. Oh, I see. Yes. And she was never married? No, none of them were married. No two girls? Three. Three girls? Anna, Maria, and Lydia. Oh, I see. There was a Lydia you mentioned before, yeah? Mm-hmm, yeah. I see. Oh. Yeah. And she was here in Augustana. Oh, she wrote also in Augustana? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Regular English, though? Well, it... No, no, no. Swedish? This was Swedish. This was Swedish, and it would be... Maybe afterwards, it would be printed in the book. No, she had an office up there, and was there regularly. She is very humoristic, though, because she calls one of the things here, the concilium squaloristicum. It's the world's biggest club, 500 million members. Oh, dear. So she describes them, and the delegates come in, and Pa takes them in, and Mother has to give them extra spare bedroom, and they have visitors with them that didn't expect a thing like that. Yeah. There's probably a lot of truth in it, though. Oh, yes. Sure. But her father died in 1900, or 19... It must have been 1900. Yes. Or 1899. 1899, it was at the turn of the century. Did her mother live on then after... No, the mother, I think, died before, and the father was left with the three girls when they were more or less in their teens. So they grew up then at Augustana? Yeah. When he was the president there. Yeah, she talks about the delegates, and... She, see, her father had one time had been in Kansas, Lindsburg, Kansas, and then later on, see, my mother was teaching school down there in the elementary department, and then she quit to go home to make plans for marrying my father, and then Mia followed her, and they kept Mia only one year, apparently they weren't satisfied with her work. Maybe she was restless. I don't know. So she worked at the Book Concern? That's right. Did she go through Augustana, or was she older than when she... You know, that's one thing I... I question that any of them got an A, B. Oh, I see. But I don't know. I question. Lydia had a job with a company down in Moline for years and years and years and years, and then she quit that and came in to work at the Denkman Memorial Library when it was first. She was at the desk, and I don't know that she was prepared as a librarian, but my father said there was an awful lot of kick because apparently she didn't know how to handle things, and so finally he says they simply had to let her go. Was the under Pastor Grenier, or what was his name? No, this was under Scarstet. Oh, he was the... When we moved to the Denkman Memorial Library, Scarstet had charge. Oh, he was in charge then. Now, how was he as a regular person? He was a very good, thorough, and a brilliant man, and he took care of the moving of the library from the rooms in Old Main into... He had a tremendous job there, and he was the chief, one in charge. Grenier was still, he still hung on in the Denkman Memorial, but I don't know that they let him do anything much except sit at the desk now and then. I know he used to be at the desk. He and Lydia, I guess both of those, they didn't quite dare to fire, and they kept him on and kept him on. I mean, they let him go, and then they had to fire Lydia because, well, she didn't know anything about library, and I guess she'd have her own pet ideas, and this was it. She didn't have the Dewey system. No, neither did he, neither did Grenier, not the slightest. How could people fire? Well, I suppose they knew each book done by the covers, so to speak. I mean, when students wanted something, they were probably more adverse than the librarian at the time, so they could find what they wanted. Well, of course, when they had a room or a series of rooms there in the Old Main, the library wasn't very big. They could remember where a book was, not necessarily... You could reach out and then... Mm-hmm....several floors like it is now. How about Marcus Garstead's father? Did you meet him? I don't remember meeting him. I might have met him because many times visitors came to our house. I don't remember meeting him, but he was an odd duck. Well, he was, though, he was. Oh, yes. According to the story, he never contributed a cent to Marcus' education. Is that right? Yeah. And, well, maybe he didn't have much cash, but he was a peculiar man. And my father did all he could while Marcus was in college to help him or to get people who had money. So, he went through Augustana then? Yes. He graduated, I think it was 1910. Anyway, my father got what financial help he could through friends who were inclined to give to help Marcus. And then, of course, Marcus was a brilliant and a hardworking student. And so, my father says, you take up library work and you will have a job here. But, as I say, his father, now I remember, this is sort of telling tales too, when Mrs. Constant Esbjerne, that's the son of L.P., he had a ministry out in California. And he liked to go out on camping trips and Aunt Sophie, his wife, would do what she could to pack things and to cook the meals when they were out in the wilds. And then Marcus Garstead's father, when he got out in the wilds, he used to enjoy being split naked. And Mrs. Esbjerne didn't like that. But she said, there he would be. He enjoyed being naked. I see. Even when other people were in the company? Well, of course, as far as I know, it was only Constant Esbjerne, his wife, whom I call Aunt Sophie, and their baby daughter at the time. They were the only three, and then he joined them. Aunt Sophie said she objected to that. She didn't. Naked men running around. But he didn't have any kind of affiliation to the religious denomination. I don't think it worried him very much. He was a free thinker. I don't know if he was or not, because he apparently thought a lot of my uncle, Uncle Phillip Andrean, that was my father's brother, and he attended church frequently when my uncle would have services. And I think he even played in some kind of a little orchestra they had on special occasions in the church. So I mean there was an association there. I don't know whether he was a member or not, and whether he was a free thinker or not. He seemed to like my uncle, and liked his servants. Skarstedt, he continued on at Agustina for many years as a librarian. For many years. And I know my father was quite disappointed when he decided to leave, but I suppose that's natural. Oh, he left during your father's term? Yes, and I know when my father was about to be retired, he, Skarstedt, came up to the house I guess he felt, he said everybody was feeling so bad that Andrean was leaving, and so he came up. And we had an awfully good time talking and laughing, and he says, here is everybody I've been seeing have been almost crying and grieving, and he says I come here and we're having a happy time, joking and laughing. Your father, no, he retired in 1934? Yeah. And then he took a parish up in Wilmar? In Wilmar. Not right away, a year or so later. Did he feel restless then after leaving? He wanted to have something to do, more constructive, or he couldn't retire completely I suppose? I think he was restless, and this position was an interim pastor because they had gotten in financial conditions that were very bad, and so they asked my father to just take care of things until they got a pastor. So during that time my father was back in the old campaign business of raising money, and got the church back, it was going to be in the hands of the receivers I think, and it was going to be taken over, and he really had to do some hard work there to get the people to come across. So your parents moved up to Minnesota? Yeah, they lived there then for about two years. Well they picked up everything? Well not exactly. They took some things, but their house here, they rented temporarily to Martin Johnson and his family, you know Eleanor Johnson, well she was the daughter, so she lived there. The folks were glad to have somebody in the house. And so the furniture and everything was there except what Mama had taken, but Mama hadn't taken very much. And then the people came in with things, and my father jokingly said, each one bring in a chair, be sure that they don't match. And they managed to temporarily get along, but he got the church back on financial position. And that was during the height of the Depression? Yes. And he had a hard time, so he was back at his old job collecting money. How did he like that? Did he feel fulfilled? Well he enjoyed the work there very much, however I remember Pauls telling me, my brother, telling me that he hadn't met the quota to hand into the Synod, because he was more interested in seeing too that they got the mortgages paid and what not, so he didn't make his payment. His father sees for the first time the position. But he'd go in and try to get the minister to raise money for Augustana. Well this time he was raising money to keep the church from being sold. So he got a prime sample of all his works. Yeah I know. He'll be alive. He said he sees the other side of it now. And so he didn't make that quota that year, and he was, the powers that be from the Synod wrote and they wanted a certain amount of money, and Papa was using all of that money to pay off the mortgage. He had a very small salary, maybe nothing at all. I really don't know. I don't know. Because he had to make ends meet. That's right. More than one way. That's right. Oh I'm sure they saw too that he had enough to live on. I don't think it worried him any. So he died now in 1940? Forty. And your mother, she still lived another ten years? She lived until 48. And then he came down here to, he lived down here in Rock Island. Well no, my father, he bought a house that the college had a mortgage on in Moline. 2824 16th Street. And the college let my father buy it at the cost. So my father wasn't given that house. And as long as my father lived, he was putting in payments for the house. Then when he died, the board decided to cancel the payments and let my mother have the house, what was left. But my father had already been paying for years and years. So your mother now, she reminisced a little bit in the last days of her life. You mentioned in your dissertation about your family or your mother. In 1948 she married in Sweden. She went back a little bit in time. How did she sum up her life, so to speak? Well I know she said to me one time that my mother would roll in her grave if she could hear sometimes the way I talked. Because she would say sometimes we Swedes have to stick together. And she says my mother would roll in her grave with such thoughts. No I think my mother felt completely converted over into the Swedish element. And she always had great admiration for my father. She says I always felt he was a brilliant man and she always felt that his work was never truly recognized and that his worth was not realized. And well she died of cancer and she had a rough going there the last year especially. Your father, he died of a heart attack. Yes in the streets of Chicago. It was something like that. And a week before that he had been examined and the doctor said that he was in wonderful shape. His heart was in good shape. But my brother who was a doctor said at the time there was only one instrument and that was in New York that would have detected his problem. But what the doctors had here in this area didn't record what his problem was. So he died in a way it's a good way to go but it was kind of rough on everybody. How did he look back on his years? He was a little bit disappointed with this university idea which probably would have worked very well if they had listened to him. But there was one of the setbacks during this time. And he felt, he said here I had visions of a, starting really a university with many schools of various interests and he says I guess I have to be happy in just having a nice good college. No if all of the money that had been gathered for all these little conference schools which faded away anyway it would have made a world of difference. And besides that he was counting on the Swedes coming in while we got very, very few Swedes that really supported the Augustana Synod and the Lutheran body. They came over here and they joined the Methodist church and this church or that church and they didn't necessarily feel that they were a part of Augustana. Their father felt that every one, every Swede should have been part of Augustana. Well because that's really wishing a little bit much. Well today it's a complete different story. There are high percentage non-Lutheran. Yeah I know. So they have to solicit members or students. That's right. I know. Walks of life. That's right. And the chapel on the hill doesn't serve particularly the Lutherans. That's right. They're so all kind of different. Well of course nowadays there is that ecumenism or whatever you want to call it. And I think before they felt the Lutheran faith was the only faith and the rest of them were off base. Nowadays they have a broader view of Christianity. And all of that of course takes away a certain amount of the affinity toward the Swedish Lutheran element. It kind of disappeared. Yeah it's disappeared. Do you think the pastor has as much power as he had 50 years ago or 100 years ago? Or does the regular church go with things for himself? I think the pastor of the past could be, have sort of absolute power. Today I think he regards his responsibility to the community. Social services more than? Yeah I think so. Now to missions and to the local and toward generally following Christian principles. And whether we came from Sweden or whether we came from Timbuktu makes no difference. Of course in those early days the Swedes were coming over in droves and that stopped. She mentioned something very interesting, Aina or? Yeah, Mia. Mia, yeah. That they had a special napkin in their house. They called it tramp napkin. Every time it came a tramp at the door they had a special napkin on a regular tablecloth so he didn't soil it on. Did you have any tramps in your house when you came and begged for food? We had lots of tramps that stopped and we would usually give them sandwiches and let them go their way. I mean just hand it to them, wrap it up you know and hand it to them. But we had lots of tramps. I don't know. Were they Swedish? I don't know. She says that they all spoke Swedish and they all had relations in Colorado. Well, no, I don't think that they were necessarily Swedish. My mother thought many times that because we were situated there next to the college that they felt that it was an institution. So they were more brave than a regular household perhaps. And they would stop. And ask for food. Oh yes. Once in a while they would offer to do some work. Well my mother didn't have exactly any work. She never let any of them enter the house. And we would especially give them sandwiches or a piece of cake if we had one handy. That was in your childhood, no? As I grew up and they usually left a mark on the gate post. My mother would see too that that would be erased. Whatever the mark was that here I got food or here the food is no good or whatever. Because they had their own communication. My mother saw too that after a tramp visited she'd go out and look at that gate and she'd wash off the sign. Whether they didn't like the food or... So some of them were nasty. I mean even if you gave them something they expected more. Some of them didn't like it. Maybe well or maybe they... I don't remember they ever asked for money. But I know they wanted food. Oh my. We'd get them right and left. But it was quite common. Even my mother-in-law told me that they used to have regular tramps. And sometimes the tramps would come year after year the same old one. That is... They had a special trail. Yeah. And then wandered maybe further and further south during the winter. But... She mentioned about the special tramp. Yeah, no we never treated them with a napkin. Yeah, your mother really had an interesting life coming there from the junction city. Yes, that's right. And she raised seven children. Did she have any midwife coming into the house then? Because there was no hospitals at that time that she went to. My own mother? Yes. Well she had a doctor. A doctor. But then she'd have a woman to help her. Giving birth in her home. Oh, all of them. All of them were born in the home. All of them were born in the home. But the children of our high childbearing mothers, seven children, you had three children. Were you thinking about this, a lot of children, I mean they put her down so to speak, she couldn't do anything more than raise her children. She couldn't go out and work for them. No, no. It was not considered proper. So your generation, did you have a special thinking or feeling that you wouldn't have it that way? You liked to do something with your hands, whatever it was. That's right. So that's why you only had three children. I felt independent and I felt that I had a right to my interests and after my children were old enough, I got a job. I taught, went back to teaching school and I enjoyed it. And I didn't try to do it when the children were little, but people do nowadays. They manage with extra help. But I always believed that a woman should have that right. But as I was brought up, the general feeling was that a woman absolutely had no abilities. They looked at them as inferior to the men. That was just a general thought all over. Even among educated people? And even my mother, I know she would speak about, educate, of course I was the only girl, but in general it was her philosophy I think. She'd say, oh well, the men will be heads of families when the girls get married. I remember her saying that many times. So they never thought of, for instance, if a girl got married and became a widow, then it would be nice for her to have something to rely on, education and vocation. But she was supposed to marry again then. Well I don't know whether that was her philosophy or not. Divorces were unheard of. Oh, that was... They would never use that word. That was terrible. That was absolutely terrible. And not to be... But I was brought up in that atmosphere, and I know my brothers more than once would talk about the greatest cooks are men, the greatest poets are men, the greatest writers are men, and so on and on and on. And as I grew up, I sort of accepted the inferiority of women, but I resented it. And after a while I began to feel that they were all wrong in their ideas. Your father, now, he was more diplomatic or... He was diplomatic about that, that's right. What did he get at, the feeling you think? I don't know, because he was just a sweet person, I think. Because he was growing up in the same environment, I mean, not sure anyone was... Oh yeah, yeah, that's right. So I think he might have been influenced by it, and he had only one girl, as far as that's concerned, so... Were you favored, you think, of the seven children here? Was I what? For your father, did he favor you in some respect, you think, your father? Because you were the... I don't. I think he was quite fair all the way around. As far as his children, he was delighted that my oldest brother decided to become a minister. And then he did all he could to support my brothers who became doctors, doctor of medicine, dentist, and a lawyer. But I know when I decided to go back to school, well, I didn't expect him to help me, but he said, I wish I could help you. I mean, his attitude was... But at the time, he wasn't... Well, I said, that's all right, I can manage it. So he was proud of me, and all that. And he wanted you to have all kind of education to be prepared for future days. But I went back, of course I was married, and my husband helped me. But I insisted on going back to school, and then I got my master's degree in education, and I was on my way to get my PhD in English, when I felt that it wasn't the smart thing to do money-wise. So you didn't look for a Swedish pastor, dating a Swedish pastor? No. There was plenty of them, I suppose. No, in fact, I think I was pretty much opposed to pastors. To me, there were exceptions, but to me, pastors were a narrow-minded lot. You can count on that. And my experience with L.A. Johnston and his business... It took care of the whole thing. Yeah, and some of them were so contrary against anything in the study of science, that I couldn't understand why they should be that way. But to me, they were a narrow-minded bunch, and we had a lot of ministers that were narrow-minded. We can talk about it as we read their stories, about how they worked, and how they were scholars, and all that, and I don't see it. You saw it from a different point of view? I saw it from a different point of view. To me, I would have to have been desperately in love before I would have taken a minister. To me, just a minister was enough to say no, no. And I had admiration for many of the older ministers. But there were... And as I said, my brother, the one that was a doctor, he said, well, he was telling my father one time, he says, well, we do have some ministers that are really good, but we got a lot of punks there, too. And that's right, we had a lot of punks. So it can have a devastating future, like Johnston's Demento, Karate Drama, and Theatrical. It's stuck for a while. I know, that's right. How was the outreach now from Augustana faculty and the pastors to the general public in Rock Island and Moline, for instance? Were they a mini-group that clung together? Like today, for instance, you don't see the outreach from Augustana out in the community as it probably should be. Are they more chancing themselves in, you think? Well, in the days past, I think they stuck to themselves, the Augustana group. And they'd have picnics, and the church, especially the Swedish church here, and that was the Zion church. I think we stuck into clans, maybe more, in the old days. If you weren't of Swedish descent, you were a foreigner. But today, there certainly isn't that element. And in those days, the faculty wives stayed home. And today, practically every faculty wife has a job someplace. So I mean, I think Augustana in general has the respect of the community, but I don't think we're clannish within ourselves. Of course, we have our faculty meetings and we have our, I'm always invited as Professor Emeritus to go to excursions or whatever, and I enjoy that very much. But I don't think that socially we're held within our circle so much. Whatever our interests are, happen to be, and that's it. Time has changed, too. Like years ago, when pastors and delegates came to your parents' home, they almost expected lodging and food. I guess. Nowadays, it would be unthinkable to think about to go to the president's home and not like to spend my night there. Yes. So that's just all the pictures. We just automatically took them in, or if there were too many, why the different faculty members would take them in. There was a burden, though, financially, because he was reimbursed for some of it, but I mean, I'm sure half of it probably your father had to spend on his own pocket. His own money. Mm-hmm. Yeah, there was, oh, any visitor that came, and sometimes it was a North Central group, and the father would entertain them and have them there at the house and serve them meals. Do you think that mutual togetherness was good for a feeling? Like today, for instance, they go off to the hotel room and they stay with somebody else. At that time, your father, he could talk things over and they could be more personal basis. Oh, yes. There was a touch that was very necessary, I'm sure. And set a lot of questions right there. That's right. I'm sure that a good many. I met many professors' wives from Chicago University. That is, I was usually given the job of meeting them at the station and taking care of the wife until my mother got, so she was free. But there was a personal touch there that I'm sure they don't even have today. Everything's official. Then it got to be, it was personal. Yes. But there was this respect, like Dr. Johnston and your father, for instance. He was much younger than Dr. Johnston. So he had the respect. He couldn't swing his belief because of the age difference, I suppose. I suppose so, and position. After all, the president of the synod. Got to be show some clout. Yeah, and he did. Not helpful either. Just his own personal idiosyncrasies. But they make you aware of, there are certain things people don't see very often. In other words, it goes behind the scene. I was aware of a lot that went behind the scenes. You should write the history of Augustana, because you've seen it. That's right. From both behind and in the middle and beyond. Yes. You probably are one of the last ones, though, that could write a story like that. I think so. Because Dr. Bergendorf, he didn't see it. He was a student then in the 20s. Well, and he sees only the high ups. When I make statements, sometimes I feel that I've hurt his feelings, because I look at all these people like quite human beings that had good qualities and had some very poor ones. Why do you think people are afraid to see it like it is? I don't know. I think they just shut their eyes to it. I think Connie just shuts his eyes to that, that it doesn't exist. They're all heavenly workers for the welfare of God. I don't see it. And your father, he certainly knew the Aspian side, I mean the family side of his wife. My father used to take long walks with me when we were living out on the farm, and he poured forth his soul to me that he didn't pour forth to anybody else. You would think he would be bitter, though. I mean, he was 11 years old coming here to Augustana College. Of course, he had a brilliant head, there's no question about it. But you would think he would be bitter, though, against his stepmother. He never showed the slightest bit of bitterness that I could detect. In fact, we regarded Grandma Aspian, as I was taught to call her. Her name was Riliandrine, and whenever there was any family occasion, she was for sure invited. My father, it wasn't in him to show bitterness. My Uncle Phillip did, I know, one time when he was talking about things. And then my father says, Phillip, tally into soul. In other words, my father, I think he had the idea or the attitude of the positive side. I think maybe he regarded Mrs. Esbjerne, Mrs. L.P. Esbjerne, Mrs. Esbjerne and Dream, as a woman that was struggling. She was looking for security, and maybe she didn't have anything to live on. I don't know what she had to live on there, and she had five kids. But just the way throwing out another bunch of kids. I know, that's a different story. How did she react now to this nice way of meeting her, you know, from her father's side? Did she respect him? I think so. She did? Yes. But she expected that, more than respect, I suppose. Possibly. I was frequently called upon to spend the nights staying there when Uncle Carl was going to be gone. And he relied on me to be there. As I say, I don't think I was much good, because when I slept, I slept. But I was up there a lot. And I think he thought a lot of me, in a way, too. Although he was full of peculiarities, too, but he had some very fine points. He was a marvelous teacher, no question about that. Well, he had his rules. But he, well, I was up there a great deal. In fact, sometimes they wanted me, because he had a niece, Aunt Mia's daughter had some kind of an either accident or sickness or something, and she was bedridden, practically. And she spent the whole summer at Uncle Carl Esbjerne's place. And so they wanted me to sort of be a companion to her, so I was up there practically all summer there with Gunda. And then later on, when Mrs. Constant Esbjerne, there was Aunt Sophie, when her husband died she lived there for a while, and then she decided to strike out on her own. But she had a daughter, a single daughter and she was very much wanted and wanted that