 Bernard Peterson, Omaha, Nebraska, was born 1904, 17th of February in Omaha. And we have today, 26th of July, 1985. I think I have a page missing. This is just the beginning, see? I call it the beginning book because it's the beginning of the Rongen family and the Peterson family and the Peterson-Rongen family. That's a lot of names in there. Yes, and then I have letters that I've written back and forth to Bruce Nelson, who was my researcher over there. I see. Very nice. So I'm sitting together with Bernard Gerald Peterson in Omaha, Nebraska. He was born 1904, February 17th in Omaha. And it's today, July 26th, 1985. So your father then, he came quite early, in 1870s. 1879. 1879. Yes. And did he tell you at any time the reason why he immigrated? His uncle, who was my grandmother's brother, came to Sweden for a visit. And when my uncle, John Carlson, and his wife came back to Nebraska, my father came with them. And that's how he happened to come along. Of course, with the large family of twelve children, of course not all of them survived infancy, I'm sure that the household was pretty well filled. So there were twelve? Twelve, yes. And his father, did he have a farm in Öresund? His father had a farm and was also a biggie maestri, building master. And his grandfather was also a builder. But his building had to do with putting up fences. Are you familiar with that law in Sweden many years ago where the plots of ground had to be fenced in? No, I heard about it, yes. So my great-grandfather had that work to do. And that's apparently how my grandfather got to be a building master. And that occupation went down to my father. So this uncle, John Carlson, had a farm in Saunders County south of Fremont. And my father went there and lived with him for probably a year and a half until he could speak the language. And by that time he was a young man of eighteen or nineteen. So then he left that farm in Saunders County and came to Omaha looking for work. And one of the jobs that was suggested to him was south of Omaha about fifteen miles. So he walked down there. When he got there, the job had been filled. And he had to turn around and walk back to Omaha facing a terrible cold north blizzard-y wind. And he said he never got so cold in all of his life. You want me to keep on? Yes, yes. Very good. So he met another young man who was looking for work. And they became friends. And they stopped into a labor contractor's office. In those days, a contractor who had a large project would call upon a laborer, what we call a laborer contractor, to get a hundred men together or maybe two hundred and fifty. It depends on the size of the job. And these two young men signed up to go out to work on a railroad job in Idaho. My father always said, the deserts of Idaho. And so he got to be a mule skinner. So he signed up then for this job? He signed up and they were loaded on a train and probably a hundred men. And they were transported out to Idaho to work on this railroad project. And it was about what time, 1880s? Around early 1880s. So my father worked for that railroad contractor for a year, driving a team of mules. And every month he would go to the company store and settle up what he had bought and what he had earned. And at the end of the year, he learned that all he had was a good sheepskin coat after working about a year. And he determined that he was going to leave. But they were out in the midst of this wild desert country and there was no way for them to just catch a train or a stagecoach or anything. So he waited until a supply wagon came in. And when he saw the chance, he got into this supply wagon after they had unloaded and got under the tarpaulin and they pulled out. And he could hear the drivers, et cetera, yelling at the horses or the mules, whatever sort of animals they had pulling the freighters. And finally, the freighter got to his destination. It was some town and it was at night and it was cold. So he waited until they were all unloaded and it quieted down. And then he got out of this freighter and looked around the town and all he could see was one big building with a door where there was a lot of light. So he went over to this building and he stood in the doorway and it felt good because it was warm. And pretty soon the fireman, it happened to be the power plant, and this light he saw was when they opened up the fire doors on the boilers to fire the boilers. And the fireman saw him up there and he looked up and he said, hey, kid, what are you doing up there? Come on down here and get warm. So he went down and told him how he had gotten there and the fireman said, you must be hungry. My father said, yes, I am. I haven't had anything to eat all day or something. So the fireman generously shared his lunch bucket with him and he said, stick around. He said, I'll find a place for you. And he found a rooming house for him and my father had to do some work there in order to earn his board and room. And I just don't know how long he stayed there, but eventually he worked in the gold mines and also on a ranch and was a cowboy around Elko, Nevada. And after he spent two or three years there, some of his sisters had emigrated to Omaha. So the oldest sister, Hulda Wilhelmina, lived at 1820 Castellar Street, or rather 2010 Castellar. And she tells a story that she was out in the front yard one day and a man walked down the sidewalk and he had a vest and a gold chain and a watch on it and so forth. And she looked up and she thought it was a salesman, like a sewing machine salesman, because after all, she hadn't seen my father for quite a number of years. And so the upshot of the meeting was that he stayed there with her and he went to work for a carpenter contractor. And before long, he started up his own carpenter contracting business. And he built the first apartment-style building in the city of Omaha, which is called the Sherman Apartments, and it is still occupied. And that building was constructed to provide housing for people who were to be visitors to the Trans-Mississippi Exposition of 1898. The reason they call this the first apartment-style building is that it was all devoted to housing, because before that, apartments were generally the second or third floor of like a store building. And after he built that building, he got more contracts. And one of the large contracts he got was building the Willow Springs Brewery down on 6th and Pierce Street. And after that building was completed, the owners came around and said, Gus, you know, we have to have someone run this business, and we think that you're the man to do it. Well, he said, I don't know anything about the brewery business. They said, you don't have to. We've got a master mechanic, a master electrician, a master brewer. They called him Doc Meyer, and all you have to do is to keep this entire group of people together, making the beer and making the contacts. So for a number of years, he was president of the Willow Springs Brewery. How did he get into this building business? Well, before he left Sweden, naturally his father did building, and he helped him. And that's how he started out. But I mean, with this apartment building, though, it was a new venture, so to speak. He had to figure the contract and make a bid to the owners and tell them that he would do the job for so many dollars. And I heard my mother mention that he would get up early and drive to the building, and the first, like, 15 men who came to work had a job for the day, because you may know that the reason that the Trans-Mississippi Exposition was put on was to sort of break the poor economic conditions in Omaha at the time. But it was banned in 1893, 1894, and 1896. Yes. And this exposition was in 98. Yes. And that was to boost business and make Omaha more popular and well-known. And they had practically all of the states in the Union and many foreign countries had buildings there. And some of those buildings, this apartment is still standing, you said? The apartment is still standing. Anything else from that time? The one building that I'm most interested in, the Kansas, after the exposition was over, they sold all the buildings at auction. And the Kansas State Building, my father bid $125 for the Kansas State Building, and that was the highest bid for it, so he bought it. And after he bought it, he took it down and used the lumber to build a barn and outbuildings and a house on a small farm out here in Benson. And that location is now called 66th Avenue and Ohio Street, and that house is still standing. And that's where I was born in 1904. I see. So Benson, is this the area we are in right now? Yeah, that's Benson. Benson. That was a small village at the time. What did your name come from? That name came from a real estate man named Benson, who sort of promoted and subdivided the country. And my father served on the old Benson School Board, because one of my sisters remarked the other day that she remembers that when she was small, he would have to write out the checks for the teachers and the other employees of the school system. So you were born there in 1904. Yeah. So how did you meet your mother now? Well, here he was about 32 years old and had successfully evaded getting married or avoided getting married. And one afternoon he attended a picnic at Hanscom Park put on by the Ladies of Viking. And when he met this little apple-cheeked Norwegian girl, he was gone. And that's how they happened to meet. She had come over then recently, or? Yes. She came here in 1890. And she also came over with an uncle who had gone back to Norway to visit his parents and his family. So how many sisters and brothers were you then in the family? There were eight children, five boys, and three girls. And you are one of the older ones then? I'm number five. The four of the boys are deceased, three of the girls and myself are still living. So he became the president of the Brewing Company. Yes. The Brewing Company. Yeah. So he liked that job then, apparently, or was well paid? Apparently. And in 1910, with a large family, he felt that bringing up a large family in the city was not as good as letting them grow up on a farm. So he bought a farm in Hardin Township, Pottawatomie County, which is McClellan, Iowa, 13 miles east of Concebluffs. And we lived there four years. And he would leave on the train Monday morning and come back on the train Friday night. And then he sold that farm and he bought a farm north of Florence. And we lived there two years. Just north of Omaha? Yes, that's north of Omaha. That's two and three-quarter miles northwest of Florence. And then he sold that farm and bought a small farm at 48th and Grand Avenue. And one of the things he used to do, since he was a building contractor, he would buy houses or property and refurbish it, put it in good number one condition, and then resell it. And that was one of the ways he was able to make some money. So how old were you now then when you started to help your dad in various things? Well, I would say that the whole family worked. You know, on a farm there's always work to do. And when we moved to the farm in Iowa, we did not have a large pasture. So in 1910 and 11, I was only six or seven years old. I would have heard the cows out on the country roads because they had a lot of good luxurious grass growth on the banks, you know. And that was your job to keep the cows in good eating. So then you moved back into town. You got to school there in Omaha. Then we moved back to town, and I finished grade school out here at Mount View, which is on North 52nd Street, and then went to Central High. And I've often thought that it's rather interesting that none of the boys in our family followed the construction industry. Not one of them. Not one of them, except me. And the way I happened to follow it, after I got through with high school, of course I had fully intended to go on. And really I was more interested like the law. In fact, I have one brother, Carl Earhart Peterson, who graduated from law school and was a county attorney outstate. But I didn't have enough money to take care of another four years of education. So I was first employed by the American Radiator Company in Omaha in June 1921. And their business was selling boilers and radiators and heating equipment. And that's what I still do today. So you learned the trade from one of the companies in town then. And then you started your own business? In 1936, I started my own business, and I have presently 19 people working for me. And you also had different subsidiaries in other towns? Yes. We have an office in Des Moines, one in Sioux City, and of course the main office is here in Omaha. And we sell boilers, heating equipment, tanks, ventilating fans, steam traps, pumps, any kind of mechanical equipment that's needed for a building, commercial building, a factory, a packing house. Well, there's a bigger... Yes. We really don't get into residential. Ours is all commercial and industrial. So you've been in the business since 1936? My own business, but actually I've been in the business since 1921. So how was it during the Depression? Did you have a full-time job? Well after I'd been with the American Radiator Company two years, they closed this branch. And they centralized their operation, so they closed all of the branches around the country like Kansas City, Omaha, and Minneapolis. And so I was looking for a job, so I went to work for one of our wholesalers. And I was there for 15 years, and I became manager of what they called the heating department. And that's where I more or less got a very good opportunity to learn boilers, pumps, and all of the trade, the people who bought it, the contractors, all throughout the state. So that gave me an excellent opportunity for becoming acquainted with them. And then in November 1936, I had the opportunity to take on the distribution of Keewanee boilers, made in Keewanee, Illinois. And that's how I happened to start here in Omaha. They make heavy stuff? Yes. Are they still in business there? Oh yes. They are? They're still in business. They started to make boilers in 1868 at Keewanee. So they have a longstanding reputation I know. Oh yes, very well known. Not just in the United States, but... So you got a good practical education from the very beginning when you were a young guy? Well I went to the Creighton College of Business and Law for a year at night, which gave me an excellent background in business and law that you needed to know in business. And I also went to UNO for another year at night. So how about your father during that time? Did he help you in your business later on? No. He was too old then when you started your own? Yes, yes, more or less. He was retired then? Yes. But in my opinion, I do not think my father ever had any schooling after he arrived in America. But he figured his own jobs, he kept his own books. I still have a couple of his old bookkeeping records in his handwriting. And the billing to a customer for work and material done on a certain job. So I think that he really made remarkable progress coming over here like he did. So he had one experience of it, or he lost a whole year's wages? Just a fur coat? All he had was a mule skinner for a year and he earned a good sheepskin coat. Was this the usual business they did with people like the UP? They rounded up hundreds of them and then they just did not pay them anything? Just the food and the arginine? I presume. Because they had no way to go I suppose. They knew that they could not pay. Those were rugged days. Those were the rugged days in the West. So did he talk anything about the gold mining days? Well, he had a partner and they did some gold mining and they needed someone to keep house for them. And one of his sisters, my Aunt Hilda, went out there and took care of their house and kept house for them and so forth. I have no idea how long she worked there with them, but she eventually came back to Omaha after he did. So he found his way back to Omaha and he stayed there. Did he join any church when he came back? Well, the first church that I can remember is the Salem Lutheran Church down in South Omaha and Pastor Elving was the pastor at that time. And then, as I mentioned, he would move quite often because he would buy these houses and remodel them. So we would move to different parts of Omaha. Now we lived on 41st and Izzard and when we lived there we attended the nearby Presbyterian Church. Then when we moved to Iowa, there was a little Methodist church there that we attended. Then when we moved back to Omaha—well, then when we moved to Florence, we attended St. John's Lutheran Church. Then when we moved back to Omaha, we attended Our Redeemer Lutheran Church. So you had many ecumenical upbringings. That's right. How about organizations? Did he join anything of Vikings and Warsaw? Well, my father was a member of the old Noonday Club before we moved to Iowa. So he lost contact with the Noonday Club, of course, when he moved out of town. And then when I started up my business, I joined the Noonday Club at that time. And my two sons have been members and all three of us are past presidents of the Noonday Club. So you have been on that since 1936? I didn't join the Noonday Club until 1948. And there's a businessman or professional club? Yes. This is a group of business and professional men for promoting social contact and friendship and so on. I'll send you a little write-up that we used at our ethnic group. We have an ethnic festival here every year, and you would be amazed the number of different nationalities we have in Omaha. So we promoted the Scandinavian group, and we gave away this little write-up on the Noonday Club to people who would come by. And you'd be surprised the people who would say, oh, the Scandinavians. Well, you know, my grandfather came from Stockholm or my grandfather came from Oslo or something like that. So there are quite a few Danish people up north of here, Blair and— Yes. Blair is quite a Danish settlement, and then the Danes have a park here they call Vennelist. And of course the Danish Brotherhood have about— And of course the Danish Brotherhood have about three lodges here in Omaha. So they are maybe as numerous as the Swedes then? In certain areas, yes. I think that it is estimated that we probably have in Omaha at least 30,000 people with Swedish genes. I think that there has been some research on that, and that's just a figure that I've heard discussed. Yeah, it's not bad. Yeah. So in your family now, your mother was Norwegian and your father was Swedish, which culture was the one that was the dominating factor? Well, really Swedish because there are very few Norwegians in this area. And then of course my father had two brothers who came here and lived here, and then three or four sisters. So our family meetings were more or less with a Swedish background, especially around the holidays, lutfisk and inner log selve and small potatoes. So your mother brought all the ideas from Norway to them? Oh, yes. Yes, she was a marvelous cook. So what kind of people do you remember now when you were growing up in the 20s and 30s of the old Swedes? Swanson with the chicken dinners, he was here in Omaha. Yes. Quite a prominent man. How did he start it up actually? Well, as I recall the story, Swanson came to Omaha and lived at the YMCA, and he went to work for J.P. Jerpy Commission Company, J-E-R-P-E. Was he not a Swede? He was a Swede, and he dealt in produce, butter, poultry, et cetera. And Swanson, Carl Swanson, went to work for him, and he was a very energetic, foresighted, promotion-minded man. And after Jerpy passed away, Carl Swanson, I believe, probably gained control of the old Jerpy Commission Company, and he started eviscerating poultry and putting up chicken dinners and TV dinners and that sort of thing. So he came here just in the right time for the TVs? Yes. And he—then of course C.A. Swanson and son was finally bought by Camel Soup. So it's— But they rented themselves to us every year. They—oh, yes, for many years. And they was processed here in Omaha? Processed right here in Omaha. Originated right here in Omaha. And of course during World War II, they put out a tremendous amount of prepared food for the Army. So there was a big multi-million dollar business then? Very much so. But Carl Swanson was the motive force behind it. And they are all deceased? They're gone. The whole family is gone? Not all of the family. There's an article in the paper tonight about one of them, if you have a chance to read the World Herald tonight. And he's still in Omaha? Well, right now he's supposed to be in Colorado. Was he in the same line of business? No, his work was more or less to take care of the Swanson Foundation. I see. Because none of the family are engaged, as far as I know, in the poultry field anymore. So Camel Soup took the whole thing over? They did. Brought them out. So anyone else that you recall? There was a Swanson also in the earlier—that was in the teens. They had a big clothing store here? Swanson, Nebraska Clothing. Yes. Yeah. He was also very big. Oh, yes. Do you remember him? Oh, yes. In fact, his son lives right down the street here, John Swanson. And of course, in the Swedish community, we always went to Nebraska Clothing to buy our clothes and shoes and things. How did he get so big? Did he have any auto estate business also? I just don't know. To me, they were just always there. And we always thought of them as being our department store. And they had everything in the— Well— There was the haberdasher and the— Yeah. Men and women's clothing and kids' clothing and that sort of thing. And they was located downtown? Yes. They were on 15th and Farnham. No longer there. So there was a busy place some years ago in the railroad that a lot of people all had here. Yes. So branching out. There were a large number of Danish people settled in Council Bluffs, and they probably came here because of the employment offered by the railroad. They employed a lot of people in the railroad, I suppose. Yeah. How about the stockyards? Did they employ a number of Swedes also, or was it mostly Polish people? There were some, but the Swedish people, in my opinion, could be said to have built Omaha because they went into the construction industry. And there were very—there were a great many construction outfits operated by Swedes. So they came in from the beginning then, in the early 1990s? Yeah. And so—and then they also had their own businesses in like stores and the Swedish doctors, dentists? Yes, there were a number of Swedish doctors and dentists and attorneys and Swedish politicians. In the early days, a politician with a Swedish name had a lot of good acceptance by the voters. I see. Even non-Swedes? Yes. But if he had a Swedish name, why, the people seemed to have confidence in him. Did they run for a bigger office like the county or the state or— County and state. We had Governor Val Peterson, who was governor of the state, later became ambassador to Finland and Denmark. He came from Oakland? He came from Oakland, yeah. And Dan Swanson was the commissioner of lands and buildings in Lincoln, and he was just elected and reelected year after year. Were they Republicans or Democrats? Mostly Republicans. Were most of the Swedes Republicans at that time? Yes, most of the Swedes were Republicans at that time, and that brings up an interesting side light. Of course, since my father was president of a brewery, he had to be on the WETS side, and of course the WETS were usually Democrats. And so the Democrats used his activity to try to bring in the Scandinavian vote, and he did well enough when Governor Schallenberger was running for office that he was rewarded by his—for his activity by Governor Schallenberger by being appointed the state dairy inspector. For heaven's sake. So they paid off. So I don't know whether he ever went out and inspected any dairies or whether it was a sinecure that he—perhaps he was paid some kind of a salary for carrying that title. I don't know. So your parents did a good job. Must have. So he was a—raised a Democrat then, you read? He was originally a Democrat. But as our family got older, we all switched to the Republican Party. I see. Did he too? And he did too. And I—I was too young to recall any conversation about it, but it happened during World War I. And we all stayed in the Republican ranks except my brother Carl, who was an attorney. And when he went out to western Nebraska, he found that all of the offices were held by Republicans, so he had to register as a Democrat in order to run for an office. And he was elected county attorney on the Democratic ticket. So he—he remained in the Democratic fold. So he—must have got enough votes for the Democrats. Yeah. Are there more Democrats in the western part? Not especially, but where he was located, the office holders were all Republicans, and there was no way he could run for those offices without changing his party affiliation. So he became a Democrat. And he was a—he was a law partner to Frank Morrison, who also—who was originally a Republican, and he changed his party affiliation to the Democratic Party, and later became governor of the state of Nebraska. And Frank Morrison is still living, but more or less retired. Well, Nebraska is probably known as a Republican state. Yes, it is. And been so for many, many years. So Omaha has tremendous building activity all the time. Is it insurance businesses that's behind that, or what is it that makes it so? Well, of course, our basic economy is—comes from agriculture. And we can take grain and feed and pasture and turn it into beef and poultry and eggs on a lower cost basis than most other parts of the country. And that's really the basis of our economy in this state. So you are competitive in the— Yes. —in tough times. Is this because of the irrigation? Irrigation—we probably have the greatest amount of irrigation than any other state because we're over this Ogallala Aquifer, and we have a lot of underground water. And there is no restrictions yet on it. Well, if you want to put down an irrigation well, you must get a permit to do it. So they measure out how much it is that can be taken out. But 50 or 75 years ago, it was not like that. There was no irrigation, and it was dry and dusty. And we just depended on the weather. And of course, then we would have dry land planting. And they learned how to plant wheat in that part of the country where the rainfall wasn't high enough. They called that dry land farming. But there was also chances taken because of the weather. Yeah. There was no winter. It was too dry in the spring. And sometimes the grasshoppers made a visit. So you've been an Omaha person all your life. You haven't been outside more than an hour, living on the— No. I traveled when I was with this large wholesale house. I lived in Sterling for about a year and a half in 1928 and 29, and I covered all of Colorado, all of Wyoming, western Nebraska, and the Black Hills. Like a salesman then for this? Yes. Boilers and— That's right. And I covered that entire territory. And that was back in the days before super highways, before paved highways. And I thought I was lucky if I found a road that had a bucket of gravel on it. So you traveled by car then? Traveled by car, yes. The first year I was out, I drove a Chevrolet 56,000 miles. A lot of miles in those days on bad roads. Yeah. Uh-huh. So I got an excellent background for knowing the country and the trade and the needs and the requirements. And it's been carried over to your two sons? For the—yes. I have my oldest son as president of the company, then my next son as secretary and treasurer, then I have a grandson in business who is—my youngest son is senior vice president of gray advertising in San Francisco. Well, that's a completely different line then from— He went to University of Minnesota and was in the Navy for two years as a lieutenant senior grade, and he was in the Pacific for two years. Then when he came back, he went into the advertising field. So all your boys then—you had three boys? Three sons, that's right. And they all went through college and further education was necessary. Yeah. So you had an established company when they came to the wars of the time. That's right. Did the war have any effect on your company? Did you change over into a— In World War II, of course, we were very restricted on supplies of material, but I worked with contractors who were doing air bases and did a lot of work with them. So you don't manufacture anything? No. We are a sales outlet, and it's—you might say a highly specialized business because there may not be enough demand in this area for this particular kind of pump, but—so the factory could afford to have a full-time office here. So they give us the distribution contract, and we know enough about the technical details of application and costs and service and operation so that we sell that particular pump, for an example. And that way they get distribution, and we are not on any salary. We only make a profit when we sell an item. So with offices then in Des Moines, you cover the whole of Iowa on that— Iowa. And Sioux City also covers— Sioux City. Part of Minnesota? Part of South Dakota. Part of South Dakota. So you have regions then you can— Yes. And all of Nebraska. So you have a lot of trucks on the road and also salesmen trying to sell. Yes. Getting in roads. Well, I suppose Omaha is a big city by itself, though. Oh, yes. Omaha is the largest city in our entire territory. So that's—that was the beginning from Sweden to Idaho and back to Omaha again. That's right. And then you come along and open up the business. Yes. So I'm sure you have more than many times when your father escapades in the early years he could swing it and— Yes. No, I've often thought about him. I think he did a remarkable job coming here as a boy of 16 and achieving what he was able to do and accomplish. He never went back to Sweden? Yes. He went back to Sweden in about 1908 and visited his folks there. They were still living there, both mother and father? Yes. My grandfather died in 1914 and my grandmother, I believe, 1921. So have you been to Sweden to visit? No, I haven't, but I still correspond with a first cousin in Malmo, Anna-Lise Thunberg. Has she visited you over here? Yes, she came here in 1948 or 49, and she worked in the Bank of America in Los Angeles for a year. And one of their employees worked in the bank in Malmo on her job for a year. Oh, I see. Kind of an exchange. And while she lived in Los Angeles, she lived with my uncle, Oscar Leonard Peterson, who had retired from his contracting business and gone to Los Angeles. So he went out there to California to stay for a while? So how did he fare in his construction business? He did very well. He concentrated on residential work. And it was big in the 30s and 40s and 50s in California when everybody rushed out there from the dust bowl and everything? I don't – I am not familiar enough with his activity out there to know whether he did any building or contracting or whether he just completely retired when he got there. Did he come back here? He would come back and visit once in a while, yeah. We have enough business to support 19 people. And you still going to office? Every day. Every day? Yes. Unless you have to. No, that's right. And most of our key men are engineers. My oldest son is a graduate of Purdue, and the next one studied engineering at UNL and Ames. And then we have other employees from University of Illinois, Morningside, UNO. So they are specialized within their fields? Yes. How about your wife, now? Is she of Swedish background? No, she's of German and American background. Her mother was born in Stettin, Pomerania, Germany, but that was at one time a part of Sweden. Yes. So who knows? I see. She has been a Parkinsonian for the last eight years. I see. So she's in a care home. And so I've been here alone for the last eight years. So she got a two then. Yeah......