 Ida, the 7th of October, 1987, I sit here together with Dola Pla, who was born the 1st of October, 1917, in Rösaskede, in Sweden, came to America in 1923. Ida's brother was a forester. He had a mother and a father. I can't come to hear her father's name. But they all got married. She and her father, and her father's brother, and her father's first. They lived that way. But they all lived together, they all got married. And that was Martha's last brother. He was a farmer. But one time they had been rich. But he... I don't know, somebody took money from him. His mother said he was stupid. Our mother said he was stupid. He had a little farm on Nyatöp, he had some creatures. He and I were the only ones. But we have two brothers who were born here. How old were you when you came to America? I was just over six. What made your parents move? What made your parents move to America? They had relatives here. Mom had a sister who lived here in Kanselblad. That was why we came here. Did you know anything about America and Kanselblad? No, I didn't know anything. But your brother was... We were in Chicago. Yes, but they were my mother's cousins. Did you stay with them? No, we didn't stay with them. We were on Ellis Island, I don't know how long. Probably a week or two. Yes, we were there. Mom got sick. You were so old. What year were you born? 1921. You were younger then. He was close to three. He turned three in January. So he doesn't remember anything? No. I just remember that it was so dirty and dirty there. On Ellis Island? There were so many people I had never seen. They weren't black, but they were darker than I was. They didn't look Swedish? No. Which boat did you get on? Stockholm. And it was from Gothenburg? Yes. Was it in the spring or autumn? In the autumn. We came to New York on October 23, 1923. We came by train. I don't remember how long we stayed. But you remember that you stayed a whole week on Ellis Island? Yes. Your mother was sick. I know it was so dirty. Our father could speak to all kinds of people. I don't know why. Did he speak to you? No. But he could speak. We became acquainted. I remember that Russian. He had a little girl. That Russian woman was sick with me on that hospital on Ellis Island. I just remembered that girl. She had dark hair and brown eyes. I didn't know what was wrong with her. I remember that he had a harness on the boat. It was made of snow. Yes. I can't remember. We came by train. I remember that we came by train and we entered the railway. We had to change trains in Chicago. I don't know what my father did. So you were a father of a mother and two children? Yes. And our mother's sister had a car that lived near her. She had a car and they came after us on the train. And took us to our mother's house. And then I can remember that I had to start school. And I couldn't speak. Not with you? Pardon? The same year that you came? Yes, I started school. Kindergarten? In November, yes. But I couldn't speak or anything. I remember that it was snow. A child threw snow at me. But when I started speaking, they put me in school. I see. And where did you live at first? We lived at our mother's house. At 902 Avenue C. We lived there. I can't remember how long. It wasn't long. She had three children. And just a small house with two bedrooms. What did he do with her? He worked on a grain elevator. And then he worked on the Illinois Central Railroad. And then we moved to his house. No, he worked on the elevator. Oh, yes. That's right. Then we moved to 915 Avenue C. Yeah, that's right. Our dad started the grain elevator, shoveling grain. And I don't know how— They were building on the elevator. Yeah. Then we moved to 915 Avenue C. I just remember that house. It had three rooms. And I don't know how our folks did it, but they got some furniture from Continental Keller. It was all new furniture. Then I can remember all these Swedes had a shower on us. They brought us stuff, blankets and different things. They all kind of stuck together. Were there many Swedes in that time? Oh, yeah. There were many. Oh, did you go home? Yeah. Did you go to church when you came here? When we went to church—when we first came here when we were little, our aunt Selma—I don't know what church she was in—the Baptist Church. And they used to meet at home. Do you remember that? Oh, I remember. They met at home. And they were Swedish, too. Yeah, they were Swedish. It was Johan Sons and all of them. I don't know what happened after Andrew Nelson got hold of us and he didn't want us to go. He took us to the Lutheran Church. So the Baptists didn't have their own church, but they met at home? They had a church, too. They did? They had a church. They had that one on 7th Avenue? 7th Street and 7th Avenue. A Swedish Baptist Church? No, it was Danish. Oh, it was Danish. But I don't know why they went. They were Swedish. They met at home, maybe. Johan Sons went to that church, and it was Swedish. It wasn't Danish. But they went to that church, the Baptist Church. But then we started going to Immanuel Lutheran. And were there girls and boys your age that you could play with or were with? You mean Swedish? Yes, Swedish. I can't hear you. Danish. You know, Elsie and John Carr, they came over here from Denmark and they moved in that house at 915 Avenue C after we moved out of there. Then we moved to 215 North 9th Street, remember? But John was born over here and Elsie was born in Denmark. No, he was born in Denmark, too, John was. I don't think so. I'm pretty sure he was. I could be mistaken. Do you remember you had any problems when you came to school? Any what? Any problems to understand people? No, I caught on real quick. I had two boy cousins that were ahead of me in school and I caught up with them. They skipped me. That's no kidding. I'm not bragging or anything. So your cousins, now, did they talk Swedish to you? Yeah, they mixed it up. That's the one John Anderson, I'll give you his name. They mixed it up. That was your cousin? Yeah. They mixed it up. But their parents talked Swedish, I suppose. Oh, yeah, they always talked Swedish at home and then they answered them in English a lot. So when you came home, now, to your parents after half a year or so, did you talk Swedish to them then and they talk Swedish to you? Oh, they mostly talked Swedish, but I got so... Well, we picked up German and Danish and Norwegian. And Italian. No, yeah, later on. Italian, no. Italian, no. So when he got old enough then, then, he was out on the streets and playing around with the Italians. Oh, yeah, we played with all of them. And I was fighting with them. Oh, you too? Yeah. Oh, we used to fight, boy. I... You only used to beat them up for me. I'd beat them all up. Because you were a little bit taller in the street. Older, yeah. Well, I was always so little when I was growing up. Yeah. I didn't start growing until, what, about 17, 18? Yeah. I started growing up. I was always so little. I can remember, I'd be in school, you know, and pretty soon they'd come in with a note. Miss so-and-so wants to see you. And that was his teacher, see? Miss Pusey and a couple. So I'd have to go because Mom couldn't talk very well, you know. And Dad, he wouldn't go to school and talk to the teacher. So they'd always have me come. Now, your brother's not doing this and you're not doing that. And then I'd... He's not doing this and he's not doing that. But we made it. Now, I was a good student, wasn't I, Stuart? Yeah, but how about him, though? English and spelling was just horrible for me. Oh, see, I was... It was very hard. It was hard. Not for me. English language was very... Getting the meanings all like... All the different words. So your brother, he got you in trouble then? All three of them. I never got anybody in trouble. But they'd always... Those teachers, they'd say, Now, you've got to help him with his homework and this. And I had all I could do to do my own work. But he had picked up English as fast as you did, though. Because when you came home, did you talk Swedish to him? No, I... We talked Swedish at home all the time. Yeah, but I picked up English real good. You were with your parents until you were five. And they were Swedish all the time then. Yeah. Swedish all the time. But I used to play with Earl McBride, and I couldn't talk English then. No. Well, he lived across the street from me. How could you converse with him, though? What did you say? Oh, kids. I think kids... Don't you think children have an international language of their own? So there was no trouble there? No. Until you met the Italians and... That's like that little... Yeah, I can still remember that little Russian girl. Her dad, he had black curly hair and black beard. They were probably Jewish, but Dad called them ryska. And my dad could communicate with him for some reason or other. And I remember that little girl. I'll never forget her. Black eyes and black hair. And we slept in kind of dormitories there in Ellis Island, you know, and her bed was by mine. And I guess one night I got up and sleepwalked, my dad told me, and I was in bed with her. I don't remember... You were there for a whole weekend. Uh-huh. Oh, that was a dirty place, crummy. Do you remember what kind of food you were served? It wasn't very good. I remember long tables, and I remember getting milk in cups, paper cups, and that milk didn't taste right. Because I suppose maybe, I don't know if they had pasteurized milk then, but the milk in Sweden we were used to. Because I always lived with my grandparents out on that farm. I liked it out there with them, where he lived in town with our folks. And the milk, I suppose, came right from the cow, and I remember that milk tasted horrible. But I can remember these big long tables and all these people. Yeah, yeah, Saganer, Mom called them. That's gypsies. And I remember Mom being in the hospital there in that infirmary place, and that Russian lady, she was there too. But I think those Russians stayed in New York. It seemed like Dad told me that. They were probably Jewish, I don't know, because of the black curls, you know. But then she was released, and you can continue on. Did somebody help you, somebody from the mission society? Well, they had, there were interpreters there. I can just barely remember that. Who your parents could talk to? Yeah, that our Dad talked to. Well, he could talk to anybody. He never met a... But he didn't do any English, though. No, but he got along. He could go anywhere and get along, couldn't he, Stuart? But I would still like to find out who his Dad was. We never could find him. He always claimed that his mother worked in the castle, and his Dad, his real Dad was a coach driver. Yeah. Yeah, but I guess she came to Visevied and had him. Postopabok, and that was the address. No, wasn't he born, I wish I'd brought that paper with me. Wasn't he born in Visevied? Visevied, and he stayed with these people. That was his home, he always said it was his home. No, he stayed with these people, Postopabok, in Visevied, and then he went, it shows, that's what I found in Vodstina, where he went to Stockholm. We figured out he was about three years old. But I can't. He said, I remember him saying he used to go to school, and I always wondered why he was so strong. He was very, very strong, very, very strong. But he said he used to pick up the stones when his kids were going to school, walking along, and he used to. Was that in Stockholm? Well, I always thought it was out there. He told me he lived with an uncle that was a sloth there. A butcher. In Stockholm, he always told me. Was he in Stockholm? He was in Stockholm. I don't know. He never talked much, and I could never get any information. Our mother was very close-mouthed about everything. And our aunt, our mother's twin sister, she, I don't know. Now, he always talked about working in Stockholm, and he used to tell me about Gamla Stan. What kind of work was he doing in Stockholm, then? Well, he talked about working with the planks. I think it was a, what is it, a janabite. Yeah, iron worker, uh-huh. A blacksmith, smith, blacksmith, he was a smith over here. So they didn't bring too much with them, then, when you left? No. 1923, there was... I remember an old, wasn't that trunk wooden? I thought it was wooden bound with kind of a metal. Yeah. Shame we got rid of that one. Well, Dad used to make home brew and put it in that down in the basement. Then it'd blow up. Oh, Lord, one night... Well, that was that 4th of July. Yeah, Lord, did that blow up all night long. I went down to look at it blowing up, and Mama let me. Oh, there was broken... Remember, he put ice on it, and it broke. Yeah, broken glass down there. And he'd come home, and oh, he was so mad, he said, Mama broke it. We had to tell Papa, Mama didn't break that. It was hard for her to explain how it happened. So was there too much yeast or sugar? It's hard to say. Boy, everybody... Everybody would tell him how to make the home brew, and good Lord, sometimes he'd... I don't know how he ever got any beer in the bottle, because somebody would tell him rice, and he'd have Riesling, and he'd have grapes, or... Hops. Well, the hops was in there, but... Raisins, yeah. Raisins. Gotta look at some of them bottles, my God. So there was beer, though? There was no hard liquor? No, no. It was beer. It was during the Prohibition. Yeah. Yeah. Everybody made home brew. Well, I know he used to... He'd make a big crock of home brew, you know, and it'd be working. It had to work so long before you could bottle it. And we had a pantry. That's when we lived at 802 Avenue C. Avenue C, yeah. And we had a pantry, and they had a hose, you know, you have to put it in the bottle. Well, him and I, we got a bunch of our friends lined up outside the window, and we'd give them each a suck out of that for a penny apiece. Then we'd fill it up with water. Oh, you didn't figure out what... We finally told him years later. Yeah, gosh. And he said, I think he quit making them after that. Yeah, we put water in there. We had quite a bit off of there, you know. We had fed it to all the kids. So the recipe faded away. So five cents a sip. No, a penny. A penny a sip. Oh, we had a boy, I think... We had a big line. I think we had all the kids in the neighborhood drunk that day. It wasn't nothing. The altitude. The altitude. We probably made more non-alcoholics in that neighborhood than anything. Yeah. It was a way of life. So you put your parents on the line then. But then you finally went through schooling, though. Oh, sure. Did the teacher tell you that you shouldn't talk Swedish at home at any time? Do you remember that? No. He never said that. One time a teacher took me into the principal. She was a new teacher. She took me in there and said, that boy doesn't try and this and that. And he's dumb, and the principal loomed me. Was that Miss Ivory? She says to the teacher, she says, can you speak any other language besides English? And the teacher says, no, I can't. Well, she says, this little boy here, he can talk Swedish. So she just told her, she said, now, which one of you two is the dumbest? Do you remember that? The old man turned out plain. Just so plain. Remember some highlights in your life, you know, or something like that. We picked up, because I played with some girls. Their folks were Danish. And their mother and dad always talked Danish to them, and they'd answer in English. So we picked up, I picked up quite a bit of Danish. And then for a while we lived next door to this German couple. And they were both deaf. And they were raising a grandson. And they would yell and holler at each other. So we got so we could understand that German pretty good, too. So were they helpful towards your mother? Oh, people were always helpful in those days, yes. And I think that's one thing, that from the Depression, people always helped each other during the Depression, didn't they, Stuart? If you had a garden, you shared it with people. And almost everybody had a few chickens in their backyard. And they, no, people shared in those days. We'd come over, and, you know, things just got established for us, you know. Yeah, and then the Depression. And the Depression. Yeah, what happened then, you rented a house first, or you didn't? No, we rented in the... So your dad didn't buy you a house then before the Depression? Oh, no, he bought a house eventually, but... But not before the Depression, no? No. No, he bought it during the Depression. Yeah. So you both remember the Depression, because you were in school. Oh, yeah. You were not there all along. I remember we used to take turns staying at the bank after school. And we'd be staying at the bank up here on Broadway, trying to see about, with the passbook, to see if we'd get in there and get the money, right? Yeah. At the bank, we never did. Did they close the bank? Yeah, they closed the bank. So you had to deposit some money, then? Yeah, we used to. Yeah. We both had money deposited at the bank. Everybody. No money, no nothing, no money, no nothing. Well, we even took money, they used to bank in schools. We'd take like a nickel every week and bank, and even that money went. And it was repaid? No. No, they were supposed to repay some of this and that. What happened then after that experience? Did they hesitate then to bring money to the bank again? I suppose it would take, took some years before they did. Yeah. So they kept the money at home then? Yeah. They kept the money at home. But then when the Depression hit, well, that was when the bank folded, of course, but... Yeah. Was he able to keep the job then, your dad? Oh, he always managed to get a job. Well, he worked for four motor companies. Yeah, at that time. And that was when Henry Ford made the big, you know, five dollars a day everybody worked for. Did he work in Detroit then? No, they had a Ford Motor plant over in Omaha on about 16th and coming. There was a lot of Swedes who worked there, of course. Yeah, he worked there for a long time, and then... He didn't work on the production line, he was on the main table. Yeah, and I think he worked nights, didn't he? Well, he worked nights there, yeah, and then things would kind of get changed around, he worked days. Uh-huh, but you worked... Everybody thought Henry Ford, the original Henry Ford, was crazy when he started giving all his men five dollars a day. Then, I remember us getting coal from Henry Ford. Well, that's when they closed the plant. Yeah. And his dad in the Depression, he closed the plant and the men weren't working. And we got a... We got... A truck came with coal and another truck came with... well, Mom was in Iowa City. Yeah, groceries. So the Ford Company was... There was a whole truckload of groceries. Yeah, and coal. Dad went home and he thought, oh, he was mad, he thought, Dolan and I are going to the grocery store and ordered all their groceries. No, we had... I said, how are we going to pay for this? We didn't order them. No, Papa, this is before. Oh. He says, is this charity? He says, no, and he finally just slipped. You can see he came from Ford Motor, he's all right. And he thought maybe the county brought it there. No. He wasn't going to take it. And then, that means it's from Ford. And they've done it twice that I can remember. Yeah. And I always say I should drive a Ford car, but... But I didn't drive a Ford car. My son-in-law drives Fords. He won't drive anything. Well, he's got a Honda, but I mean... They were good then to the people that... Oh, yes, Henry Ford, the original. And he received five dollars a day then. They made five dollars a day. That was big wages in those days. So did they close out the factory for good after a while? Oh, yeah, it's closed. I don't know what... During the Depression. Oh. Yeah, during the Depression, it was closed. I can't remember what's in that. But there wasn't any production. Wasn't it on 16th and coming? I know where it was at. In fact, this is where Tip Top was at. Yeah, Tip Top. And it's best from... Ringfrist, Ringstrom? No. The sweet, no, it was so rich. Renstrom, Renstrom. Renstrom, Renstrom. Renstrom had the building. He made bubble pins and... Yeah. Right. Did his daughter ever get out of that mess down in Mexico? They got him, the daughter, his real daughter, and his half-sister. Well, the two, they were both his daughters. They were half-sisters. Yeah. They got everything resolved, it was in the paper. And they're back being friends and everything. So his children are still living? Yeah, Renstrom, he's got the... But he's dead though. Yeah. But his daughter, one of my... She was in jail for quite a while down in Mexico. The youngest daughter, wasn't it? Lisa was her name? Yeah. And they live in Omaha. Yeah. I don't... That one lives in Omaha, and I don't know where the other one is. California. I'll find out for you if you want to... Interview him. No. But she must be an older person. No. She doesn't talk to the rich Swedes here. Yeah, don't talk to us poor... But we're poor worms. Good, you're rich Swedes. Rich in heritage. So was it easy to be a Swede now in the concert clubs when you came in the... I think so, because I think they kind of... Well, you talk about roots, but then, you know, for... You get pushed around being a Swede. I know one thing... But they was kidding them, there was more kidding than... I used to hear it seriously, though, about that damn foreigner coming over here and taking our jobs. Yeah. From Dad, you know, that Dad had a trade. A lot of these fellows never had any trades or anything. Yeah. And he was... He could make tools, you know, and it was very... Like I say, on big construction jobs, they'd always want a good blacksmith, you know, to make these tools, keep the tools... Sharp. And he wasn't anything sharp with that, you know, but then all that changed. You know, then it kind of changed from the Depression and... Was he able to get into that kind of work, though? Oh, yeah, yeah. Everything he could take over, he could do it. I mean, he was very good at his craft at the time. So what did he say now when he came home at night? Was he satisfied with the day's work or was he homesick? I think so. No, he was never... I never ever could have ever heard him talk about it. No. He was... He never looked back? No. No. He used to say his famous words were some of them say something about... If things were so good over in Sweden, how come you came over here? Well, he says, I'm over here. I got enough money when I was in Sweden to get over here, and I've never been able to get enough money over here to go back. So he was a dependent of them. Yeah. Of course, at that time, that was kind of bad in Sweden, too, I think, when the immigrants came over here. Yeah, that's the reason. It was a hard time then, 22, 23. There's no hard time over there now, I don't think. Those people lived good. You mean the... In Sweden? Yeah, we know Chief Doe and... I was over there in 85 with them. I thought they all drive nice big Volvos and... Well, they have a lot of minuses, though. If you drive a Volvo in the United States, you've got to have money. The only junkie car I saw over there was some girl driving a Volkswagen, and she gave me a run over. She just backed up. That was the town where... That's why you remember it. Well, she parked over in this stall here, and so I was over here the next day, and here's some noise, and here she is backing over in this stall out here. Now, where do you live in Sweden? You don't live there now. No. Tell me something. Your cousin's down in Sweden. What else? We could not find any of our blood relatives, but our aunt, our Musta... Musta Manda. She married a fellow named Muller. Muller, M-U-L-L-E-R. He had... He had kids. He had, what, four or five daughters or something? Yeah. And a boy or something, another boy. But anyway, one girl stayed there. Florence stayed, and she stayed after her dad died, didn't she, Doe? Yeah, she stayed... With Musta. With Musta Manda. Musta Manda, till Musta Manda passed away. No, she got married before Manda passed away. Then Manda... Manda, well, the older dooms him, but then... But anyway, she really no relation, but we found her over there. We looked her up. Oh, she's a care... And she was so... Well, at first she was kind of scared, but, you know, she thought we'd come over to Grace Keane with her, something about the home place and everything. To me, at first, it didn't make any difference. If she got any money, I would find whatever. Yeah. Because she was the last of the children in Sweden. Well, no, she was... Oh, our aunt, Musta Manda, yeah, that was... She stayed in Sweden, because she never married until after our... after our Maafa, Doe. Because Maamaa, Doe, before we came over here, Maamaa, she went to Ecuador, she was a lacerated in Ecuador, she had, what do you call it, cancer in her throat. But I can... Just a little bit I can remember her funeral, just a little bit. But... Then Florence... No, she told the visa... Continues next site. Next site. Leonard, she was so thrilled. She thought we were going to be there at her place a day or two earlier, a day earlier or two, wasn't it, Ola? Yeah. And she had some print, oh, and they made this beautiful, beautiful... It was a loaf... Roller... It was like a loaf of bread, wasn't it, with all kinds of fancy stuff, I don't know what you would call it. But it was really beautiful. Well, she had... Well, she's divorced from her husband, or he's dead, I don't know. She was divorced from him. And anyway, she had this fella that was living together, I guess... Diva falovada. Falovada, yeah, diva falovada. Anyway, he had some of his relatives there. He had a telecom operator. And so, anyway, we're there, and we're talking, and I'll never forget, they said something to her about something, and she says, You don't have anyone coming from America to see you, do you? You've never had anyone to write to from America, like I have. Dahla had bought a submarine. Do you know what a submarine is? Yeah, a hundred and fifty submarines. So we had to count them, and so they floored someone, and floored someone, and so, You can't eat that, they looked at some wheat. But I got hit on the tape. I had my mic recorded, and we listened to it, and we laughed when it comes in their way. These guys would floor us and say, You can't eat that, they looked at some wheat. So she was pleased that you came over? Oh, yeah. Well, we had an address our aunt, our mother's twin sister, used to write to her, and we had one address. Where was that? Langdon. Langdon, L-A-N-G-O-N. Well, I remember we went up there to ship the pajamas, and then they called. He said, he had never, what was her first name? First when she married that guy, the outlaw, as his mother called him, his first name was Peterson. And right when it was, we started getting letters from him, and then his name was Langenholm. And it was the same guy, but he had, Changed his name? Yeah, changed his name. And so we went, he said, and I said, where are you going? He said, let's go see if we can find her. So we went, how many places were we? I was in a camp, and there was a woman sitting there, milking a cow, and she said, oh, you mean in Langenholm. They used to live down there, so we went there. And the people who had that place, they were very kind, and she had Florence's telephone number, and she called her on the phone, and she said, there's someone here who wants to talk to you. So Florence came on the phone, and I told her who I was, and she kind of, she didn't know. And I said, well, we want to see you. So then she told us where she lived, what was her name? It was Skräddarnshus. Yeah. Borgholm, what was that name? You can't have her in a place where you can't ask her how to milk. You said you went to the right, and she went to the left. She had it all over. It was in the store where I bought the acid. And that man, he called, and I... We went back there. But I went back to the store, and there was a woman in the store. She was in there, and she said, and that's up by me. So we followed her. It was raining. Oh, no. What was her name? Borgholm. Wasn't that your name? It's on the island. No. It's on the island. It wasn't in Småland. It was up by... No. She lived up by Motala. It was up by Motala. It was just in Jotland. Yeah. But when we got there, she had her car there. We had passed by it two or three times. She was happy when we passed by. She didn't stop. She was happy. Did she have letters from your mother all over the year? With our mother's twin sisters. Yeah. Did your mother often write to them in Sweden? My mother didn't write as much as Hilda. So they were interested in finding out what had happened to them. Oh, yes. Did you write to them? Yes, we did. Did you write to them? Yes, we did. You have a dictionary in English. I'm a consul. Did you write to them? Yes, we did. Oh, I wish I had a present for you. You should have a present for them from the day. Oh, a polka dot... Aftershave. Aftershave, all that stuff. I don't use all that. It was in a nice packaging and it was in all plastic. It was a good brand, too. Very good. So anyway, for Christmas I made sure I sent that for Bertil. Bertil. Bertil. And then you know... No, not Leijonholm. Leijonholm was a nice guy who told us that when he went to the doctor, he had black and blue marks on him. And he found out what it was, Leijonholm or something, he had beat up on her and was abusive. So the doctor made her get a divorce. And Bertil, he... Bertil is younger than me, but he is nice. Yes. And so... She was at the hospital for something and he was at the hospital. That's where she met him. And he had... Where is she... That was his sister. Yes, but she doesn't live there in Borgholm anymore. It was another town. Tell us about how it was during the Depression and how it was just as difficult in Sweden as here. It's not comparable to how it was in Sweden in the 1930s. I don't know. The Depression. She was younger than we are. I don't know how old I was. Didn't Theas say she was 57? We were 56-57. The same as Theas. Yes. She had a mini skirt on. And that first Christmas... That's your cousin. No, she's not a cousin. She's not a bad person. But we call her a cousin. And she... She's a good cousin. So she took over the parents' floor after your mother. Yes. So your mother never got any money from Sweden? She got a little, I think. We had a brother in Sweden. He was... We tried to find out... His last name was August Lindskogen. He was a farmer. We would go to... To the event. Huh? We would go to Visby. Visby, yes. Visby, yes. But we could never go to Götland. But he had a cousin. He was... He was married. He was married to a woman named Ingrid. And they used to come over to visit their grandparents. And Ingrid... She had... She was so sick, so she became... So they put her in an asylum or something. I don't know if he was divorced or not. And the next thing he stayed with was this woman named Elna Jokobson. And they had a son. I think they had the son before... The son was older than all of us. But we wrote to Visby and never got any reply. And we even... The son worked at the post office. But we could never... I was in the post office. There was no one. And we talked to a guy in... When we were in Katrineholm. We were at a people's house. And their... Hansa's mother and our mother had friends in Sweden. They went to school together. And he called over to Visby. And we couldn't... There was nothing we could find out about that. Did your mother and father ever come back to Sweden? No. Never? No, no. They never came back. How old was your father when he died? When he died? He was only 59 years old. What was he... He had a heart attack. He... let's see... He was... When did dad die? 59? No. I'm telling you right now, on my 30th birthday. Yeah, on your 30th birthday. I'm telling you right now, on my 30th birthday. He died. He died. He died 51. He died 51. He died... 51. Yeah, 1951. He died 51. He died 51. He died in August. She was 84 years old when he died. How did she do in English? Did she like to speak Swedish in her last years? Yes. Poor mama, you know she just learned how to say yeah. And then it changed to yelly. Yelly. Wasn't that scary? No, mama spoke better. Her sister. Her twin sister. She never got married. She lived with us for many years. And here in Gransö Blåst? Uh-huh. She... When she first came here, she came here in 1926. What's her name? Hildur. Hildur Johansson. And she came here and she did housework for a while. She... I don't know how she found out that there was... She worked in Svansk, in Cleveland, Ohio. So she was there for a while. And then she came back here and she worked in a dry cleaner place. She was a wonderful ironer. And she... Now when did mom die? 80 or 81? She's been dead... She died in 80... 81, wasn't she? Or was it 80? Because they would have been 91 years old in July if she'd have lived. Yeah. So she died seven years ago. Seven. 1980. Yeah, 1980. Let's see. Can I figure that out? Because Gretchen was born... My granddaughter was 10 months old when mom got sick. And Gretchen's going to be 8 now in December. So Gretchen was born in 79, wasn't she? Yeah. So mom got sick in... Well, when were you up in Minneapolis and I called you and said... Mom got sick in 1980. She died in 81, mom did. You were up there basically. Yeah, I was up there. Well, Rana just had his back surgery, my son-in-law. So after... you went through high school and then... Well, I didn't graduate. It was bad times. I had to get out and work. It was the depression. Yeah, I had to get out and work. Was it easy to get a job for you or... Well... All kinds of work kind of jobs, just like the kids nowadays get in work. Minimum wage. You got to pay. They must have said, you got to pay. No. So... and then you started Dated Voice. You had Danish, Italians, and Polacks, and Swedes. So what did your father say when you came home with Harold Plow? Oh, he was all right, I guess. Did he say anything? No, they liked him, I guess, didn't they? He and dad liked him. He and dad used to go out and have quite a time. So he was also living here in Konsell Blad? Who, my husband? Yeah. Yeah, he was an engineer on the railroad. So you met him here in... Yeah, he was an engineer on the Chicago Northwestern Railroad. So he had a steady good job. I guess, all right, I get a pretty good pension out of it. Then I got two kids. I got a son and a daughter. He's got three daughters. I got a boy and a girl. So, and your husband, he died, you said, 12 years ago. He died 12 years ago, yeah. You were living... Oh, do you know Stuart? There was Stuart. But they... Stuart, my brother, Gustav, brother, Carlson. He was from the Royal House, directly from the Royal House. Our house, right out of our house. But you are called by the name of Swine Carlson. Stuart, when I started a school, they spelled it S-T-U-A-R-T. And then I went to another school and they changed it S-T-E-W-A-R-T. But everybody calls me Swede. Except me, I call him Stuart. Well, you still call him Stuart. I never call him... Some people call me Stuart, or Stew. But maybe Sheriff people call me Swede. No, I call him Stuart. In the phone book, it's only Swede. No, it's not... S-A... Stuart. Stuart. Stuart. There was Swede Olson. Yeah, there was another one. There's another Swede. Is that the one... which Swede Olson? The one from Omaha? No, no, this is the one from... You ought to stick him on here. I'm going to give him his name. That... The one... John Montgomery, Montgomery's grandson. Who? John Montgomery's grandson. Who's that? John Montgomery, that's Montgomery, the one from M&B. Yeah, who's their grandson? That's Swede Olson? Swede Olson, yeah. Oh yeah, their mother... Norman Olson. Norman. Oh. His brother, Norman. Is that his first name, Norman? Yeah. So they distinguished you from the Norwegians and the Danes then? Oh yes. Definitely. Yeah. So you grew up in this tough neighborhood. Oh yeah. A lot of Danes. Dane? Dane. There were so many Danes. A lot of Italians. All Irish and... Italian. There were quite a few Jewish too at that time, sir. Yeah, the Jews used to beat the hell out of me. They did? Yeah, they used to be mean to me. Why? I don't know. They just... I guess because they had found somebody they could whip. I used to get beat up something terrible all the time. Oh God. But I got... They were fighters. My friend of mine, he was going to go box. And he needed somebody... I said, I'll go with you. I'll spar with you. And I used to go down there, that YMCA, and they used to beat the hell out of me. And one night I went down there and the fellow was there and he says, Anybody here to work out with? And I said, I'm here. He says, come on. He took me upstairs and he laid down all the mats. And he says, he never laid the mats down like that before. He says, come on. He says, you're going to learn some things. He knocked me down and I got up and everything. So he started showing me this and that. I come down there on a Sunday, just waiting that Sunday for somebody to want to put boxing gloves on. Because they used to put them on me and beat the hell out of me. I knocked this one guy down. He got up and he said, that was a slip. And I knocked him down again and he quit. He took the gloves off, he quit, he never came back down. So I used to go out around and different towns and box. Oh, you did? Yeah, but I used to box under the name of Gussie Anderson because my folks didn't want to know what I was doing. Well, there was a secret. You were boxing here, Stuart. You took lessons then? Well, yeah, I got lessons. Who was the trainer? A fellow named Herbert Skinner. Skinner? Yeah, and I had another fellow too by the name of Royal Kaufman. He was on the 1924 Olympic team. From here, it comes to Boston. But Kaufman, he was a dame. But anyway, I got a lot of experience there and the main thing I learned what I wanted to do, I learned that I could take care of myself. And after that, I don't take much stuff from some people like I used to. So regardless of nationality, you don't back up? No, I don't back up. This was before the Second World War then? Oh yeah. During the Depression? No, I was... Well, now the Depression was still on. The Depression was never over until the war started, right? Dad always said Hitler was one of the... It wasn't Roosevelt who got rid of the Depression, it was Hitler who got rid of it over here. How about this political affiliation? Was he a Democrat or Republican? He was Democrat. He was Democrat? Yeah, he was Democrat. But otherwise, most of us, we'd say we were Republicans. No, I would... Eric Johnson's were Republicans. That was the only one... Like I was saying about, you know, that they used to... when Al Smith and them, we were kids and we couldn't... Oh, I remember that. That was terrible. But maybe Sheridan people couldn't vote anyway. No. And they were Catholic. Yeah, he was a Catholic. What happened then? Oh, they all said the Pope would come over here and they were going to build a tunnel under the Atlantic Ocean to the Vatican. And there'd be nuns knocking on the door every day, begging, what, for you to give them their money. If you vote for Smith. Yeah. Al Smith. So Hoover... He'd go to the school, Washington Avenue School, the Democratic headquarters is down the street about a block from there, and I'd go down and I'd get the Al Smith button. And then Dad would laugh, I'd be wearing them, and other people... You better take them off for that. Yeah. Because in those days, for some reason the Swedish people at that time... Well, all your Scandinavians were very prejudiced against Catholics. Very much so. In fact, our youngest brother, well, he's 15 years younger than I am. Our youngest brother, he joined the Catholic Church. He was going with a Catholic girl. And, oh, my mother had a fit. And she wasn't going to go to the wedding. I said, okay, we're all going. We all got our stuff. Well, I was going to say, it's just Mel getting here. Hi, Randy. She reacted in the... So the Wednesday before his wedding, he was going to get married on a Saturday, she calls me up and she says, well, I guess I'd better go to the wedding. And I had to take her uptown, go shopping, and she was the first one at the church. But no, and that... well, I imagine, because we... Of course, over in Scandinavia, before the Reformation, they were Catholic. Because one night we were... what was the name of that town we were in, Stuart, where we were going to stay at that con... it was... Boston. Boston. I told him. Oh, you told him about that. And that was higher price than... And they didn't have an elevator. They had little tiny stone steps we were supposed to walk. We turned around and left. We sure stayed in a beautiful hotel in Helsingborg, too. The... what was the name of that? The Horizont. Oh, that was gorgeous. Glass elevator saunas on every floor. I like the one a little taller than this. So, and... Shh, shh, the phone's off the hook. The phone's off the hook. Well, this is the hook. I think... Yeah, I just think... You're going to get in trouble. Oh, he lives in... You had two younger brothers. Mm-hmm. And they were born here in the... Council Bluffs....late 2010. And did they stay in the Council Bluffs also? Oh, yeah. Yeah. The four of us here in Council Bluffs. Oh. We never got that money to leave town yet. Well, you all found employment and... Mm-hmm. And your dad, he worked... he died too early, though, for his employment. Mm-hmm. He was not able to collect any Social Security. He was a Democrat, though, you said. Oh, yeah. Was he active in politics? No, but he... No, he'd vote and he'd tell everybody. The only Dem... Because Andersons were Democrats. They really argued that. They'd get into it with Eric Johnson. Well, I think when Roosevelt was running, I think everybody was a Democrat. Yeah. So he was a popular president. Oh, yeah, well... Among the sweet... Among everybody. He got them out of the Depression. He put people back to work. He started the WPA, the Work... Work and Progress Administration. Yeah. But what did the Republicans say about it? Well, Hoover was always the one that got the blame for the Depression. Yeah. It was really the big money, the stock market. That's really... It's how it all is. That's... well, that's what controls everything now, too. But then, like your dad said, that there was Hitler that saved you from the Depression. Maybe there was a lot of truth in that, though. Well, Hitler meant the... Hitler ended the Depression. No, he opened the factories over here. Yeah. What kind of factories were located here during the war time? Well, they had the bomber plant in Omaha, where Offutt is now. There was a big bomber plant, Martin Bomber. But there was nothing... no factories here in the country block? Well, they had a lot of... Well, railroad was a big... Well, then they also had a lot of these places, well, like World Radio and all those, where they made those crystals for radio things for... So what happened? You got drafted? Yeah, I went to join up at one time, and I had a broken tooth here. That was before the war. My front tooth was broke off here. And so that's when they want to pay $21 a month, and it's going to cost me $45 to get the tooth fixed. I didn't have $45. But then... You mean they didn't take you then? Because of the broken tooth? Yeah, they wouldn't take you in the Army then. I mean, both is. They were strict. They were strict, you know. Because a lot of guys were joined up and didn't have any work or anything, you know. So anyway, then I went to join up when the war broke out. And a friend of mine I used to box with, Skinner, he says, they wouldn't take you when you wanted to go, he says, and they really don't want men enlisted now. They got too many. They don't know what to do with them. He says, why don't you just wait until you're drafted? I said, all right, I'll wait until I'm drafted then. So you were drafted? Yeah, I was drafted. Then I got the... You were in for... 42 months. 42 months. Over Europe? Well, not all over Europe. I was only in Europe a little over a year. They were doing... But I spent time in the States training the men, training them. For Texas and Tennessee? Down in Texas and Tennessee, and I've been to Kentucky and Mississippi. And I got the... One thing I got to do, though, was over in Germany, is like I was telling you about Raoul Wallenberg, he helped the Jews, and I got to help the Jews that came out of Buchenwald prison camp and set up a hospital for them. The group I had, they were... Every day I'd go there, I'd have some dead. And so there was a winery, the engineers were guarding it. So I went down there and I got a big keg of wine, and I had it up there, and that night I gave them each about a little better than a half a cup of wine. They wouldn't drink any of this. They thought I had to poison them, because the Germans told them the Americans were going to kill them, and they poisoned them. They didn't want to drink any, so I'd have to take a little drink. Well, they had one good time, but I got drunk for hell. But the next morning I went there and there wasn't anyone dead, and after that, every night and evening, I'd give them a cup of wine. Were those Jews, Stuart? No, they were Jewish people. I never knew this. The Jews didn't make any difference to me. They were all nationalities, who they were. But were they people? They were human beings. They were terrible. Did they ever... Did they go into the furnaces to those people, or did they... Well, they weren't... Well, that's where they come from, that big Buchenwald prison camp. That's where they've been burned. That's where they had... Is that where that lady... They all called... They called me Carl, because that's what I... Carl, they didn't... Stuart, I never thought I'd try and talk sweetly to any of them. But I used to walk through there, and they'd grab my hand and kiss my hand. Would you believe that? They'd grab my hand like I was their savior after that morning. But that first night, we didn't have any curtains on the window, and it was supposed to... Everything was supposed to be blacked out. Hell, we had a party. We really had a... We had a colosse. And that... There used to be an airplane that used to come over a German plane to check. You could hear it. It was a two-motor job that we heard. Not one-motor job, two winged, and a biplane. It was a spy plane. He'd come over, and then lights on. He must have wondered what the hell was going on. I thought, well, the war is over for sure now. But they... Well, didn't you say you saw some of those lampshades and things that were made out of... No, I didn't go over there. The other guys went. I didn't want to go to the... I had enough. I saw enough horror going right through us, that... You'd hear people in there. And that smell. Well, they didn't have any... Well, they were just beat down to nothing. They were terrible. The poor guys, they'd throw the toilet on the floor and everything else. And I finally got them straightened around. We had... So that was a sad situation. Yeah, it was very sad. But it was quite an experience. It kind of affected my life in a way at times. Sweden took in a lot of those people, didn't they? Because I know there was a lady who came from Jetteberg. And she came over here twice, but she went back. We tried to look her up when we were over there, but I suppose she's dead. She was a friend of our mother's. I don't know. Well, somebody else... I guess her daughter brought her over, didn't she? Yeah. Yeah. And she told about, in Jetteberg, how boats would come in at night with them and they'd help them. Because Sweden was the only country that was neutral, wasn't it? And why was that? Well, there was the way they... Well, I've read accounts of where... Was it Göring or Goebbels' wife was Swedish? Göring. Yeah. Well, they claimed that Sweden had all them mines ready to blow up if they would interfere. You know, we found out when we were over there, the Swedes don't advertise it, but they're a little afraid of the Russians, aren't they? Well, all the countries along here, of course, changed everything, but... You don't hear too much about it, though, I mean, you... Over there, but they'd say they were... His wife and I, he was in Stockholm one day. He took the interurban, the train in there, and his wife and I, we were in there, but we went back because we wanted to shop. We bought quite a bit of glass at that castle, for some reason. We were sitting out in... at that shopping center, and this fella came up to me, and he talked Swedish, not very good, and I... He wanted to buy a cigarette for me, and I said, No, I'll give you one in Swedish. Then he said, he wanted to know if I was Swedish. I said, Yeah, but I'm here from America. Well, he could talk pretty good English. He was a Russian, and he was... He said he'd come over in the underground, and he said his mother was over there visiting him from Russia. She was sure shopping. She'd come out of those stores with all kinds of packages and given to him. He said he was a writer, but he was about half drunk, too. He wanted to take his wife and I in and buy us a drink, and we said, No, we don't mind. But his mother, you know, you think these Russians, well, she was very well-dressed and had nice jewelry, and she really looked nice. Who was that character we met in Beast of Seattle, with the... Well, we stayed in a little hotel there. Which character? We met a lot of characters there.