 October 1st, 1987, I'm sitting together with Mrs. Doris Pong, Omaha, Nebraska, and she was born 28th of June, 1910, in Sao Paulo, Minnesota. Your father, now you're not telling him, he came from Bermalan, Carl Scouga. He was born in Bermalan, yes, in Carl Scouga. His father was a schoolteacher and had been educated at Uppsala and changed his name to Hedin when he went to Uppsala. What was it before Hedin? It was Johnson, I think, yeah, and he changed it. So he went to the university then? Yeah, he went to Uppsala, and there he was trained to be a schoolteacher and an organist. And then, I think his first place of business was in Carl Scouga. Then he went back to Helsingland where he was born. And he and his wife, it was Yuhan Hedin, and his wife was Rita, and they lived in Edspoon. And then, for a while, of course, he lived right there by the school, in the school building itself. And we've been there and visited the school. We have been there to visit the friends of the Lindanes. You probably know Stefan Lindane, the cartoonist. That's a cousin of my father's. And we have visited them several times and kept in touch with them, the Lindane family. And also, my father's two sisters were married to Bjerlings because the Bjerlings were there. So my father's brother-in-laws were cousins of Jussi Bjerling. They all came from that area up in Helsingland. So that's why you are Jussi, the line down? Oh, I don't know. Maybe there's something in the genes. So how long did he stay in Edspoon? Then he stayed there all the time. My grandfather did. But my father left Sweden when he was 16. Oh, so this was your grandfather? That was my grandfather. Yes, that was my grandfather. And then my father, at the age of 16, left home and came with the Bjerlings to Ovenoker, I mean, to Cambridge, Illinois. And they went to church. They were out in the country. And he stayed with some of the Bjerling family for a while. And then he lived on a farm and was going to school, night school, to learn English and so forth. And he was influenced by the, what's the name of that, Jenny Lynn Chapel is in, what's the name of that town? Andover. Andover, yeah. So he went to church in Andover. And they had a very active Methodist church there. And the pastor there was very influential in his life. And he decided he wanted to be a clergyman. And he went to Northwestern to the Methodist seminary and was ordained a Methodist. Yeah, but he was ordained a Methodist pastor. And then when he was... This is your father, no? This is my father. That was Eric Hedin, Eric Nathaniel Hedin. And then he went out to Bridgeport and was in a church there, in the Methodist church, and met my mother. And they were married there in Bridgeport. And he also had a congregation in Brooklyn, New York. And then from there he decided he wanted to go to Minnesota, from Brooklyn. He left the church there and went to St. Paul, Minnesota, and was not happy in the Methodist church. He was indoctrinated in the Lutheran church in Sweden. And he liked the Lutheran church and the teachings of the Lutheran church and the practical way of living. So he went into the Lutheran church, came back to the Lutheran church where he started. And he was ordained... So he was ordained, first of all, in the Methodist church, and then in the Lutheran church in 1912. Did he go to Augustana then for some courses? Yes, he took some courses there, as well as with the... The man who was the president of the Augustana Synod at that time was Dr. Johnston. And he was pastor of the first church in St. Paul. And I was born there in Arlington Hills, which is just right next to the first church. And he worked there with him. So he was a pastor then in Minnesota. And we... That's your congregation there in Augustana? Yes, yes, in Rush City and in Watertown. And then we moved to California. And that's where I went to junior high school and high school and went to the University of Berkeley, University of California for a while. And then my father moved to Kansas, Topeka, Kansas. And I went to school then at Bethany College, graduated from there with my degree in music and in liberal arts. That was during Dr. Pilblad's... That was in... Yeah. He was in the... He was just on scene and... Yes, and he was there. Brossi was the director of the chorus at that time. Arvid Wallen was my piano teacher. All the famous fellows that gave themselves, you know, completely without any... It was very little, the salary. They really gave themselves, literally, for the school there. So you felt at home then at Bethany. It was a good college? That was a very good school. In fact, I felt that I got better music work there than I did at the University of California because they were putting emphasis on other things. I did take quite a bit of science and languages and so forth. So as far as my background is concerned, I have both. I'm visiting here. The college was very good to both Bernard and me. Both of us have received the recognition from the school. We've been named the alumni award. He got the first one, the first alumni award ever given to an alumna. And I was given an alumni award, and I was also given a doctorate degree from Bethany. That was partly because what I did as far as the international relations is concerned, because I've been very active in Lutheran World Federation and have helped us to get women's position in the Lutheran World Federation, to get a women's desk. I've been delegated several times to the assembly in Helsinki and Evian and Minneapolis. So the Messiah choir, now, they were strong already at that time? That was very good, yes. And the first—I was there when they dedicated the Presser building, yes, and sang in the Messiah. I sat next to Margaret Sansame, she graduated from the college the same year I did, Bethany. And I did a lot of accompanying down there, did that sort of thing. And I taught school here at our college, Luther College in Wahoo, Nebraska. I taught there for four years before I was married. So how was Linzburg now? It was a close-knit society, everybody knew each other. Yes. And sometimes it doesn't work so well in other places, but in Linzburg it has worked. It seems to have—because they were so closely knit together, they have given real support to the school. So they have to— You might be interested in knowing that it was my brother who was the president, as I told you, of Central States. When one of the presidents, Kenny Andean, decided that he thought the college should move to Denver, and my brother was the fly in the ointment and kept the school in Linzburg. And the Linzburg people really started then to do something to protect Bethany College, because it hadn't been done very—they had given support, you know. For example, I collected money from many of the merchants to send the basketball team to Kansas City to play in the national tournaments, and they did support it a little bit, you know, but nothing like what they're doing now, since they realized that they would lose the college unless they did something. Yeah, I remember that, because I was working out there. I met your brother in Kansas City. Yeah. And he wanted to move, and Andean wanted to move to Colorado. That's what Kenny Andean wanted to do. And I'll tell you, and he did it without anybody knowing that they were going to do it. And it caused a real stink. But there was really a cooperation among the people. They just came together and— The people got stronger and stronger, and they've done a lot. Now I think Linzburg is a different city now. Our little town, we're going to call it. It's remarkable. It's remarkable what they have done. And they're having Hildingsfest again this year. Every year. Which is every other year. I was going to say, every other year now. Yeah. I thought it was every year. They just keep it now for every other year. But they're really doing terrific things. They have remodeled the hotel. Everybody has their little dollar out there and so forth. I mean, it's a very loyal city, and they do support the college. They surely do. And they have King Oscar and a second coffee. Yeah. That's good. So you remember Birger Sanzino? Yes. In fact, we have a whole lot of his pictures. Bernard was given one when he graduated by Birger Sanzino. It was his—signed by him as a gift to him. We knew him very well. And also his daughter, Margaret. And his daughter, Margaret. Reno. And they graduated from the same year I did, in 1931. You also knew— And then we were good friends. Amory Lindquist, of course. And Amory Lindquist was in college when I was, too. So we had a lot of times together. And I used to—I knew Carl Lund-Hyfenquist, the one who was the executive for Lutheran World Federation for so many years. I think he probably has a higher reputation than most of the people that graduated from Bethany. I used to play for him when he sang, because he took voice lessons to improve his music and ballroom. I was dumbfounded by the distance they traveled for the practice. They came from many cities around. All the way from Kansas City and Topeka and Salina? Well, not too many from that far. But I heard there was somebody from Topeka. Yeah. But they would come—they didn't come every week if they came to sing. In fact, when I came back the year after I graduated, they asked me to come and sing in the chorus. So I sang without any practice and sat in my front seat, the way I usually sat. And Rossi looked up and he was so thrilled to see somebody else, one of his former students. So that was probably good for the college, for the teachers. They stayed on for so long. They stayed, yes. There was no uproar with the teachers every other year. No. And I'll tell you, as I said, they were willing to stay, even though they weren't given very much money. They lived on very low income. But they were satisfied with the— It was a good, warm feeling. And I think that there was good rapport among the teachers. Emil Dier was the dean there and he just—he gave of himself. He lived right there in the dormitory with the boys. You were up on fifth floor and he was on fourth floor. He was right there with the fellows. So there was a homely feeling. Yeah, it was a good feeling. And for the students, they came far away from— Yeah. Mrs. Swenson was still living when I was there. Yeah, the wife of the president. And Annie Swenson, I was in some of her classes. She taught speech. And we learned from her. We used to memorize poetry and act it out. Yes, E.O. Swenson. That was a big name on the— It was a very good name. On the campus. And I think you know that Emmett Ecklund is writing a book about him now. About Swenson. Why do you know that? Yeah. And he's also going to start a book on Karl Lund-Heifenquist. I know he published one about Fjellstedt. Yeah. Four or five years ago. I didn't remember what all he has written, but he's written several. We talked to him when he was here in July. And he said he was working on it because he was trying to get information. We have—Merton Lund-Heifenquist lives here in town, and he's a cousin of Karl. So you went through Lindsborg then, four years? No. I was only— You were there four years. He was there four years, but I started my work at the University of California. I had a year out there. I see. Most of the students now at Lindsborg, they came from Texas and Colorado and Kansas. Yes, and Nebraska, some of them. And some of them came from other areas, but chiefly from in that area. And see, Lindsborg was a very strong music school, and if people wanted good music teachers, they would come to Lindsborg to find someone they could have for their public schools in music. So it was not easy to find a job then after— Those were the years of the Depression when I graduated. So the first year I taught school, I taught everything. I was hired as an English teacher to teach the high school English, also to teach Latin, and I taught German, and I had all the music. I had the band, the orchestra, the vocal work, the operettas. I did the library work, cataloged the library, did the school paper and all these things. That was what we did in the Depression. I got $100 a month. So it was a heavy schedule. Oh, I worked from early morning to late at night, correcting papers and doing things. It was just busy, busy. And you were not married then at that time? No. Then I came to Wahoo and taught for four years at Luther College, and I taught piano and organ there. It was a very interesting time because Luther College was a remarkable school. I don't know how much information you have on Luther College. I had some yesterday. Yeah. Carl Wieden went to school there, and there were a lot of people who are leaders in our church, the Dichter family, the Hansons, the Edwins, the Lundins, all these pastors that you've contacted. They had at the beginning. Their parents were there, and the children who were missionaries' children, the parents were on the fields in China and Africa and various places, and their children went to school at Luther College, first of all in the academy to get their high school work, and then two years in junior college. Then some of them would go either to Gustavus or to Augustana College or Bethany and finish their college work. But there were a lot of people there who are the whole, it reads like a roll of pastors and missionaries in the church of Augustana Church. There was no rivalry between Bethany and Augustana like Gustavus and Augustana? No, no, no. Now for example, I think they were too far apart and too different. Yes. But with Augustana and Gustavus, there was always opposition because they were up canvassing money, Dr. Andrean. Yeah, they were pretty close. Yeah. It was the money from all over. Yeah. See, Bethany had superior music. They had something special. When Veld came to Augustana, then they developed having a very fine Augustana choir for Mosiah and Bach and so forth, and they had a wonderful choir, the Augustana Choir. Bethany seems to have the edge. On music. Yes. And Gustavus now is doing much better in music. They really have a very fine, they've done a lot with their Berling music call there. They have a good band, they have a good choir, doing some good things. So your father now, what did he retire to, Minnesota? No, my father was killed. So he died when he was a pastor in Topeka, an automobile accident. He died when he was 60 years old. And then my mother did various things. She worked in various institutions in the church. She was what they call the director or matron for several old people's homes, one in Kansas City, the girl's home in Chicago, a home in St. Paul, and so forth. She did that sort of thing after my father died, because she was about nine years younger than he. And so she had a lot of living to do after he died. And your brother, no, he was the... My brother Everett died, and I had a younger, just died about five years ago. And my younger brother was also a pastor, and he was in St. Louis. That was K. Luther Hedin. And he died of a brain tumor when he was 39. But he built a church, Gethsemane Church. Gethsemane, oh, I see. Yeah, in St. Louis. He was responsible for moving the church from downtown out to Chippewa, there in the new building out there. And he was a musician, and he directed the seminary chorus when he was there in the seminary. And then you married your husband in Wahoo. After Wahoo, yes. We were married in Topeka, in the church that my father built. They had a very interesting experience. The church burned in Topeka, and they built this new church just across the street from the governor's mansion. That was Trinity Church, Trinity Lutheran. So and then you had to move it on, were there? So we moved. Pastor. And we've lived a lot of places, north and south and east and west. I have had a lot of leadership in the women's work. I have been president of the Women's Augustana National Missionary Society. We call it Augustana Lutheran Church Women, for six years. And then I was the leader when we had the merger with LCA, and I was chairman of the committee for the planning of that. And then I was on the board for nine years after that for LCW and president for part of the time, and vice president. How did you feel about the merger in 1962 with Sue Omminger? Oh, I think it was the right thing to do. I think it was, of course, I was involved in it, and I was very definitely a part of it. I knew that it was a good thing, and I could see a lot of good things about it. And I think that it was what we needed to do at that time. I think it was appropriate. Do you don't think that Augustana lost its identification? I think that Augustana's thinking, as is stated in the Christian Century rather recently, is still a very vital force. In fact, if you look at things, you can see a lot of Augustana leadership, even now in the new ELCA. I'd say also that at the time I was president of LCW, I was a person that set up a committee to do something to expedite the ordination of women in 1970. And it was the backing of Lutheran Church women that helped to bring about the favorable vote for women to be ordained. Did new blood come in from other directions that was helpful to be leaders? Sure. It was everybody together doing something. Okay. The interview continues on the next slide with Reverend Bernard Spong. Next slide. This is side two, this continuation with Reverend Bernard Spong, Omaha, Nebraska. We have October 1st, 1987. You are a Texan. I was born and raised in Texas. Round Rock. Round Rock, Texas. And I left there when I was 19 years of age to go north to Kansas City. I had several uncles up there and aunts in Kansas City, especially by Uncle Victor Spong, who was the pastor of Emmanuel Lutheran Church in Kansas City. And he attracted so many of the family to go to Kansas City. And I went there to work with the idea of having quit school when I was in ninth grade because of circumstances in my home. Mother had died and father was left alone with five children. And he had a farm down in Round Rock? He was farming. And then I couldn't go to school, so I had to go to Kansas City to work and go to night school so I could finish my school and get to go to college because it was my ambition all along to go into the ministry. In fact, it goes all the way back to the time when I was a child, a small child, that I had in mind going into the ministry. I never thought of anything else. That's been my... So you had met your uncle? Oh, I knew him well. He'd been down many times, so I knew him. And there was another uncle, Axel, who was also there. And I went to live with Uncle Axel and his family. And my cousins were... I had a cousin there, a male cousin that was very close to me. And we lived together while I was working in Kansas City. If I remember right, if my recollection is correct, as they usually say, I think Victor Spong had the most beautiful handwriting in Ivor Stanislaw's history. That I don't remember. No, I've seen his records. Yeah? And I remember the name now. Well, hmm. Beautiful handwriting. He used to have just like flowing ink over the pages. That's news to me. I didn't know he had a good handwriting. Yes, because I filmed all the records when he was a pastor. And so how much older was he than your father? Let me tell you a little bit about the family there. Grandpa left Sweden when there were two children in the family, a woman and my Uncle Axel. And Uncle Victor, my grandmother was pregnant with Uncle Victor when Grandpa left Sweden. And so he was born then in Sweden. And after he became a little old enough, Grandma took the other two children and baby Victor and came to America. And then my father was born next after him. So there's about two years difference. My father was born in 1884. In Texas? In Rock? Yes. And then Uncle Victor was born two years before that. So he was born in 1882. Where did he come from in Sweden? Småland. Anders Torp. Anders Torp. And he was born in Barkaryd. Yes. Actually, I guess the family lived in Barkaryd for some time. But then they moved up outside of Anders Torp. Grandpa was a Knikt. And that's where he got the name Spong. The family name was Anderson. But anyway, then he left Sweden and they brought the family over. And they came to Texas and lived there. And that's where my father was born, in Texas. Did they have other relations in Texas already when they came, or was there recently? There were no other relations as far as that was concerned. Grandpa had a brother that came later. A couple of other brothers. In fact, three brothers came later. And he had two sisters that went to Connecticut. But Grandpa was the first one to go down there. There was an attraction on the part of a land developer by the name of Swenson. You probably know that. Sven Munger Swenson. Yeah, you know that. And that's what brought Grandpa down there, too. And he did well. At first, it was very difficult for them. So there's all kinds of stories that come out of how he had to skimp and live without practically anything at all. But when he died, I maintain that Grandpa was worth at least a quarter million dollars because of how things had gone with a large family. He bought land. He bought some farms, yeah. And my father never was able to buy a farm. He had to rent a farm. But he rented the home farm for quite some time. And that's where I grew up, really. You had to have bought a farm? Oh, yes. That's where I quit school. Well, I never really picked much cotton because I got a finger that was cut off in a sausage meal. And you can't pick cotton with that kind of finger because it gets under there. But I did a lot of other things, such as weigh cotton and haul cotton to the gin and take care of other things around the farm besides going to school during those months. How about Trinity? Trinity College down there? Yes, the one where you were growing up then? I was... And it folded up? They attempted to... The director, or the president, attempted to get me to go to college, to Bethany College to get my high school education. But I decided not to do that. And they folded the next year. So that it was a good thing I didn't go there because it was... They had financial difficulties. There were not enough students. Yes, there were not enough students. And that became a... actually became a children's home, the college facilities there. And now it's a nursing home. And I was chaplain in that nursing home for three years before we moved up here. So I know that place quite well. You had also other congregations in Texas? I never had a congregation in Texas. My first congregation was at Yakima, Washington. And I was there for four and a half years, from there to Yakima, from Yakima to Gary, Indiana. And I was there for nine years. That's the Bethlehem Church, isn't it? Bethlehem Church in Gary. Then I moved from there to Brockton, Massachusetts, where I was there for five years and got the building program started and had plans all made. Then I left and moved to Minneapolis to Augustana Church. Oh, did you go to Augustana? Yes, yes. I was there for eight and a half years there. Then I was called to be the director of the Merchant Seaman's Agency in New York City. And I was there for eight and a half years. Then we retired and moved from there to Florida. And I... we lived in Sarasota for a while, for a year and a half, actually. And then we moved to Venice, where I became the visitation pastor for a congregation in Venice, Florida. I was there for six years in that church, but we were in Florida for seven and a half years. Then we moved to Texas for three years, and up here three years ago. That's the story. So you have tried every climate in the United States? Yes, yes. Which one is best? Well, we are now. That's probably the answer you should have. No, there's no way to say that one is better than the other. There's always pro or con to each one. In Yakima, we had a congregation of three different backgrounds, Norwegian, Swedish, and German. So there was no question about any other language but then English. When I got to Gary, Indiana, they had just done away with any Swedish at all some two or three years before that. Was that in the early 40s then? That was early 40s, yes. But then I went to Brockton, Massachusetts. There were a lot of Swedes there, but no Swedish services. Then I got back to Minneapolis. There of course, there was more Swedish influence. In fact, the representative from the Swedish government used to come to our church in Minneapolis. I don't remember his name, but what do you call the... Yeah, the Consul General. Consul General. Yeah, he came from... He used to come to our church occasionally. In Minneapolis, we did have... Well, we had Swedish... We may have had a Swedish service at the Hanna Norg U. But then when I got to New York, as I said, there I had to start preaching Swedish. That started out way back in my intern year when I served my internship in Galesburg, Illinois. Pastor Bengtsson, I don't know if you know, had a... C.E. Bengtsson at First Church. He called me in shortly after I got there. He says he had that little Swedish primer in Rue Severet, and so on and so on. And he asked me to read it. I had no problem reading that, of course. He says, you're going to preach Swedish next Sunday. This was on Monday before. So I wrote out my sermon in Swedish, and I read it. And then the people says, nej, men, där får inte studenten stå där och läsa. Han måste predika. They couldn't notice the difference. So then I... The following... Next time I preached, I preached in Swedish, but I only had an outline. And when I got to a word that I didn't quite know how to say it in Swedish, I said it in English and nobody said a word. And you were not paid more because you had to write two sermons? No, no, no. Same price. Same price. But then when I got to New York as a visitation... I was a director of the Siemens Agency there. And I served Bethlehem, and there we had Swedish services every... Every once a month. And the same way at Salem Church in New York, in Brooklyn. Because there were so many newly arrived Swedes there. Because we had the Swedish Siemens Church in our building in New York for five years. But that got to be a little complicated because they wanted more building, they wanted more time, more space than what we felt we could share with them. So they then, in time, established their own church. So that's better because they had their own program and lots of activity there in the Swedish community. How were you able to pick up the Swedish? Because your home, they didn't speak Swedish the way you were. My grandfather and grandmother on my father's side hardly ever spoke anything but Swedish. And my parents, when I was a little child, always spoke Swedish in the home. And Texas, that community in Texas was very Swedish. In fact, they're more Swedish now than what they are in a lot of other places. They talk a lot of Swedish among them. The younger generations, they have learned it. So you were able to converse in Swedish when you went to school? Oh, yeah, sure. Yes. That was my first language, my childhood language. And I really had to learn more English when I started school as a child because I had been speaking so much Swedish in the home. And then at Augustana, you had to preach in Swedish, too? No, I stayed away from that because I had Dr. Emil Swensen who could preach Swedish. And there was a professor at the seminary who spoke Swedish. I would get them to preach rather than... Was it Lindbergh? No, no, this was at the Northwestern Seminary in Minneapolis that came in and he would preach. He preached for us a couple of times on that Anandogild service. That was all the Swedish we had at Augustana at the time that I was there. The idea has been that we should stay away from any other language than English. That was very much the idea way back in my ministry. But more of it has come back in certain areas like New York. More like nostalgia, I suppose, or old memories that bring you back again. But I preached once for the Swedish Seaman's Church in Swedish and I asked the pastor's wife afterwards, I said, did you understand everything I said? She said, most of it. I think she may have been kidding me, but it's not easy to satisfy the real Swedes that speak nothing but Swedish, to speak in the same way, to pronounce and to use the same words because as you know, among the Swedes, they've mixed up some English words. So when I try to mix up English with Swedish, it isn't the same because they have a different word for it. You have to know everything you say and how it comes out. It's easier to read it, of course, than to preach it. That's right. My first sermon that I preached at Montclair, that I preached in Swedish, was I had a Swedish couple when he was a professor, in fact, staying at our place in New York. I had them help me. I wrote my sermon out in English and then they translated it into Swedish. I read that sermon then, pretty much, because I hadn't done it for many years. You didn't have practice then? I didn't have practice, but after a while, when I got to preaching at both Bethlehem and Salem, I didn't have too much trouble because then I began to think in Swedish again. Then you got the hang of it. And what do you think about the merger in 1962? Some of the pastors told me that they lost the connection with the East and West because when it was like it was then, it was easier to have like a big family, but then the interest diminished. Well, I can't say that I had any difficulty on that at all because, first of all, I was in Minneapolis when it took place. And there, there wasn't that much of a change for us because we were still a large group. But then when I moved to New York City, then I felt the difference as far as the fellowship that we had among our Augustana pastors and people, so that I was in a different atmosphere and felt it. And since then, I have not felt that relationship that we had the same in Augustana. But as I say, when I was in Minneapolis, there was not much change. Because what they complained about is that when they went to synod meetings, for instance, everybody knew each other because they came from the same place in Augustana. Yes. But then later on in the 70s, they said that they are at loss, you know, who is it? Yes, this is true, very true. But of course, when we went to synod meeting in Minneapolis or Minnesota, there again, we would know each other pretty well because it was such, so much, so strong, Augustana. ULC wasn't that strong. Now of course, with the merger... And what happened now with the new one, ELCA? ELCA? Yes, ELCA. Well, we've got a lot of new people to learn to know. In Minnesota, there are five synods, whereas we used to have one. Now within those synods, ALC is stronger than LCA in Minnesota. Consequently, there's a lot of learning to new people, new people. We have the same thing here. And it's going to be a different kind of a thing. We have had here in Omaha, as you've gotten together, maybe somebody's told you about this. Yeah, I heard off in Minnesota, there was about 200 congregations that said it's going to rebel against. Well, I don't know if it was Minnesota, but it was 200 because... That is not going to be the case. That's not true. That's not going to be the case. They are finding out that some of those that have said they were not going to come along are coming along. And in one case here in Nebraska, I think it's Omaha, where the pastor tried to get the congregation not to go along. The congregation voted against him, and he has now resigned and left the church. It's the leadership, it's the pastor that's probably doing it more than the people themselves. So the fallout is not anticipated to be as great as some people think it is. No, but what I was going to say, we have had here a few of us Augustana pastors, former Augustana pastors, that have been getting together every Friday night to meet at bishops and just have a good time together. But now we have brought in others from LCA of other backgrounds, so we have a larger group of retired pastors that meet together. Dr. Swanson, he's going to retire January 1st, or is he going to continue on? Reuben Swanson? Yeah, the one from Omaha. I asked Reuben in June, when he was with us at Fremont, at Midland College, I said, what are you going to do, Reuben? He said, I really don't know. He has several options, and he hadn't decided. From what I hear, he hasn't really decided yet where he's going to be and what he's going to do. He has possibilities of New York or here or other places. So what will come of that, I don't know. I don't think he's going to retire, darling. He's 63 years old, as far as I know. So I don't know whether Reuben will, where he'll be. So this will be a challenge, January 1st, when you start. Yeah, they're getting pretty well organized, though. Things are well underway. It's going to be a tremendous administration. Yeah, and I have great respect for our bishop, Denny Anderson. He is really on top of things, doing a good job. Being received, too, by ALC as well. How about the new bishop now, Shilstrom? Shilstrom? I've known Shilstrom for a number of years and have very high respect for him and his ability. I think he's going to do all right. That's another thing, you see Augustana background there, that he comes out of that kind of spirit. When we had our 125th anniversary celebration of the seminary in Chicago a couple of years ago, it was very much brought out there how much influence there has been from Augustana background in the LCA. So that the old spirit of Augustana has still continued on. In fact, in the Christian century, there was quite a long article about that, the spirit of Augustana. Have you heard about it? So that's the Christian Foundation, though. Yeah, there's a certain good piety that came out of Augustana that is still pretty much going along. Now, of course, we've got the ELCA, I mean the ELC, the old ELC and the old ALC, and ALC now coming in with some different backgrounds and feelings. We've got the group that left Missouri, Dr. Tijen, coming in with their background and atmosphere. So it's going to be interesting to see how the melding of this is going to come out with the future. Do they have a conservative group also, the ELC, the old German group? Not to, I don't know if you'd call it conservative in the sense of Missouri, but it's an atmosphere of thoroughness and definite thinking, definite theological approach, which is good. I mean that's solid, much more so than what some of the others in different groups have come into it, which have come into this thing. So I don't know. It's going to be interesting to see what it... There's a turmoil among the Catholics, though. This seems to be very unstable now between the parishioners and the hierarchy. You mean in the Catholic Church? Yes. It's a strange thing, though, for so many thousands of years. Well, the Catholic Church is making great changes. However, some of the Catholic priests that I have talked to and been with have indicated that as long as they have the present Pope, they won't make great strides in change. He's too much bound in tradition. He would never budge for any kind of pressure. Yeah. He didn't really accomplish much when he was here now, according to my thinking, because they're going to go on just the way they were. There isn't going to be a great deal of... Isn't he right, though, to some extent? Well, it depends on what you're talking about. I don't know. I mean, if it's a matter of family planning, abortion, and all those things, those are questions. Right. And whether to say right down the line that this is the way it is, it's pretty hard to say. I mean, I'm not sure that that could be. But as far as adhering to the true doctrine, that, we all say, is the way it should be. I mean, I certainly believe in that myself. But I don't think we haven't gotten a new approach to salvation, Jesus Christ, the work of the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures. We haven't. That hasn't changed. The thing that has changed in relationship to the Scriptures, and that relates to our brothers, the Missouri Synod, is that we have gone much more into the scholarship approach. I mean, we have, we believe that there's been some things that have come about through thorough studying the Scriptures, through all of these things, that has brought about a new thinking in approaching and interpreting the Scriptures. Not that it's taken anything away from the Scriptures, but it's simply a matter of accepting the fact that maybe there has been some, not errors, but things that have come into the Scriptures that must be interpreted properly. Do you think the Popes traveling around the world has taken away some of the mystiques, like the royal house, for instance, in any country? If they get too much close to the common people, they seem to lose their respect or identity if they get too much publicized and too much commercialism in what they do. He certainly hasn't let down any. He hasn't mingled around too much. He hasn't let down and become, and yielded in any way, to the people's thinking. He stays the same. He has held his own as far as that which he believes in his teaching. If you just do wrong, you've got to do what the Church says, that's it. That isn't going to sit well with the Catholic people, because they want to have more freedom than that, I believe. In fact, I heard it last night from one Catholic. And especially losing so many of the priests, of course, is the most difficult problem to tackle, because it's a fact. Oh yes. So no room for women in the Church, really. That's going to hurt them. But it's debatable too, though. I mean, is the Scripture right, or is the time right? In other words, every generation are supposed to propel themselves up to a higher level, but they can't go so far. Well, there again, it's a matter of recognizing when the Scriptures were written, under the circumstances under which those things were said and done. Whereas in this day and age, we have come a long way in the individual freedom, much more so, whereas today we don't believe a woman is the slave of a man. But that was very much the case in the Old Testament times, and certainly in Paul's time, and all through there, when the Scriptures were written. And so we believe that through the times, these are changes that we must recognize, through scholarship, through other approaches. And this is what puts us in a position where we believe in giving the women the privilege of doing what they want to do, as far as being pastors and so on. In fact, my wife was the, when she was in the position that she was, did she tell you about this? That she was the one who was the president of the organization of women at the time, when they adopted the ordination of women. And she pushed this an awful lot at the convention of the church, so that it was voted in. So I have learned how to look at things in a way that there shall be opportunity for women to do that which they are equipped to do and want to do in the service of the kingdom. And so far it's been working very well? Oh yes, very fine. Except that not too many women are senior pastors today in any of our churches. They just haven't been accepted at that point. But there is no problem with recruitment for the ministry though? Not since we have women and men both. We have sufficient pastors. The seminaries are still turning out pastors. Yes, they sure are. But for the Catholics, they have trouble. Yes, yes. They have to color a few good men to get going. Yes, whatever they are going to do, that is going to remain to be seen. What did they mean with this article in the Newton last month? That evangelism is not going to be pushed? Well, outreach. Yes, there is a strong statement against all the missionary idea of developing new Christianities all over the world. What did they mean with it? Well, I'm not sure what you mean by your question as far as the idea that we are going to put more emphasis on outreach. Reach people in person. Get to them and bring the gospel in that sense. We have not been as strong on that as we should have. We don't believe in the past. We've been pretty much satisfied to be within our own group. We have many pastors who feel that it is sufficient to minister to the people within their own church and not have to go out into the community to do anything to reach out. But the article actually said that they are not going to be pushing that too much, evangelism. I didn't read it that way. I mean, that's what... Maybe I misinterpreted it. Because I felt that it was like the Lutheran pastors years ago, the Swedish Lutheran pastors. He was a tech by day. He never reached out. In other words, he had his desk and...