 This is cassette 2, page number 1. We continue with an interview with Alfie Nyrén, Port Wing, Wisconsin. This is cassette 2, page 1. This is cassette 2, page 1. This is cassette 2, page 1. This is the Freeport close to Rockford. This is cassette 2, page 1. This is cassette 2, page 1. This is cassette 2, page 1. What were their names? What did that have to do with it? It was a good name to have, Johnson. Yes, yes. Johnson, Johnson. They were proud of Johnson. They had to plaster it all over the walls. Anyway, I had to go back to Chicago. I wanted to get in on the painting. Then he said, I'm going to finish up here. I don't want that. So I went back to Chicago. I said goodbye and thank you so much. They were awfully nice to me. He wanted me to learn the piano business. Then we learned how to play it too. So I don't know if there was any bright future in that. I remember all those piano tuners, they were starving. They didn't have enough to eat. I remember that. So I said, well, I think I do pretty good in my line. I'm a painter and I learned my trade in the old country, so I know my business. So I want to keep it up. The best thing you could have done too, somebody told me, because after all, a good painter is always wanted. From then on, I went to the Germans. It went fine. They liked me and all that. Then I kept on for a year, off and on, to different contractors. I finally said, I'm going to do my own work. Not as a business, but keep certain people inside my district. So I can work on them. I got quite a few. Finally I got 20 painters working for me. But I figured, it's hard work. Look at how I have to suffer to collect the money and pay them. I said, that's a headache. A lot of times I pay them and I don't get any myself. It happens all the time. I get some extra on the day anyway, so I can get along. But that's the idea. I kept on, kept on, and finally I got a partner. That partner, he had a few jobs. We went together. He was a seller. He was Hungarian. So you were able to speak English at that time? You knew English enough so you could talk? Oh yeah, a couple of years after, then I could talk. Here is the thing now. Did you belong to the painters union? Oh yeah, in 1984. You had to. So you lived on the south side then? Yes, on the south side. 1984. There was an Irish local. Mostly Irish men. And Irish, they were bad. They weren't very good mechanics. They were not? No, they never learned the trade. They come in and drove right into it. And tell them, I can do so and so. What he got was floors, varnished floors, and stuff like that. You clean the floors pretty good before you varnish them. And stain spots, varnish peeling off. But if you compare the Swedes yourself now with the Irish, they knew the language. They had no trouble to speak. But they were bad mechanics, you said? Yeah, the Irish were bad mechanics. They were ahead of their job because they could talk English. That's the reason. Did they make any difference in your case? Could people see that you were a good craftsman? I didn't like their idea many times. I didn't want to say anything. He hasn't got a very good idea. So I tried to work on the ideas. And I liked the police people. So people had a hard time to understand you, and you had a rough time to understand them? Yeah, at first. But your workmanship was better? My workmanship took care of it. My workmanship took care of it, smoothened it out. He's such a good mechanic, so we had to overlook. So they could see that? Yeah. And I was happy about that. So when you belong to 184 now, the local? Yeah, that's on 63rd Street. Did you attend most of the meetings? The union meetings? Did you attend the meetings? No, I did, but I didn't like it. A certain group had everything to say. And I figured I wasn't good enough to say anything. So you were frozen out then? Yeah. So I figured I wasn't good enough to say anything. So what good did you have at the union then? Oh, well, you could work in the place. You couldn't work in the place otherwise. You couldn't? You couldn't get a job downtown. They locked you up? No. The union was right there, the opposite union. They had their locals downtown. They stopped you. How did they stop you? Because they didn't think you belonged to the right group, I guess. He belonged to 184 and we belonged downtown. We were a different bunch of painters. So you had the book or the card with you all the time then? I didn't have any book from Sweden, no. But you got one in Chicago? I got one in Chicago. I got a lot of books. I don't know where they are, but I got books. Did they check up on you if you were a member or not? Oh, yeah. You know, the first job I got was with that boss, Boberg. I didn't belong to the union then. And there was an honest man. He came and worked with me and he said, Oh, you're a scab. Well, I don't know what the scab means, but I didn't belong to the union. So I wanted to work with you. So he got upset. So I said, Okay, let's go out there and talk it over. So he took a 2x4 and was going to hit me with it. So I got hold of another 2x4 and I stuck him right in the front. I just came from the army. I know how to fight. That kind of fighting. I was an iron man. I knocked him down in the ditch. I fixed him. He never said anything after that. No? No, sir. He never said anything. So how long could you work without the union card then, after that incident? Well, then they took me in and the boss really told me how to do it. You go to Sosol, you get a permit. And you can work on a permit so long. Then you have to join the union. That's what happened. Did somebody have to recommend you to the union? A sponsor? Well, there was always somebody who recommended me. He was your sponsor? That I worked for. The sweet mover, he recommended me. He told me he's a good painter and he knows all the colors. He can name all the colors by looking at them. You didn't take any tests or anything? Test work? Test? You didn't take any tests? Well, there would come questionnaires. And in the questionnaire, on colors. But you couldn't read it? Huh? You couldn't read the questionnaire? Well, by that time I understood some of it. This was a couple of years after, you know. So I understand some of it. So everything went smooth that way, enough so that I could get along. I didn't know the whole alphabet, but I know part of it. And this went on and on and on and on. And finally I got bigger and bigger and bigger. And I said, no, I got hold of another partner. So we was talking this thing over. And he said he was a good painter and I was a good one. So we belong together. Let's be partners. And we hired out the company to do big jobs. And in that company, all the big manufacturers with paint, you know, had stock in that company. So we got a job. And those fellows had in their head, they were going to have a contest, see who do the best work. So it went on and took a couple of months to go through all that. It was hundreds of painters, you know, big buildings. And lots of different kind of bosses, too. So now I had to think a little bit. Anyway, it went on. In a month or two, they had to figure out who was doing the best. So I won the first prize in Amelin. My partner won the first prize, Stippling. You know what Stippling is. Yeah, we can talk about it. And those two companies, they had stock in the building maybe or something. Stock in what? I don't know what stock they would have. Most likely they had in the buildings. And... It's so easy to lose. You lost stock in the building, you said? Yeah, oh yeah, we won the first prize. And then after that, up we went. See, those fellows, they used our paint. See? And every place they were in had so much stock in the building. And we used our paint. So you get the jobs. So we got so that we could pick a building. The skyscrapers in the downtown, I could pick any one of them. But we didn't want any downtown because they were too dirty. Boy, there's soot all over. You had to wash everything before you could paint it. That you should do anyway, but this was really dirt. Coal, coal, soot, all over. You were talking about, you won the enamel. Yeah, but the first prize. And your partner, he won the Stippling job. What kind of base or paint did he use for that? Oh yeah, that was the big paint company in them days. Oh, I know I forgot them. I forgot the name of the company. I forget names. Yes, but what I meant was that what kind of paint was he using for the Stippling work? Well, that was real Stippling paint. Special paint. That was a glass Stippling, and semi-glass, and flat. No lime. No, no. No lime. No lime. No lime? Lime. There was no lime. Oh, no lime. No, we didn't use any lime that time. No? No, no, no, not that time. They used it before. I know, but there was... Oh, yeah, coal smelting and stuff like that. There was no... Downtown was mostly coal smelting because you had to wash it anyhow. And then you wash off the coal smelting. Oh. And then you put on more. And schools, schools, all school ceilings, they were big, you know. Consummate. Yeah, almost a half a block, you know. So this was a good break for you then, to win this contest? Yeah, yeah. Was that a better deal than the Union could do for you? Well, I was still a Union man. No, but I mean, the Union couldn't get you into the big buildings downtown. It was the skill that made you the entrance. Well, yeah, it's... In a way. They had three or four men that did not go and check up on your work. I see. And their report was to my favor. Yeah, it was. In other words... It's empty to my part. What I'd like to ask is that did the Union give you any job at any time? I mean, favors? They could get any job, any billion or whatever. That's what we did. Yes, but I mean... We took a building between us. We didn't have any gang to work. It was just him and I. When the building was over, we did it. We worked hard and we made money, too. You were all Union guys? Uh-uh. All Union? All Union. Oh, yes. We had to be downtown. Well, we didn't pick anything downtown. We picked all the big buildings on the lake shore. Clean and hardly anything. We had to dust off spots, you know, a lot of dust laying on top. Uh-huh. And all that. But very few places that we had to do in Washington. But here is the thing, though. You and your partner were the boss. You were the boss of the company. Of your company. Yeah, I was the boss all the time. Between the two of us, you see, I was the boss. Yeah, but did you have to belong to the Union then if you were the boss? Oh, yes, sure. We were, we were, we were, uh, we were, uh, Only your hired guys? We were contractors. That's what we were. And you still had to belong to the Union? I did belong to the Union, sure. And we could hire people and we don't have to hire people. See, that's the rules, you know. Did, uh, you said, no, you didn't visit the Union meetings too often. Did they offer you any good jobs, the Union? No, the Union had nothing to do with that. They never... We got that through, through, uh, I'll tell you now, I don't want to say this, uh, Title and Trust. That's the biggest real estate office in the world, you know. They really got it? Yeah. Anybody that has a flat building and they lose it, the Title and Trust, they go over it and they run it. And they use it, and they rent out the places and they use the rent money to pay for whatever they do. And it was this particular, you know, you tell you, they wanted good painters. And one that know how to put on the paint and put it on right. That's what they wanted. And that's what we, we were at. And, uh, we kept that going. I didn't, I didn't want to hire anything in the, in the paper, on the job. We did it all ourselves. All yourself? Uh-huh. And then when the building was finished, we fixed another building somewhere. And until a couple of years, then they figured it's good enough for two years now, what they did. So, well, they made a little washing, but they do that themselves, the people, the rents, and they hire somebody to wash. But, now, now when you worked for this, uh, uh, Title and Trust. Yeah, yeah. I am sure when they, when you took the job with them, they pressed you on the prices. Did you go by the union scale? Oh, yeah, well, oh, yeah, we had to give them a price, sure. I know, but did they press you on it? Well, it, it, it wasn't very, uh, no, but it was a reasonable price, we got it, and that's all, and because we were good payers. So, I mean, you went by the union scale then? Yeah, oh, yeah, sure. Yes, but, I mean, the... We, we paid ourselves on union wages, so... You did that? Yeah, you could do that. But when the company... You could do that yesterday. But when the company hired you, you know, then, they could bicker with you, you, you don't. We had to send in bills every week, you see, what we had done and what building we worked on and all that. Well, that was just the rule, you know. But you had to be competitive. It wasn't necessary, it wasn't our absolute resolution to do it, but they did it anyway. And, uh, that's how we got along, and we made good money, and, and we know we had one place to go to, uh, always, and nobody was fussy. No? No kick coming, no from no place. And you didn't have to pay anybody to get any jobs either? No, no, no, no, sir. No, we were sitting pretty, we had it, we had it. That's what they said, we got it, no. But you know, you know, Alfred, in Chicago, there's a big, uh, capital, uh, place of a lot of kickbacks, you know, if you get one to get a big contracting job, you have to pay somebody under the table. Oh, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's, uh, yeah. Did you know those things? That's, that's higher up, you get, uh. Higher up? The flat building isn't the highest, the flat building. You get in on, on, on private property, and the biggest stage, yes. But then you be on your toes, too, and then you, uh, well, that, that comes later on, I tell you, you know. Yeah. Uh, you climb up to the, you climb up to the top. I did, I'd climb to the top. That was my doing. All, all along, well, I come to this, you know. See, now, now we are, uh, we are downtown now, and, uh, we can pick any building we want. Well, it was the end today. One building was just like a next one to us, so it didn't make any difference. But next year, we got to pick one that we have done ourself. That's it, that's the main thing. And, and, and that's easy. We have good stuff, good material, and it wasn't easy. So we, we tried to do that. So we got back to building in a couple of years again. The same, you know. Uh, in the meantime, we didn't have anything done. And, and they did a good job, so they're okay. And, you know, any wallpaper had to be removed. All wallpaper had to be removed. And put canvas on. And paint canvas with figures. Ah, that looks nice. And that's the idea. You could paint at any time on the canvas. And, uh, you have to, you have to have a little, uh, heavy paint to sparkle, uh, to sparkle, uh, some, uh, other, sometimes you have to find cracks. And if you have heavy paint, you can, uh, you can, uh, Stipple it? Yeah, you could, you could, uh, fill up the cracks with that. With just the paint. So everything went fine. We had, we had those fancy ideas, you know. Nobody know the difference. But the paint in the crack, it holds better than anything else. Plaster pallets don't hold nothing. No, no, no. Well, if it is a big place, of course, we'd use plaster. But, uh, cracks, you, you, uh, you, you fill up with paint. And then you give it a little extra stroke with the brush before you finish up the, the, the set. Then you have a good job. Mm-hmm. And, uh, don't have to be so fussy because if you do the right thing, wash off, if it is dirty wash, you get a good job the second time. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, anyway, this, we carried on, carried on, and that went on. And, uh, then the war started. Well, every boss was so damn busy. And they had a big boss, uh, Eckley. Uh, Eckley. No, Eckley, uh, yeah. I think that was his name. Yeah, he was the biggest boss in Chicago. And he lived on the west side, too. And he could get any job, any job, on his own price, you know, and figure skill, just the skill, nothing else. And, and, and by using that, he got lots of money left over because the job was worth more than the skill. And, uh, so we made a little extra money then. We got in on good stuff that time. How did you get in on that? How did you manage to get in on that job? Well, we got to be known. Yeah. I was very, very much in favor. Everybody know my work. I've been working all over. See, I had, uh, I had, uh, Chicago Club. They moved to Lake Geneva. And we lived in Lake Geneva during that time. We moved to Lake Geneva, too. And they found out that I was there. I was doing work for, for, uh, Shills. That's a big name in the Jew, you know. Uh, and, uh, and, uh, and then I saw, uh, we worked on the, on the Chicago Club. And we had about 150 buildings to repair, outside, not every year, but often on. So we, we were busy, really busy. And, uh, now we are in Lake Geneva. And, uh, Morton Salt had a big estate in Lake Geneva, big, 73 rooms. And I don't remember how many bathrooms. Close to 30 or about that. And, uh, there was a big, uh... Thirty bathrooms. Ah. Thirty bathrooms. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, look at all the bedrooms. People had to run around an awful lot before they could go to the toilet. Yeah, and, uh, I had to think a little bit. I liked to follow steps if I could. And that's pretty tough. We are still in Lake Geneva. Yes. Well, anyway, there was, uh, The Thailand Trust had a big office in Lake Geneva, and they had a farm. They built the farm, see? And when they built the farm, I, I had to put in my, uh, my, uh, know-how on it. So I tell you, I told them, you go out now. I did work for those people before. You go out and look at the country and see how many farms you can find that has paint on it. They're all peeling off. Every one stick, every stick of paint is peeled off. It don't paint over, it don't paint, uh, paint them over again. So I said, you look that over, I said, and see how many you find that has paint on them. If you want Jews to look at that, I'll tell you what you do. You, you back frame every stick that you put on the barn. Have paint on the back first. You understand that? And, uh, and then let it dry good because you have good undercoat. You gotta let it dry very good before you finish it. So let the barn stay for a week at least. And, uh, this was the experiment farm, the Silent Trust had it, no, not Silent Trust, Morton Salt had it. And they sold a lot of salt, you know. And the salt containers, and the car rubbed a little bit on top, it opens up. They got, even get a squirt of water. And then, then they lick the salt, and the salt is good for the car, they love it. It's just like candy to you and me. So... Let me see now, I have another jump now. We go up, up, up. So, well, anyway, we work for the bosses. They came to us, us too, you know, and asked, say, will you please work for us and run jobs? We have so many big jobs. We had, uh, we have, uh, a new, uh, new buildings in every state, they gotta be painted. Hospitals and all that stuff, they painted after the war. And, uh, you, you, you can bet on those, scale. See, because most of the government works on scale. You bet your scale on it. And then you were sure you could make a scale. And, uh, and that went on and on and on, and finally everybody got so busy that they had a Sunday off. Uh, uh, a war worker had to be done first. And, uh, if you... It got, it got filled up. They had room to put anymore on, you know. Yeah, well, anyway, what was I... Do you remember? Yeah, I, uh... Well, anyway, you know, here it is, you know. The, the, the boss, the one big boss, you know, he had a contract, you know, any contract he wanted, he got it. And, uh, he had another two men with the government, you know. And, uh, and that was the government jobs. So I could have gone to any state I wanted to go and run a job, run a big building someplace. But I didn't want that, I don't want that. I want the St. Nichols, I told him I want the St. Nichols, I don't want to go out in the outskirts. So... We, uh, during that time, we, uh, moved out. Yeah, and, uh, well, I'll show you. We had to be close to this, this boss's jobs, you know, because they were on a certain spot. So we wanted to be close to it, so we moved, so we didn't have to drive so much in the morning. And we liked that afterwards, anyway. So Lake and Eel, you could always go back there. And, uh... You know, what happened next? I had to try to get it in line. This is a long time ago. Yeah. So do you think... Yeah, anyway, here, yeah, I must finish that. You fellas have been telling the vacation for a long time, you know. You called them all together in a big room and talked to all of us, all of the boys, all the running, the running jobs, you know, the run jobs for them, big jobs. And, uh... My head gets so mixed up, you know. It's pretty good stuff coming up, you know. Yeah. Well, anyway, the boss, he said, you need a vacation, see. So why don't you decide and go together, a few of you, and go to California on vacation? And then you can help these men. One of my men, he said, had bought a place in Los Angeles. And he's care stiff. So everybody tells him that he has no chance to start any job in Los Angeles. That's the worst state in the Union. They refuse to recognize a new man coming in, especially in that kind of a business. So, and he got scared. He hired six best painters we had in our... God forbid them, he had good painters. And he paid 20,000 for the job, for the place. And he had those six men, and he said, he has nothing to worry about. For goodness sake, he's sitting pretty. If I had the money, I wouldn't worry a bit. So, and my partner and I, we were talking this over. And, uh, so then we were in, uh... Maynard, do you remember the name on the town that the Roseberry starts? Do you? No, I don't. Ah, that was in California, yeah. Roseberry starts in that town. I have, I have. Yeah, anyway, the name of that town, we lived there. When we were in California. You moved to California? Huh? You took that wife to California? Yeah, yeah. We moved to California. I'm in California now. Yeah, yeah, sure. You moved? So, uh... Yeah, I remember. You remember? Uh-huh. So, anyway, we said, my partner said, he said, when he said, I got a job, he said, my brother-in-law is building a house in, in, uh, up north, way up north, someplace. And he wanted me to paint his house. So, he said to me, why don't you go and join the place? I'm going to do it, my brother-in-law's place. So, I said, nothing to do with it, I'm going to start my own business. I'm going to start, I'm going to show that guy I can do it all by myself. And I showed him. Oh, you're crazy, you can't do that in Los Angeles. But I can. Well, we'll find out. So, I said, okay. I, uh, so I did. When he left, you know, my car was fixed up for a paint shop. I had everything in it, everything. Step ladders, planks, small planks, short planks, you know, but big enough to get around. You had a truck then? Huh? You had a truck? Yeah, I had, uh, I had, uh, four paperboards with, I had, I fixed up the trunk, so I could put this paperboard in, in the trunk, straight in. And it was something to hang it underneath the car there, that the fellow put it in for me. So now you can load it on. And I had the step ladder and everything in there. And, uh, and four paperboards, and then four horses. If you get a big, uh, big, uh, canvas job, you got to have four. Four horses. And, and four boards. Those boards were eight, eight foot long. And putting up a double table, you had to put in big, all you could do was reach in the middle when you, when you put. So you, you loaded up your car then, and took your wife with you to California? My wife? You left to California then? Oh yes, she was with. Yeah, you, you left to California? Yeah. Yeah. I'm back in California now. What year? What year? This was in 1949. 1949. 1949. So when you came to California now, and Los Angeles. Well, I tell you what I said, I get to that now. Uh, what was that last time I said something? Lake Geneva. Oh, it was Lake Geneva, and now I'm in Hollywood. You're in Hollywood? No, not Hollywood, I was in, in that little town. Burbank? Yeah, yeah. And, uh, we lived there for the time being, for a while we lived in, in, uh, in Los Angeles. Yes. John, my, my father, he knew someone, he had a trailer, and I rented a room from him, my bed, bed and I, for the time being. So when you came out there now, to California in 1949, you had a Union card from local 184 with you? Oh yeah, we joined the local, we joined the Hollywood local. You mean the 84 was no good? Hollywood local. The 184? We can, you can join any local you want when you get to a town. Would they? So, so we, we joined Hollywood. Were they strong out there? Local number one. Were they strong? Yeah, oh yeah, there was some, uh, Strong would you? They were nice people, nice artists and everything. And, uh, but the, the idea they had in painting, they told, there was three interior decorators. Well, I, I haven't come to that yet. I'm, I'm ahead of it now. I may forget that. I forget that. I, uh, I'm going to try to get this straight. You know, he, he, yeah, I said, I'm going to start my own and you go and do your job for this, and I start my own or you never make it. Well, you'll see. I don't know. I'm going to try it. So I did. The day after, I went to one paint store, you know, the closest one, and I went on, went on and on, until five of them was, and no answer. And I couldn't get a job in either one of them. So I have to tell this to somebody and he said, did you go through the big one on, uh, on, uh, on, uh, what's it, California Boulevard or something like that? It was a big boulevard that just went through town. No, I didn't, I didn't know. Yeah, that's a big one. He said, oh, that's for me. I said, I'll go there tomorrow and you bet your life. So I'll go there. And I told him my story. I'm here on vacation. I love the place and I like to start business. I like to have a little job. Now, you see, he said, that's pretty tough now. Every painter around here hasn't got nothing to do. It's a bad time. Yeah, I know it. Everybody tells me it. All the paint stores I went through tells me that. So, but anyway, it should be a job somewhere. And I'll mention anything, you get a job, but you don't trust me. That's the trouble with this part of the country. You don't trust an honest man. If I come and ask you, can I have a job, you don't trust me. The job isn't going to be done right. That's where the trouble is. Now, I know that, but I've got to have a job and I'll show you difference. And I talked to the owner of the store. It happened to be that they weren't busy. So him and I could talk and we talked for the whole hour. And I told him, everybody I did work. I said, I even did work for Rothschild, the world's richest man. And he loved me. I could have been with him yet. But he had such a big job that I had to re-equipment. Equipment, re-equipment, because I hadn't enough. You've got to have a big house almost to do some of the work he wanted me to do. He took me downtown and showed me. Rothschild, the richest man in the world, took time to take me downtown and talk about work. And he sold all the stutting heads. The Rothschild Stutting Head. And you know how much they cost? All the carboys got them, you know. That's $85, $90 for a head. You can stick them, roll them up, roll them up, stick them in your pocket. You take them out, just as good as new. No wrinkles. And that's how this worked. So he was busy. He sold heads. He was going to give me one. I said, well, I never wear a hat. So I didn't want to owe him anything. You've got to be careful with Jews that way. Stay off as much as you can. You know, tax for it. And they don't think nothing of it. Well, he's handling his business, and that's all he thinks about. But anyway, I went on and talked to this painter, and I said, and talked about all the jobs I've been on and what luck I had. And he was wondering, he was thinking and thinking and thinking. He said, I haven't got one, I don't think I have one painter working yet today. Well, who me? My mother moves around, and I said, and I go to the next place. So I went to the door, then he stopped me. Say, say, mister, do you see all that rolls of wallpaper in that corner? Yeah? Do you think you can find a way if I give you the address to do it? He said, don't worry, I can. I've never been lost yet. Not even in California with all the hills and peaks and everything. So I did, and now let me see, where was I? You got the wallpaper? Oh yeah, yeah. Yeah, I got a job for him. And when I came to that job, there was a carpenter foreman, his name was Exet Johnson. And he, he, he taught me, I'm used to bluffer. Oh, you're used to bluffer, he said. Why did he say that? He. Yeah, why did he say that? He said that to me. Why? You don't know how to do it, and you go to the armory, you're just going to come and bluff yourself in. And that's what you see, and I've done many, many good jobs in my life. And believe me, you're going to be, well anyway, I said, I got the car full of wallpaper. Go, take them out and put them in the room where they belong. So he had them already in the dining room, and you know what I did? I cleared the spot to put my canvas on, I had a canvas with, and put up my board, paper board. All these, but he was walking around worrying about what to do. And he was worrying about, should I have him or shouldn't I? So, I, you know, I did, I put up the boards, then I mixed paint, and I tore off the paper. I said, I see the paper is in here, I said, but he didn't pay no attention to me, what I did. I bluffed him right then. And, and I cut up the paper, all the paper for the whole room, I cut them up in one, mixed paste. And while he was talking and worrying about things, I had four strips pasted already, folded them up and threw them under the table. Oh, then he said, I never seen anybody do that. You haven't? Well, you haven't seen much, I said. I said, you know, some days, I said, you can't hang a wallpaper without soaking it. No, two strips later, at page four, just the time when the first one is a little bit soaked through. And I'm going to show you, now I'm going to hang those. He didn't still, he still didn't know what I was doing. No, he didn't know I was on the job already. And I had to laugh by myself right there when I thought of it. Oh, you son of a gun, you're bluffing, you're very true. No, I don't think I'm bluffing. He'll find out someday, I said, that I was right. And anyway, he was going to work that day. Well, he said, I hung four strips and look at that, it don't look nice at all, I said. But when you come home tonight, that wall is going to be beautiful and you're going to find out. Well, he said, well, I better go back to work. I said, I say you know what you're doing. Well, I guess so, I said. I know what I'm doing already. So I hung the whole house. Well, I had one room left the day after. It was five rooms and if you hang four, you do a nice work on a big room, too. So I came back the next day and boy was he ticklish. I never seen such a thing, nicely I must say. I'm just sick of it. Well, you had to thank me, I stuck to it. I didn't bluff you, did I? No, you sure didn't. I never seen such good now. So I told my boss about it. Oh, send him over to me, too. See, I was in business already. Send him over to me, too. He's building a house, too. And he had a paper hanger and he said he isn't any good. Well, I don't want to take anybody's job away from anybody, I said. I just want a job so I can find out how the country works. How long did you stay in California? Oh, just one winter. My partner got sick and he had to go home and he died, too. So that was a sad business, a very sad business. Well, anyway, they told him to come and see me. So I went to see him and there was another boss. He's running the job altogether. He was a cutter. He's the one that cut up the pieces that go into the house. All the braces and everything, all the tuba four and everything that goes to be nailed in. And so he really run the job, that guy. So he said, well, I'm building a house. He said, I saw him. He's the one that wanted me to go to him and do all the painting and paper hanging and everything. So I said, well, I don't want to take a job. Well, he's no good anymore. But he said then, OK, then I'll take it. So I did. And then I was painting on his house. Then he said one day, see, we're finishing a house, a new house on... He said the name on a hill, right on top of that mountain, we're building a house. And there's only room for one house up there. And it's finished now and we'd like to have it painted. Do you think you can handle it? Why, sure I can. I'm certain of it. I didn't know for sure I could, but I said yes. I said, I'm going to call my partner tonight and say maybe he's finished. He should be finished by now. So I did. Yeah, he was finished, so he can come tomorrow. Well, good, then you got a job. I got a job for you. You have? Well, you'll get that. Well, you'll find out when you get there. He didn't think I had one. You know something? I could have had 20 painters just that minute and put them to work. I got so much calls from the first big paint shop, paint store. I got so many jobs from it. He found out how good I was. Boy, that again we're going to have. And he told his customers and they all wanted me. So I said, well, we're only two now, so we have to get along together with what we have. We can't grab any more. So he painted, my partner painted the house, and I finished up this for us home. And by that time, he had more work. They were building a 72-flat building, and he was the boss over that building. 72 flats for the exorcists to live in. That was their home. And he said, we have a 73-flat building here to be painted. Now, can you handle that? Sure, I can handle it. Yeah. I was gambling. It's a good thing my partner was as good as he was. He took care of the outside. I did all the sash and windows. Had it been really necessary not to belong to the Union out in California, would you have been without the Union? Sure, sure, we were Union men. Could you have done the job without Union? Well, no, he would ask, but he said, you've got to have a Union man here on the job, and all that. But we were newcomers, and nobody bought us. And they know how good we were, and all that. So they didn't buy us a bit. And I know I had my card and all that, so I could show them the card. How much did you pay a month, Union dues? Well, sometimes there were strikes, you know, and stuff like that. You were out there? I paid for the strike. It was as high as $27 for three months. For three months? Three months. And that's the highest fee. Did you go to the meetings in California? Huh? Did you attend many meetings of the Unions in California? I was there a couple, three times, but we didn't have time to do it. I needed rest, you know. We worked hard. You can imagine what we had, 73 flat buildings. So you trusted the Union guys then all the time to run the meetings perfectly, and give you the right breaks when you needed it? Oh, yeah, you had to trust them. You were never on the board? Huh? You were never on the Union board? No, no, no, I wouldn't have time to do that, no. It takes a lazy painter to do that. No, I couldn't say that. Here is the thing, Alfred. You said it takes a lazy painter to be on the board. I mean, if he is a lazy painter in the first place, don't you think he is lazy on the board, too? You've got to be the first one. The first one, he'd be the chairman of it. So what is your opinion about the Union? The Union have been good to you? Well, the Union had nothing to do with any of it. We joined it, and we got our car, and now it's ours. Did they raise the wages for you? Huh? Was it good for to get a good pay? Oh, yeah, naturally we got the Union's care. It was up to us to do that. You think so? No, nobody had to work without the Union's care. Yes, but in your case, you were a good craftsman. You were a good, skilled worker. Don't you think you could get the same pay because of your work, regardless of the Union? Oh, sure I could. I didn't have a Union to run us. You didn't either? No. Why still you had to be on the board? It wasn't necessary. It's just the Union that made that law, you know. The more painters we had, the more money we got. I know, but didn't you feel sometimes there was a pain in your neck? They were not running things right. You never had the feeling that there was a pain in your neck instead of a good thing for you? Oh, yeah, you mean the dues? Yeah. Yeah, we paid the dues, and that marks in the books. He paid his pay. He's legal. You cannot think you can do about it. He's a Union man. But do you think they gave you a good share of the money you paid in, though? Well, I don't know. That we had nothing to do with. We paid the scale, and that's all that's there. We don't know what it goes through. Somebody's going to take half of it and all that stuff. That's a crooked business. So there was no way for you to attend a meeting and tell them you know what to do? If you want to go to a meeting and you were not satisfied, could you tell them then what to do? To the Navy? No, to the meeting, the Union meetings. Oh. Could you go there and tell them this is the way it should be run and not the way you are doing it? No, I wouldn't say anything. Why? Let somebody else do this. I won't stick my head in. No, I was lucky, you know. Nobody paid any attention to it. No, sir. That's those quick thinkers, lazy people that get those jobs. Is that right? Yeah, if you're going to hire a man like that to paint, you don't get much done. They're Irish, you know, Irish, and they are foxy. And I don't know why they get so foxy. They're not smart people, exactly. So you didn't care to work with Irish and German and other workers. Do you like the Swedes better, you think? Are they better? They're honest people. You think so? They're honest, John. They're honest. The Irishman is up to try to skin you or something. I found that out. And he's skinning a job, too. You know, skinning a job is to do so that you only need one coat instead of two. And the same thing with the Karlsmeyer. Some wash off. The honest man washes off the old and puts on new. But the crook, he skin it. He soaks when he has to take off the dirt and spots, you know, and stuff like that. He can do that with water and with a sponge. And then he uses the water to wash off dirt, and he skins the ceiling and puts on another coat. That's a dirty trick. The fellow that gets the job, he rips and he doesn't know what to do. He can't make any money on it because it's too hard to wash it off. If we did anything like that, you know what we did. We didn't have any glue. We didn't put any glue in the top. And then that washes off like nothing, you know. We were friendly that way. We made it easy one way or the other. There was no way for you, for instance, if you wanted a big job, you could tell a union guy on the board or something like that? No, he had nothing to do with it. You go and figure your own job, and if you get it, that's yours. But like Chicago, they are always known for being, you know, you've got to have it under the... Yeah, but of course they are painted a little bit to be bad, you know. Sure, it isn't as bad as you think. Have you seen that on the job? Has there been jobs that you have seen that that happened? No, I don't have to. It doesn't make a difference how big it is. If you get it, good for you. That's all that's there. If you get the job, okay, you're okay. And then you have union men who work on it. You have to keep the union men going. That's a big job, too. They don't like to see half of the hall with a jobless painter coming in. Do you have a pension now? Pension? No, no pension. I was too late for that. Pension was passed before I retired. When did you retire? I retired in... 1950? In 56, 57 I think it was. You mean they didn't have any pension plan? I got two years' credit on that. And that's all there was to it. Then we went to Sweden in 57. We went to Sweden. My wife comes from Luleå. So we went direct to Luleå from here. But you finished your work there in 1957. 1957. You mean you didn't get any pension from the painters' union? No. After all these years you've been paying... I get it when I die. When I die I get it. Yeah, but then you don't need it. Someone had to bury me. They get it. The children get it. But you never get the benefit for what you paid in the... No, no, but... I could have drawn it for half price if I'd known it. But why should I do that? I didn't need the money that bad. So I might as well let the kids get it when I die than to go and rob it now for nothing. So that's how I left it. And I thought it was a good idea. And, well, anyway... I'm going to be a job now, but a job now.