 We had a Yeah, Ray Molander was our assistant pastor and of course, he's a Swede no wonder and But we got through the dinner he came over my wife and he says that's the most authentic Swedish dinner I've had in a long time It truly was Here we have 6th of October 1987 and I'm sitting together with Chester Pearson, Omaha, Nebraska And he was born 1905 purely to a pool in Omaha Your parents know they were both Born in Sweden, Gustav Anton Pearson. Yes, he came from Brostorp, Eging in Halland Yeah, La Hulme, that's the name of the place now So you're probably familiar with it What did he tell you about his early beginnings? Oh well They were farming a little farm, yes and Yeah, you know I had five children and And you know, they're poor. That's why the people came over to this country on account of poverty And so he went to school and He learned to the carpenter trade and cabinetmaker in Sweden But when he came over here You know not knowing the language or anything The best he could get was on the railroad section hand But then Went over here. Did he meet somebody? Well, he had a brother here already here. Yeah His name was August but everybody called him gustin took my dad also But his he went under the initials GN but his name was actually August Yeah, but he went over the initial GN Yes, he was here in Omaha I still have two cousins from that marriage in Omaha So, did he send a ticket to your father you think well, I don't know I don't think so no, but he came over here In the 1800s because he's my dad served in the Spanish-American War In fact three generations of my family have served in the war my dad in the Spanish-American War he was in Cuba and And My brother was now deceased served in World War two in the Navy and my son in Vietnam So your father now was he drafted and when he came here no, no there was no draft then he volunteered Yeah So how long was he out then? Donnie Cuba. Well, he was in that lot war didn't last very long couple years But I know he contracted typhoid fever and he was pretty ill for a while, but He lived to be 74 but mother died at 58 Did he receive a pension then for his yeah, he received a small pension from the government Before Social Security, you know So, did he say anything about that Cuban war well, oh, yeah, I got some pictures About that the pictures they took in the boneyard where they threw where the Cubans through their Dead after so long and then just accumulated a bunch of bones and And I got some pictures of his army I got some pictures of his army. Here's a here's something interesting if you can read Swedish, but it's a Story about your grandpa. Yeah, and that Yeah, you know that was kind of interesting because that appeared in the paper shortly before we made a visit to Sweden and here's a A house paper put out by the Omaha National Bank where I worked After I tripped they interviewed me and See I have a first cousin in and yet the burg And they took us all around, you know, they took us darling sauce and down to La Holme and I got to You see that picture. I was taken by the barn where? I Mean where and my uncle Carl Pearson's initials are there someplace I didn't see that or not So did your dad see this Writing about his oh no Yes, this was see my dad died in 1947 and you also have an English translation of this you understand Yeah, oh, yes, so, you know more about your father than you knew before we bet I know more about my father and his family. I do about my mother and her family Of course, I do know I have the cousin I have in In your to board is Her mother and my mother were sisters that's kind of a strange story On your visit to Sweden did you Especially on your grandfather's Side. Well, you know, I did see It sure gets to you when you when you see where your grandpa work you could see that a little field that he plowed and stones were at each end of the field where they plowed them out of the ground and He must have worked awfully hard And you know, they farmed out the kids Tell you anything about hard work or well, no he didn't you know My mother and a sister Gina Came over to this country together along with their brother And My mother and her sister went back to visit to Sweden After I don't know how many years but they went back after a while And Gina decided to stay back in Sweden. My mother came back alone but dad dad never wanted to go back because he said it was just too hard over there and He's never had any interest in going back but for me to go back and see where my roots began it was very interesting and even The course the cottage where they lived had been remodeled into a pretty modern place. But anyway, it was there You could see the land. Yeah, I see the land in the end the foundation of the barn was still there So he was not interested to be a farmer then when he came to know no he was not in fact, as I say, he was trained as a Cabinet maker, but you know when you first come over here and don't know the language You can't get around and find out find what where to get that kind of work. So as I say From the Spanish American War he came back to his brother and in Omaha No, I don't think so no not after and I'm not Clear on the date. They got married, but it must have been around 1900 because You see my sister was born 1902 so I'm sure that they got married around 19 that some they probably probably got married shortly after he got back home And your mother now she came about the same time or a little bit after well, they didn't know each other, of course and she was only about 16 or 17 years old when she came over No, she came with her sister and a brother and And local John my favorite uncle and So they left three of them from the same family, yeah, that's right No, no, there was One other brother stayed there But there were five in my dad's family, but her family or her father what kind of work was either we was Me my mother's father But I don't know You know when you when you think back You wish you'd asked your parents more about their previous about their life No, no, no No, no Yeah So They married and what kind of work did he get them? Well, then he got a job in the box factory in the packinghouse You know at one time Omaha was a big center for big packing houses armor cut a swift Wilson and He got a job in the box factory. Then finally he got into carpenter work and He did some beautiful work he He built our house, which we had on other part of town 46th and Pierce And you should see that boy. Yeah, I'll stand for another hundred years or more 1934 1934 Yeah, yes there was a depression Did he have a job or work done during that time it was a hot Well, well he had he he was he had worked and you know saved a little money So he took about three months off and built the house Well, she didn't do the brick work and he had some some help but not much Oh, yes, only inside work So you went to school here in was the did you live in a Swedish area? No, no There were some Swedes around there Yeah In our neighborhood, there was a Swanson and the Lundberg and a home quest but they're also well, there's a Johnson to incidentally, but there was also a massic and a brisley and But there are quite a few Swedes at that. There was a Carlson So Yeah, they didn't go to a Swedish church I come who married them. It's a minister. No a They got married on Platt Smith, Nebraska and Yeah, that's not very far from here, you know Yeah, actually, it's well about 25 miles or so south and from home, but there was no this way these passes to marry them. No I don't know. I think so. I think that was more more of it than anything Basically my dad Right, I was baptized in the Presbyterian Church and I've been a member of that same church for 70 years I Was a treasurer of the of the church for 32 years I was a treasurer of the other church for 32 years and I'm an ordained elder and I Am served on the Board of Trustees and was any more Swedish families Not very many I don't know I really don't know of any I know that's right. But my folks had a good neighbor by name of Clements who lived right in back of them and they went to the Presbyterian Church and they encouraged my folks to join the Presbyterian Church, so Naturally I followed And Then you went through high school, you know and college also no No, I didn't go to college. I got a job As a messenger in a bank in 1922 and $40 a month And Well, I had all kinds of jobs and I just kind of worked up through the transit department and and Clearinghouse and discount department and finally got to be assistant cashier And I was auditor for a while in cashier then I became vice president of the bank But not that bank. It was the Livestock National Bank that I was vice president of and And the Livestock National Bank was sold out to the Omaha National Bank So and then I went up there as a vice president and I was the vice president when I retired I was in the commercial loan department Of the bank. Yeah sure did. Yeah, I did suck in the bottom the very bottom No, no, I did go to night school like American Institute of Banking and I went to Creighton University here and Took accounting and stuff like that, but I didn't have any college degree or training But you learn on the spot and so speak right on the work site, yeah That's right. And my wife the same way She's you started working as soon as you got through high school and I was she was 16 at the time But she was such a good Shorthand and typewriter student that the principal asked him she wanted to come down work in the office So, but actually our families her family my family grew up fairly close together in the same neighborhood No, that's not how we well, no, that's not how we met The families knew each other and we went to the same grade school But you know, she was about four years younger than I am and you know What when kids are four years younger than you are girl, you don't pay any attention to them but When When when she started working at South High She brought down the deposits every day for the school, you know from the cafeteria and stuff like that and I was a teller And you know, that's how it really started So in June we celebrated our 58th wedding anniversary So what you brought home? From a date and your parents didn't object that she was not sweet. Oh, no. I'll tell you my parents thought she was tops my mother but She used to call her honey Lou and she thought she was the best and she is And you mentioned her in the beginning that she is able to put on a Swedish murder was booed. Yeah Oh, yeah, I think their mother's influence, yeah, and and of course We have just about every Christmas we go up to Minnesota where our son lives he's a doctor up there And I surgeon and He married a gal it's half Sweden half Norwegian and they have traditional Swedish food on Christmas Eve So, you know, it just kind of goes along in the family There was a custom you kept in there, yeah, and of course the Sandy's mother my daughter-in-law's mother is a Pure-blooded Swede. Her name was Gustafsson And her father is now dead But they always went along with that custom, you know of Swedish food. I guess I can remember when when I'm I was young and my mother was alive and and they had a Family by the name of Soderbergh that live right close by or right behind them. In fact And I'm telling you they used to start to prepare for Christmas about October Well, they get that dried the lutefisk, you know, and they'd make Ed cheese and then make fruitcake and Yeah, pepper caulka And so they made their own potato sausages, of course taught this curve and They started early. Oh, yeah, they did and it was a big affair and we had Brooks up on battling and oh that stuff and and head cheese and bound beans and Lutefisk and No cheese no no cheese no no didn't make me cheap just had cheese How about the Christmas celebration or how far ahead of Christmas did? You dare bring home the Christmas tree Well, he made the Christmas tree Yeah, it was a it was a Wooden pole with wires that held candles Yes, you know in the shape of a Christmas tree made in the shape of Christmas tree and every Christmas we would wind paper around those wires green usually and and the candles were far enough away from the paper so there was no danger of fire and That's the kind of a tree we had Oh, yeah, we use it over and over same thing. Yeah, only we put new paper on Yeah new candles candles. I don't know what happened that that tree Candles I don't know what happened that that tree No, it is it's pretty high I would say Oh, yeah, yeah. Oh, yes, it was a maybe five feet tall or something like that five or six feet tall No, I don't remember a real tree And the candles now were they lit only on Christmas Eve Yeah, just on Christmas Eve No, you know Christmas Day was kind of a you know Relax and you know eat what's left over and stuff like that. But Christmas Eve that was the That was the day That's when Santa Claus came Yeah And he had presents in a bag or a sack on a bag and and one of the neighbors or one of the Soderbergh boys He was older He said dress up a Santa Claus and knock on the front door Come in with a red suit Yeah Not too long What was the first thing you noticed that the first thing I noticed was his shoes he didn't have boots I Don't know how old I was but then I Knew that what kind of presents did he bring to you? Well, you know, that's hard I can't remember what I got for Christmas. Really. I Can't really remember any particular one thing. I remember only The real well was a what we called an Irish male. It's what something like a hand car, you know I don't know if you ever saw one of those or not but That's one thing I remember that was a fun thing to have oh and oh I got a sled You know flexible flyer and we had a nice hill in front of our house And I had the fastest sled on the hill But Christmas was a great time How about other kids in the neighborhood? Did they have the same kind of Christmas tree and the same kind of customs? Well, most of them did like the home of the Swansons and the Lundbergs and the Carlson's No, they never wouldn't Christmas do they had a regular Christmas tree My dad was very handy with everything. He could he could make anything do anything, you know, he made a little spice cabinet Which our son has now and it just the model of Excellent work He was a real cabinet maker Yeah So and When did you take the Christmas tree down then after Christmas? Well between Christmas New Year's Yeah, we didn't keep I remember we didn't keep it up after New Year's do you remember going to a Swedish you don't in the Swedish Church No but my folks used to visit in the summertime, especially my mother my dad never went out but the mother was friends with a family in Swedberg, Nebraska it's about six miles south of Wahoo and They always went to a Swedish Church and of course I went along But the sermon was in Swedish and I didn't understand a word of it, but I sat there anyway And we went to the church in a in a Surrey with a fringe on top drawn by two horses It was a different yeah, it was a different age I Can remember the names of the horses to Lynn and Daisy? It was a driving team and I don't not a farm team Not work horses Well, he was pretty yes he was because his name was Nels Hockinson and He had 80 acres and a hired man, but of course, you know in those days You know, no machinery or anything like that So But they had pigs and they had cows and and they had chickens and they made their own butter and and They ground the wheat for breakfast cereal and stuff like that. So they're pretty self-sufficient even on 80 acres Here in Tana then You started at the bank and it was going to be your employment for rest your life. Yeah, it happened to be Yeah, we we got married the year of the stock market crash in 1929 You know quite a bit about American history, don't you? Well, I know that much but okay, so how was the feeling then people say this one to last only for a week or Well, I Tell you we were pretty lucky because we both had jobs and we didn't lose any Didn't affect us very much. Of course. We didn't have anything to lose in the stock market because we didn't have any money Did your wife quit work then when you married or no? No. No, she kept working. Yeah And We rent the upstairs of a house from Nelson Yeah, I was made into an apartment but it was very primitive because the kitchen didn't have any Water in there in the kitchen we had to take the water from the bathtub And then we rented the house, yeah No later on 3040 said Yeah, we ran the house and well sound south on law. It's not been taken by the interstate system So it's not no longer there Well most of the banks solvent, you know, oh no No, I tell you so many of them failed but we oh Absolutely Well, I know the main banks Yeah, a lot of state banks failed. Oh So many of them and every bank in town had a run Donald you know what a run is they stand out in lines waiting to get their money And incidentally at that time I was a teller and I had money stacked up as far as I would stack in my cage and People would come, you know, they were lined up come to get their money. We'd hand it over to him They wouldn't know what to do with it Now what are you gonna do with the money put under a mattress? But Shortly after that our president his name was Alvin Johnson Incidentally, he was a Swede and he was the president of the bank He wrote a letter to everyone who's mostly savings accounts that took out their money And said if you bring it in with a certain time within a certain time You won't lose any interest and we got most of it back But it was a traumatic time. I'll tell you Every bank in town had runs And of course some quite a few of them did not survive And then a week before the inauguration of Roosevelt every bank closed. Yes, we were closed for about three or four days Yes Right, and I'll never forget that day When mr. Johnson came down and announced that we wouldn't open the bank today. That's kind of a scary feeling And he explained that the president declared a bank holiday. He got the wire on After Washington, how did they react? I suppose it was a by wire. I don't recollect that but No, no, we've closed for three or four days Until they could assess Who should reopen? Yes, right Betcha, they had to check the banks and see if they could survive and so many of them around the country did not But the main bank the one I eventually wound up in the Omaha National Bank That also survived and and the president of that bank at the time served coffee and Donuts and cookies to people who are waiting in line to get their money up It was a good psychology move Yeah, that's right but everyone had their little Yeah, but Yeah, well people scared and to deposit money after oh, yeah a lot of people were scared Yeah I'm lost that do that way But more there's still some eccentrics that won't trust the bank now anymore even with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and behind them Yeah Yeah, that's right, I think only one has failed in Nebraska this year that's pretty good Might just fail the other day Oxford, Nebraska But But your bank lawyer the banks you were to add you didn't have any farm loans or anything like that. Oh, yes Boy about well, you see in fact I had some farm customers You see I was a loan of a commercial loan officer and I had some friends in Sotheby County who owned farms and they come in to see me and borrow money and And of course we used to buy loans from country banks And so The interview continues next site next site I'm sorry you had to Just a Pearson site you so but the farm Commodities and especially land Has always been a safe bet all the way since the depression and up. Yeah, however I remember during the depression that corn got down to 15 cents a bushel And the farmers were burning it in their stoves instead of trying to sell it because it more valuable as fuel and Ground to sell it. So the crop is sometimes a little bit unsafe them. That's right Must be a safe Investment do what the land? Because there will never be any more land. Oh, that's right You know in Germany for instance when they had when their currency went to The pot way the only people that survived were the landowners But there's a less a couple years now they have Overvalued the land. Oh, yes, the land values have gone down, you know, a lot of the fault is with the bankers They thought like the farmers thought the land would keep going up forever They didn't figure on going down And you know when you overvaluate your land you got a good financial statement But It sure did and now it's kind of settled down so I think it's going to be alright That's a paid-off for a person not to to borrow 500,000 in the bank and start a farm Today, I don't think so. It's better to have them in the bank and they draw the positive interest on it. It's It's too expensive for a young man to start out because it takes so much equipment and you've got to have farm So much land nowadays To make it worthwhile And about the only fellas that I know If you get started or getting help from their parents, you know, they can use their parents equipment and stuff like that. Yeah And of course, there are a lot of good farmers that the majority of them are good farmers in there in good sound financial condition But It was when they started to add land. That's right. You see some of them got greedy I say They had their home place paid for but they saw a piece of joining that was up for sale and oh if we only have that And then they'd mortgage the home place and put a mortgage on the second place And then the interest rates went sky-high and they couldn't pay But bankers were a little reckless too, so they're at fault as well Should they have said no then when the people come in and borrow money instead of well, yeah, they should have been more conservative Really? Yeah but all banks have had some problems and even our bank had some problems, but you know, I always say that the longer a bank is in business the more it can build up and reserves and and reserve for losses and things like that, so Those savings and loans are always at the Curious eyes on them. Oh, well, they've been bad shape to very bad shape more so than banks a lot of them have failed and I just read an article in the paper the other day about one savings loan association in Omaha that showed a multi-million dollar loss and Well, they invested heavily and in Texas real estate condos and apartments and stuff like that and then the bottom fell out of the Texas economy so They had lost there. It seems to people have a feeling of All this probably a little bit greed or when they go to California and invest in Florida and Texas, why do they do that? Why don't they invest in the local community where they can check it? Yeah. Yeah My dad used to say People are wonders And they start out going west and then they have to stop when they get the Pacific Ocean That's why so many people settle in California. That's what his theory was Oh, no No, he liked Omaha and so do I I said the wonderful town and it's made a good living for for us and your mother dies 58 58 cancer No to my dad But he lived to be 74. Yes, though He was the money. I remember they used to say after he hit 70 says now I'm living on borrowed time Did he go back to Sweden for a visit no, he wouldn't go and that the mother she was back once You know, I Learned a little bit of a poem in Swedish and I actually learned from my dad And It mentions that in the article on that Swedish article And maybe you might be familiar with it starts up dipped under tolerance but then tomato horse the pew that beware. Imagine gumma he difficulty stu Until just they go Oh my yes, that's a rocking chair. That's my son has now Uh My son's kind of sentimental about old things, you know. You know, another interesting thing. I have a brass cup that my dad brought over from Sweden. My understanding is that it was issued to Army personnel when they got their daily ration of grog or whatever they gave in those days. And it has an inscription on there with a date, 1734. That's over 250 years old. I want my son to have that. So he brought that with him then from home? Yeah. He didn't bring much when he came here? Well, no, they didn't have anything to bring. No, no. He brought all his tools here when he was here. Was he interested in reading Swedish books, for instance, this poem of? Was that by heart or did he read it to you? Well, no, he read it to me. I have a book. I mean, I got, I had a cousin, or well, a husband of my cousin visited here one time. And at that time he was president of the Furniture Manufacturers of Sweden. And I told him about this book. I kind of, told him I kind of wanted to have that if I could and if he had any idea where one could get it. Well, he sent me one. I'll get it and show it to you if you want me to. It, I just know a little bit of the poem, but that's the way it starts out. Did your dad belong to any Swedish organizations here? Noonday Club, for instance? No, he didn't. The only thing he belonged to were the Oddfellas. But I belonged in the Emporio Arrara, or the Vikings, as you know. But I'm not a very good Lodge member. In fact, I don't drive at night anymore. Because it's just too hard. How about the political affiliations? Was your dad a Republican? You bet he was, and so am I. Why was that? How did they? Well, I really don't know for sure. But... What did he say about Roosevelt, for instance, though, when he came in with his 90-day day, 90-day theories? Well, let's see. That was the... When would Roosevelt take power? Thirty-three. Thirty-three. He didn't talk much about politics, but I know he said he wouldn't vote for him. And I guess I just followed in his footsteps, and I'd become a... died in the war a Republican. And so was my family. Yeah. I thought he might be interested in knowing that our son served in Vietnam. Yes, I heard you have some information. I'll show you this quickly. End of interview.