 July 23rd, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Esther Kjellström in Rockford, Illinois. She was born in Rockford, 1899, 19th of June. Your mother now, Mrs. Kjellström, she was called Friels Skönhet. No, Friels Skönhet. Friels Skönhet. Oh, that was just, that's just a little joke. Who told you that, some of your friends? Well, the one who told me would be, she would be my second cousin. It was her, she was, and she was a child of mother's cousin. But she lived in, she lived in Groveland, Florida, where I did when we had the Grove. And she told me that, but that doesn't mean anything. But, um... Well, but the mother, she came then from Friel, Västergötland. You're almost sure about that. Yes, that's, that's where she grew up. Do you know what time she came to this country, in the early 1900s, or... No, I couldn't tell you that. No, she must have come here in the late 1800s, because you were born... Oh, sure, oh yes. Yes, when I was born, why, my parents had been married, oh, let's see, five, at least six years, I would say. Six or seven years. Must have been in the early 1890s. Oh, yeah. And how about your father, now, August Stenlund? Do you know when he came to this country, he came about the same time then, or... No, well, this is, this is, this is nothing that would go in the record, but, no, he, he courted mother in Sweden. Oh, in Sweden, so they knew about each other then. Yes. So he came from Västergötland also. Yes, he did, not exact, about, in that area. Yes, he courted mother in Sweden. She said, no, she wasn't ready to get married, she thought she might be coming to this country. So, I guess he was ready to come to this country, which he did, and he came to Rockford, Illinois. Well, mother did come to this country, but she went to, came to Boston, Massachusetts, because her cousin, Charlie, lived there, and he was her sponsor. So she went to, there, and she lived then in Boston two, three years. And I don't know if she kept in touch with my father or not, but she was courted by another man there in, and they were ready to get married. And anyway, mother said she would never marry a man that drank. And he said, I don't drink. Well, she found out he was drinking, so she said it was all off. She said, you lied once, you lied twice, I can't believe you. And now, this I do not know if mother ever kept in touch with my father, or my father knew all the time where she was. But she was, as I said, she lived there in Boston. And then, now this is on the sidetrack. My father lived here like the other young men that came. They always had rooms, and it was, had got their meals at a certain place and all that kind of thing. Well, anyway, my father had a sister in Sweden who had an illegitimate daughter. That happened quite a lot, there and did here, but I don't think they, there were very many provisions in the old country, and this family, the relatives took care of the little girl and her. And of course, that was kind of a hard thing. And finally, she wrote to my father, her brother, and said she just didn't know what to do. The little girl then, I guess, was about three, four years old. My father, he was a good man, anybody will say that. He said, well, he said, I'll tell you what I'll do. If you want to come to this country, I'll send you the money so you can get here, and I'll make a home for you. And he said, you can use my name for the little girl. And then the little girl came to Rockford, and my father set up housekeeping for them. And then it has never been told me how they got together, if she wrote to my father or my father knew where she was or what. But anyway, she came to Rockford, and they were married. And by that time, his sister, the mother of the little girl, had a boyfriend, and the boyfriend wanted to get married, but he didn't want anything to do with the little girl. And so when my mother and father decided to get married, they took the little girl with them. So Clara, that became her family. Adopted her then. Yes. So that's how that all hung together. So she came to Rockford and then married your father. Yes. And what church did they join then at that time? Munchenswenden. And so they were members of the mission church. Well, now what is the free church in Rockford, the group that started the free church in Rockford, was a group that came out of our church. They somehow felt they were a little more holy or something like that, were very strict, and women couldn't have any flowers in their hat or anything like that. Oh, you mean the free church? Yes. They were more strict. They were very strict. And anyway, as I said, he wanted to marry the mother, but he didn't want the little girl, so that was that. Did they marry then? Yes, they did get married, yes. And they never took the daughter back? No. She was raised there? I was 14 years old before I knew that was not my real sister. They never told me. You grew up with her then? She, of course, was older than me. I think she was nine when they got married by that time. So, you see, and I didn't see that. My parents lost their first two children. The first one was a little girl that died when she was three, and the other little girl was born shortly after that, just a month or two. And, you know, in those days they had some bornemuska that stayed with mother for two weeks, and she took care of the baby. And mother claims that it was in the wintertime, and they had a window somewhere in the place, but the baby caught cold. So then that baby died. And then, of course, it was a couple of years after all that happened that I was born, I guess, something like that. But you made it through. Huh? You made it through the heat and cold. Oh, yes. The wind and everything. Oh, yes. Well, it just could be, you know, if there was just a draft on a new baby like that, she was bathing the baby. So anyhow, that's how those two children, they lost them. So this Clara, then, she was your babysitter then? I mean, the babysitter. Well, she was nine when they were married, and you see, I was the third along there. So she, by that time, was maybe like, well, she had her schooling here in this country, naturally, so she would have to be about 13 years old, anyway, something like that. No, she was, this was like her home. So she grew up then together with you and the rest of the four children that survived. How about your father now? What kind of work was he doing here? Well, he was, he just did shop work. I mean, he was a big, strong man. He was over six feet, and his death was so unnecessary. Well, he died young? He was 42 when he died. His mother was 40, and she was left with three children. I was nine the day he died, and then there was no children for six years, and then I had a sister, and she was three, and the baby was a year and a half. The boy, he was a year and a half, so she was left with three children. And your father, did he die in an accident? No, he went to, he was a big, strong man, and in the shop, anything that needed to be lifted, they'd always call for Stenland, you know, and he was going to be lifting. No, he went to that good hospital and a very good doctor for a hernia. I guess they did take the appendix out, but then you don't die from that. No, but peritonitis set in, something that never would happen today. Now, Mother said that the doctor who performed the operation went to Europe the next day so that his assistant took care of it, but being, whatever it is, poor nursing or what, but he died within the week in the hospital, and just nothing, going there for a hernia operation, it was so uncalled for. So you don't remember Dad too much then? Well, I used to, he was nine the day he died, and naturally, having lost the first children, they thought, the world of me, naturally. Oh, yes, I remember him very well, very well. So your mother didn't remarry then, she stayed? No, well, I said she had quite a nice little love story about it, because, as I said, I was nine, and this one day, we had a nice home, they had bought a nice house, it was a two-family house, and I was out alone, I was playing croquet in the backyard, when this nice-looking man came, and he said that he wanted to see Mrs. Stenland. So he went into the house, and that was the man that she turned down. When she turned him down for some, well, because the Lord had something to do with it, she said that he became a Christian, he was a minister. So he was a fine-looking man, well-groomed, naturally, and as I know, he stood looking at me, and he said, you know, you might have been my daughter. Well, I didn't know, I was a child, and I didn't know what went on, I told Mother, because I went in after he left then, and I said, who was that? She said, oh, somebody I knew long ago, and I said, what he said, something about being a daughter, and then she told me, and of course, for a child, doesn't mean much, but she said, when I was young, I might have married him, she said, I said, well, what did he say about you now? Oh, I guess he thought I wasn't pretty like I was when I was young, she said, you know. But I really didn't know that, but I was told afterwards that he was a widower. He had, I don't know, a couple of children, and of course, he knew now, he had heard somewhere, he might have kept track of what was happening to Mother, so he wanted to know if she would be interested, if she couldn't come, and she said, no, between your children and my children, I've had enough. Mother had been, she'd had five children, and to be left with three little children, no. And so we got along fine. Mother, of course, didn't do anything for about half a year, and then she started to work three days a week, and then Clara was grown up by that time, and in those days, when you got a job, any of the children, they always paid board, and we had some rent from the upstairs apartment. And Mother kept the house and added another room, bathroom, and closet for each floor, and it was a beautiful house, beautifully built. A bargain, of course, figures today, it sounds like a joke. They paid $3,000 for that house, and it was, now downstairs we had a parlor and a sitting room, and the parlor had the floor, these narrow strips, you know, and patterns. It was well built, and a dining room, kitchen, one bath. Of course, there was only one closet there. So Mother, with that, she hung on the house, and with all the little things coming in here and there, she added to the house, and we had it, it was, of course, for gas, we had that all electric, put in two furnaces, and Clara, of course, helped, and the rent, and I started to work when I was very young, very unusual. You went through high school? I didn't even go to high school. Both my brother and I both graduated from school when we were 12 years old. In those days, they gave special promotions. I was graduating at 12, and my brother did too, so he was through high school when 16. I was the only one that didn't go to high school. Well, as I said, Mother was working three days a week, and sometimes four. It was always with the same family. Well, next door was a girl living, and she was secretary to the president, and she asked if I would like to work in an office. Oh, I thought that would be wonderful. I also liked books and things of that kind, and I mean, almost like playing the piano, you know, typewriter. So that's what I was. They had what they called an office boy and an office girl, and so I really learned a lot. Well, I worked in that office then until I was 16. What office was that? Well, that was the free sewing machine. I worked for two years, then I went to business college. My years in the office stood me good because I finished in half the time it would have taken. I did it in half a year where it would have been a year because I had learned lots in the office. So I worked in an office, and I didn't get married until I was in my 50s. Well, something happened when I was real young, and I just always had somebody being nice to me. I got my share of red roses all my life. But you stayed home then and took care of your mother for many years. I didn't. Well, I stayed home, yes. With your mother? Yes. Because she got sick, or what happened to her? Well, she was like me, and I used this thing. She had arthritis. We used to call it rheumatism. How old was she when she... She was a month lacking of 87 when she died. No, Mother, well... She got that young age? Well, no, it didn't start until now. It was me. I had arthritis too now, but of course mine just started when I was in my 80s. But she was much younger when she got it. Yes, she was younger, but somehow or other she... Well, to begin with, she used crutches, but she got better, so she just used a cane. We sold the house. By that time I had a good job. We sold the house, and Mother and I bought a flat, a two-family flat. It was a new building. It was a lovely thing. The man... Because the Depression set in a lot that time, so the man who was a builder, he had built that and intended to live there himself and rent the one floor. But I guess he needed money for bills, so he sold. But you took a risk of rising to the Depression. Well, we took advantage of it, I'll say that. But you were able then to keep up with payments? Yes. Well, we... No, Mother, that house that she paid $3,000 for, and we lived in so long, she got $8,000, and I paid $8,000. So we paid $16,000 for the flat. What kind of work was your mother doing when she was working? Housework? Well, it was housework. It was a very wealthy family. Well, I'll tell you who was working there would be Clem's mother, Clemwell's mother. You talked with Clemwell? Yes. All right. It was a big family and a big house. And so on wash days, they had two other ladies that worked, and that's what Mother did. They had a big laundry room, so they worked together. So it was hard work. It was good because it was... The people that were working there, most of them were all friends together. So she was able to save enough money to pay for the house. Oh, we did that. You see, well, as I said, they paid $3,000 for it. They had $1,500, so it was only $1,500 to be paid. But it was still hard, I mean, being the only breadwinner. Your sister Clara, she was old enough then to work. Where did she work then? Housework? No, we called it factory work, but it wasn't bad. But it was factory work. She did that for a number of years, and then she just got tired of it, so she did housework. She became kind of a companion and a housekeeper for a wealthy girl, for a wealthy lady. She was there until she died. So when you bought this house then for $16,000, your mother didn't work then at that time? You were the only one then, bringing it in? No, I was working. So I took care of my mother all my life. And you kept the house, and it was a good investment. Oh, yes. So, and then you both belonged to the Covenant Church, to what you call the First Covenant today. Yeah, that's right. And you were confirmed in Swedish? Well, when I was being confirmed, the class, you could have either Swedish or English. And I decided on Swedish. I thought it would be kind of fun because I had a very good girlfriend, and her parents came from the same part in Sweden, so they were more like relatives than just friends. But Elsie and I, well, we had a class of over 60, and I don't know, we had I think nearly half of them were Swedish. And this church was down on Kiswaki at that time? Yes. How did you know all that? Well, I know it was down there in downtown. Well, how did you happen to know that? Well, I... See, the new church I think is maybe 21 or 22 years old by this time. Oh, it was moved out. And then you had a split by the Covenant on Washington Street, Bethesda. Well, that's one... How did they break out? Was it a language question, you think? Yes. Well, it was understandable. And at the time it would kind of hurt feelings, but it was understandable because they had... Their children then were old enough to be in church Sunday mornings, and that was the only meeting that we had in Swedish was Sunday mornings. And so that's when they broke away. Of course, the old First Covenant, you know, we have started... I don't know, we've got about seven Covenant churches here in Rockford, at least seven I think it is. But your generation, I'm born 1900 or thereabouts, you had no trouble to understand the Swedish sermon and the singing? Oh, no. I always sang in the choir. So that made a difference. So you had no trouble then to go to the Swedish service? No. How about your mother? Did she use Swedish in the home? Well, we didn't use Swedish in the home because maybe her... Just the children, you see, if my father had been living, they'd be different. They would have spoken Swedish, but we didn't. But it was all English then? Yes. How about the Swedish newspaper? She had Mifonsvännen? Oh, yes. When Mother Lived, yeah. She had another paper? Well, I don't... Kvinnan och Hemmet? No. Well, I don't remember that. If she had that... I really don't know. But, of course, she kept up Swedish because any number of people, her, their friends were all Swedish-speaking. Yeah. So you wanted to have some... And then in what year did you meet your husband, David Kjellström? How did you meet him? Well, as I said, we are distantly... we were distantly related. And, of course, he was married and he... His wife died about the same time that Mother died. And so he got in touch with me and I asked if I... if he could come up and talk with me and he did. So he was in Rockford, then? No, he was in Florida. He was in Florida? Oh, yeah. No, when they first came from the old country, he worked in Rockford. And then there were a number of Rockford people that bought land down there and moved to Florida. And he was one. One of them? One of them. About what time did he move down from Rockford, you think, in the 20s? Before the Depression? Oh, yes. Yeah. So that's why he was there. Why was the reason that so many moved on? Well, they had a real estate office in Rockford that kind of pushed the buying. In fact, I think they paid for the train fare, so there was a whole train... car load of... train load of people. Like an excursion? Like an excursion, yes. Take a look at it. In fact, we had one or two bankers that bought and some businessmen that bought it because just as a business venture. And it was in Grodno? Well, when they went down, it was Dave, that would be my husband, and his brother-in-law, the man that married his sister. And those two young men went down. And also Dave Nyberg, if you... in the pre-church, if he had any... Well, of course, he... He's down there? He was down there. But he and Dave grew up together in the old country, and he became interested in a business up here. At that time, it was lumber and coal and all that kind of thing, and successful business. So the boys bought some land down there, and... though Dave Nyberg didn't move down there, but my Dave did, and who else? And his brother-in-law. And they bought land. And they, of course, didn't go into the grove business right away because they went into the raising chickens. They had very big chickens. In fact, you see, Groveland is not too far from Orlando, if you've been down there. Yes, I know. And so they, between the two of them, they had a tremendous lot of eggs. They couldn't find any outlet in Orlando that was interested in that many eggs. So they went down to investigate at Miami, and we had Mr. Anderson down there, if you heard of him, that man that... Well, he... He was the one that donated so much money. Yes, that's right. Was he down there at the same time, then? Oh, but he was down at Miami, and he bought a tremendous lot of land for 50 cents an acre, which this millionaire paid a million dollars for. Hmm, some of it. Yeah, well, anyhow, he wanted Dave to put his chicken business down. His basket, too. Well, no, Dave said that's too far out for the business. Was it too far south, or was the chicken ranch down there? Well, in Groveland? No, I mean in Miami. Well, he didn't... The chickens were raised up in Groveland, and they had a tremendous big truck that they brought down. Once a week, they brought the eggs down. And you see, at that time, they were not air-conditioned trained. Now, see, it was a very, very big business. They really hit it just right, so they made good money. About what time was there after the Depression? Oh, let's see, when was that? That would be before the Depression. In the 20s? Yeah, and yes, I guess it would be the Depression when it was hard to get meat and all that kind of thing because then, see, by that time, they had the hell of a river that his brother-in-law was responsible for the picking up of the eggs and driving them down to Miami in the big truck. And Dave was responsible for the business. They bought location in a different, not out by, not where our home was out down there, but... So he bought land, and they put up a building. And then that period came in when it was so hard to get meat. He said many times they'd have a line waiting a block long to come in to buy the chickens. I see. So... So they sold the chicken then after a couple of years, or how did they... Oh, they had that for years, and then... I mean, how old were the chickens when they killed them off? Well... Like two years or one year? Oh, that I don't, I can't understand. That was up to Halver when they got to selling so many chickens. He got the chickens and the eggs up here and brought them down. And... How about the heat though? Wasn't it hot in the summer there for them to keep them out and open? They never complained about that? No. How grove then, I suppose, a little bit cool, we had cool nights up there? Well, of course it gets warm down there, but I don't know that... They didn't complain about that? No, they had no air conditioning for the chickens. Because I, see, when I married and the first two years we lived in Miami, and then when we decided to, so they built a new home up there in Groveland. So what year then did you marry the... Did you marry him? In the 50s? Oh, let's see, what'll I say? I was, let's see, when was it? See, I didn't get married until I was out in my 50s. 1956. We'll say 1956, I think so. I don't know, I sound so stupid, but I'm not the kind that can remember years. Now my cousin that was married in Groveland, she could tell you to the day of everything. So he came up there to Rockford to date you, or did you go down there to date him, or what happened? Oh, he telephoned every week. Every week? Oh, yeah. It was hot every while then. So his first wife died. Yeah, of course, I knew her too. In fact, I would be called bridesmaid the first time he was married. They didn't have any, we just went to the minister's house, the four of us, and then they had a dinner at home afterwards there. And they had children? Oh, yes. So when I, yes, they had, well, they really had three boys, but their first boy died, so he had two sons. So when I married, of course, I got two sons. But they were grown up, though. They were grown up, and they were married, so there were five grandchildren between the two of them. So your mother had died, and you had no siblings attached to Rockford? No. It was about a year and a half after Mother's death that I moved down. Of course, he came up to Rockford and everything, and I said, well, I have a vacation coming. I'll go down now in the fall, and I'll see if the children like me. I didn't know, so how I went. This is side two, a continuation with Esther Shellstrom, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. Were you living in north Miami, or what side of town? Have you been down Miami? Do you know where our home was down there? We had a lovely old folks' home down there. Was it on South Third Street, or was it? I don't know what address, but it's... It was close to the retirement home. Close to the what? The retirement home, the Covenant Retirement Home. Well, the retirement home is across the street from land, but it wasn't too far away, because my brother... Of course, I was married down there, and my family, all of which was just Clara, and Clara, she's the one who never married, but that came with my mother's marriage. So there's Clara, and my sister Marion, Rudy, and his wife all came down for the wedding. So this Mr. Anderson, he bought the land there around the retirement home? Yes, he had a lot of land across the street from the retirement home. So your husband, he had bought land from him too then? No, Dave didn't buy any land out there. He thought it was too far out. No, he bought land in another place. I see, so he bought the hostel home, yeah. So how long did you stay then in Miami? Well, two years after we were married, yeah. How did you fit in with the new climate? Oh, that was alright. The house was air-conditioned, and of course the new house was all... We had a real lovely home up... I have a picture of that. So we had a real nice home on the lake. We had about 500 feet lake frontage, and the grove was 40 acres. With the orange grove? Yes, orange and grapefruit. So he was in the business then? Yes, but he... see, after we were married, we moved up to our home here. Of course, the boys took over at the store. I see. But then you also moved up to Groveland after two years? Yeah, well, we didn't live in Groveland. Dave built on the lake where the grove was and all. I see. So then you actually moved back to Iraq for them? No, no, I lived there. You lived there for how many years? Well, Dave died down there. I lived on alone in the house for 11 years after he died. I see. I've only been up here... In Groveland? No, not in Groveland, but it's about a mile and a half out of Groveland. You were talking about... what were their names that you've been talking to? Cockrell. Well, Cockrell. But the Rockford people that lived down there... Oh, Colsons. Yeah. I can't remember the first name now, but the name was Colsons. And they've been there since 1925. Yeah. So you probably knew them then. Old man, we were with them a lot. Yeah. And they had an orange grove, a big one. Oh, yes. So how was it now? Did you get familiar with the orange industry? Well, you see, when you have a big grove, you really don't do any work. Now, Colsons, he moved down years before, and there, a lot of the first groves, the men did a lot of work. Dave never touched the grove, never did any work. You just... No, he had the trees planted. That is, he supervised it. We were with the Plymouth. And by that time, Dave was pretty well fixed, so he bought quite a bit of stock with the Plymouth. But anyhow, with the bigger groves, you have them come in, do everything. They do all the work. They pick it also? Oh, yes. They do everything. How was the climate on it? I mean, you had some frost nights, though. Well, but you see, I was... this is what happened. I came here four years ago, the first of... it would be the first of November, it would be four years. And it was a month and a half after I left that we had that killing frost. So that was a tremendous loss. It's not like that grove of Dave's, it was well worth over $200,000. And then one night, you see, it froze. They killed the trees and the whole thing? Well, yes. So the trees... I don't think there's anything picked out of there that was so badly frozen. So they had to be replanted then? Well, we haven't replanted. You still have it then? Well, I don't hold any title to it. That's all right, because when we settled our finances, I was part of it. Not part of it that I would ever own the land, but I got my share of the profits. Because I had some wealth myself, so we left it that way and that was fine. But a killing frost, they can really kill the whole thing off then? Well, yeah. They can wipe you off? Because I said, Marty, you know, one of Dave's boys have died, so there's only Marty left. And he said that, I said, haven't you had any offer on the land? I said, yes, I guess we could get $100,000, but he said it's worth more than that. So I don't think there's anything coming in on it, because if there is any... Who's living in the house then? It's being rented. He rented it. So I mean, I really have no real claim on it. And what I had in the way of money and stock and things like that, I kept on my side. Why did you move north again after so many years down there? Well, that I came back here? Why did you move up north? Well, the family was worried about me, because they thought it was terrible that I live alone in that house. Well, you had nobody with you, no help? No, no. The people on the one side of me, they were Canadians and they were up in Canada half the year and half the year down in Florida. And they said, well, you could be lying in the house for a week and nobody... Well, that couldn't be possible, because I had friends, so I'd be telephoning to different ones every day, and they'd probably call me and something. But anyway, they didn't think it was well that I stay alone. They felt that I should come up, maybe see if we could get in here. This is a free church home. And so... There was no covenant church down there, though? No, for a number... And then St. Luther was in Groveland, in a free church? Well, in Groveland, as far as churches, they had plenty of churches there. But no covenant? No. As far as a covenant church was, when we had Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, he had a greenhouse here in Rockford. And, of course, we knew them from Rockford. So then Sundays, Dave and I and the Johnsons used to drive over to Orlando. We'd go to church and then we'd go out for dinner. That was kind of a big day for the Sunday. But there is a covenant church up in Leesburg, which is only 15 miles from Groveland, but that's a later thing, of course. There's a newer one. Oh, yeah. So you couldn't get any help to take care of you either down there? Well, I was getting along fine. If I needed any help with the housework, I certainly could have it. But, of course, then I did start to get this arthritis business. And it was too big a house to just keep dusting, and then that got to be a hard thing to do. So that's when I decided to come up here. You moved back to the old stomping ground again. Well, it is, but it's very, very different because, you see, the only way I can get down to church is go by van, and I don't want to try it. So I just have to get my preaching. Well, they have services here, and any number of churches have their vans come down here Sundays. Oh, you don't get too much of it? So I don't go out much on Sunday. I just have to get it by my TV. And how about the rest of the Rockford people down there? Like Miss Carlson, is still down there? Oh, yes. Well, they're well set. They've had many good years. Did you have a group of Rockford people, like a club or something, that you met once in a while? Well, my... Oh, there were quite a number of Swedes, yes, that we'd get together a lot. And then, of course, when I was left a widow for those 11 years, I went to the Methodist Sunday School. They had a beautiful big Sunday School class of women, and those women were just so wonderful to me. And then I belonged to the Women's Club, and I was related to nearly half of the Lutheran Church, so I used to go over there. Zion Lutheran? Huh? Zion Lutheran? Uh-huh. So if you can live now in either place, is it better to live in Florida than up here? Or what do you think? Well, of course, me, I just... I had an ideal living between the two cars, and Dave not doing anything. All we did was just drive here, there, and anywhere. You had air conditioning in the car and air conditioning in the house? Yes, sure. You didn't have to be out in the field? No, no, no. Dave, when we first moved down, we had a big riding mower for the lawn. He did that, but he got so he couldn't do that, so when he bought a new little mower, he had somebody come in and do that. And his hobby, the first years we were down there was gardening. I said, I wish you'd play golf like some of the other men. No, he'd rather... So we used to pack up and drive down to Miami maybe every month or every other month to the children. They were both living in Miami. We had a lot of flowers and a lot of vegetables. And as I say, we'd go riding here, there, and everywhere, sometimes go to the West Coast. And then we went every Sunday, we'd go to the East Coast. See, Groland is just about halfway between Orlando and St. Petersburg. It's probably a good climate up there because it's cool nights. Oh, yes. And of course, when you have a house nowadays and have an air-conditioned way, it's the same night and day, just the whole house. I had a lovely home and a lovely big yard. How is the area down in Miami now where you had your house? Is it different today? Oh, I really don't know. I haven't been near it for years and years and years. It's a changing neighborhood. No, really, if I had made a fuss about it, Dave said, well, I could build up it here in Miami, you know, in North Miami or something. But I said, well, that's foolish when you've got the land. So we built up here. Oh, I don't think that Miami is anything like it used to be. Well, in town, you might as well be in, well, somewhere with all Spanish. In fact, you can't get it. You couldn't get a job to work in a big department store unless you could speak Spanish. Even then, your husband, I see, buried in Florida, in Groland. What church did you attend down there? Well, we didn't we didn't change membership in any way. Dave was a member of the Methodist Church from Miami. See, that's where he and his first wife lived. That's where the boys grew up. And I kept my membership up in Rockford all the time. But he's buried at the Groland Cemetery. Well, that's I know when the first time we went out, because I knew Esther, the first wife. We were out and I guess he was kind of embarrassed because it was just a place for the two there. Well, I said, that's all right, Dave. I'm going to be buried in Illinois. So don't worry about that. So I but the way it turned out, of course, now it never would be buried here anyway. So you will be down there, too. No, I'll be buried here in Rockford. Yeah, my name was my Stenland in the first. Well, family plot. And yes, we have a big family block and there are not too many graves there. There's only only my mother and father are buried there. And and Clara. So she never married. She never married. No, we none of us married. That is, I didn't marry until, of course, I would have been married. I was just about to be married. I would have been a minister's wife all my life, but that didn't turn out that way. And that's all right. So I always I always had somebody nice. I and I had a I had good position in the office. So I never planned to get would get married. But then I did. And we had some very good years, but they passed away. You had a chance to come to another part of the country. Yeah. To live there. Yes. We, of course, had had had a nice home in Miami and sold that. When we built up here. How many acres of orange grow? Was the oranges and the grapefruit? It was 40 acres. 40. Is this the regular size of most of them or? Oh, I don't think that I don't know if Johnson's have that much. Carlson's have just what they do have. I don't think they've got as much quite. I don't think so. So there's all they need to make a living on the floor. Oh, that's that was a handsome profit on that handsome profit that that grew. You see, because it had to be when wrote out the will and everything. I got a share and where I would say get if I would get to see if I would get between two and three thousand a year. Each of the boys would be getting between 10 and 20 thousand. Were they sold for orange juice only or for eating the oranges? Well, they they come in by a whole trainload of trucks and pick you clean and then they carry the fruit down to the. And no grapefruit. Huh? No grapefruit. Grape. Grapefruit. Yes, we have grapefruit. Oh, yeah. Would they be mixed together with oranges? Well, they're picked separately. Oh, sure. I know, but I mean, can they grow close together? Oh, yes, that is most everybody has, say, 10 acres of one kind and 20 of another and something like that. No, I think in its heyday, I know we had a man from Detroit and he he wasn't the next group, but because that was Canadians. But the next girl, he said that he said of the investments, he got the highest return on that girl. So in its heyday. But, you know, the orange business is a changing thing today. South America is taking over and they can raise three crops in some places and their labor situation is so different. So. So it's hard to sell than an orange grows on there. Oh, no, it's not hard, but it isn't like it was. But if somebody comes in and buy this land for you, I guess, for 100,000, could you make a living on it? Oh, sure, sure. But you have to have you know, it takes three if you just plant trees, it takes at least three years before you get anything to pick. And all those three years you have a tremendous expense because you have to fertilize, you have to cultivate, you have to do all the things. Spraying, everything. Sure, they come in and do a spraying that maybe a thousand or more and all those things. And your stepchildren or your husband's children, they are not interested in it then? Well, it's the title to the property went to Martin and Laverne. Laverne died. So I suppose his two boys will get in on it. But there isn't much profit on it right now. There's this profit that if they decide to sell, sell the land. Too much labor ahead of them, they don't want to get into it. I mean to plant new oranges. Well, you've got to have some money to take care of all those expenses until you start to get a return. And then when you're getting a return, if the freeze comes, well then, that is it. But there's a tremendous area of orange. Isn't there an orange capital of the United States down there? Well, I really don't know. Of course, there's a lot of fruit raised in Texas. There's a lot of grapefruit and oranges from California. But Florida's got, but those three states are really the ones that have the... Right around the grove line there is a big area of orange, orange, oranges all over. And they have a big fruit grower association there with a big... Yes, that's a Plymouth. On top there. Oh, there's Plymouth. Yeah, that's the one that Dave was interested in. I understand that last year or two, while they were still taking care of the grove, I think Marty transferred it to the Golden Gem. That's where Carlson's belonged, the Golden Gem. But the Plymouth, they folded up now. So I guess, well, I got some returns and I suppose the boys got more returns. Because there's a tremendous lot. I mean, you see, they have a big fleet of trucks and all that kind of thing. So their capitalization would be in the millions now, at least. Big business. Big, big, yeah. So are you visiting Florida sometimes, just for a few weeks? Or do you stay? No, I don't go down there. There's nobody to go down to particularly. The old-timers are gone. I have a nephew who is in the insurance business. He's an insurance broker. And he said it's the hottest this year that he can ever remember. So they're having heat on there. This poor old world, I don't know. We're having more heat than we usually have. So the climate is changing. Yeah, I think so. Now, this data, do you— In your home now, how about the Christmas time? You had a Christmas tree taken in off or— Do you mean right here or what? No, I mean that in your home with your mother, growing up. Well, the only family circle we have is like you were talking to Clem and her husband. Yes. You see, their mother and my mother were sisters. Mother was the old sister. So you were close together then? We've been very close. When my mother was living, why, they just looked at— My mother was the head of the family, you might say. And so we were always together all holidays. Aunt Selma used to call Mother Ma. I think every one of her babies, my mother was with her when the baby came. That is Clem, we'll see. Aunt Selma had a big family. There were six living children, and there was one little grave up in the cemetery. There'd be seven. I think there were one or two that just never were born, really. So you celebrated Christmas together then, many times with parties and— Oh, when we were children, we were together a lot. How far ahead did you take the Christmas tree at Christmas? A week before or two days before? It's altogether different. Don, you asked if we had Christmas tree when I lived all the years I lived in Miami. Well, how about up here in Rockford first? What did you do in here? Well, I can't say that— The Christmas itself, we had a Christmas tree, of course, in the apartment. Mother and I, we were upstairs in the apartment. We had a Christmas tree, but there were no children. My brother lived downstairs. He had one little boy. So they were more with— We were together at Christmas, but the Christmas tree and Christmas children, that would be on Tilly's side of the family because there were many children, many small children. But then your mother, she baked and cooked Swedish things like lutefisk? Oh, well, not too much. Not too much? No. See, there were just no older people. If my father had lived, it would have been different. You didn't care for that kind of food, either? No. No, we—I never cared for it much myself. My sister Clara, but for many years, Clara got tired of working in the factory, and she became a companion and a housekeeper for wealthy women. They got along beautifully. So Clara was with her— Here in Rockford. Here in Rockford until Clara wanted to go to a retirement home. Now, the Covenant's got beautiful retirement homes. You've seen some of them, maybe. In Batavia, they have some of them. There's one in North Chicago that's beautiful. And the one in Miami, they were moved. Yes. They moved— They were up there in— Fort Lauderdale? Fort Lauderdale, yes. How did you celebrate Christmas in Miami, though? Did you get that Christmas feeling down there in the heat? Well, yes. Of course, when I think of Christmas in Miami, the only time we had Christmas— really felt like a real Christmas is when the children were small, the grandchildren. See, when I married, there were five grandchildren between the two boys. And they were all within the ages of from three to seven. So that made for a big Christmas that way. Like your stepchildren, are they interested in Swedish background? No, no, no. They were—the boys didn't marry any Swedish girls. So they don't know any Swedish at all. They are all Swedish entitled, then. No. No, the one girl—the one girl married—well, he is—they're down in Uruguay. Her husband is a teacher in the Babbitta Seminary School down there. And she was a nurse before they married. They have two little children. Then the next girl, she's married to an Army man. She's living in El Paso, Texas. They have two children. And the other—so that's three, that's two, two, that's four. And then the fifth one is the son of David Shelstrom II. He has only one child, and that's a girl that's 13 now. They live in Georgia. So that's the grandchildren. And you never visited Sweden? I've never been to Sweden. Your parents didn't go back either? No, well, my father didn't have money for that, and then he died young. He was only 42. I think it's remarkable, I think, with those young Swedish couples, how they could come here and have a nice home. And, oh, they did. No, it didn't do much traveling. Your mother, though, she was not too bad to keep the house together and start working and feed the family. Mother was very, very—had a good head. Yes, she did. We had another good friend of hers that came from the same place in Sweden, and her husband died about the same time, and she just could not take it. Anything about any—well, she had three children, two sons and a daughter, and the boys were quite grown, but just everything worried her to pieces. And she sold the house, called it, sold it to the oldest boy, and he got it at a good price, which meant that there was nothing to give to the second and third, which isn't fair. I remember what Mother said to me once, well, I'm glad that at least I have a head so I can think, and you have to think. Mother did. She was sharp. Because, you know, things, when you've got property, it's constantly something to be done. You've got to be on top of it. Yes, she did. She had a good head. Mother did. She did. Was she much with the church work and with the ladies' aid? Well, she didn't have time for much of that. She did have coffee parties occasionally, but when you have growing children and work two days a week and three days a week, which she did a good share of the time, that— as I said, with the three days, that was working down there at Hentschliff's. But at the same time, it was kind of nice because it was her sister that worked there all the time. And, well, all the other help that they had were all from our church, it seems. So that was kind of nice. So the people within the church, did they help each other when they had trouble? Well, they helped Mother when she—first, yes. Well, we didn't get any—you don't need a check every month or anything like that. But, you know, as years went on, things changed. When Mother was—there was nothing for her. They said to her she should go down and report, like people get help. Well, Mother did go down, and they said, Well, you aren't entitled to any of that property. And, of course, Mother did have property. I said I grew up the day I was nine years old because the next month I had to carry the check over. The people who owned that house built another house only a city block away, one family house. She was so fussy. That house was so beautifully kept. She was so fussy she wouldn't even use her kitchen in the summertime. So they had a big room down in the basement that had everything. And, of course, we made use of it in the summertime, too. You know, they had a cupboard, and they had a stove and water and flooring and all that kind of thing. So— You didn't have a washing machine, though, at the time. It was all by hand. Well, it was, yes. But, of course, we did get a washing machine. Oh, just any time. But, as I said, that— Mother paid off. It's only $35 a month she paid. She got $25 rent upstairs. But a little here and there, so we managed.