 I'm going to do it on August 10, 1987. I'm sitting here with Anna Landström in Detroit, Michigan. She was born November 16, 1905 in Markaryd and came to America in 1924. Your father, Anna Johannes Jonsson, what did he do? He was a plumber in Jernbägen. You had nine children in the family. Yes. Two of them were boys. Were they younger or older than you? You were one of them? No, I was the third. I have an older sister who lives here in Montgomery. Did you help out a lot at home? Yes. Do you want to hear a story? When I was seven years old, my mother said to me, Can I speak English? When I was seven years old, my mother said to me, That old lady over there, she has rheumatism so bad she can't pick up her potatoes in the ground. Will you go and pick up her potatoes? She gave me a great big bag like that. I lay on my little knees, you know, and picked up all those potatoes. I went home to the old lady, and she was sitting there and couldn't hardly move, so I asked her if there was anything else I could do. She said, Can you scrub my kitchen floor for me? There was a white wooden floor in those days, you know. Of course I did it. My grandfather was preaching in the mission house, you know. Missionshuset, you know what they call it. Was that your grandfather? Yes, that was my grandfather. And he told us that, Children, you've got to help those people who are old and who can't help themselves with anything because, you know, that's why we do it, he said. And I said, Now you go over there and do it. I put my little head down and I said, Yes, Martha, you can do that. And that's how I learned that we people in this world have to remember when we are strong and healthy, we help the ones who are helpless and sick. That's how I learned as a child. My mother told me, Go out in the woods, pick lingonberries, you know, bring them home. Nobody said, No, I don't want to do it, I want to play. We girls, we had one little doll, and that little doll, my mother said, You have it three days, they have it another three days, and you play with them nice like that, and there was made out of a little head there, a porcelain head, and then, you know, we made some clothes and put on that little doll. Nobody said, I can have a doll. Now you go into a house in America today, one room is so loaded with all kind of toys, and the kids, they don't look at it. So the world has changed. So you had to take turns then? We took turns, we took turns and played with it, and there was no fight about that at all, you know. And we found our own toys by going in the woods, you know. We picked up little acorns and little stuff, and we made it into something, you know. We never expected anything. And my mother said to me one day, she said, Yeah, she said, Now I have a little couple of crowns, you know, and now I'm going to get something in the store so you kids can have something. And she came home, and she had got a few answers, and she divided it up to us, you know. And we thought we were in another world. It was so wonderful. Those memories you never forget, because it was such a clean, nice, wonderful thing. You never heard of anybody attack children, you know, or anything in the house. They never closed doors in those days, nobody. The always was so safe and everything. It was a different, altogether different world. But when you tell American people that, they just think that's a fairy tale. They don't think anybody could do all that work seven years old. And I did it up until I was 14 years old, and then I left, and I started working in a hotel, and I worked real hard there for all those years, and I got $10 a month. 50 crowns a month, you know. And I thought that was, of course, you get room and board, you know. But old men in those days, they were just as devilish as they are today. I remember the one who owned the hotel, you know. I was in there, and I was washing... Yes, and I was washing some dishes and everything, and he come around and he said, What's that? And I got so scared, so I started shaking like that. That's how innocent you are, you know. I thought, oh, am I going to sit down, something's going to happen to me, now I'm going to die, you know. But men in those days, when they saw a young, blonde girl, you know, they were just as devilish as they are today. Even Swedish men. So he touched you, then, on your... Then I thought to myself, I am never, never in my life going to let a man touch me until the day I'm married. And I stood by it. I was a virgin when I married, and I tell you, I'm very proud of it. To heck with all that stuff that you have today. Oh, I tell you, in those days, how innocent people were, and how nice kids were, and we didn't... I remember we went to the store once, you know, to buy something for my mother and dad, and we had one penny left, you know, so we asked if we could have some candy for that, you know. He said, are you driving? He thought, buying for one penny, you know. Give us a few little pieces of that, some candy for that one euro. Was your family religious after your mother was... We had... My mother was brought up, of course, in a home like that. In a home like that. And they called that Missionshuset, you know, so he was teaching Sunday school, he was teaching Bible classes, and when somebody died in those days, they took them out and put them outside the house, you know, like in a barn, and then they was there for a week, you know. And then when it was time for the burial, you know, my grandfather, he went and preached in that barn. So then the one who was ordained pastor, he didn't have to do nothing except to use ashes to ashes, you know, when you put them in the ground, because he did a sermon over there in that barn. So Morfar had lest ut liket? That's what he did, yes. And my moffa, he was a man, he was about 6'5", or maybe 6'4", barabaritalo, with a big beard, and we had such a respect for him, you know, but he had a heart of gold, but he never let you get away with nothing. He always said, you got to learn, you got to do it, that way, you know. And he was so nice. But don't you think a man like that got a brain tumor and died? Sure. All good men die, and the devil, he lived forever. Was he young when he died? No, I can't say he was young, because I can't remember exactly how old he was. Was he living with you, or beside your house? No, not in that house, but he lived in the same vicinity, you know, but he lived in another place. In Margaret? In Margaret, yes. He lived more out there. We lived right by the railroad, because my daddy, he worked there, you know, in the railroad, but he lived more out in the country, you know. But anyway, he had about, I think, about four or five children, you know, and they all lived out there. They lived till they got old. Did you go to Missionshuset also then? We went there for Sunday school, every Sunday, you know, we went for Sunday school there, you know. Every time we went to the state church, it was on Christmas morning, when they put us in one of those sleighs with the horse, you know, and we went in there, and then, when we were confirmed. There were two years you had to go to that state church and learn before you could get confirmed in those days. Two years? Two years! And now they don't even have more than one year, if they have that, even in my church. But Christmas morning, we thought it was the biggest day of the whole year, you know, when we could see they had a Yule-Lotus service, you know, at 7 o'clock, you know, and my dad put us in the sleigh with the horse. And we went up there, and when we got close to that big state church, the bells were ringing, you know, and every window had lights, you know, candle lights, you know, and oh, it was so beautiful. And that church, they took in all those small vicinities, you know, so that's why it was such a big church. There was only one like that, and I think they could have 4,000 or 5,000 people there. Up there in the choir loft, that's where we used to sing, you know, our schoolchildren sang there, you know. And when we walked in there that morning, that's why I loved that song, you know, when they sang that, you know, Bad hälsar, sköna morgonstund. And when we sing it here, we sing it here too, but only in English. But I thought it was so beautiful, and that follows you all your life. When you hear that even here, of course, we can't have juletta no more because nobody can speak Swedish. It's funny with people in this country that you only learn one language. In Sweden, my brother, he came here, he spoke fluently four languages. He spoke German, he spoke English, but he don't speak American English, he, British English, you know. Your brother's... Yeah, my brother was here visiting, you know, and his wife, you know, and he spoke German, and that lady in here next door, she was living then, and she was a German lady, and she said, My, he talk better German than I do, I can't talk like that. But that was more refined, you know. And then he talks, of course, Swedish and Danish, and then, you know, he was taking up Spanish. He said he thought that was beautiful, so he said, I'm almost through with that. And over there, everybody learn English, because, you know, people who have been home now, they say, We have no trouble there, because, you know, people speak English. Yeah. So, did he also go to Jylluuta? Of course. Once a year then? Oh, yeah. The whole family? Oh, yeah, we all went, you know, everybody went then. And he was so nice, oh, gosh. You don't find people like that anymore. No. But that's nice to remember a childhood like I had, because it was so pure and so clean and so, I mean, unselfish. We didn't expect nothing. We just were happy for what we had. And you did what they told you to do? Absolutely. And I remember for Christmas, you know, my mother, all summer on our farm, she had a pig out in the barn, you know, and she got a slug of that for Christmas, so we had a little food for Christmas. I'm telling you, we cried like babies when they were going to kill that pig, because we had him as a pet. Instead of a dog or a cat, we had him. We took him down to that little lake down right where we lived, the little inland lake, and we washed him there, and we played with him just like it was. And then we had to kill them and get some food for Christmas. It was hard to understand when you were little. No, you couldn't understand. And you asked your mother, why you have to do that? He didn't do nothing wrong. Why do you have to do that? Well, we got to have food for Christmas. Then they made all that food from one pig. They never wasted nothing. They made pig's feet, and they made all kind of a sausage, and they made ham, and oh, gosh. Did you learn then from your mother how to do it? I learned from childhood. You had to watch and see how people done it, you know. You had to learn, because, you know, when you were in that, you know, you couldn't say, I want to go out and play. Your mother told you, you help out. Now you see how I do it, and you keep on helping me. Sure. And when we made sausages, you know, you had to hold on to those things, you know. And so my mother put them in, you know, by hand. Now they have, like, we got to do it, even if we have big machinery to do it. Who slaughtered the pig, your father? Oh, yeah, my dad. But he done it before we got up in the morning, of course, because we wouldn't have been able to stand it, you know. We would scream and everything. So I guess he done it early in the morning, you know. He worked mostly nights, you know. Oh, he worked steady. Yeah, so he had a steady job. But even in those days, even if you were by the railroad, he didn't make anything at all compared to what he do. No. How about your brothers? Now, did they start a career on the... No, no, no, no. My, the boy, the brother who went over here, you know, he was only, I think he was 19 or 17 years old when he came over here, you know. And he right away went to work in a tool and dye shop. So he worked for, there was, no, not Michigan Tool, that's another, they had another tool shop here, you know. And he used to go there, and, you know, they took him in, Neil Arm right away, you know, and he was there for all the years he lived. Colonial Broads, they call it. Colonials. Colonials, yeah, Colonial Broads. And he worked there all the time until then he died of cancer. He was a wonderful brother. He was so quiet, you know, and so... How did you learn about America, now, in school or in your home? Nothing at all. Did you have any aunts or uncles? No, no, no. We used Eileen, my oldest sister, you know, she was married in Sweden, you know. And she had a son, and her husband, she was also, of course, Swedish. He didn't want to stay in that town, the little town. He wanted to go to America to work in a tool shop, so he worked for Colonial Broads too when he got there. Anyway, he went first, and he, of course, wrote to her to come over, you know. So she went over with the boy, and, a year after, so they had another little boy, you know. And they lived here on this side of Detroit, which is, you know, a colored town now, you know. But then my sister wrote to me, she said, Don't you feel like you want to come over here? It's so nice, you can get a good job here and everything, and you can stay with us. So I said, No, I don't want to leave Ragnar, you know, that man I was trying to get hold of. So she said, Well, I had a letter from him, he's going to go, but he's not coming to Detroit. He's going to go to Minnesota. It was non-stop. Yeah, because he was going to go to Minnesota where his family, his uncle and aunt, lived. But after a while, he found out that there was nothing in his line. He had graduated from trade school in Sweden for tool and dye, you see. And he was 26 years old already, so he wanted to have a job in that line, but he had to study, you know. So he said, Well, I don't think I can probably stay in Minnesota. So he wrote to my sister, and that's how my sister told him to come and live with her, and he got a job there right away, you know. And then he wrote later to me and asked me if I would come. He would send me the tickets, and I screamed and hollered, and I said yes, and I went up to the immigration office and got my, you know. That was your... That was my boyfriend then, you know. How did you meet him? I told you I met him in Youngby, you know, when I was working. In the hotel? When I was working in the hotel. His home was there. He was living there, and that was his hometown, you know. But he went to that trade school, you know, and like I said, he was older than I was, you know, so he didn't think I was much of a girl, you know, because... Oh, you started there when you were 14? Yes. So you saw him already the first... Yeah, I saw... No, I was 15 then when I could go out a little bit at night with some other girls. We were seven young girls working in that hotel. Seven girls? And in those days, the Swedes, they were even mean. Do you know about that cook? She couldn't stand young girls. The cook, the head cook, couldn't stand... So, you know, she told us, you cannot be out. You have to stay in because you've got to be up at six in the morning. You don't go out. So we sneaked out one day. And, you know, she found out and she was waiting for us and she threw a pot of water right over us, you know, when we came in. She was so mean, you know, so I tell you... She was in charge? Oh, yes. And we had to do what she told you. But in a way, I appreciate because I learned an awful lot from that woman. She was mean and strong and everything, but if you didn't talk back to her, if you just listened and done what she said, she could be very, very warm and nice, you know. I found that out and she taught me many, many, many things that I still remember. So she was a good teacher? Absolutely. She was a wonderful... She was preparing food? Oh, yes. She sure was. So you were helping out in the kitchen too then? Oh, absolutely. I learned from the beginning how to do all that Swedish food, to do everything. And that's why I thought when I came over here, the tables here, they didn't have them set the way we had. We had napkins, you know, that was made into figures, you know, with flowers on. They didn't do that? And fresh flowers always on the table. They didn't have that. And then when they served, you know, they used paper napkins, and I couldn't believe it for a long time, you know. And I thought it was so different, you know. But then you get used to it after all the years you were... But then I got involved, like I said, in public life, you know, after my children were raised and everything. Or before I even went to church a lot and done church work. So after a while then, Ragnar Lundström, he started to look at you, and he asked you all the dates. Yeah, he started to look at me then, and you know, so his sister told me, see, and I was exactly the same age, she said, I'll tell you one thing, when we go up to that park, and when they have dance on Saturday night, there is one dance that the girls can ask the man to dance. They call it Domino's Dance. You know, Domino's, I don't know what else. Anyway, she said, why don't you stand behind him so he don't see you? And then when he started to play that, grab him, then he can't say no, because he did. And we danced, and he laughed, and we talked and everything. A couple of nights after he called me, and we went out and walked in the park, you know, and everything like that. But he was such a nice, he didn't try to be funny. But anyway, so that's how I really, I really, when you fall in love when you are that young, you know, it lasts for life. So you were engaged then, shortly after? No, I was here for a while, you know, and then... So you were not engaged in Sweden then? Oh no, I told you, he went to Minnesota. He wasn't even going to come to where my sister lived there in Detroit. So he left you then, what did he say when he left you? Well, he just said that his life is going to go down, that's how I understand. He want to, you know, get his trade, you know, over here. What did you get, figuring in your head, were you set to go after? No, so then I, then when my sister told me that, I went over there right away, and then he had come back. When I came to America, he was already living with my sister, because he had come back from Minnesota, he couldn't find the job he wanted. So he was here in Detroit then? He was in Detroit, living with my sister, and he and my brother-in-law, they met me at the railroad, because you know, it took a long time in those days, you had to be on the ship, you know, from Sweden for ten days. Did he send you a ticket? Yes. He did? He did. He sent you a ticket? Yes, he did, he spent 25 years on our wedding anniversary, he says, you know, you never paid back that ticket. You never did? So I said, no I didn't, I said, because you know, when people love each other like we do, I said, you forget about money. What did your parents say now when you were ready to leave? Good. You'd been away for... I had been home since I was 14, they said, my, oh my, they said, that's your life, Anna, and you, but you know, but my mother told me, but that I don't want in the record, but she told me, she said, the only thing now I want you to sit down, I want to tell you something, she says, don't let a man touch you at all, before the day you are married, because if you do, you get into such a trouble, and your life is completely destroyed, she said, there is no life for you anymore. That's why I was so afraid of men, you know, because she told me, if they touch you, you know, you get pregnant, you know, and I thought that was nice in those days, because usually they didn't tell the girls nothing, you know, but my mother did. They don't even do it today. Look at the world we live in, especially in Detroit, oh gosh, how do you find babies in garbage cans, 14, 13 year old kids, you know, black kids, and we throw them out when they are born, how do you find all kind of babies born with parents that were drug addicts, and you know, you know how terrible it is, there is no life anymore. So your mother, she sat down and talked to you? Absolutely, and that's why I have such a regard for my childhood and for my parents and my grandfather, because they told me the truth. They told me the truth, that's all. They didn't fool around and say that and that and that, straight right to how it was. And I think that if people do that, you know, and I know when I had my daughter, Marianne, and when she got into teenage, you know, age, teenage, then, you know, I said to her, Marianne, I said, now I know you like to go out now and you like to have fun with your young people and all of that, but now I want to talk to you, I said, and I want to explain life to you a little more, you know, so you know what it is, you know, and everything like that. And I remember now when she had her 50th birthday, she said to me, Mom, I have to tell you this, when you sat down and talked to me about that, when I was, you know, a teenager, I thought you were a funny person, I thought you was really not the way you should talk to them. She says, Mom, thank you, thank you, thank you, Mom, she told me. I thought that was nice. But if people did, and you know, I will never, as long as I had small children, I will never once even try to go out and do anything. And of course, I have never worked for money, I have worked volunteer work. And anyway, I will never think of leaving the kids like they do today, you know. I see people, they come with their kids, you know, and they put them into a place, well, that is not a mother, that is not a home, that is nothing, you know, and they stay there until about 4 or 5 o'clock, they pick them up, take them home. You know, that is how they do. That is not raising children. God has told me that if you are a mother, your place is beside that child until the child can take care of itself. And that is the way I feel like people should do, but they don't. And when you talk to them about it, you know, I remember once I had a talk in church, we talked about motherhood and stuff like that, and then one woman got up and she says, well, today's living, there needs to be two paychecks, and that is all. No, I don't believe that. I do not believe that, because I think love and caring is worth more than money. Absolutely. Do you survive on one paycheck? One paycheck. And then you worked... The only time I got paid was when I worked for the, of course, election board, you know, for 35 years, but there was only once every four years we had election, you know. We didn't have election every week or every, you know. So, and then you, I remember when I started, you know, we got, we started to work, you know, 6.30 in the morning and we worked about 10, 11 o'clock at night, you know, and, you know, you got $12. Now, the latest year when I worked, you know, I got about $60. And I worked in a little place up on the radio, you know, they had one of the little booths, you know, with the little black stove inside, you know, and we had, you know about paper ballots, don't you? We had paper ballots, you know, but we worked like heck, you know, and then take it back to the police station. But you didn't think nothing of it. Going back now to Sweden, when you prepared yourself to come over here to your husband, Ragnar, he was your fiancé. Yeah, we were not engaged, but he was my fiancé. What did the pastor tell you, Kyrko Hedin, when you come and took out the dismissal letter to leave Sweden? What did he say? Nothing. You remember you had to go to him and... Not to him, you had to go to get the immigration office. Oh, but didn't you go to the pastor to pick up... Oh, yeah, oh, yes, oh, yeah, utfletting, oh, yeah. No, what did he say? No, he didn't say, I can't remember he said anything, you know, he didn't talk like anything like that. I can't remember that at all, because I think he just gave us the paper, or maybe he said something, but I can't recall. Were you the only one from your area that left? Yeah. The only one. The only one that left, and do you know, oh, gosh, do you know what, when I came to New York, after being on the boat for 10 days, we got out, that was one of those women, you know, standing there who sort of looked after immigrants, most likely, you know, probably a social worker or something. Anyway, I could only speak two words of English, and that was thank you and goodbye. Anyway, I got up on the train, you know, the train was going to take us to Detroit. I got up on the train, and I was sitting there alone, and a young girl my age, she come and sit beside me, she started talking, you know, like mad, you know, and I just locked her, I didn't shake my head, she moved right away. Yeah, I was sitting looking through the outside windows and seeing everything was so new, you know, and everything, and you were so, oh, boy. You had no trouble at Ellis Island? No, I didn't have to go to Ellis Island. That was out when I left, you know, I don't think there was any. In 24? Because I was never there, you know. Did you go second class, perhaps? No, no, immigrants, your regular third class. Third class, okay. No, my sister, Eileen, she said that when she came over here, that was the last time they had Ellis Island, you know, she went over there and they locked in the hair, she said, and they locked in to see if they were pregnant, and they, you know, they saw how your health was and everything, but then I guess they had to change it because there was too much complaint, you know, about those young, from, there was different countries, there was not only Scandinavian. So, that's what she said, but they didn't have it. And you came here and to Detroit? Yeah, come right to Detroit, and that's where I have lived for 60 years, and Detroit is my home, black or white or green or anything. I love Detroit, I love Detroit. So, you made the transition easy then, from young to old? Oh, absolutely. What did you pack, though, in your suitcase when you left? In no suitcase, I had a big trunk, you know, like that, and I put my clothes in there, I put in some Swedish stuff that my mother had sent to my older sister, and I put in all kinds of things like that, little souvenirs of all kinds, you know, and oh boy, I thought I was such a rich woman that I had all that stuff with me. I still have the trunk up in my storage area upstairs, and I remember when I come over to my sister, you know, I thought, oh, what a sad country. She was in bed with her second baby. The baby was born the third, and I came the fourth, and she was in bed, and in those days, you had to stay in bed for a week or two, or nine days or something, and I was used to life, you know, and I thought, oh boy, so sad. Am I going to be here? And, you know, I went out and got a job the first week I was here. Got a job out in Blomfield Hills, mind you. On your own? I went out with my husband to be, you know, he went out because he saw an ad in the paper, you know, and he had been there, so he understood more about it, and, you know, they asked for Swedish people, you know, for Swedish people. So he went with you, then? So he went with me, and they wanted Swedish help, you know, and you know who I worked for? No. Champion Sparkplugs. The president or the? Yeah, the owner of it, Champion. The owner? Sure, Mr. Champion, and his wife. His name was Champion? Yes. He had a big, big, big estate out in Blomfield Hills. I don't know if you know Blomfield Hills. Oh, yeah, I know where it is. Yeah, but anyway, he had a big estate there, you know, and the housekeeper, she only hired Swedish or Norwegian girls because she was Swedish, and we were seven Swedish girls there, and she was Norwegian, you know, and we each got a job, and I had the easiest, wonderful job, you know. I had to just make the beds, you know, and do the upstairs, you know, and you know, serve the dinners and stuff like that, you know, and I thought that was so easy, you know, and I got $16 a week. That was better than a hotel at the Youngby. $16 a week, can you imagine that, and I got one, I think, I got one day a week free, so I could go and take, you know, in those days, he had a cute little, you know, streetcar from Blomfield Hills into the city. Thank you. Yes? Mr. Champion, he insists that the help have to go to night school and learn English, so the chauffeur took us into Pontiac, and we had to go to night school, and I thank God for it because you were young then, and you could easily learn, and I know more about English than those who graduate from high school today. Anyway, we went there, you know, for every fall term, we had to go there, you know, to that school and learn English, and boy, to begin with, we were about, I don't know how many immigrants, but from different countries, and when we met out in the corridor, everybody spoke their own language. Here comes the club down, the teacher, and you had to be quiet, and that was hard, but oh, I tell you, that was the most wonderful experience, and I am thankful today that we had it. So, this estate now, you are seven girls, Swedish? Swedish, seven girls, working. The same age group as you? Yeah, a year or two or three difference, but young girls. You had seven or six of them? Yeah, sure. So then you get friends? Friends with them, oh yes, and we could go into the city together on that streetcar, you know. But even in those days, you know, there was some problem, you know, I remember my, when I first came here to my sister, you know, she said that a friend of theirs, the wife was so terribly sick, and the husband had to go to work, and she was wondering if I could go over there. She was Swedish, you know, if I could go over there, you know, and stay with her for a day or so. So, my sister's husband took me over there at seven o'clock in the morning. When I got there, the ambulance left. Here, I stood alone. I went into the door, nobody was there. I stood alone, and it was way out on the other side of Lebanon. I stood there, no money, no nothing, you know, and nobody, and I went over to the next door, and I couldn't speak, and I said, pointed over to them, and then they pointed to me, the ambulance had taken her, because she was dying, you know. And they hadn't even left as much as an address or nothing, you know, or any place, that man. Of course, I guess they got hysterical, or maybe, you know, excited. And the neighbors, of course, they didn't do nothing, you know. And here, do you know what I did? I started to walk. It was seven o'clock, 7.15 in the morning. I started to walk from Lebanon to out to the east side, you know, St.… No, Harding, Harding, yeah, the name of the street, Harding. Anyway, seven o'clock at night, I come walking home. And you know how I had got home? Because I had my sister's address, thank God, but they lived. So every person I met, I showed to them, and I didn't have no money to go on the bus or streetcar or nothing. So I showed them to them like that, you know, and they pointed that way, that way, that way, that way, and wherever they pointed, I walked. And, you know, after seven o'clock in the evening, I had walked all day, alone. So when I come in, I told my sister, I said, why in the world did you throw me out to a place like that? And she says, why have you done… So I told them I had walked home and they almost died. She said, you walked from there? I said, yes, and I'm here now, seven o'clock at night. How many hours without water, without food, without nothing? Yeah, but anyway, she died. The ambulance took her to the hospital, and that woman died, you know. I mean, that wasn't their fault, I guess. But they could have done, they could have left, you know, a Swedish note to the people next door and let me explain how it was, and left a few cents for the, you know, explain, you know, how I could go back. But then my brother-in-law, he got mad when he heard about that at night, so he got hold of the man, and he really let him have it. And then he said, well, you know, I was, I don't know, I couldn't think, you know, because he was ready to die, you know. But he thought it was terrible, you know. But when you tell anyone here in this country about that, they say, how could you do things like that? Why didn't you… well, how could I tell the streetcar or the bus driver, I don't have no money, but I want to go there, and I couldn't speak English? Could you do that? No. So I walked. But thank God to my Swedish strength, they don't do that. But I did. Yeah. So, there hasn't been… Were you homesick at any time? Never. Never? As long as I had Ragnar. So he was the salvation for you? Yeah. But he and I went back five times, though. To Sweden? Yeah, because my parents lived, his parents lived, and you know, his brothers and sisters and everything, we went back. The first time, you know, we went back was 1930, and his parents then had some kind of a wedding anniversary, I don't know what it was. But anyway, when we come over there, it was so beautiful, it was just like, oh boy. And he felt so lost there, because he was the only one left out of his brothers and sisters. And he said to me, well, he said, when I get home now, I could see my brothers and sisters. He thought I could have stayed where I belonged and not come, but he could see he was lonesome for his home, you know. But then the next time we went, we had our little son with us, you know, and it was so nice, you know. So now when you were working at Mr. Champion's estate, and making $16 a week, Yeah. Did you say, then, let us get married now, right now? No, I didn't. How long did you work there? Because I had to work. You didn't want to get married, because you wanted to continue the work? He didn't want to get married right away, because, you know, he wanted to have his life settled so he could rent a flat and get a place. And we didn't have nothing, you know. What kind of work was he doing? He was doing tool and die, in Michigan tool, Michigan tool. Tool and die, that's what he went to trade school in Sweden for. How much money did he make then? Well, I don't think he made much, you know, because even, I know, even before he, you know, he started to get sick, you know, before even he was supervised then. And I remember he got about $300 or $350 for two weeks, you know. He was paid, you know, not weekly, you know. But then in the 20s, you made as much money as he did, probably, because you could see. Well, I can't, that I can't remember how much he made. I can't remember. Because you stayed out there, you didn't spend any money for food or rent? No, no, no, no. How long did you stay there? I stayed there for over two years, you know. Two years? Oh, yeah, yes. And then we got married, you know, and then we rented a little flat out on the east side of Detroit, you know. I remember it was $20 a month, you know, but there was no backyard or nothing. So, of course, my husband, he started to put in a lawn, you know, he bought grass seeds and he put in a lawn and he fixed up everything so nice. He was a builder's son from Sweden, so he has built half of this house. My recreation room downstairs with fireplace and everything is built by him. The whole upstairs is built by him, you know. The lawns and grass and garage and everything is built with him. We had a, you know, we had a brick, of course, but he done most of the wiring and everything because that was not his trade. But his father was a builder and he had to learn from five years old how to do building and that's what he could do this. And this house is better built than, well, I don't think there's any in the city of Detroit because, you know, it was built by love and real good material. So this is where you moved and where you married? No, we moved to a flat. Flat, you know. We lived in a flat, you know. An upstairs flat, you know, until after we had money enough so we could buy a lot because this was, out there was a chicken farm up here and it was, you know, not a... There was country out there. Absolutely, no pay a blow, nothing. But anyway, when we could buy enough money to buy the lot, you know, oh, that was so much fun. When we bought the lot, in the evening we come up and look at them, we would see how much was done. And one night we came, you know, the builder was there with his people, you know, they were putting up the fireplace. And, oh, we were just hugging each other and we were so happy there was going to be a home. Boy, why can't the world be like that now? Did you quit working then when you married? Oh, yeah. Then I quit working. And you stayed home? I stayed home because, you know, after that I had a baby, you know, about 10, 11 months after that I had my first baby. And I stayed home, yes. But, you know, here comes an immigrant from Sweden and he was looking for work. And the poor thing, he didn't have no money, so I said to Ragnar, oh, I said, let us take him in. He can live with us and maybe he'll pay us back. And he stayed with us for two years. And he never did have no money. Besides, he had trouble with his indigestion and everything, he had to have special food, you know. And I became a captain for two years. I did all the washing on one of those washboards, you know, and helped him and everything. And then he finally got a job and he said, no, I'm going to pay you back for those two years. I'm going to pay you back for all you have done for me. He moved to another town, but he never got as much as a Christmas card. And that was so damn sweet. Never, never. Never even sent a Christmas card or a thank you card or nothing. So you did things for people and you figure, well, that's what you should do, you know. Sometimes they don't pay off. So you were married in the Emmanuel Church then? No, I was married down in the Justice of the Peace Department. Justice of the Peace? We couldn't have had a wedding or nothing, you know. We hadn't been there that long, you know. Yeah, but the pastor... I wasn't going to church in those days. Well, you didn't join the church then? No, no. Why? It was too far away then to be in the open hills and going to church. Yeah, sure. I didn't go to no church then. Never. But anyway, we didn't join the Emmanuel Lutheran Church here before, you know, way back in 1940, you know. You didn't tell your grandfather you didn't belong to a church? No, but we went there. You don't have to belong. You could go to Julota here. You could go to all the Swedish services they had in Emmanuel. You could go down to services. And the children actually had to go to Sunday school there, but you didn't have to belong there. But you paid, you know, you do, you know what I mean, but in the envelope, each Sunday. But then Dr. Olson, there was another pastor we had, and he came over and he said, well, he said, I think you people should, you know, become members of the church, he said, because your husband do so much work, you know. He built all the things in the church that needed to have help, like the candle, the air bus that is in the, you know, in the wall going up to the altar. And he done so much work, he said, I think you should be members. So we said yes. So we joined the following month or Sunday or something anyway. And that's how we become members. And after that, I have worked continuously. And my husband, he did so much work. I was on the church council for 16 years, you know, and during that time, I did lots of work, you know, that I learned through the council, you know, that you could do, you know, to help out, you know. So that was a nice experience, too. I love to work in public life. I can't help it. I just love it. You became very active, yeah? I love it. I love to be in public. I can't sit and, because I, like I told you, I don't care for sitting playing cards and I don't drink or anything. And to me, it's more important and fulfillment to me to do things like that, you know, like I do. I enjoy it. I have a good life because I do exactly what I feel like I want to do. Did you belong to any other organizations like Vasa or...? But last year, you know, a Vasa person come over here and he said to me, because they meet in our church, you know, once in a while, he said, we'd like to have you as a member of our church. So I said, yeah, I won't be surprised because you like to have a Swedish cook, don't you? And she laughed. She says, that's one of the things, she said, but we'd like to have you as a member. So I said, no, I don't know about Vasa. He said, will you please explain it to me first? I don't join things when I don't know. I said, but what Vasa stands for? So she sat down and she told me that's an organization that is used, you know, for entertainment and, you know, for people, getting people to go together, you know. So I said, is all that you do? I said, don't you do anything else, anything good for anybody? We do because we meet with people and we have singing and we have good time together. So I said, well, I can't say anything. I have to thank you. Then I got a big book from the Vasa committee, whoever it is, you know, a whole big lad like that with all kind of stuff. And they didn't, they wouldn't give up. So I thought, oh, well, I don't know, maybe I should join just to see how it is. But it is, see how it is. But, well, I have to tell you the truth. I don't think that's much anything. You have to sort of be a Vasa. You did join then? I joined last year. But before you didn't belong to any organization? Not, no, not that, no. Jenny Lynn Club is another one? No, I didn't belong to that either. I belonged to those, you know, what I told you about that I do all the work for. You talk about the election committee. Are you politically involved then? Or how did you get involved with that? Because I was interested in my city and interested in my work. I mean, in how the city is run and also who is on the election board and how it's run and everything. So I went and took, you know, sort of a... Active part in it? Well, I went down and signed. I went downtown to the city hall and I signed up, you know. I said I like to work on the election, you know. They took my name and everything. And the following election I got a letter that I should work. I was accepted to work, you know. So that's how I did, you know. And I enjoyed that. I was there 35 years. But I enjoyed that. I thought it was nice. But now I wouldn't... They wouldn't let me quit now. I quit last year because I couldn't stand it no more because they sent me to the black precinct. Way down in what we call the ghettos. Oh, you didn't get one of your choice then? No. They would send you whatever they want? No. Because, you see, all the years that I worked, I worked in the school right up there. Right in your neighborhood? Yeah. Right in my neighborhood. So I could use... That's about five, six blocks from here. You know. A big school there. Public school. And that's where we had an election board, you see, in a big hall. Anyway, when I got the letter, you know, that being that I was chairman for the board, you know, that they wanted me to teach a new group of people. And they were black. And it was way down in a place where you don't, as a woman, like to drive alone at night. You know, especially white women. So I wrote a nice letter. I said, I have enjoyed my work. And I said, I have a... I just have to tell you, I am not able to do that. I cannot. If they had been in my own neighborhood, I maybe would have stayed a year or two more. But I said, I cannot do it, you know. So I got a nice, really nice diploma, you know, to thank you for work, you know, that I have done. You would think the election people would understand that, though, use common sense. I think they did. But, you see, they have to have qualified people to teach people who start out on the election board. Because they don't know nothing. They don't speak English, some of them. You know, they are, I mean, you know. So, anyway, they told me that. They said, they have to have people who have worked a long time to teach those who are going to be inspectors. You don't get to be chairman right away. You got to be inspector first. So, what party have you preferred, the Republicans or the Democrats? I'm a non-partisan. Non-partisan? Non-partisan. Who do you vote for then? I vote for the men. My choice. I don't vote for any party. Because I want to know what I vote. But you got to raise the voting in the primary. I know, but you can raise those non-partisan. You can? Oh, absolutely. Sure. Oh, yes. And I have never had no trouble with that. Because even when I went on to apply for my job, you know, they asked me if I was Republican or Democrat. I said non-partisan. Non-partisan, they wrote on. You can work on the election board. You can vote as, you know, non-partisan. Because that's right on your, you know, when you get your letters, you know, there is those three things you can vote on, you know. Either one of them. So, there's no problem. But, anyway, there was really, in those days, when I worked, it was really nice. And it was really nice up until now when they wanted me to move and go down there. I won't do that. No, my family told me don't go down there because it's no good. Are you through with me? How about your husband? Was he also interested in politics and... No, no, no, no. But he was a Democrat, you know. He voted steady, you know, but he was not working in that at all, you know. But he was voting all the time. He was a real good voter. He voted all the time. But not involved in any of it. No. And when he worked, he belonged to the union? Did he have union in those days? I didn't think so. Well, maybe so. I don't know. If he did or not, he must have. How many years did he work for Lundell's Colonial Branch? You want to see in there? Go in and look. So he worked there for 30 years at Michigan Tool Company? Yeah, he sure did. And then he retired? No, then he got trouble with his kidneys. And, you know, we went to a doctor and the doctor, he gave him some medicine, you know, for high blood pressure. And in the meantime, they didn't get any better. And finally, we took him into Ford's, you know, and he said, well, the medicine he got for high blood pressure was absolutely nothing. There was not for that. And both kidneys were destroyed. So he died then, you know, two years after we found out that his kidneys started to get bad, you know. And that's when he quit working, of course. And that's many years ago he died. Yeah, he has been dead 25 years. What did you do then? Did you start to work? Your kids were out? Oh, no. I took care of the house and I did what I have been doing, church working, volunteer working. But you didn't charge anything for what you were doing? Heck no, I didn't have to. How could you survive then? Because my husband left me some money. We didn't have much, but when he retired, he was in profit sharing, you know, so I got a pretty good sum then. And that money, I never touched. I have that invested. And used that for, you know, when I need payment for... The house was paid for when he died, of course. But it has very high taxes on the house, you know. You pay close to $2,000 a year taxes for the house, you know. So you have to have that, you know. But then you get Social Security and I get pension, $80 a month from his pension. And that helps to pay... Of course, the gas bills are high too in the winter. So you moved here in 1941? That's right. To this house? Yep. And this house is going to be my house till the day I go. You are still strong and eager to work and you have a lot of different citations of volunteer work for the church? Absolutely. For the church? Absolutely. And I love to work with people, especially all the people that need help. So Murfa's words are still ringing in your ears? Always help the one who can't help themselves. And to me that is very important because you shouldn't always be selfish. I could go out and get a job. I wanted to do some Swedish cooking if I wanted to, but I said no. I don't want to. I'd rather do work for nothing and get really good inside feeling that I helped somebody that needs me. Like tomorrow morning I got to get up at 7, go down to Luther Haven and wash 20 heads. That's nothing. Well, you take care of the hairs? I wash the hairs. 20 of them? And some of them have... Well, I said the whole body is crippled so they can't do like this or like that, you know. So what I do, I put little plastic stuff around them and then I sing a little bit and I wash the hair and they don't know nothing. There was one little lady who was a man when she saw me. She says, I don't like you. You can't touch my hair. You get away from here, she says. So I said, yes, little sweetheart, I'm not going to touch you. And she was always, you know, hungry for something. So I put the cookie in her hand and I said, now remember how nice we used to sing you and I together, children of the Heavenly Father in Swedish. And then she smiled, so I started to sing it in Swedish, you know, and she went to sleep. And I could wash her hair and she didn't know it. Oh, yeah. I have used a lot of things like that to women. Well, they can't help it. Poor little things, they are full of pain, they are old and, you know, they are in a nursing home and that isn't always... The guy, the one who is president for Lutheran Heaven, you know, he always come in and he look at me and says, did you bring sweets today? I said, yes, but you are not crippled, so you don't get nothing. And he get a cookie and he laugh. Very nice guy. Not long ago you put on a smuggler's board at the Immanuel Lutheran. No, that's long ago now. We can't do anything like that. You had for a pastor, 200 people. Oh, that was... How do they, I mean, it has changed over the years. There are not too many Swedes left now. There is the second generation Swedes, you know, like Lundell and Thor Olsson and, you know, Andersons and Rosins, you know, and all those people, their children still come to our church, you know, and are active in it. And, you know, like especially Lundell, Arvid Lundell, he come there and his sisters, they come and they take part, especially in our guild work, see. See, I was president for the guild for seven years and now I'm service chairman. And they come when we have doings like that and help out, you know, and they are really good. They talk pretty good Swedish, but they are second generation. So they participate in and help out? Oh, yeah. But now when we had it for memorial for Pastor Truett, you know, he, there was just not too, there was vacation time and most of those people were not home, you know. So the one who walked, there was about maybe five, six, seven of us, you know, that used to be there. I did, like I did all the Swedish meatballs, you know, and I did also, you know, some of that potato salad we had and stuff like that. But most of them, you know, they just want to be inside in the dining hall, you know, and wait on the table, you know, and see. So they like that and, well, I was so embarrassed when the meatballs went so fast, you know, because I thought, why couldn't they eat some of the other stuff? But they teach me, if there's another doing for, there was over 200 people there for that memorial. Oh, yes. And there was, I counted 12 pastors, you know, from different areas, you know. 12 pastors? Yes, who came from different areas, who used to be Emmanuel's preacher way back, and, you know, and even that Pastor Eben, who lives way up in Saginaw, he came with his family, you know. And John Seifkin, he is one of our assistant pastors. He has his own church and has a lot, a lot of people out where he lives. He lives out in the suburbs. And they were there, and of course, many other pastors, you know, Pastor Heil, Pastor Hill, and Pastor David Steele. And one guy come out of the way from Minnesota, and his name was Barry Olson. He used to be a pastor here, but I told him there must have been before. I used to go to this church. No, I remember you. I saw you in the kids when I was here, he said. So I don't remember him. His name is Barry Olson. So there was a lot of nice pastors, and they all come and said hello, and we had a nice time. So a large segment of the membership are black? Well, I don't think we have quite half and half yet, but we have quite a few of black, but not quite half. And they like the Swedish Murgersport too? No, they didn't come to that service. They don't come to anything like that. They were, you know, more like just for... For friends. Yeah, for friends and family of the pastor's wife, you know, you know, the pastor's wife. But don't they get to close, also the black people knowing her over the years? No, we haven't had black people before the past two years or three years, you know. Oh, I see this, you're saying later years. Absolutely, we didn't have nobody. Now we have a black organist who is absolutely wonderful. He's a doctor of music, and he was black. But, you know, before, even three years or four years ago, we didn't have one black people in that church. It's come now lately. Sure, and now, of course, the pastor we have now, Pastor Heil, he is of German descent, you know, but American, of course. And he welcomed all black people. He used to tell them to come in, and, you know, all the black children come to Sunday school. And, but they are good black people. You know, bad people, they don't get to come to church, do they? No. So they are all good people. They work. Well, I said they do some work, you know, like those wonderful male singers. We didn't have no male singers before because, you know, our male singers, they were all getting too old to sing, I guess, or something. I don't know. But anyway, they sing so beautiful, you know, those male singers. So they have helped out a lot, and they are real nice. I have nothing against that kind of a black people. In fact, I really like them. And we are friends because everybody knows me there, and they all call me and they all hug me, and, you know, they are all very friendly. That's nothing wrong with people like that. But that is the one who do the most harm. They don't come to church. They live in another. Another part. I don't think they go to church at all. But all the black people love music, especially gospel music. They brought in some gospel music with them. And some Swede who is married, again, stuff like that, she said, she's not going to come anymore. I said, why not? It's beautiful music. I said, I don't think there's anything wrong with that. She says, I don't mind that. As long as they live a good life like that and help us. They have to help us support church because they cost money. And they do. Because I asked the pastor, I said, how are we doing? Yeah, oh yeah, he said, they are helping out. They are doing good. They are pledging everything. Of course, now we only have one pastor, and we have an assistant helper, you know, lay helper, you know, she is not the pastor. She is just going out and talk to her own people because she's black, you know. So. So, well, it goes. Church is doing good. I think Emmanuel is still going to be there for another, maybe a few years before the town are all black. But that isn't going to be for a long time. Because there are still other people. Half of the church, you know, every Sunday morning, more than half are people, I mean white people. Where do they live now? They live like you? Not out there, they live down in the, beside the church, you know, by Chandler Park Drive in the churches. The Swedes live around there? No, the Swedes don't live there, the black live there. What did they move then, the Swedes? Oh, most of them live in Grush Point now, you know. Oh, yeah, and some of them live out in Roseville and Warren, you know. Harper Woods. Yeah.