 Uncle Alfred, there's a guy up there in an oval frame and his name is Boostrum. And Boostrum translated is boo is nest, strum is stream. Now my great great grandfather had a nail factory in a little town called Hvrvde. And there they hand hammered nails, see. And he used a big water wheel to achieve the power to run the hammers. But later on when they got into automated nails, he didn't have enough working capital to come with the automation. So they closed it down. Then my father came with his brothers to this country because they wanted to avoid conscription in the armies of the king. And they had remembered King Charles XII and the war, the Thirty Years War and the death and the impoverishment of Sweden and they said we're not going to bear arms for the king. And they came to America where they also heard that the streets were paved with gold and all that jazz. But there wasn't much gold laying around. But when my father got off the boat, the first thing he did was to head for Andrew Carnegie's steel mills on the Mahangahela River in Pittsburgh. And so he worked there with all the other immigrants, filling the furnaces with pig iron and with coke and with lime and so on. They had high top boots because of the spatter of the steel. And they were walking around to their boot tops a quarter of an inch from the top, they were sweat because they were in 123 degrees on top of the Bessemer furnaces. But they were tough guys and they had to work and they didn't know the language and so on. Well he became familiar with the United States and then he decided to move west. Which so many of the immigrants, the Finns, the Norwegians, the Swedes, they wanted to go to where the forests were of birch and pine. So they came westward to Wisconsin. Many of them were miners, went up to the Mahangahela, I mean went up to the big iron mines on the Masabi in Minnesota. And there you had a lot of Finns, there if you wanted to get a sauna, that's the place to go. So at any rate, he came to Wisconsin and in the meantime he had learned to become a machinist and a mechanic and so on. And so he took a job with the Alice Chalmers Manufacturing Company. And so he never moved west or northwest into the woods and so on because he was basically not a woodsman or a miner. But then his brother John, who was my earlier partner in the Bostrom Manufacturing Company, they came through and stayed here and they then invented and had a place called the Holmes and Bostrom Company. And they made the first, what was known as an all-weather enclosure. In those days you had a touring car top made out of vinyl and as Henry Ford said, oh Hank, you can have it any color you want as long as it's black. And he, Hank, Henry Ford, was a sort of a high priest of the working men because he introduced the eight-hour day and the five-dollar day. So he was a god to the working man. And my father just loved old Hank Henry Ford. Well at any rate, my father then worked for Alice Chalmers and his brother John and his brother Fred, one worked at another machine shop operation. And John was the upholsterer and he had learned his profession in the king's place in Stockholm. He had served his apprenticeship, learned his trade, so he was a furniture man. He was an upholsterer. So they got together with their several skills and so forth. And I remember as a kid, I was only five years old, they would come to my father's house and then the first thing would be my Uncle John, who was later my partner many years later, would take his magnetic hammer and his tack and he would tack up some newspapers over the basement windows. And being a curious little kid of maybe five years old, and I said, well, therefore, what's that for? So he had the nails in his mouth? Yeah, he had magnetic hammers, you know, the tacks. And I said to him many years later when he became my partner, I said, where the hell did those teeth go over here? He said, the tacks abraded the enamel. Well, I said, we're going to get rid of that. I'm not going to put any tacks in my mouth. So I developed a stapling machine to make seating. It was actually through the enamel. Oh yeah, sure. From the steel. The steel, yeah, sure, abraded away. Just one side? Just one side, wherever your tongue spitted them out. That's what they call spitting tacks. And he did it first? Oh, Jesus, God, you couldn't follow it, you know. Well, I got to be as good, but that story comes later. Now here they are nailing the newspapers over the windows, saying, well, therefore, the neighbors of steel are ideas. So what they did, they developed the bed davenport, where you can unfold the bed and make a bed out of a davenport. Or he used to call them in knuff. So they made one prototype, and they put it in the store window here in Milwaukee in the Kunzelmann Esser over on Mitchell Street, and it didn't sell. So they sold it through in the sponge. They were not merchandisers. They were not salesmen. They were not marketing men. They were Swedish tinkerers. So a couple years later, and I learned this when I was much older, they offered the patents for sale. And I've got copies of the patents to verify what I'm talking about. And this guy in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, took the patents and his agreement, and he bought it for $1,400. Look at the Chicago, and there was a furniture company down there called Pullman. Pullman set up a corporation with these patents, and they put my father and his brother's thing in all the Pullman cars that went on the railroad. Every Pullman sleeper. That's exactly it. That was the beginning. So I mean, they sold it for $1,400. They wouldn't have had to put any papers over the window. They gave the damn thing away, you know? Well, they didn't have any smart ass. The patents dated 1911, and another one in 19, I think it was, 13. So your father and your uncle then took this patent off them. That's right. Did they have any problem not to take it off? I mean, they were greenhorn, so to say. Yeah, but... Who would have come up with it? Well, they knew enough that there had to be protection, and they knew it. Did you get a lawyer then? Yeah, a fellow by the name of Young, here in Milwaukee, took out the original patents. And I can show you. I'll make a note here of that. I'm going to send you the copies, Xerox copies, of those two patents, 1911 and 1913. That's the original basic patent, basic claims, and so on. Well, $1,400. But there was a lot of money, though, to... Oh, I suppose, but not in terms of the Pullman Corporation, for God's sakes. Hundreds of millions. So they sold the whole thing? Lock, stock, and barrel, with no contingencies, like saying, I'll sell it to you, but I want to retain a 5% royalty. Well, there was the mistake they made. That was a mistake. They would have been millionaires. But at any rate, they then formed the Holmes and Bostrom Corporation. And Holmes was the husband of my father's sister. And he was an engineer. So they formed this Holmes and Bostrom Company, and then they made these, what they called, all-weather enclosures. At that time, all you could get from Henry Ford, or whoever made a car, Maxwell, all the cars that had gone, was what they called icing glass in the side curtains. And in six months, the sun had made them brown and brittle, and they fell out. My father and his brothers, they made a sliding glass. They made a frame that they could put into the side material, so you could open and close the glass enclosure. Now they called that the all-weather enclosure. And they made those for a number of years, and they had at one time up, I think they had about 78 men. Then came the Great Depression of 1929. And my later on partner, John, he worked right on the bench next to a fellow by the name of Charlie Nash. Now Nash formed the Nash Motor Car Company, which later on became American Motors, which is still operating down in Kenosha and Racine, and a plant up here. And two men by the name of Seaman, S-E-A-M-A-N, formed the Seaman Body Company. Were they of Swedish background? No, no. No, no. Seaman. S-E-A-M-A-N, I think they were English. But anyway, they formed the Seaman Body Company, and they supplied bodies to Charlie Nash. Now my uncle John, who knew Charlie Nash, who was an upholster with a tack hammer next to him down on Edison Street here in Milwaukee, they just kept on making their all-weather enclosures. Now they made the first all-metal body with a man by the name of Lohersdorff, a German down here, on Old Eleventh Avenue and National. And they should have then continued and gone on to making bodies, but they didn't do that. So then when the Great Depression came along, they folded up the thing, and that was the end of it. Now then, for a couple of years after that, they built a couple of houses, and they had a hard time getting along with Uncle Holmes, because he was one of those persnickety. I can give you some vignettes on that, but that would make a too long a story. But then my Uncle John, it was the Great Depression, so he had his box in the basement, and he was recovering furniture, and so on and so forth. And I had come back from New York, where I had spent three years getting my education in the streets, and that's a long story in itself. But I came back here, and I was sitting down in the basement and watching Uncle John sew, cut and reupholster furniture. And I had brought back from my little sojourn in New York, in Mignola, Long Island, around $800. Now $800 is a real poke in those days. So I bought an old truck. So I was delivering and picking up the furniture that my Uncle John would get. And he said, Harold, as long as you're sitting there anyway watching me, why don't you learn how to be an upholsterer? I said, I'm willing. Show me. Tell me. So I began by ripping out the old stuff, then putting the webbing back on, then sewing the springs back in, then making the roll edge in the front. Then finally I began to Schneider and cut and sew, and then I was able to put the cover on. Pretty soon I was a full class upholsterer. But the education you got in New York, that was completely different. I was a taxi driver. I was working for a man by the name of Jorgensen, a Dane. He taught me about building and about business. In New York City? In Mignola, Long Island. So at any rate, then one fine morning, I'll never forget, it was in June, my Uncle said, how would you like to be my partner? Well, he kind of knocked me over with a feather, because I was 25 years old, he was 55. He was my father's brother, he had gone through the Pullman and all this, and he wanted me to be a partner. I could hardly believe my ears. But I thought about it. He said, you can sell, and I can make. So together, we can do something. I said, all right. He was called in Sweden, Ulle. He was in fact called Kål Ulle at one time, because he worked for a blacksmith. And in order to make the boss think that they were really working hard, they smeared a little from the forage on their hands and made black, you know, like busy, busy, busy. So he was smart enough to, and then they called him Kål Ulle. So at any rate, Kål Ulle, Uncle John and I, I said, okay, I'll join you. But on this provision, that we get out of this damn basement, because nobody knows we're here, we're buried. Well, he says, what do you, what do you suggest we do? I haven't got any money. I said, all right, just let me think about it, and I'll see what we can do. So I had been looking around, and I found a garage that had been empty for three years based on 3822 West National Avenue in Milwaukee. So I, being of a curious turn of mind, I looked in the back window and I saw what it looked like in the interior. Then I went down to the city hall and I found out whose name it was in the record of deeds. And then I found it was an old German by the name of Bewer. So I looked up where he lived and I went to see him. And I said, Mr. Bewer, I'd like to rent a part of your building. I don't think I can rent all of it, but I'll rent a part of it. He said, okay. So he took me over there. I said, Mr. Bewer, this place has been standing as I have observed it for three years, and the cold in the wintertime has cracked the walls, and that isn't making your investment here any better. And then I said, when I went down to the basement, I said, your boiler's smashed. They didn't drain the water and it froze. I got no heating system. I don't know what I'm going to do in November, but it's only June. So between June and November, I'll figure out something. So he said, okay, how much do you want of this? I said, I want the front end on the street and I want so much. And then the rest of it you can rent to others. He said, okay. He said, how much are you willing to pay? I said, I pay $8 a month. He said, it's a deal. And what year was this? During the Depression? 1932. The first Depression. The bottom of the worst. They didn't have any social security, unemployment insurance, no welfare. You either, later on they gave out food, but not at that time. So presumably he didn't have any money to fix this boiler room. No, no. He was poor like everybody else. But at any rate, I said $8 a month. He said, it's a deal. But I said, Mr. Beaver, I don't have $8. He said, what are you trying to do in a very broken German? What you're trying to do, kid, make fun of me. I said, no, I'm not making any fun of you. I said, when I get on the street, I'll earn an extra $8. You will be the first to get it. If you believe in my honest Swedish face, we got a deal. He said, you got a deal. So there was no down payment? No down payment. And I paid him about 60 days after we got in there. I paid him his first $8. Then I caught up. Because I'll tell you how that came about. So it took that time, or to raise those $8? That's right. For the first three years, my uncle John and I averaged $0.10 an hour. And we worked 80 hours a week. We didn't work 80 hours, but we were there to get anything that might come off the street. And we called ourselves the Bostrom Auto Body and Paint Shop. Now the reason for that was that I had had three years of auto mechanics, so I knew something about engines and so on. And so we were Bostrom Auto Body and Paint Shop. And we were on the street now. And I knew that the only business that was moving at all was used cars. So I said, I got two more steps to make. We got to get some things here identifying us as the Bostrom Auto Body and Paint Shop, what we can do, and so on and so forth. So now how to get that done? Well, I inquired around. And there was a young kid down on the lower side, south side, who was a sign painter, you know, with a brush. I went to see him. I said, how much would it cost to get this done and so on? $25. I said, well, I'll tell you something. You can't eat brushes, and you can't eat paint. And you've got all the time in the world because you've got nothing to do. So you put it on there. I'll pay you $25 when I get some business in off the street, OK? Sure, he said. I'm not doing anything. I knew he wasn't doing anything. So I got step number two made. Now comes step number three. The used car business, most of them were concentrated on Elsa Avenue and 21st Street. There was another one on 35th and National, not too far from where we were. So I discovered another guy who had been in the printing business. And he had his old galley of a California bed plate and an old roll of typewriter, I mean, print machine on it. And I said, I need 200 priceless. And I indicated what we could do for recover, top, and do this, and reupholster an interior, et cetera, for the used car business, furniture, and so on. So I said, what would it cost to get 200 of these? He said, $12. I said, well, you can't drink ink, and you can't eat paper. So you give me that, and I'll give you the first thing I get when I go out and put this stuff in the tray. Did you sign a note or something? No, no, no. All of it was on face value. My face, your face. OK. So at any rate, now I got the priceless. So now I go out, and I go to all the used car dealers, leave my little thing. $35 would make a whole convertible top. There were a lot of convertibles in those days, both sedan convertibles as well as two-seater convertibles. Were you able to get the raw material not to make those things? How did you buy that? We had a credit line with a man by the name of Gebhardt. My uncle owed him $600 when I joined my uncle. But he had faith in us, and I said to him, well, we're going to need more materials, but we're not going to be able to pay you right COD. But if you have belief in us, I'll tell you if we're going to make it. So we got so we could go and buy enough for that job. We didn't buy enough for 10 jobs. We got enough for that job, five yards or whatever it was, or a pound of tax. And we got it, and then we made it. And the minute we got paid, we. And everything with the used car guys was cash on the barrel head, COD on delivery, no credit, no on time cash, $35 or $8 or whatever it was. So now we were in the body and a Boston auto body and paint shop, and I knew how to tune engines. And then we got another guy that was unemployed, Charlie Tetzloff. He drank a fifth of whiskey a day, but he was the best damn body man. He could wrinkle out a fender by a guy you couldn't see that had been hit. And those fenders were old at that time? Oh, they were heavy metal, 16 gauge or more, not that paper tin material. So old Charlie Tetzloff came to work for us. And then so we were getting from the used car people, we were getting, dinging out the fenders, cleaning up the bodies, doing the upholstery, the whole ball of wax, spraying. I got a spray gun finally and a compressor. So here we are. Well, I'm partially colorblind, so I have to go out and sell. And I have to sell so that whatever she puts on the damn part of the chair doesn't conflict with anything and so on and so forth. And all I could do was to recommend taupe, T-A-U-P-E, because that was a neutral shade that would go with anything. But I had the whole south side with taupe material. And in spite of that, a woman would call Mrs. Knobloch. I remember Mrs. Knobloch, she said, Mr. Bostrom, my furniture clacks. I said, what do you mean, clacks? Well, she said, it clacks with the drapes. She couldn't, it was Polish. I said, oh, who said that it clacks? My neighbor. I said, this Mrs. Knobloch, your neighbor is jealous because she couldn't afford to have her damn poor club chair and wing chair recovered for $35, but you could. And so she's jealous. Forget about clack, and with that I'd hang up. Well, I said to Uncle John, Jesus, if this is what I got to do all my life, I'd just soon be finished with it. He says, what have you got in mind? I said, I've got in mind mass production. Mass production of what? I said, I don't know, but mass production. Well, at that time, Alice Chalmers had an open house. So I went out there, being of a curious frame of mind, and I saw a Model U industrial tractor, which had a little cushion, a little back pad, and with an iron frame and a channel iron that the cushion was set in. And I came back to my Uncle John at 3822 West National. I said, John, we've got it, mass production. I said, come on out. I want to show you the Model U tractor. So he looked at it. I said, could we by any chance make a thing like that? He said, your father's a mechanic. I'm a mechanic. I'm an upholsterer. Absolutely, we can do it. How many? Well, I said, there's only 200 a year, but 200 a year is better than none, 100 a year. So OK. There was a man who was a works manager. His name was Ivar Limberg, L-I-M-B-E-R-G. He was a plant manager. So my Uncle John knew Ivar Limberg, and he said to Ivar, Harold says that we should quote on this Model U tractor seat. Can you get us the blueprint? So he went to the purchasing department and got the blueprint. We looked at the blueprint. I couldn't read a blueprint anymore with my wallpaper. But OK, so we made a sample. We submitted it. We submitted our price. And lo and behold, we got an order for the next year's production for 200 Model U tractor seats. Well, gee, I could have picked my tongue off. I was so happy. I said, John, look at this. Here's a WC tractor. I said, this one they make $22,000 a year of. Now, this thing had a pressed metal pan. And then somebody had riveted a piece of heavy shoe leather on the edge. And then they had sewed off like you sew a shoe. And they put a black horse hide in there with a little urethane sponge underneath it. It's comfortable. So I went to a guy who I'd gone to school with. And I said, hey, Fred, how much did they pay for this? He looked up. $8.05. I took all that information back to my uncle John. He said, we'll make a detachable seat pad. I said, that's the ticket. Now the farmer can take it off at night and put it behind a wood stove. And he isn't going to be cold and wet or anything. And it's not going to cost $8. I said, how much can we make it for? We figured it out. We make it for $3.12. That saves us some. It's $5. We got orders. The first order was $10,000. And then we got an order for $15,000 for the first year. Now we're in mass production. Now comes number three. You had to hire people then. Oh, yeah. Hell, yes. I'll get to that. So then the fellow by the name of Harry Merritt, who weighed about 350 pounds and was about, I'm going to just stop for a minute. I can see that. To this Italian engineer. He was the first man in the United States to put rubber tires on farm tractors. Before that, it was steel wheels, was lugs. Well, up in the gumbo of Minnesota or something, you grind away. And then pretty soon, you're down to the bottom. And you're in two holes. And they are laying on the axle. Well, this fellow realized that better flotation was better so that you wouldn't grind yourself into the ground. So he said, Harold, I want you to do this for me. Now we were making for the WC, $25,000 a year, and for the Model U, which was only a couple hundred a year. Maybe it was $1,000. But anyway, it was a very small number. So he said, I'm designing a tractor. And I want to show you. It's going to be called a Model B. And it's designed for farmers who have 90 acres or less and therefore have a pair of horses or two pair at the most. So I want to make this Model B tractor. And it will retail for, I think he said, $795. And I've got this steering wheel set off to the side. So the farmer sits here. His son sits next to him. And he learns how to operate and knows how to pull the single plow and so on. So I said, OK. So he said, I want a cushion 32 inches in length. You decide what depths you need to accommodate. He said, the farmer's ass is not a big satchel ass. You know, he's pretty lean mostly. But you give me the depths. And then we have a back cushion and so on that can accommodate for two. Now he said, this tractor, we're going to build a new tractor plant here at Alice Chalmers because this tractor is going to sell somewhere between 25 and 30,000 units a year. And you've developed a cushion and the back pad. And you've got the business. So we made one. We made half a dozen. We put them on test. So there was a third piece of business coming out of Alice Chalmers. Then, not wanting to stop there, I went to the Springfield Works of Alice, where they were making the big cats. So they hadn't had a design change there in 30 years. And what they had as a seat was something for the birds. You know, I mean, the damn thing would practically fall apart after about 100 hours. So I introduced some new straight helical instead of hourglass springs so that there was uniform distribution of stress. And they were prepocketed in muslin so that they had a upward thrust. So at any rate, geez, I could spend the whole day here telling the story. Oh, he's taking time. Where is that? Oh, I got that here. So it's coming through all right. Did you check it? All right. So all right, and that was the Model B. Who developed the design and the conformity of the padding and so on? We did that. We did that. He gave us the dimension. Uncle John and I, we figured out what we wanted. That's the height, which is about a six inch high cushion. The kind of a spring construction we're going to use and so on and so forth. Was it all spring or no foam rubber? Yeah, on top of it was a jute or sisal pad. And then on top of that was one inch of neoprene foam, which was from DuPont. And we had to cut that by hand. And I had blisters the size of a silver dollar in here laying on the floor and cutting out the pieces, you know? You couldn't afford a cutting machine yet. So at any rate, now we were really in business. Fact of the matter is we moved out of 3822, and we moved over to 3615 National Avenue because there was a apartment above the stairs that I could live so I could practically slide down the pole and be on the job all the time, all the time. And then we had a front window there, and we set up to make complete new furniture, not only to repair, but to make new furniture. And then the back and the backside, I was making my WC. I was sewing my ass off. And so then it got so much business, I had to put up a mezzanine for the sewing operators. We hung some rods from the roof and put up a balcony, or we call it a mezzanine. Were you the same in the old building that you rented for... No, we got out of that. You got out of that one. Another guy took that over. It was a big repair operation. He's another interesting character. He's dead now, but anyway. So, well, it wasn't very long before we grew out of that thing. So then I took a building down on 712, what the hell was it? Marshall Street. And there we had 15,000 square feet. This is site two, the connection with Haraldur's Room in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. And it's December 9, 1986. Site two. All right. Now then, we got the Springfield Works business of Al Schalmers. And then I said, then in 1938, 32? No, wait a minute now. I had been in business with my Uncle John for three years. In 1932, it was 1935. He died all of a sudden at age 58. He had a massive cerebral hemorrhage. He had always been telling me, oh, my, blah, blah, blah. What did he call it? Rheumatis. Rheumatis. Well, he had an embolism in the arm. And then he had five yards of cinders that he was going to spread in his driveway. And he went too fast. The embolism let go. And he then was having a hard time breathing. And I went, I was, at that time I was married. I went over to his house. And I saw what a struggle he was having. So I said to his wife, we got to get John to the hospital. And they put him in an oxygen tent. But the next day, which was June 11, my birthday, at 11 o'clock in the morning, Uncle John breathed his last. So now I am all alone, a young kid of, how old was I? About 27 or something like that. So what am I going to do now without my partner? Well, I went it alone. We had now moved to 723 Washington Street on the south side of Milwaukee, right past Allen Bradley. And so I went it alone for two years. And then I had a brother, Carl, who was a newspaper reporter. He was a labor editor, in fact, on the New York Post in New York City. He never had any interest or pretensions to business. But he loved to write. And he was a journalist. Well, I made an offer to him that he couldn't turn down. In fact, I guess his wife was the one that persuaded him. I said, I'll give you 50% of the business without $1 of contribution on your part. I just want you as my partner. I want some guy I can trust, be honest with, et cetera. So he, in 1941, decided to come. And then we worked together as a team. And we got business from International Harvester. We caused them to close down their own seeding plant. They were being made at the Springfield Works of International Harvester, which is a truck plant, for the tractor plant, which was in Chicago, Illinois, on the outskirts. So we buttoned them up. Then we went to Caterpillar. Caterpillar was making their own cushions, too. And I said, you know, this is like having a dress goods shop in the midst of a foundry. I said, you guys don't make your own batteries or your own tires. You leave that to specialists. We're specialists in seeding. And you can't keep up with what we're going to be doing, because it isn't in the nature of things that you would. So why don't you let us quote? Well, we quoted. And apparently, as compared to their own costs, they probably had 400% markup on direct labor. We had probably 100%. So they said, OK, you're going to make Caterpillar seeding from now on. And if you deliver on time, quality merchandise, you'll be here for 15 years without any problem. So that's another tune I like to hear, see? So how much did you have to struggle to get this? Did you have to tangle your way through it? Or did it come easy? No, it came so slowly that we were able to. I can give you a little vignette on that. I was out at a bank in West Allis. And then the war. West Allis, that's the headquarters of Elgenders. That's right. I was at a bank, West Allis State Bank. We had been getting increases. And I didn't have enough to cover for inventories and work in process and accounts receivable, payable, and so on. So I went out to this banker. And I said, I need an $8,000 loan. And they had, in those days, what they called a V loan. In other words, it was guaranteed by the federal government. I said, I need an $8,000 loan. He said to me, Bostrom, you've got to learn to crawl before you can walk. I said, OK. I'm not walking out of here. I mean, I'm not crawling out of here, mister. I'm walking out. And it'll be a long day before I walk back in. Get that? You told the banker? I told him. Did I tell him off? Now, what had happened with him, he had had a company called the Badger Bumper Company. And he had been supplying to General Motors. And he went belly up. So he figured nobody else is going to make it, because he didn't make it in manufacturing. And therefore, don't come to me and ask me for money. So I left. So I went downtown to First Wisconsin. And I said, I need $8,000. OK. Look at what you're doing. Caterpillar is your account. This is my home. All blue chips. Alex Chalmers, in that case. John Deere. We had them all. We had them all. Did you have to have a signature on the piece of paper and with you at the showroom? My signature, but no. It didn't have to be co-signed by the corporation. They checked with their purchasing and that there was no problem there. And that we were in full time all the time, because we were, you know what they said at the Caterpillar? We've taken the inspectors and the quality control off, because nothing ever goes back. And it's on time. And the price is right. We check price from time to time. So that's it. Well, at any rate, yeah, I'm missing a lot of stuff in between here, but I'm trying to hit the highlights. At any rate, now we had them all. Then a man came to see me by the name of Albert F. Hickman from the city of Eden, New York, which is about 60 miles north of Buffalo. He had seen in the paper that Alice Chalmers were developing a reconnaissance tank for the Army. Now, a reconnaissance tank is a tank that went to the foxholes and the bomb holes and to the battlefield to see what the hell was going on. Well, up. I'm beginning to swing too much. So a fellow by the name of Ted Swanson, again, a Norwegian. No, he was a Swede, Ted Swanson. He was chief engineer now of the tractor division. And he said to this guy, Albert F. Hickman, if you want to do something, go and see Harold Bostrom. He's the guy that did the tank. If you want to do something, go and see Harold Bostrom. He's the guy that supplies the seating and so on. So Hickman came down to see me. And he said, you know, on a conventional cushion, a man sitting in this reconnaissance tank, he's going to go through the roof because this thing, chung, he's going through foxholes and so on. So he said, I've developed a suspension seat, which has a shock absorber. And it was a very crude seat. It's a Smithsonian now. But that was the first suspension seat. And I recognized what he had. So I said, Mr. Hickman, I think you and I can do business. So that was the beginning of suspension seating in the United States, or in the world for that matter. Did you develop that one? Yeah, yeah. With the Army? Yeah, with Hickman. But you see, his was a very crude thing. It was a rack and gear. There was two straight racks. And then there was two small gear. Then he had a set of yokes down here. And the end bearings were in rubber. And the whole thing went up and down the back. And the seat went together. And this shock absorber was in the back. All of it was very crude. But nevertheless, it was a conceptualization that had originated with him. And how it had originated with him was that he was an upstate farmer living 60 miles north of Buffalo. And he was a guy that could use his head. So what he took was little paper cups and put them over the cabbage plants so that they would resist the frost. And he'd punch holes in them. So he brought his cabbage two weeks ahead of the market to Buffalo. And he was able to exact a price that was about 15% to 20% higher than when all the farmers came in there with their cabbage. So in taking the cabbages to Buffalo, he had the same experience I had. He had a truck with rubber tires that were solid rubber, not pneumatic rubber. And the washboard rows were not cement. Those were washboards, you know, with gravel. So you were shaking the pieces. And all you had was a cotton pad underneath it. I knew, because I had been driving a packard, 10-ton truck with solid rubber tires on a cotton pad, too. And I knew when that damn truck hit a thing in the road about that deep, if you didn't have your together, if you had your mouth like, pchang, your teeth would be gone. And you had to use your legs as shock absorbers. And you'd grab ahold of this 36-inch diameter wheel, because there was no power steering. And you'd lift yourself up in order to provide yourself from getting ran through the roof. Well, anyway, one time I was driving down, and I was hauling cement. And I was hauling wet sand. And I was coming down a hill. And you got the momentum of this 10-ton of wet sand. So I went in the weight of the truck, which is astronomic, too. And I hit a little thing on the bottom of the hill about that deep. And one morning, I was barreling down this thing at about 55 miles an hour when I hit this thing. A guy was out there waving me down. So I put my foot on the brake, on the emergency brake. And it took me about a city block to stop. So I got out. And I walked back. And I said, what's on your mind? Well, he said, gee, would you slow down when you hit this crack? He said, the dishes in my pantry come right off the shelf. The shock is so enormous. Well, gee, I said, if I'd known that, I'm sorry. I'm very sorry about that. And then what I do, I put it in second gear and go down when I hit that spot. So I didn't knock his plates off. So that was one little thing that I became familiar with. Well, anyway, when Hickman told me about his suspension, I knew what the hell he was talking about, because I'd had the experiences like he had delivering cabbage heads to Buffalo. So at any rate, he and I got together. And I said, now I'm going to refine your operation. So I went to Ted Swanson. I got a great big tractor wheel. It had a big rubber tire on it. And then I took a leather belt about that wide. And I riveted, bolted various kinds of wooden apertures. Then I could control the speed so that I could see what translated into the seat that I had up here. Then I took a camera and a light. And I had a stroboscopic camera so I could see the lights as to how much was being absorbed by the seat, because this light was on the seat. And this seat was being hit like it would be in a vehicle. So out of that, then we joined with the University of Marquette. And we carried out some tests involving live monkeys to see what degrees of vibration and so on would hurt the brain, et cetera, et cetera. And then I sent out a direct bail piece to, I think, it was about 3,000 physicians who were with muscle and bone and invertible disc injury, whatever they call these specialists. They're not accompanying me at the moment. But anyway, I sent that out in the heaviest tractor census states, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa, and either Nebraska or Minnesota, one of the two. Well, I got a phenomenal response of something like 3% to a direct mail piece to doctors unheard of. You see the secretary in the basket. They didn't bother with it. They wrote back and said, there is a direct correlation, Mr. Bostrom, because I had a questionnaire. Is there any correlation between invertible disc injury of the spine and the operation of tractors, farm tractors? Yes, yes, yes, yes. Then I knew I was on the right track. So then we developed it for the farm tractor. Well, you'd be surprised of the inertia of engineers to accept change. I went to the purchasing agent at J.I. Case down in Racine. Well, he said, Bostrom, I'll tell you, you're a lunatic. I said, so? I've been called many names, but never a lunatic. What's going? Well, he said, look at this press metal pan. That and that spring bar, we can buy or make for $1.92. And you're suggesting a suspension seat that is going to cost $10. I said, yeah. It was a prospector. That's right. So I said, OK, this lunatic is leaving. And this lunatic is never coming back until you call me. I will not call you. Well, they were the last to put on rubber tires. They were the last to put on a suspension seat. Alice Chalmers was the first. My old buddy. In the industry. Then we had our suspension seat on everything from John Deere to Alice Chalmers to anybody that made tractors, including Ford, Ford some tractors. Everybody in the industry was using suspension seats as developed by Hickman and Bostrom. So we had the whole market. But the research now going into this, the findings, did you have to fund that? Oh, yeah. We developed all of that. Well, we were getting some. Did they help you out on Alice Chalmers to do that? No. Uh-uh. Oh, no. Yeah. So they took some doing then to get them to twist their arms. Well, what it had to do with it was to venture and decide that nothing ventured, nothing gained. So we were looking at gain, and so we ventured. But anyway, I'm going to get back to something that's fundamental. Whenever I get home more than I feel I need. Shortly after my brother joined me in 41, we were over at a place on Buffalo and Milwaukee Street. I could see the oncoming wave of organization. John L. Lewis had organized the miners. Phil, Phil, Phil had organized the CIO. And William Green was head of the AFNL. So I called my people together. At that time, we were around 82. In your plan? Yeah. Now the plan is on Buffalo Street. We've got 35,000 square feet worth of land. 35,000 square feet, we're pressing the walls. And your partner was there with you? No. The one you were with? No. My brother Carl was with me. John died before we got to Buffalo Street. He died when we were down on Third National. We were substantially less people at that time. I can't quite remember the detail. But we'll type this, and then I'll refine the details so we get it right on the button. So at any rate, I said that I'm going to invite the business agent of the AFL, the CIO, and Teamsters and let them tell you what they're going to give you. And I said, they're going to tell you this on the company premises, on company time. And then after they're through and they've told you what they're going to give you, then I'll tell you what I'm going to give you. So they told me, and I had relationships like this. And I said, now I'm going to tell you what I think. And maybe some of you think that this is nepotism, that I went to Control E, and I said, that's BS. What I'll say is this. We know our problems better than any labor that's from the Teamsters from Detroit or anywhere else. We know our problems. You know them. I know them. I'll give you anything that they offer you in terms of the wage schedule. If they were reasonable, though. Well, no. Anyway, I didn't even make that qualification. I said, actually, now you're getting the same rate as if you were working in Detroit, so that there's nothing that they can give you there. Then I said, on top of that, I'll give you one other thing. I'll give you 25% of the profits, profit sharing. In the meantime, I had gone to Cleveland, Ohio, where a man by the name of JF Lincoln of Lincoln Electric held forth. And he told me. With your welding tools? That's right. He told me. You know what he had? He had 35,000 people on the waiting list to come in to JF Lincoln. His brother had died. He was a minister. He didn't know the first thing about manufacturing. So the first thing he did, he called together the superintendents, the foremen, and so on, and said to them, I don't know, the first thing about welding arc rods or welding machines or anything else, you guys know. Now, what I'm going to do is this. I'm going to set up a profit sharing system here. And I'm going to give an extra incentive to anybody that uses his head and brings something better. One guy in his engineering department took a copy of the machine they were then making into his basement at home and figured out. And he took 75% of the cost out of the machine they were then making. He got a bonus of $50,000 that year. Plus, the profit sharing bonus was the same as mine, 25% before taxes went back to the people. And they, in turn, got 25% of the world's business in electrodes and machines. And they set up and automated that electrode coating plants. It was totally robotized. So they could compete with anybody. That was JF Lincoln. Well, I came back from JF Lincoln, I was so god damn enthusiastic. And you could see air and light under my soles and my feet. And I said, I'll give you the same as JF Lincoln, profit sharing. Now you decide. They came back. We have decided to form the Independent Union of Bostrom Employees. I said, OK. So you were organized then at that time as Bostrom's? Well, we were just Bostrom. We had a partnership between my brother and I. And his name was? Carl. Carl Bostrom. Carl Bostrom. K-A-B, Bostrom. Boo, house on a stream. Nest on a stream. But how could you be? You went to Lincoln in Cleveland. Cleveland, yeah. And could you compare the art look that we need to look forward? Because you saw a silver lining in the sky, even for your company not to produce a lot of work. To any company. What year was this? 1940? After the war? No, wait a minute. This was about, must have been about 1942. During the war? About, yeah. Well, the war was over with the Germans. The Japanese war was not closed yet. I think the Japanese war was closed in 44, wasn't it? 45. 45, yeah. So it was after the Germans had capitulated. So at any rate, there we were, and we had profit sharing. And one time then I made a study to see how much better we were in productivity than the furniture industry. Furniture industry had 7,000 product per year per man in 1945 or 44, whatever it is. We had 33,000. We had damn near five times more productivity. Now, it's true that unlike furniture, we were more mass producing so that there was more repetitiveness than if you just make one damn part. So there is a variable there. But we were so effective in terms of price that I'll tell you a little vignette and sneak in here. Our sales department came back and told me that we had lost the Battle Creek, Michigan account of the company that made these tractors, lift truck tractors. Forklifts. Forklifts, yeah. It was Battle Creek. The name of the company will come to me. But at any rate, it only involved a couple of thousand cushions per year. But I had a loudspeaker on my desk. And it was to the plants, two plants now. I said, hear this. Somebody has come in from Chicago. And I don't know whether he knows his cost or what the hell it is. But he's $1.48 lower than we are. And I give you 48 hours to come up with an answer. At the end of about 24 hours, the head of the Independent Union of Boston Employees came up to me. His name is Cliff Card. You can get more stories from him. And he said, Harold, we've taken $2.52 out. I said, how did you do that? Well, he says, Clara and Agnes and Georgiana on the heat sealing machine, which makes these puffs that make the, you know, they had to use two extra sheets of vinyl below. And they had to take it through a three-process stage. They figured out a way to go through one stage. One stage only, and we cut out two pieces of material. And we cut out three steps in the process. That was the one big lump that accounted for the $2.52. Plus, there were a couple of other little things. And they still qualified for a good job in the? Oh, right on the button. So the next morning, I went down and saw Agnes and Clara. And I said, people like you, we need an industry. Use your head. And that's wonderful. And I said, you're going to get an extra bonus, plus your profit sharing bonus this year. And I'll not forget you when it comes middle of August. So then I went back on the loudspeaker. And I said, hey, we have picked up $2.52 instead of $1.48. But I'm going to make a new quote $1.49, one penny lower than our competitor. And the rest of it goes in the kitty. I said, you do that in a half a dozen other places, and we'll be singing with it. So anyway, that all made everybody enthusiastic as hell. Because every decision isn't made by management. It's made by the guy who does the job. This is what the Japanese learned long ago. So at any rate, that was that. That was just a vignette. Now we go back to where were we? Suspensions. Well, you were talking about the coming back from Lincoln and an offer for the workers. Yeah, yeah, yeah. In other words, you didn't have any rambling about any union activities at your plant. No, no. Before I- But you knew it was going to come, though. Well, sure I knew it was going to come. And what I had put up in the plant was what I call a squawk box. I had cut out of a piece of plywood a parrot. Squawk. It was a squawk. Now I said, if you've got any real or imagined complaints, you can put anonymously. You don't have to sign anything. Put it in. Say that this form is no good, or this is no good, or whatever. And so that was working. But I said, now we've gotten to a point of size that the squawk box is no longer any good. You've got to organize. One guy is your spokesman, and we have our meetings, and so on and so forth. So I mean, they did that. And so now here we were. We were organized. And they took their treasury and created their own credit union. And then they would loan back to their people at whatever the credit union rates was, 10% or 12%. And that was a high percentage. And then that went back in their own treasury, you see. Didn't go to Detroit to those crooked mafia keemsters. All right. So here we are now. And it's 1944, 45. And now I got, here was a big Dane. He was about 6 foot 4. He was head of works at the Oliver Tractor Company in Charles City. And I was in Iowa. So I made it a policy. I was to take the purchasing and engineering men fishing every year. By this time, I had a place up at Crab Lake up in Vilas County up north. Come on up fishing for a week. So they came up. And we were selling them that detachable pad for a deep seat, but they were still conventional. So I said to this fellow, and I forget his name, but I said, you know, one thing you've got to realize, and that is if you put our suspension on, you're going to sell tractors. He said, how do you figure that out? Well, I said, you know, you can have that as an optional equipment and send it out of the plant with the optional equipment on. And here we have the choice. You can put the pan on. But with this suspension, you, your wife, your daughter, your son can all drive this thing out of frozen clods, cross-froze. In the wintertime, you're not going to get your back broken. So if that isn't worth the difference between this and this, which was about $35 when they're buying a tractor for a couple of thousand, they said, give me the suspension. Because they'd ride the suspension tractor, and they'd ride the other one, and they knew what the difference was. So OK, no jeopardy now for the guy to break his invertible disc. And this we had discovered by going through the orthopedists out there who attended the people who had broken three or four discs in their spine, completely finished for farming after that. That was the end of it, lying. So they put it on. Well, it's the old domino theory. Once one guy does it, they all do it. So pretty soon, Al Shalmer were testing, of course, in the meantime. They put it on. Everybody put it on. The last one to put it on was J.I. Case. This guy finally called me about two years later and said, Mr. Boston, this is a purchasing at J.I. Case. Yeah, I said, I remember you. I also remember that I'm an idiot. What have you got in your mind? Oh, he said, gee, let bygones be bygones. Well, I said, I've got the memory of an elephant. But if you've got something good enough. The old spring seat was $1.98. Yeah, yeah. $1.92. $1.92? Yeah. So he said, gee, won't you come down? I said, well, if you say, gee, won't you come down, I'll come down. But no monkey shines this time. I'm going to the engineers. I'll show them what we can do. He says, come on down and get a carte blanche. So I came down. And they were the last ones on. But they had our suspension. So the Boston suspension was across the board. Everybody that made a farm jack. So you were so far ahead then of the game. Oh, nobody was making it. Because you would think like Ford Motor Company. They are a billion dollar business. Yeah, yeah. They were not able then to come up with the idea. They had the old press metal pan like everybody else. They hadn't innovated.