 I'm sitting here with Carl Ebert Johnson in Lafayette, Michigan. He was born on January 12, 1911 in Stockholm and came to America in 1924. You were not more than 13 years old when you left Sweden. No. You have spoken Swedish. Yes, I remember. I went to school for a few years. You haven't forgotten the time you came to America? I haven't been with the Swedes much. No? No, but I came back. We traveled to Stockholm twice. About four years ago was once, and about nine years ago we came back. We were there about three days and it came back to me. I fooled some people. They didn't know I was an outbuilder. You are still doing it today. Yes, it went well. Did you see your father, Carl Ebert Johnson? What did he do? He was a city builder in Stockholm. The times were bad, but my mother's brother helped us to come to America. She had brothers and sisters here? Yes. Many of them? Three brothers. No sisters here. My mother is the only sister in Sweden. She still lives in Sweden. So how did the times after the First World War, after 1920, become bad in Sweden? Can I talk English? My father didn't have a trade as such. For that reason he had problems here too, because he worked as a production worker at Ford's when we came over. Actually, I don't think he was ever happy in this country. Then, of course, in the 1920s, things got bad here. We had a struggle. But it turned out alright. So you went to school there in Stockholm anyway? Yes. You were not finished with... I went to Kongsholms folk school, and then I went to Kongsholms läroverk for a year. But then we moved. You were not confirmed in Sweden? No, I was not confirmed. I was killed. You were too young to get confirmed. And you were the only boy in the family? And you lived at Kongsholmen? Kongsholmen, yes. On Plemengatan 73. And your father had no doubt that he could find work anywhere else in Sweden? No. Your mother wrote to her brothers, and they wrote back and said that there were opportunities. Did they all live in Detroit? No. There was one in Montana, and one in Detroit. And it was the one they wrote to? Yes. I think all three were in Detroit, around Detroit at the time. Did they send you tickets? I don't know. I think my parents borrowed money to help. Did you all go at once? Yes. Do you remember when you were in America? Yes, I remember. Did your parents bring you? Yes. Did they bring you household items, plates, and porcelain? No, not porcelain. But it was the most necessary. And the rest they sold. Did you still have a mother and a brother in Sweden? Yes. I had a mother and a... My father had some brothers. I don't remember how many. He was one of eleven. And you were a part of the family. Yes. Do you remember the trip to Detroit? Yes, I do. Was it a good trip? Yes, it was. And no one else was known who left from Stockholm? Yes. One of my uncles, a mother's brother, sent for a girl he knew in Sweden. So she came with us. I spoke to her yesterday. She lives in California now. She was 88 years old. So she was also on the trip? Yes. Do you remember Ellis Island when you got there? Yes. No difficulties? No, not at all. And then you took the train to... Yes. And none of you knew English? No. How did you do? You ordered food on the train. They came and sold the box lunches. I see. And it was only over... I think overnight. And then we were picked up at the station by my uncles. They came and met you? Yes. And how did it look like from that time? Everything was so dirty. Really? Against Stockholm? Yes, against Sweden. How was the traffic? It was... not much, I think. Because you were used to the life of a big city. Yes, I was. It was worse for those who came from the dark Småland. Yes. So where did you live in the Swedish part of the city? In Highland Park. Highland Park? Yes. Near Ford factory. Did many Swedes live there? Yes, quite a few. So you met children or young people of your age? Yes, I did. So you started to get along with them? There was one boy who understood Swedish, so he helped me. You talked to him first? Yes. But it didn't take long before you started to get along with him? No, it didn't take long. We came in May and I went to school in September. Then I went to what's called an alien class. There were children from all different countries in there. And the teacher didn't speak any English. I mean, only English. So we learned that way. But in your home, there was Swedish, Houston, Thai... Yes, for some time. But then my parents were anxious to become citizens. So we spoke English. They never lost their accent. And I helped them to study for their citizenship papers. And when did they become citizens? Well, most of them were in 1929. Both of them? Yes. And you became a citizen automatically then? Yes, I'm a derivative citizen. Did they join the church then when they came here? No, they didn't actually join a church. They weren't really church people. So you would have confirmed them? No, no. In fact, I joined another church later. Later on? Yes. How about the organizations, like Vasa? Yes, they belonged to Vasa and Ullud. And the Vikings too? No. So they could get the sick benefit then if they got sick? Yes, it wasn't much, but yes, that's right. But it was the only insurance they had? Because at that time, very few... I think so, yes. Later on, they had insurance. And your dad, what kind of work was he getting? He was a production worker at Ford's. So his brother-in-law helped him into that? Or how did he go about it? I guess so, because then Ford's hired anybody that came along. And there was plenty of work then. So he was not without a job then? Yes, he was. During the Depression years, he was out. But not before that? No. And then, well, he was laid off from Ford's finally after quite a few years. That was before unions and that sort of thing. So he was out of work, and he went to work for construction. A company. And then finally he got a job as a maintenance man at the Fisher Building, if you know where that is. That's when he finally had an accident down there, and he died as a result of it. Oh, I see. He was in the hospital about nine months, and then he died. Head injuries. So were they paid, did they pay you? Yes, they paid what they call workman's compensation for some time, and a small insurance policy. So he was not that old then when he was... No, he was... I think he was 64 or 65, just before he would draw Social Security. Oh, I see. So he never could do that. And you went to school, you said. Yes. Went to high school, then? Yes, I went to high school, and I started... I had one year in a college in Detroit, but then I happened to have a job on the side, and things were very bad for us, so I quit my... quit the school to help the family. So had they bought a house then? Oh, yes. And during the Depression, they lost the house, but they were allowed to stay in it. I think they paid $10 per month as rent, and my mother rented out rooms. But they lost the deed to the house? Yes, but then when things got a little better, they bought it back again for, well, less than they owed in the first place. So that worked out pretty good. So there was the bank they owned then, or some... It was an individual. Individual. So there was a bad experience they had. Yeah, they had pretty bad years here. So your dad, he didn't feel too good about the... Well, it never came out. I'm pretty sure that he... Looking back, I don't think he was really happy here. So he had to start all over again, and then the language barrier and everything. That's right. So how about your mother now? Did she cope better with it? Yes, much better. Did she join any Swedish groups? Just Vasa. Or Dynord. I think both of them. I'm not really sure. There's almost something similar. Yeah. But they don't belong to each other, Dynord and... That's right. No, they're two separate places. So when you... During the Depression then, did you have trouble to get a job or keep... Well, I had work. I mean, you know, just menial work. I was pretty young at the time. I worked in stores and drove delivery cars. But there was no way to save anything, or... Oh, no, no, no. No. Did they discuss at any time to go back to Sweden? Did you remember? Not that I know of, no. And there was no one that wrote letters and say... I think there were letters, but I didn't see them. I think my dad's family wrote to him. I gathered that when I came back, they felt sorry for him, you know, when I visited them. He never went back? No. And not your mother either? No. But it was also bad over there, of course. Yeah, I know. But things are sure good over there now. I noticed the last... the two trips I took. Really had a nice time, and everyone seems to get along real well. So... Then the Second World War, then you were drafted. No. What did you do then? Well, then I was working for this manufacturing firm, and... Maschinen Tod? Yes. And of course they were building machinery for the government, so that helped. My daughter was born the month before Pearl Harbor. And that kept me out to begin with, for a while. And then when that wasn't effective anymore, then... Well, the job that I had was important enough, so I didn't have to go because of that. And then when that wasn't good anymore, then I was too old. How about the unions now? Were you affected by that during the 30s? No. No, not at all. What happened then in the Detroit area? Then they started to move around, anyway, the union activities in the 30s. Oh, yes. Late 30s. Yeah. The UAW and the... No, I was never involved in anything like that. In fact, I never worked for a company that had a union. Oh, I see. There was no union. No. How about your father? No. That's why they laid him off as he got older, you know. And had there been a union, I think he would have been able to retire there. Still there? Not still. He would have been about 105, 106 years old now. That's right. Started to draw the pension. Yeah. And during the war, then there was hustling and bustling. Oh, there sure was. Everything. Worked all kinds of hours, night and day. And the women came into the workforce. That's right. Yes. It was not too common, though, in the 30s. No. When they married, they stayed home and just one husband. Like the way I think it ought to be. But there was the war years, though, they brought on the... That's what started it....double shifts. That's right. Because they needed men more. Yeah. And the women, I suppose, they were able to assemble as good as men. Sure. Get used to it. And then after the war, then... Well, after the war, I continued on with the company that I worked for until I retired 15 years ago. Did you start from scratch there? Yes. Did you learn every step of the way? Yeah. That's right. Yes. I didn't have any... Oh, I had some background. I knew how to read blueprints and things because for about 10 years, I worked for automobile dealers selling auto parts. Oh, I see. And there I got some background. I could read a blueprint and I could tell what it looked like and so forth. So this company, they were producing machine tools? Yes. Heavy industry or automotive? No. No. In fact, it was kind of machinery that almost every manufacturer could use, including people who built other machine tools. So it was a broad line then? Well, it was called... they were boring mills, if you know what they are. Yes. And then... So did you join any organizations of Swedish? No. You were not too much with the Swiss? No. This is the only one. I see. Uh-huh. So you stayed away from the... Uh-huh....Voss works and... I did join Voss. Just to be able to get in here, you had to be a member of Voss, from, I guess. To be a... To become a member here, you don't have to anymore, but at that time you did. I see. Uh-huh. That was a very good... So when did you start to go out here and... Your parents went out here? Yeah, they came out here, but they weren't members. I became a member. In fact, they helped me to become a member. I mean, helped me with some money for it. And... 1929. Oh, 29? Uh-huh. Oh, that early? Yeah. Because they were the first when they came out here. Yeah, that's right. And they stayed over the weekend. That's right. So you belonged to the bachelor club then for a while? No, I didn't. I was too busy. I was going to school and working. I see. So... Oh. And at that time, the lake and the swimming facilities up there, was that your screwed... Well, it was at first, yeah. But they kept working. They were a bunch of hard workers back in those days. Yeah. So... They started to haul in sand and... Mm-hmm. Yeah. And on the road and bridges and everything. Right. Yeah, we had blacksmiths and we had carpenters and painters. I mean, real craftsmen that knew what they were doing. They were self-sufficient. Yeah. Today, they're mostly a bunch of pencil pushers like me. Ha-ha-ha. But you have it built up now anyway. And there's nobody can build anymore now. No, that's what I was saying. Yeah. Oh. And here's the peace and the quiet and the security. It is nice. Everything is nice. Yeah. Mm-hmm. It's a little bit scary. They're beginning to build up all around us. We used to be out in the country by ourselves here, you know. But they're not too close, though. No, not yet. I hope it stays that way. And there are still people in town that appear they doesn't know that... That's right. Yes. Mm-hmm. All they see is a sign. Yeah. Ha-ha. And they don't tell you what it is either. No. They're just private property. So did you meet with the many other Swedish immigrants that came? Oh, yes. Yeah. They had trouble in the 30s, for instance. Yeah. They lost all their jobs. Yeah. Most of them were younger people than my parents. That's another thing about my dad. He was a little... He was actually too old. Too old to accept ideas. Yes. Not only that, but to learn a trade or that sort of thing. There wasn't the opportunity then. Oh. So, no, some of them did very well, but they were mostly young bachelors. Mm-hmm. In fact, we had some of them live at our house when they first came over. Oh, I see. You took in the voters then, your family. Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. Oh. So... They were greenhorns. That's right. Ha-ha. Yeah. So did they go back, some of them, that had the problem? Uh, some did. I remember... I think a couple of them that I remember. I can't... I don't know where they went or anything. But the bachelors, they didn't own any houses, though. No, they had that... No, they don't have. Yeah, that's why. But, I mean, in Detroit, they had... No, they didn't. They had rooms. Yeah, that's right. Mm-hmm. They were the family units. They lost their houses if they were closed off. Yes. Yes. Mm-hmm. So they were in trouble, some of them. Mm-hmm. But they could stay on, then, your family? Oh, yeah. Your family. I managed. Uh-huh. I helped all I could, and I didn't make much, but... Well, we got by. You got by. And you still lived in Highland Park, then? Yes. Mm-hmm. Oh. Did they move out here later on in the life... Your father died at 64. Yeah. So he never moved out here, then? No, no. No, my mother didn't either. She didn't. No, she... We had a cottage. I mean, well, this place, except it was much smaller, you know. Mm-hmm. And so we used to come out here, and in fact, we had another cottage over on the other side for a while, and then we... Our children were growing up, and they had a lot of other interests, so we sold that, and we swapped, and got a lot here. Oh, I see. And then along one day, somebody said, Well, this place is for sale, so I bought it. Oh. So then now you... Mm-hmm. So you still live in town, though? No, no. I live here. You live here? Yes. So this is your permanent home? Yeah, my wife and I moved up here when I retired. Oh. And we enjoyed it very much. Mm-hmm. And your wife is still with you then? No, she died a year and a half ago. Oh, I see. Yeah. You are... Yeah. Are you seeing her then? Mm-hmm. And how about the politics now, like your father? Was he on the Democratic side or Republican? Yeah, pretty much. Democrats. And I was for a while until after Roosevelt, and I became a Republican. Oh, I see. So I follow the Republican most of the time. I split my vote depending on the person. Oh, that's your wife. Yeah. Your brother in the party, then? That's right, yeah. Uh-huh. Have you been active politically in any... Oh, a little bit. I did some electioneering for, oh, some time back, but not a lot, no. Where did you locate it then when you married? In Highland Park. Highland Park. Yeah, but then we moved on to Detroit and then another town, Royal Oak, if you know where that is. Yes. That's where we lived most of our years. Oh, I see. Mm-hmm. But you were not on the school board or anything like that? No, no, I was never active in civic activities. Oh. You stayed with your job and... Mm-hmm. And you have visited Sweden? Yes. Several times or... Just twice. Twice. Yeah, mm-hmm. That's not during the last 10 years. I see. So you met some of your... Oh, yes, lots of them. I was surprised at the cousins I had. Mm-hmm. Did they know of you being over here? Oh, yes, they knew all about us. They were mostly from my father's side of the family. I see. I had two cousins and their families that live out on Muske, outside of Stockholm. It was beautiful out there. Then I have others in... Oh, just outside of Stockholm. So they have had pretty well then? Very well, yes, very well. So what did they say about your father moving over? Well, I don't know. They seemed to feel sorry for him. You know, he was the oldest of the 11, I guess. Some of them were still alive. I think they're all gone now. I met his sister and one brother the first time we went, and they've died since. So it's their offspring. Offspring, yeah. But very nice people. Were they able to talk? Well, you could talk Swedish very well. Yeah, well, most of them did. They spoke English. They did? Oh, yeah. They'd all gone to school, and I guess that's part of the curriculum. When I left Sweden, we were studying German, and then after that, I guess a couple of years of that, we would have had English. And over there, it's almost necessary. You know, it's like going from one state to another here. If there were different languages, you'd have to be able to speak with them. So if you had stayed on, or if they had stayed a couple of more years, you would have probably gone to your schooling in Sweden? Oh, I think so, yeah. And the schooling over there at that time was way ahead of this schooling here because when I came here, I was able to take up, even though I had to go learn the language, pick up pretty well where I was over there, in math, and of course I didn't know history and so forth, but literature. I gave book reports on some books that I had read in Sweden. I mean, they were on our reading list here. Did the teachers tell you at any time that you should stay away from talking Swedish in your home? Not that I remember, but of course a child, you know, a young person like that, well, who are you going to play with if you don't talk the language? That's right. So you learned fast then? Oh, yes. Yeah, it didn't take long. So were you interested in sport when you left Sweden? Oh, yes, I played soccer and skied and skated and so forth, like, you know, what you do, like kids do. What did you get into here then? I didn't. I didn't, no. Well, of course, just play around, that's all. I mean, no team or anything. Well, it might have appealed, but I didn't have any of the skills. You know, the people 13, 14 years old, they were good players, and I didn't know a first thing about it. So I was, maybe I was shy, I don't know. It could have been. So you didn't join the next year's season? No, I didn't. How about basketball in school? Did you...? No. Well, look at the size of me. I don't look like a basketball player, do I? Well, I used to in school, in gym, I played a little basketball, and I liked to run. They had track, you know, and so forth. And they didn't play soccer here in Detroit at that time? People didn't even know what it was at that time. So there was a dead subject. Oh, yeah. And I don't think it's too active yet here. You hear of it, but it's... Takes many years before it... I think so, yeah....rubs in or rubs over. Yeah, that's right. Your parents, now, did they take a Swedish-American newspaper? Yes. Svenskammerkollaren? Yeah, or Tribune. Tribune. Yeah, yeah, coming over there. So they had it every week? Yeah. Did you read that? Oh, yeah. At the time, I did. You did? Yeah. Once in a while, I borrow a copy from somebody here just to see what it says. Oh, I see. But you didn't continue to subscribe to it after? No. No. You died out there with your parents? I used to. When I was working, we dealt with a... When I was purchasing, we dealt with a company in Sweden. I can't remember. In Nacka. And they used to send me, every week, the digest, that little paper. Do you know it? I used to get that every week for years. Oh, I see. It was very interesting. Of course, it was written in English one side, Swedish on the other. So I enjoyed that very much. So then you can follow the news? Uh-huh. Yeah. I followed the warship, Voss, from the time they discovered it until they had it right up. You know, the stories. Very interesting. So when you came back to Stockholm, the first time you went back, it was ten years ago, you said? Yeah, about that. Nine or ten. Did you recognize Stockholm? Oh, yes. That was my playground. Gamla stan, and all over. Sidan två fortsätter med Carl Johnson, Leper, Michigan. Sidan två. So did you meet some of your schoolmates? Yes. Some of your old friends? Yes. Well, one only. His name was Åke Dahlke. He has retired since. I think he had just retired. And he had remained in Stockholm all his life? Oh, yes. He worked for a company. He became the sales manager eventually. And our work was kind of parallel. He was a purchasing agent at first and then worked up to better positions. So did he tell you about any difficulties he had to get a job? No, I don't think so. I didn't hear of anything anyway. When I left, we were both pretty young, and I think things picked up after that. He didn't comment anything about the depression in Sweden? No. He wrote me some very interesting letters. Oh, you kept the corresponding? Oh, yes. And in fact, I have some of his old letters. I took them back to him to show him what he wrote when he was young. He was telling about when they blasted the underground under Stockholm. I refused to bounce around. And he used to give me some – I don't remember exactly – but he used to comment on the government and what was right and what was wrong. What kind of political leanings did he have? Was he a moderate or a democrat? You know, I don't really know. In fact, I wasn't too interested at the time. I didn't know too much about government. What kind of views did he have on America, for instance? Well, he didn't really say. He was never here. And strange, he has a son that travels in the United States for a company back there, and he knew exactly where La Peer is. He used to go through there. I don't know what business he was in. So you met him and could exchange some ideas? Yes. Reminisce back? Yes, we did. Did you meet your New York teachers? They were all dead, I suppose. Oh, I suppose. I don't know. I tried to get inside of the school that I went to, but it was in the summertime and it was locked up. I think I mentioned the second time we went over, I took my wife and her two children, and my daughter and two children over, so they got to see it. And my grandson, well, he's 13 now, but he has good friends there. They correspond all the time. He lived on Muskear, by the way. Oh, I see. So on. So you were happy to see the old stomping grounds? Oh, I was. Yeah, I felt right at home. And the nice thing about that is that they don't tear things down, they fix them up. We were in some of the buildings in Gamla Stan, they had what they call lifts or elevators, and they were really modern, very modern. But outside they kept like the old times. Yeah, that's right. The streets and all. So it was an interesting and pleasant trip then. Oh, very. Beautiful weather. The first time we went was in June, and it was just beautiful. July, the last trip was in July, it wasn't quite that nice. It rained quite a bit, it got cool. In Detroit now, the Swedes, have they cooperated? Yeah, there are some clubs. Well, some you might say are Scandinavian clubs, like Scandia. Is it Farmington? I think it is, yeah. And there's a Swedish club, as you probably heard about. Yes. I didn't join, I do donate a little now and then. I'm not a great joiner. So some people belong to everything. Yeah, I know that. But you are selective. Yes, that's right. And then you have DeVos, of course, and RP Singers. But do they all cooperate when something is going on? Not always. Not always? No, some belong to both, or there's more than one. And I'm one of the, I don't belong to any, but I enjoy them all. When I do go to some of their, yeah. But you are not active? No, not at all. How about in this country club, Norg? I was on the board a couple of years, I guess, but that's all. So they have managed to stick together, haven't they? Yeah, they have. It's been great. It seems to me, though, that the three that came here, despite difficulties and depression, they stayed. They didn't move away to Chicago, for instance, or Cleveland or... Some did, I guess, but most of them were pretty dependent on the auto industry. They worked for it. Because they swallowed thousands and thousands of orders. They sure did, yeah. But it was a tough job, though, to be on the assembly line. It used to be in those days, yes. In the 20s. Oh, yeah, they slaved, those guys. Ten, twelve hours a day. Yes, man, pretty rough going. But they had to stick it out, I suppose. That's right. Then, of course, the unions came in and that sort of... Slowed them down a bit. That's right. And now they are slowing it down too much. Yeah, they probably almost ruined it. So that's pro and con. Yeah, if it ain't one thing, it's the other. Yeah, that's right. In your family, now, your wife, she was of English, French. Yeah. Coming from Pennsylvania. How did your side of the culture of Sweden come in, not your family, your kids? Are they interested in the Swedish background? Yes, they are. Did you coach it in any form? No, in fact, they regret that I never taught them to speak Swedish. I never did. I didn't try to do it. No, because your wife couldn't speak it. No, that's right. But I guess they wish I had taught them some. And my wife was very happy with the club and the friends and so forth. So she fit in very well. How about the holidays and customs? Oh, yeah. Did you have ring and lute fisk? Oh, yes. My wife learned a lot of it from my mother. She never liked lute fisk, but she learned quite a few things. And the kids always, all cookies were a pep by quarter to them. So we still carry on. We still celebrate on Christmas Eve. And it's a sort of a mixture of the two. I see you've got a Swedish flag in there. Oh, yeah. So you can see the background. And we have some of the dollar horse, Hestar, and we have Justakar, you know, Vitajus. Ganska mycke, Rantjär, you know. And one of my cousins came over here and he says, You're more Swedish here than we are at home. And I believe it. They were very modern. Of course, people here stuck to the old ideas, you know. And it's been some kind of a custom to bring home dollar horses. Yeah. Well, that's a big industry. It must be. You have to watch out they're not made in Japan, though. Hong Kong, I understand. Oh, is that right? Yeah, I believe it. Swedish stores now in Detroit, do you remember any Swedish stores? Oh, I used to remember them. I don't know. Were they imported lingonberries and... Yes. Well, Pete Benson is one of them. He used to have a store. And he imported from Sweden? I believe so. I don't know. I was never in his store, but I heard. And there are some, but they... But now in later years it has faded out, more or less. Yeah, I think so, yeah. It's a certain time and then it dies off. Did they go together quite often, your uncles and your parents? Oh, yeah. We used to get together and have parties, you know. Swedes used to get together around Christmas. Did they talk Swedish to one another? Sometimes. It all depends. More for the fun of it than anything else. All tried to be good Americans. Was there stress to be a good American, you think? Well, in those days, immigrants were looked down on. As foreigners? Yeah. Nowadays, people kind of like to bring up their ethnic background and so on. But when you came over, it was a no-no to... Well, yes, it was. You didn't brag about it? No. Because there were so many. You know, the immigration and migration in those days was thousands and thousands. How about the Italians and the Finns and the Danes? Did they suppress the nationality also then? No, they seemed to stick together more. More cliquish? Especially the Polish. When I went to... I told you about an alien class I went to. Well, they were grown-ups, Polish people in that class. They were born in this country. In Hamtramck. I don't know if you've heard of that or not. Perhaps. I've never heard it in English, then. No. Well, it was pretty much the same here in certain areas. Now, like in Chicago, you know, the Belmont Park area. You used to go in the store there and talk English and they'd ask you in Swedish. So they were a community. And there are others like that, I think, in Minnesota. They were like colonies, you might say. But the Swedes were not strong enough to be there? They didn't seem to be here. They were moving... Well... They lived anywhere in the city? Yeah, that's right. As near as I know. Now, there was a little... you might say there was a little community where we went to Island Park there. There were, oh, about seven or eight families within a small area and they used to get together. But the Poles or the Polacks on the other side, they maybe had hundreds of families then. Oh, yes. The whole city, the city of Hamtramck is almost all Polish or was. And there was Polish folk all the time? Yes. How did they fare in the job market? Well, they worked for... The Stanley Line? Yeah, automobile plants. And... And Merkel? That's why she came in. Okay. So, it was important then to go to school and be an Americanist? Yes. In those days, if you finished high school, it was pretty much the same as going to college today. How about the Poles now and Italians? Did they finish high school, most of the... I think so....children? Well, I don't know about those days. I didn't know about that. Did they come around with any or came around with... Oh, yes. Highland Park was all Ford country, you might say. There was a big Ford plant there, employed thousands of people. And they were... it was a melting pot, you might say, all kinds of... Did the Ford people do anything for the neighborhood, helping out? Yes. Well, they contributed. Of course, they were the biggest taxpayer. And Highland Park at the time was an outstanding community. The school system was, oh, the second best in the country. And I went to school with a lot of young people that paid tuition to go there. They came from other parts of the country. From Boston? Well, no, they moved there and lived there, just like when you go to a university or college, you... They had to pay tuition then? Oh, yes. And it was a very clean city. Oh, for instance, during Prohibition, you know, when they... there were no illegal... Speakeasies? Speakeasies and so forth, no. And it was a very clean city, very nice parks and so forth. And it was because of the tax revenues coming in? I believe so, yeah. Were there any Swedes on the city council there that you remember? Not that I remember, no. Who was running it then, more or less, the Pollocks? Irish? You know, I can't tell you. I don't know. Now it's all black. Oh, yes, no. Yeah. But the Irish, now, they must have a preference, because they knew the language immediately. Yes, oh, yeah. The Irish, Scotch, yes. They became the policemen and politicians and... That's right, yeah....and movers, real estate men. That's right. At first, they used to be... to get any place, they used to have to be prize fighters, and then pretty soon the Italians came along and they took over, and then so and so. It was not easy to come in there as a foreigner. No, no. And then, of course, if there was no work, then there was no compensation of any kind like there is today. But they still lived in the same neighborhood, so they didn't move away from there if they lost a job. Yeah, I believe so, yeah. Now, there were a lot of people from the South that came up to work in the auto plants, and when the plants shut down, they'd go back south again. Were they black people then, or...? No, they were hillbillies. Oh, I see. Yeah. From Kentucky and Tennessee? Mm-hmm, that's right. Oh, so there was the higher wages then. Yeah, there was a joke about that. They say that there were only 46 states left in the Union. How was it? Kentucky and Tennessee moved to Michigan, and Michigan went to hell. So there was a standard saying. Yeah. How did they melt in after the Heisenberg, the hillbillies? Oh, they were fine. But they had a different opinion, or...? Yeah, well, they eventually adapted and bought homes and so on. Oh. So how about the Finns? The Finns, well, they kind of stuck together. Were they also living in Highland Park? Oh, there were some, yeah. Because quite a few moved on from Upper Peninsula. Oh, yes. We have quite a few here that came from there. Yes. I don't know if you talked to the Lindbergh gals. Yeah, one of them, yes. The Lindbergh gals, yeah. And Esther, the same way, she came from there and married a couple of Swedes, Lindbergh. Lindbergh's been earthen, huh? Mm-hmm. So there was also problems to get a job up there. Oh, it is still. Yes. It's very poor. My son is up there. He's in counseling and teaching, and he happens to be up at Sumi College up there. In Hancock? Yes. But it's very, very poor up there. Oh. So then Detroit will be a mecca. But how is it now then to attract people to come here? Detroit? Yeah. Well, of course, they try to get the, I mean, the government, the mayor and so forth, they try to get the white people out and the blacks in, and they're doing quite a job. It's all black. So the big part of Detroit then is not white public anymore? No, uh-uh, no. But do they have employment, the black people? Well, it's very poor. How can they afford to have the house? Oh, they... Foreclosures. They can't, most of them, but, oh, there are some that are settled down and so forth, but it's a terrible place, as you know. You're like the Emanuel Church now. It's right in the middle of it. That's what I understand, yeah. I don't get down there very much. I don't care to get there. But it's a completely changed neighborhood. Mm-hmm. Detroit used to be a beautiful place. Nice, nice shopping, a lot of stores, they all moved out. But on the east shores now, St. Clair Shores and Harper's Woods and up around there, there are still beautiful homes, though. Oh, yes. They have not been invaded. Well, Detroit has some beautiful homes, you know, around Boston Boulevard, around that area, do you know it? Well, some of those are made into apartments now. Several families living in some of those, and it's all gone to pot. Where do they move, then, the wealthy families on the east coast? Oh, they went to... To the suburbs. To the suburbs, yeah. Birmingham, Bloomfield Hills, the ones that had the money. Royal Oak. It's not as fancy as Birmingham or Bloomfield. Oh, it's a nice town, yeah. Yeah, we lived there for 30-some years. Had a nice home. And talking about Bloomfield Hills, there were, you had Miller, Carl Miller, I mean, statues. Yeah, oh, yes. Do you remember, well, you were too young then to remember him when he was here. Yeah, I heard of him and saw some of his art. But, well, actually, I wasn't that Swedish in those days. I went to school with everybody else, and I played with the other kids, and I worked. I worked since I was, oh, I don't know, 14, I guess. You had to whip yourself into it. That's right. I worked nights in drugstores and soda fountains and things like that. Did you work for any Swedes? No, no, never did. So. So, looking over in the valley, there's the bachelor's quarters. Yes. And there was quite a bit, a downtown. Yeah, oh, yeah, they had an upstairs, you know, there was room for beds and so forth. And there was only bachelor's students in the house. I suppose you talked to Bredenburg? Yes, he lived there. Yeah, well, he was one of the first ones. He's a charter member here. Yes. I think he's the only one around, too. Yes, I believe so. There's Mrs. Nelson, Ebba Nelson. Her husband was a charter member. He was president for many years up here. And there they had the parties. Oh, yeah. They had parties together with the rest of them in the period. Oh, yes. Oh, sure, but they had their own parties down there, too. They started out there and went up there. Right. Ended up there. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah, I'm sort of sorry I missed that. You never went down there? No, I didn't. I wasn't out there that much. Once in a great while I'd come out. It seems to me that they picked the site too far away from Detroit. It wasn't a heck of a way. Well, it isn't that bad, really, now especially. It's only an hour away. But I mean, those times when the... Well, you know how far Pontiac is. It used to be gravel road from Pontiac out here. For a long time? Yeah. So Pontiac, that was the end of the world. That's right. And it was out in the boonies. Uh-huh. But here, well, they bought 360 acres. Mm-hmm. It is a nice place. All our friends that come out, they aren't Swedish. They wish they could be. Well, there's beautiful oak trees of the old-timers. Yeah. The only thing about them is an awful job in the fall. With all the leaves. Yeah. It's getting old too much for me. A lot of leaves, but you also got some spruce and emigres. I think they were planted, yeah. Mm-hmm. The sweet ones, the spruce. And how about the mosquitoes? They're pretty bad. Yeah, but how did they, nowadays you can fight them off, but in those days there was no way to get rid of them. No, not really. For a long time there, they used to have the place sprayed with DDT. You remember that? It was after the war then. Yeah. But then, of course, we can't use that anymore. So, well, it's up to the individual now. But before the First World War, it was only the mosquitoes in the upper hand. Yeah, right. Right.