 This is cassette three, this is side one, continuation with Ina Beckstrom, Omana Bereska, cassette three, side one. So now I think that's what we were talking about. I see, what were we talking about? What were we talking about the, about the, I was just telling you about burning of all of the... Yes. Coffee. And I asked the question before, I don't think... About coffee, I think you said. Yeah, when did they start to serve there, the cafeteria style? We've had coffee since the beginning of time. When I first came into nurses training, we ate our meals family style. They were served family style. There was no cafeterias like it is now. Nothing for the public? Oh no, no, no. If they come to visit them? No, no, no, no, no. We had it in the basement of the old, of the old building and the only ones that ate there were the doctors if they wanted to and the nurses. No, nothing for the patients, for the family. And how often could they visit a sick person? They had a set time in those days. There was no such thing as going in like it was like from one to three and from seven to eight thirty or something in the evening. And then of course they were here during surgery in the morning, but there was no coming and going in the daytime, absolutely not. They had a set time, right? Nowadays in many hospitals they like the people coming in because they watch the patient. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There was not... No, no. In those days they put the patient out, you know, they gave him an anesthetic and they were out for like I said five hours. And we did not have a recovery like we do now, so they brought the patient back to the room so the nurse that was in charge of that patient had to sit for five hours until that patient responded. Five hours? If they had what was called at that time Averton or Averton, I don't know how you pronounce it today, I don't even know if they have it. If they had Averton, they came back for five hours we would sit there and wait for them to... And hopefully and prayerfully they'd come too, you know, and if they would throw up in the meantime. But somebody had to sit there and take their pulse the whole time. And we were so grateful when the day came that they had a recovery and they all went there instead. Sure, nice. And it was a common thing that they were throwing up then after that? Oh, of course. Oh, everybody. Because they had to clean the system. Sure, yeah. And they felt probably worse after the operation? Oh, it's like when they talk about it now, they say about, oh they couldn't stand if anybody's throwing up, I would say, just think of all the times that I've been thrown up on, you know. No, you get used to it. So this very seldom happens now, is it? No, not very often anymore. And you see the patients are not out that long anymore and they have better anesthetics where they almost are awake before they even leave the operating room. It's very nice, very nice. There have been a lot of improvements. Oh my, I should say. There was one thing that they also fabricated there, there was communion wafers. They made them here. Who made them here? Yes, and you know what was so strange, you see here was a deaconess home now and I had my classes up there and then in the basement of that deaconess home, there she stood and made those communion wafers and sold them to all the churches. Right, those little communion wafers. Isn't that something? They had a special oven then, or? Oh yes, that baked those. Like a baking iron? Yes, yes. Press, like a press. Uh-huh. And you know, thinking about making the communion wafers, we had another sister, I wish I could think of her darling lady, what her name was. She had on the bottom floor of the old people's home at that time, she had all those looms and they would make rugs. So all the people from the old people's home and from the invalid home, they would come and she would teach them how to make rugs. So there was some kind of a therapy going on there? Uh-huh, and she ran that for years. I remember that, how darling she was. Then they built the bloom hall, you know, so that everybody and anybody could use that for a gym. It was in 1937, the bloom hall was built. Is that right, in 37? It was the 50th anniversary. Oh, I was in nurses training at the time, uh-huh. And he was a big businessman here in... Yes, Alfred Bloom, darling man, lovely people. What you call, hair-equipment, or was it clothing business? Alfred Bloom was in woodwork. The clothing people was Swanson. That was the way it was, yeah. Uh-huh. So he was well-to-do then, this Bloom then? Oh yes, yes. There were quite a few rich people this week here. I wish I wasn't going to be on this here. I wish I could tell you something, because you see, well, it doesn't matter. Nobody's going to... You're not going to have this shown all over the world, so they'll come back to Omaha. But when... Blooms were very, very nice to foreigners. And so in the olden days, he started that business down there on 11th Street or wherever it was. And all of the foreigners, I remember that men that came over here, lots of them with no experience of any kind now, no training of any kind, would come over to leave the conscription over there. They came to work for him. And they came to work for very little money, very little. And they would work so long for him until they would realize that the knowledge they had on woodworking could go and get more money someplace else. So he stayed, however, he was there until he died. Then he left the business to his two sons. And of course, now they're gone, broke. Well, it happens so often, don't you know? I'm sorry. The second generation, or in other words, the next generation... Spent all the money, everything went, yeah. Isn't that a shame? Darling man. He was a precious man, and his wife was a darling lady. And they had these two boys. And that's who he got the business after. But he did his thing in his time. Let's put it that way. He really did. We have a very dear friend that started working for him. And when he first came to Omaha from some Swedish town out here, I can't remember the name of it now. Malmö, or something. I can't remember. And he went to work for him. But before too long, then he went to work for another company so he would make more money. But that was the thing. People had some place to go. Early here in the 1900s, 1904, 1905, they brought some nurses over from Sweden. The motherhouse in Stockholm. It was long before the motherhouse. Yeah, the motherhouse. Before... It was called the Diakonis. The beginning of... I bet they started. But didn't they go to Chicago? Didn't they go to... Philadelphia. Philadelphia. Yes, but they took some from Sweden to stay for a few years. Yes, that's all. And they went back to Sweden, but that was long before your time. Oh, that was before my time. How about during your time? Did you receive any Swedish doctors on the visiting status here to serve at the hospital? Not that I remember. Not that I remember. Did we ever have... Because if there were any that ever came, they always would call on me anyway to talk to them. You can't remember that. No, I cannot remember. I would remember, because I remember more then than I do now. But I can... Were there any Swedish doctors, descendant doctors on here? So, you had some... No, no, I talked the other day now. This is last year now. A Swedish doctor came from Sweden. He's working at the university hospital now. Johansson. His name is... He's so precious. He's working here. He married one of our black RNs, went over there, and they met, and they got married, and they have four children, three children by themselves, and they are back here, and he's going to stay here. He likes it here. So he came as a student then? No, he was already a medical. He is in pathology. So he is doing his research or something in pathology last year or two years ago, but he is now applied for citizenship over here. Darling, darling man. And so I can't remember any that ever came when I was young. Oh? Huh? Did you have any exchange with Denver, the Swedish hospital in Denver? No, not to my knowledge, not to my... That I can ever remember, no, no. You know, we had our own Deaconess Hospital here, the Deaconess Institute here, and then when they disappeared, then we had more to do, of course everything went back to Philadelphia, but then they have that one in Minneapolis, you see. So a lot of our sisters have gone to Minneapolis. Because we go and see them, Sister Irene is there, and Sister Grace, and yeah, a lot of them. At that time, when they left the Deaconesshood at that time, they could go to their own home if they wanted to. So I remember that one Deaconess, she went home to take care of our mother. So they all more or less did what... How were they able to take care of themselves now, because they didn't have any pensions or anything like that? No, but do you know, they must have had something though, because Sister Ingeborg now gets a pension, but that's because it's today. But she's been working in the later years though. Yeah, that's right, see, she worked all those years. But and Sister Olive, you see, she, when she left here, she went to Wisconsin and ran an old people's home there, and she worked there until she died. So I'm sure that she had made money, but the rest of them, I bet they just went, you know, to be taken... They served their time. They served their time, yeah. Worked all their life. Yeah, yeah, darling people. They ran everything here in my day, you see, there was a Deaconess on every floor, Deaconesses ran every department, one in x-ray, one in lab, one in the dietary department, every department had a Deaconess. You had also a display up there with six or seven dolls. Oh yeah, that's how they have all been dressed, how the Emmanuel nurses were dressed over the years. Right. So the Deaconess, she was, you could see her right away when she came on the floor then. Oh yeah, oh my, yes, she was dressed different, and she had a funny hat on, you know, long hair on, and her dress was always to the floor, where ours got shorter. Always to the floor. Ours got shorter and shorter, however, when I came in training, they were way down like they are today, and then by the time we were through, they were way up by the knees. Oh, I remember when I was walking down the hall one day, I know, Sister Oliver used to drive her nuts, we were not allowed to have our, the rule was that when we put the belt around our uniform, we all had the same uniform, all of the students, you know, so when we put our belt on, we had to put our hand in there so that it wouldn't be too tight. Well, you know, how many of us were going to do that and walk down the hall, we had these itsy-bitsy waistlines at that time, you know, so we would pull them real tight and we would just be real neat looking, you know, and I'm sure that every girl that was here was out looking for a guy at the time, like she is today, but I can't remember because I never cared. But anyway, Sister Oliver came up one day and put her hand in there and she couldn't get her hand inside, so I had to take my whole thing apart and move the button and move everything over because she was standing there, I couldn't have it as tight. So you were not supposed to please the surroundings? Oh, absolutely not. No lipstick? No, and we didn't, and we didn't either, let me tell you, nobody ever made advances at the nurses in those days because we really looked crummy. Yeah, but did it make any difference, though, if you had, you know, the sick people out there, they needed encouragement. Oh, I know it, I know it, but, you know, it was a different time, you know, I remember taking care of this lady who had a whole stack of books, what we would say to her, dirty books standing there, they were love stories, and you know, in those days, you don't, that was not, that was unheard of, so I said to her, my gosh, I said, are you, I was always very outspoken, as you realize, are you, did you read, do you read all these terrible books? I said to her, you know what she answered me, no, I write them, and I almost died, of course, you know. But she was one of the patients? One of the patients, uh-huh, she was writing dirty books, and she had written all of those books, and she was a writer, do you know somebody else that we had there at the time, and I will never forget when she came, she was from New York, and she worked for a company that made a solution, or a cream, I wish I could remember the name of it now, I don't think you can buy it anymore, that covered birthmarks, okay, and she came to have an operation, and I remember she was put on second floor there, and we had at that time a young man around there, the son of an engineer, and he had a birthmark on his face, so he came up and she covered it up, and I never will forget how embarrassed he was, because he didn't like it, he was used to his birthmark, he was probably 21 at the time, 19, and he ran home and took the birth, the stuff off. We've had lots of fun people here in my day. And they also stayed for so long, so you got to know them. Yes, oh right. And you know what, in those days, in those days they gave us presents, so when they went home, if they liked you, oh my goodness, yes, and they would give us, I had so much cologne on my dresser, that we always used to share our cologne, they would give us cologne each time, they would go, that was a big thing in those days, just the beginning of 4711, I remember that was the first cologne, I just dearly loved that 4711, I haven't had it since, but they would give us all this stuff, yeah, isn't that something, and we were just talking about that day, when a patient would come in and they would get all these flowers, so the flowers would be brought into the room, and in the evening, we would, our rule was to carry all the flowers out, because it wasn't good for the patient, because the flowers would eat up the oxygen, well it's the reverse of what it is today, you know, flowers make, and then in the morning when we'd come to work at 7 o'clock, the first thing we had to do was to drag all the flowers back in again, but we took them out every night, now wasn't that a dumb thing, but you see, that even has changed, yeah, but now they have the allergy problems, you know, some can, oh yeah, but that would depend, that's right, that's right, that's right, but there is no law against any flowers now, oh no, they can bring flowers, anything you want, the only place you can't have it now is in intensive care, but that would stand to reason, yeah, no, no, you can have it, but nowadays then they leave after a few hours operation and then go home, there's no feeling between the nerves, no, no, no, no, so you could actually get attached to a person, very, yes, if they were nice, right, I remember this one lady that came in and she was a wealthy lady here in town and she didn't like our food, so she had it brought in from what used to be the Blackstone Hotel here, and it was like, what did they call it, duck, whatever you call it, pheasant under glass, well, one day the food was brought in, it was pheasant under glass and I had never had it, you know, none of us would we know about pheasant under glass, we couldn't afford anything, and she was throwing up in there, she was so sick she couldn't eat it, so she says as she was throwing up, you can eat it, we went out there and a whole bunch of us shared this food because it was the most excellent pheasant under glass, you know, but she had her food brought in every day because she didn't like what we were serving, so you served the whole community? Oh yeah, we served everybody, yes. How were the Swedes now that came in, were they different than the Americans, Italians, French people? Well, you know, the Swedes really have hung close together, you know that, all the Swedes came here, we very seldom had anybody else come, I can hardly remember, there was an Indian girl that came into nurses training, the year before I came into training, she was an Indian, and that's the only girl I can think of that was not of a Swedish, Norwegian, or Danish descent, and then all of a sudden, that's not very many years, you know, there was never a black one while I was in training, and in fact I cannot remember having a black, a Negro nurse in our bunch, ever, in our training. But the patients now, they came in, you know? Oh yeah, oh I should say, I should say. How were the Swedes differing from the other people? From other? Yeah, from Polish, Italians, and Germans? Well, I feel, of course, I felt, always felt that... Did they complain more, for instance, or? Well, I remember getting Jewish patients, how awful it was, because the Jewish patients, if I remember at that time, I don't know how they are now, but I'm sure they're the same way, had very low threshold and they would lie there and go, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, ay, oh, very much more so, where Swedish patients, and if I remember right and everything, and Norwegian and Danish, have a very high threshold, and you know, we see that to this day, where they don't complain, never, never, it's demanding. I'll tell you who were demanding, though. We have one Swedish lady that came over here, and she came over, I'm not going to tell you who she was, because I'm afraid they had so much money, and anyway, she came over, and when she came here, she didn't know anything, she had no education, no nothing, she went to work cleaning somebody's houses all the time, then she married a man here in Omaha, who was also a Swede, I should tell you who they were, because that's the owner of, it used to be the Outer Swansons, you see, of Swansons, no, they owned a department store, the big department store, clothing store, nice people, what went on, but the old lady came over here, then she married him, and she was a patient here at one time, and I kid you not now, I walked in to answer her light, and she did not like, evidently, what was on her tray, and I kid you not now, she threw the food at me as I walked in that door, so instead of saying, now there was only Swedes that I can remember that was really a jerk, she threw that food at me, funny she didn't kill me, but it must have been something icky, I don't remember, and she said, you take this, I'll take it down, and I cannot remember ever, she would come in here now and then, and then they would all say, you know, go in there and answer her light, because you remember her, she threw something at you, but she finally died, but she had, and then they had some children, you know, and everything, they grew up here, and then of course Otto died, I'll never forget when Otto Swanson, nice man, you know, he got the department store, and he became the king of Exarben here, which was an honor, you see, to become the king of Exarben here, and everybody was really proud to think that, yeah, right, and he became, but they used to have a king and queen, they would crown a king and a queen every year up until last year or two years ago, they couldn't afford it anymore, it cost so much money, such involvement, and you know, it's gotten away from that, people don't want to do that crap anymore, but anyway, so, but he was the king, and he even made the time, the life magazine at the time, and then he had two or three children, and then one of his grandchildren is a preacher in Stockholm, they went back to name him Liljen Stolpe, so John Liljen Stolpe is a preacher in, they were telling in Stockholm, I think, I did not look him up. Were they of nobility then? Yes, the Liljen Stolpes were, so Otto, who became the king, was married Christine Swanson, of course, so Christine was the old Mr. and Mrs. Swanson's daughter, and she fell in love with John, with Otto Liljen Stolpe, and she, of course, did not want him to keep the name Liljen Stolpe when he took over the name Swanson for the big department store, so he changed his name to Swanson, but their one son, the grandson of Otto, took the name back of Liljen Stolpe, and he's a darling man, but I didn't look him up when we were there last year, but I will bet you that if I had been able to see all those hundreds of people in Uppsala, he maybe would have been one of them. So he's a Lutheran minister now? Uh-huh. In a Swedish church? In some Swedish church, uh-huh, he stayed there, he went over there and stayed there. Neat. So we've had some neat Swedish people here in town. You have met a lot of them over the years? Oh, of course. Both relation and non-relation. Oh, right, right. And you have observed things over the years. Oh, my, yes. I'll tell you one thing about the Swedes, though. They are square, a lot of them are square. Why in the world won't they grow? I learned when I was in nurses training, when I was in nursing, when I got my job as to work for Sheila Ekström to be in in-service education. I was the first one hired in in-service education after she became the director. And she said to me, there's only one thing, Ina, that you've got to learn. You cannot say, I like it the way it was. You cannot, and as you are teaching new things, new things, new things, new things, you can't say, I liked it better the way it was in 1937. Who would want to have an outhouse all your life, you know? And it's just so dumb. So, but here sits the people in our church, for instance, saying they don't want it to be changed. They don't want the new music in the church. They don't want these new hymns brought in. They don't want plastic glasses at communion. They want the glass glasses. Now, isn't this dumb? And but they, for some, and I know them all, let me tell you. And it is very, very difficult to keep your mouth closed. So and I don't, I speak up too much, maybe. But my husband says, as long as you're right, you can speak up. So I speak up. So the husband you marry now, or the man you married, he is compatible to you in that belief that you got to renew yourself and be up to date? Absolutely. Oh yes. Oh yes. But some of the old Swedes, they were squareheads. Oh boy. Uh-huh. They're not going to change. But Gunnar now, you know, is a very, very nice man. Ted is on some committee with him. And Ted will say when he comes home from this committee meeting, he'll say, every time I'm with him, I admire so many things about him, the way he feels about things. He is so different from the square Swedes that we have, even his own relation. But the first generation that came over here now, the next generation, they changed with the kids. They went to college and high school. Right. That was their main goal in life. Yeah. Because I didn't get an education, my daughter is going to, my son is going to. That's all you would hear. Uh-huh. What do you see, and I'm going back to old things. You mentioned before that the first department you moved into, there was mice and there were mice and everything. Oh, I know it. Right. And that had to do with the washing machine. Oh, right. Your kids never had this now? No. You funny man. How do you see it? I mean, when they start to complain about things, do you tell them that? It burns me up. Sure. And I tell them. Yes. And in my day, when the children were growing up, they knew, though, that my oldest daughter, she went through, when Ted was going through law school, you see, so she had a harder time than my second child, because when she, by the time that she was grown, we sent her to Gustavus, you know, and we had plenty of money, but, so Teddy will remember, Debbie doesn't remember anything of the hardships of anything, but I will say, of course, to this day, she'll say, Mama, why don't you get a dishwasher? I don't want a dishwasher. I've got one. Ted will do all sorts of dishes for me. And we're just two of us. Why have a dishwasher and run all that water? So it's funny how you still think about wasting all that water on a dishwasher, that they both have dishwashers and you name it, everything. You got to have the same. Yeah. Do you think, well, I would probably agree with that, that it's very beneficial when children can grow up with their grandparents. Yeah. You never had a chance, though. No. So you had to fend for yourself. Right. And I also remember you earlier, you said that your daughter remarked about you care more about her children than you care about her. Right, right. So there's a very important factor that grandparents play in. Right. Well, it's just that, you see, I was working all the time, you see. When Teddy was growing up, I had no time. And then, but then, you know, in those days, we didn't have TV. We had the radio. Then finally, in whatever year it was, when it must have been about 53 or 54, we got our first television, and then things started to change from then on. But, you know, you had to make your own fun, and we went out together in our families, but more so than now, everybody scatters. So when you see your grandchildren, are you still influenced by old-fashioned values? I certainly do. I do. And they love to listen. You know what one of them said the other day? They bought me a book. It's a darling book about so thick. And they said, Grandma, we want you to write everything about you from the time you were born and all that, because they can't see how anybody could leave their mama and their papa in Berrien and go on this big ship and wave goodbye, and I was only 12 years old. So they wonder about that. They wonder about that. How could you do that, Grandma? You know? And, yeah. It's hard to explain though, many times. I know. How do you do it? I don't know how I... But they are willing to listen. They're willing to listen, and they want, oh, yes. And they will say, when they were littler, they used to say, tell us, Grandma, how it was on the boat. Tell us how you were sick. Tell us how they used to water. They used to have all their things, their seats, and then they would come with a watering sprinkling can, and after they put... It's a scream, you know, because we've been overseas since in that plains, and they don't do anything. But they would water the tablecloth so that our plates wouldn't move on there. And I think about that, and that's why probably... The plate probably moved. That's why I was throwing up all the time. So your daughter would never have time to this because she's working full time. She could never have time to sit and talk with her children like you do. My daughter? Oh, no. Because you have the time to it. Oh, yeah. But except my two daughters, neither one of them work full time. Oh, they're all full time. No, no, no, no. My oldest daughter, when she started to have her first child, she quit teaching, and my younger daughter, only nurses, goes to work when her husband can take care of the children. So it's very nice. But they don't talk about the hardships. No, no. They don't want to hear it. In fact, Teddy will say to me, I don't want to hear how it was, Mama. It was so terrible, you know, and everything. But the grandchildren love to listen. Did I tell you about this one grandchild? We went, we had him in a car, and they've all got these lovely lawn mowers and everything, you know. So here we went by someplace, way out north, where they were going along, mowing the lawn with an old lawn mower, and my grandchild said, Grandpa, why don't we get a lawn mower like that? You don't have to fill it with anything or anything. Nice and that's goofy from the... So you can see the benefits. Benefits, sure. And also exercise. Yes. And that's not so dumb, I guess. No. The interview continues next site. Next site. November 1987. End of interview. This is cassette three, side two, continuation with Arnold Breskin. Omar Breskin. Thank you. This is cassette three, side two, continuation with Einar Baxstrand, Omar and Veska. This is three, side two. In the 1950s, there were two operating bays at the, do you remember how many there were? Like, what do you mean? The operating bays where they operated on people. Oh, yeah, two rooms, that's right, that's all. And one was for delivering opiates. So they're together with that? No, that was on the other floor. That was on the OB floor. That was the separate room. So they did not do that together. The only thing that was brought upstairs then were the cesarean sections. And they were done upstairs in surgery. Then they had a separate room, a small room for E and T, ears, nose, throat, that type thing too. So there was a small operating room for E, E, and T, we called it, you know. And when you came in contact with it in the 1940s, it was about the same size then? Yeah, we had that same thing until we moved here 12 years ago, 11 years ago. Were you able to facilitate people then? Oh, yeah, I think so, because we were not that great, we're not that big, you see. When we moved here, now here we have so many more patients and what have you, we're up to 600 and some here now. And there we had a small area. And I think, yes, it was adequate, let's say. The reason that we left there, because it was old, you know, of course, and the pipes were beginning to, they couldn't accommodate what they were doing, so so much would have had to be done to redo the place that it would cost so much money. It cost a lot of commotion around here, because you see, we were in a poor area. And they needed us, they felt. So they really fought a lot to keep us there. But you can't explain to people, they don't realize all the things that you would go through in order to keep it. Because we had all those buildings, you see, and they were all, for instance, working on the, thinking about the sewer system, for instance, and the water system. And it couldn't be done. The maintenance was hard. The maintenance was too, it would have to be all done over. So we had to do something. It was beyond repair. Yeah, right. But the people now in that area, they were predominantly Swedish in the 20s and 30s. Right, but now they're not. When did you leave Auckland? Well, let me think now. I see the 30s, I came in 30s. And I would say, 30s, 40s, and they started leaving there in the 40s, early 50s. Oh yeah, because now it's predominantly black. But they were also encroaching at that time. Oh yeah, or coming little by little. Oh yes, yes. But, you know, it is really funny when I think about it though. When I was young and came here, how many Swedes there really were in our church. You know, our church, when I came here, was the Old Emmanuel Church down on 19th and Cass. And then they merged with Zion Lutheran Church on 36th and Lafayette. And that was probably in about, let's see, 1945. I can't remember, I think it's 1940 or something like that, because Ted and I were married in Zion, and which was then the Augustana Church. And then we were there for a few years, and then we moved across the street to 38th and Lafayette, you see, and built that new building there. But when I look back, when I think about it, just think how many, all of a sudden, there were no Swedes that came over here anymore. So seldom did they come up to me, or even now, never, come up to me and say, oh, Ina, we have a Swedish friend here, would you come and talk to her? Would you say something? I'll bet you that was, in 1950s, that ended. When I, you know, in here with all the patients and everything, you know, it just got less and less and less that I was called. Now, the other day, they called me to the old people's home to see if I would go over there to, and then I was put on the roster, whatever you call it here, as I was the one that translated and would take letters, write letters or whatever, for Swedes and Norwegians, and which I have done all these years, and I still get calls. My husband said the other day, you ought to charge, from now on, you should charge everybody. But I've gotta go over there and translate a letter, and then that one man wants me to write a letter, and that's not so bad, as long as they don't write the letter first, and I have to translate from Swedish to English, if they have written it. That's hard for me, for some reason, but otherwise, I do fine still. So when you were working in there, you said 12 years ago, they were still down there, or 15 years ago, you said. How was the area to work in then? Were you afraid to go there? Yeah, it got to the point, it got to the point now where the doctors were not happy to come at night. It was hard for the nurses to come when you were on call, because it became, yeah. So they was not attractive, and to bring in new staff, for instance? No, no. It got to be to the point where everybody was afraid, and we were not getting any new doctors coming, and that's who you depend on. That's why they have to take care. How about money now coming in, because they've been existing in a lot of donations, and don't want to take it. Oh, fine, fine. How about the Swanson outfit, you know, remember that, with the chicken dinners and all that? Did they give a lot of money? At one time. Were they reluctant to give any later years? Oh, they said that they would rather, and it became that way all over, that they would rather that we get out of there. It got to be less and less and less help. They were afraid of the event. Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. And you know, then the big argument was that the poor people were so far from us here, and they timed that, and it was just a very short, like 10 minutes, not even that. Or for emergency. From emergency room. But for, oh, for let's say, one, two, maybe three years, we did keep an emergency room open over there. But you know, the people came here anyway. It was only 10 minutes away. Oh, yeah, from the other hospital. And they were not satisfied to move it up there. They wanted us to stay there. But you see, they didn't. You know, then they gave the church or the hospital, or whatever you may call it, the Lutheran Church of America, gave the hospital for $1, I think, or something, to an organization that was supposed to work for the poor there. And they went broke in a short time, so that things stood there empty. And so finally they had to just get rid of it, because everybody was just destroying it. So there are no facilities left? No, the only thing left there now is the chapel, if you can imagine, that beautiful little chapel. And it was just now bought by a black man, and he is refurbishing it, and bought a lot of terracotta. I think 12 acres he's already bought, or something like that. And then they're gonna use for parking. And they're finishing up, fixing up that little darling chapel up there for their congregation. Isn't that cute? So it's entirely black up there now. And then the new nurse's home, they kept that. And then that is now for the alcoholics, for the day timers that come and go. Otherwise everything is gone. Many of the old ones over the years have been very clean. Were you able to do that? Well, we worked our tail off, sure, yes, absolutely. It was hard. And then as time went on, we never ever were, that we did not pass the rules and what have you of the state, no. It was very nice. Did you stick up against the Falcion and the Berger family? Well, we stayed pretty much the same. But when you see, when we stayed there, they went ahead, and they moved, they built beautiful buildings and everything. So we really needed to move. Well, in order to get the doctors to come, that's all there is to it. Because the doctors were getting to the point where they were afraid to come at night. And you really can't blame them, because there's your car sitting there while they were in there. And there were a lot of stuff going on. And there was no security. Well, yes, but not that great. Not that much that we, no, they couldn't be everywhere. That's right. How about the, there was a doctor, Guggen. Guggen, sure, darling man. Obgyn. Oh, O-B-G-Y-N, yes, yes, precious man. He's still alive, you know. He is? Yes, his wife just... He had a lot of babies, like wealthy people. Oh, yeah, he, yeah. Wasn't he recognized to be the... The... The world of Omaha. Oh, yeah, the big Omaha. If you had the baby delivered by him, you were... You were really, oh, yes. Why was it like that? Well, if you, of course, you're not as old as I am, so you wouldn't realize it. But in my, when I was young, that status symbol was something else. And, you know, that is all gone. As long as you don't give this to anybody, I'm gonna tell you. In our church, Otto Swanson was the big operator, okay? Real nice man, you know. And his wife, very nice and everything. And they had the daughter, Mrs., she runs the poppy shop here, Mrs. Anderson now, Ellen Lee. It was a scream how they operated. And I could see it as a child and as I grew up. When he walked in that church of ours, boy, he walked like this, and all this old Swedes thought, boy, he is wonderful, you know. And what a neat man, because they all sort of kowtowed to him. And all the people with money. Okay, so then, when we were living in that Zion church, then we want, it was getting so terrible, so they wanted to build someplace. So we went here and there and there and looked for all these places to build. And Mr. Otto Swanson decided, he owned a little piece of property on that corner of 38th and Lafayette, and he wanted our church to be there. They looked at that property, and it was terrible. It needed so much work, because it was stuck on a, not a river, but a stream of some kind. So they had to, you wouldn't know how much money they had put into that before we moved in there to get the foundation in because of the water. Along with his thing. Oh my, yes. They will say to this day, we should never have listened to him. But you see, if that had been today, that would never have been. Things have changed. But those old Swedes, I'm telling you, they all, ah, ah, yeah. But how about this Dr. McCracken? Why did he settle there at the manor? He could have been at the- Well, okay, Dr. McGugan came from, I think he came from Canada when he was a young man. I can remember so plain when he came. And he went to work with Dr. Pollard. And Dr. Pollard was the big OB man at the time. Because at that time, we were pretty good there, you see. We had all the Swedes in the world that came to Old Emmanuel, you know. And they all came there, and we were a neat hospital. All the Swedes and all the Jewish people. We had so many Jewish people that came there. Because they had those doctors, I assume. And I think so. I felt, I always felt so. I know when I wanted to go to nurses training, I preferred to come here. We had the deaconesses, you know. Really neat. They just watched us like you wouldn't believe, you know, about everything and everything. And they ran everything until they were no longer deaconess, that much of an influx of women that wanted to be deaconesses. But, so, and McGugan came to Pollard, you see. That's how it started. And Pollard was our big OB man. And then when McGugan came, he came to work with him. And as time went on, Pollard got older and older, and then McGugan took over. And then little by little by little, he built his own staff over there. Until now, I don't know if there is even one man over in that office that comes over here anymore. They have all gone to Clarksville Methodist because their new office is over there. And they don't want to fool us. And I don't blame them. Did you ever? I mean, I know you. I mean, I've worked. It is funny, I think there are 12 men on this, on his staff there, before he retired. And, because I remember when that now Dr. Sundell is the top man right now, I think. And when he delivered my oldest daughter's first child, I saw him in the hall and I said, I want my grandchild to be delivered here because I want to be around. And he said, okay. He said, I knew him quite well. Okay, I'll deliver him. So when my daughter then got pregnant again with her second child, he sent a message to me saying, tell your mother, I don't want to deliver your baby at the Emmanuel anymore. It's going to be at Methodist. So, and then he said, did you tell your mama she's going to Methodist? And so they quit and then that child is now 11 years old. So they really couldn't come here because it's so far away. So really, most of our babies here are delivered by general practitioners. But we have a few OB men, of course. So there is no special doctor that we saw him on a sphinx or a congenital? Really, no. Not, no, not as like it used to be. Oh, isn't it funny how that used to be? No. So I understand that he also had a private nurse, Mrs. Thingam? Yes, yes. She went around? Oh my, yes, I just remembered, yes, of course. She went and special, her, his expensive patient. Special service. Oh yes, yes. Went home with them. She went home with them. They stayed in the home? Oh yes, oh yes, in their lovely homes, yes. They had plenty of power, huh? Oh yes. Because everything in comparison was high at that time. You know what I mean, $5 was a lot of money in those days compared to now, you know. But no average person? No, only the rich had her. Everybody called her Miss Thing. Was she a regular nurse at the hospital? Uh-huh, well she was an RN, but she just became his, whatever, yes, nurse, uh-huh. That went everywhere with his patients. And you know, just think, in those days, the patients stayed in the hospital a long time. Like when I had my caesarean, I was in for 12 days. And now, they do it and practically send you home the next day or two days later. And then you have to go home and worry about, terrible. But things have changed a lot. And then the same thing with anything. You know, that the patients come in here for minor surgery, go to ER, and get it done in emergency, and get it done, and they go home right away. Or they stay for four days for major surgery here, and then they have to go home. Because, well, medicine has gone so far. Just think of it, in these 50 years. That is just unbelievable. But they still think, though, that it was too far away to move the hospital up here. Uh-huh. It was only 10, 15 minutes in the emergency room. Yeah, right, right. Isn't it strange, though? That's strange. But you know, in the meantime, however, this is a lovely area here, you see. In the meantime, now, they also are moving around here. So we have many blacks around here, also, coming up this way. And they are probably the richer of the blacks, because they are able to buy the lovely homes around here. But I tell you, we have so many pluses for this area that I can go on, and on, and on. We bought all this territory. We, I'm saying, you know, all this territory. So consequently, we can grow. We can build. We can expand. We can do almost anything, which we have done. Just think of all the things that we have done here, you know, where the other hospitals are not able to do it. They cannot, because they are so enclosed in their area that there is no way. The only way that they, Clarkson or Methodist, can expand is to go out to, what do you call it, another hospital, you know what I mean? Or a- Lenox. Yeah, something, someplace else. Or they have to move the whole thing. Or move the whole thing. Like the worry with Clarkson, of course, would be, you know, that if they would have to move, they would probably build a new hospital someplace and leave that for the Lutheran University. But, you know, so we are really in a neat place. And so we built the alcoholics, and the old people's home, and a village, and expanded like everything. Very nice. You know, today, of course, you have a lot of assistance from the various organizations, so there's more money coming in. Yeah. But how were they doing the credit? Oh, no. Were they able to get credit for the hospitalization? Oh yeah, oh yeah. Because there was no hospitalization like we had. No, not like it was, no, no. But we know- They still operated on the people. Oh yes, we did so much charity, you wouldn't believe it. We are a very church organization. So nobody was turned away. Never. Regardless of how the creed was. No, no. And I know for a fact about the other hospitals here, how they have turned away their patients. But I'll tell you one hospital that never does, that is just as neat as ours in that respect, is St. Joe. Of course, now that was taken over by a California outfit. It's a private company. Uh-huh, it's by like a, I can't remember, like HMO and that type thing. So it's run by a California bunch, because they were so in debt. But they do so much good in this town, that St. Joe's Hospital. You know, I work with the Indian Chicanos, you know. And we take referrals, give referrals to the Indian Chicano Center, from the Indian Chicano Center, to the St. Joseph's Hospital, and Nebraska Medical Center. And they just work like everything for the poor here in this town. So when I was a student, and even after I became an RN, then we would dismiss a patient, then we would have to wash the hairy socks again. Well, that's okay, it's part of it. It's part of it. And then we would have to start to wash it. So we washed the beds and the- The whole mattress. And then we would take the mattress and carry it out to the sun. Two of you? Uh-huh, two of us. And then we'd have to carry it back when we got the bed washed. And it was off in the sunlight then, when you were washing? Oh yes, out in the sunlight. And we had to do that to every bed, all the time, until the point when they got more antiseptics and whatever you may call it, so that they wouldn't have to do it. Then, all of a sudden, they got the covers. So then we removed the covers. So that was the next step then, which was very nice. And then we'd throw them in the water. How did you feel when you come home at night to work on- We were tired. We have a lot of work, but we were used to a lot of work. There was no question about it. That's the way it's supposed to be. And the teachers were in the charge. Oh, yes, yes, yes. I was just telling them how, when we were students, how I would, we never could fix our hair, we never could put lipstick on or anything. I think, I don't know if I told you that or not. And how she would come and put her finger or her hand inside us. So they really kept track of us. I'll tell you. Yeah. How about the doctors now? Did they have a stake in the profit? I mean, did they own the equipment or anything like that? Well, oh yeah, lots of- I was just saying the Dr. James, he had a lot of- Oh. I'm not gonna go into that. He had some investment in it. Much. How did they let them do that? We couldn't afford it. Well, the board couldn't afford to buy it? We could not afford to buy that scanner at that time. They decided that they could not. And you know, it's really dumb when you think of it. Every hospital here, they cost a lot of money. So every hospital bought one. Now that shouldn't have to be. So when I had a funny thing happen to my head, let's say 25 years ago. And they said, Baxter needs a CAT scan. So I had to go to Methodist and have my CAT scan at that time. They didn't have it there? They didn't have it here. That was probably, let's say 25 years ago. I can't remember the first time that I had my CAT because there's something wrong. I'm taking meds to keep my blood vessels open, you know. And they've been open all this time. But then finally we decided to invest. And the money that they started getting, they invested all their own money. But they didn't sit too good with the rest of the board. Well, board, I don't think cared. And then you see what happens then. Then they channel as many people as they can to have it done. And you know, I paid, at that time, when I had mine done, it was $270, I think. So they were always expensive, the CAT scanners. So that way he could channel some of the money to return it. And it was an expensive machine. Very, very. You know, I will say this, though. I liked him very much. He was a very nice man. But I bet, manipulated. There comes some, all happens in there. But don't you think that happens a lot with people that have money? They maneuver there, or whatever you may call it, to make more. You don't stop it being just a little bit. You want more and more and more. So, I don't know. But he actually presented the service, though. He certainly did. He certainly did. And he had, all those years. That man ran our department there. For years. Oh, he was especially, wasn't it, he left? Oh, he was our X-ray. Oh, yes. Oh, sure, he was the head of the X-ray department. What did you decide to do? He ran it for, I bet you, 20, 30 years. I liked him. I think he's a real nice guy. There was a Hoffman from Mason City, Iowa. Dr. Hoffman. Yes. He was a time investor, or you call it a time investor. Yes. He timed the doctors' performance. Yes. And some of the doctors, they worked in other hospitals, also. Yes. And the question was, did they put enough hours into it? Right, right. It's always been that way, I think. And I think- But don't they do that in most of the cities and places in the United States? I think so. There's several offices. Oh, absolutely. They all go. Oh, yes. Yes. So, the board wanted the doctors to stay only with Emmanuel. Yeah, but they couldn't do it. They couldn't. They couldn't afford to exist there. No, no, no. So, they all, most of them went everywhere. Go everywhere. I would say that there are just a few, maybe, that just stay here. And about 20 years ago, I went to work for Dr. Quiring here. Darling, darling man. He's a general practitioner. And he needed to have some work done in his nursing-type thing revamped in his office. And I went to work for him. And he most always went to Emmanuel, and very seldom if a patient would say, oh, please go, so then they go as a, what do you call it? Not as a, you know, they can go if they wanted to, now and then to a different hospital on their, what do you call that? Can't even think of what it's called. So, he would go, but lots of them stayed here in private practice. But the guys that were OB, DYN, surgeons, neurologists, they all go everywhere. There's no way that they could just stay. Who put this time study manual, this hospital? Is it the board? I imagine the board did. Oh, I think the board did. Must have been a bad feeling for the doctors, or the people at the bottom? Well, I think that, yeah, I suppose so. But, I mean, we always used to cater so terribly to the doctors for everything. And I think it's getting less, too. Because there's so many doctors, for one thing, and it's getting harder for them. To get placed in other, in other hospitals. Yeah, yeah. So they show more, I think so. Patriotism. They're not like, the young doctors today are not like the oldies were in the old days. How we used to stand up when they could walk in the room and stood up until they told us to sit down. There was so much, what do you call it? We were so, well, like, for instance, like if they came, if a doctor came, like somebody else would come, to heck with it. Here, I am a woman, you know. Why would I have to let them? No, sir, when the doctors walked in, woman or no, I stood up. Because we had so much respect, is the word. Oh, yes, we had to respect them. No more of that. That has been, oh, my. You mentioned before, you know, the time study of 10, 15 minutes a day. Some doctors said it was too far. But then if they have several hospitals, it takes a lot of travel. Oh, I know, lots of travel. Why do they do that? Around the lights. They cannot. That's why a lot of them stopped coming here, because there's too, so many of their offices are way, way south, you know, and they just figured it was too far to come up. The ones here, they stay here, they stop traveling at night. Yes, uh-huh. And then there's quite a few doctors in this area, you know. But then we still have many doctors that come here. That darling Dr. Goldner still comes, and he has his office down there. Dr. McGrubin had his office down there and came here all that time regardless. But since they have localized over there, more or less, we don't have any doctors' buildings as such here, like they have close to Methodist, and university, of course, you know. So the stairway is among the hospitals, now Emmanuel is right up there. Oh yeah, oh yeah. There is no old tradition. Not anymore. I used to think, even now, that Methodists had much more, and then I talked to some other people that were in with things, and they say that Emmanuel is just as high up there now as any place. Oh yes. They just equipped the places. Absolutely, oh yeah. In fact, lots of people prefer to come here because of where we are, and that we don't charge for parking. And that's a big thing everywhere else. Easy parking. And easy parking. But everybody else charges, you see. That's hard. And you have to park in the streets on some of them, and everything. So we really like it here. It is just the neatest. So what are you all for, then, the staff and the doctors and nurses? Oh yeah, oh yes. Oh my gosh, yes. Yes. So the board's decision and the wife of Mr. Sorensen Yes. Is a welcome new type of... Oh my gosh, yes, yes, yes. Everybody was happy. We all love it out to move out here. Well, it was cramped over there, too. You know, it's very... It's just really neat here. So you spent all your life spending the best years of your life right there at the manual. 41 years. And you are still, how many years? 41. 41, and you are still going at it? I start... On a volunteer basis. When I retired five years ago, then they said, where do you want to work? And then they said, you want to work in a gift shop? No, I hate gift shop. Do you want to work in the doctor's lounge? No, I don't want to be in the doctor's lounge. I want to be as far away from the patients as I can. I have had them for 41 years. I don't want to. So then, what do you want to do then, they said to me. And then I said, okay, I have a thing I'd love to do. I want to work in a pharmacy. And they go, you can't. We have never had a volunteer in a pharmacy. And I said, well, you're going to have one now. And so they wrote my job description. And I'm the only one that volunteer that has ever been there and probably ever will. And the only reason they took me is because I worked here so long and I know them all. And they know me for all these years. And when you know, just think of all the stuff that I get in with, you know. You are like Dr. McGougar. I am Dr. McGougar, yeah.