 Was your father active when the Union came in then? They were on strike for quite a while and stuff like that. In cases, I don't remember how long it was, about six months I guess. Six months? I wouldn't doubt it. Was he active within the board of directors for the Union? No, no, no. Who were those people who were in the leadership of the Union at that time? Were they outsiders or were they Rockford people? It was outsiders and Rockford people both. Mostly they'd come, but some Rockford people would take hold. Were they Swedes, Irish, Italians, Polacks? I think the Polish were good organizers. So they were a good, a pushing idea. They weren't afraid. But I think a lot of the Swedes, after they once got in, they were good people. You know what I mean? Oh. But I don't know what's going to happen now. It's a big... It's a big time right now, you know. But you see, years ago, the doctors never belonged to a union. The lawyers never belonged to a union. And school teachers and policemen and firemen, and them really ain't got no business in the Union. But now they're organized. Now they're organized, yeah. But the teachers, they came in late though. Not too long ago, and the policemen and the firemen are the same. So you got to be in the Union to have some... Some benefits....leverage, yeah. Yeah. Because if you're not organized, they will just pay what they please. That's right. Whatever you could get out of them is what you got. So the management of a big factory years ago, they never saw the need for the workers to have a few dollars extra that they could buy things from and afford. Well, like screw... The more money he gets, the more he spends. Yeah. But screw products in Amrock, they were both pretty good places to work. But they followed LockCompany and Elco the same way, see. Whatever Elco or LockCompany paid, the other ones tried to come up with it, see, in some kind of benefit or some damn thing. So quite a few of the factories then are piggyback riders, so to speak. Well, all three of them, see. They were all big factories, but none of them belonged to the Union, see. And they got away with it. They got away with it, sure. What do you work for now? Yeah, that was the idea, you know. See, the idea, you know, with the 8-hour workday, that was to give workers more workers' work. That's right. 1932. Yeah. And then, you see, all the time when we... From in the 40s and then, they claimed that when work got slow again, we was going to go to 6 hours a day. It was a lot of talk. But now the talk is 10, 12 hours a day, you know, just to make more money, see. But it's not fair for the people with all the work, though. They have nothing. No, that's... And more have... It's the same with breaking up the states like they're doing now. I just got through reading a book of the Civil War and stuff, and when California was made a state of the Union and stuff. Now Reagan's idea is to break up all this. Like he said, he ain't going to raise the taxes, but he don't pay nothing back to the state. And still he takes that money and buys war machinery, and then he ain't going to raise the taxes, but every state's got to take care of their own. Otherwise, we were all united. It was the United States. Now it's each individual state. You get it? Yeah, it looks like it. Well, it is. It's an honest-to-goodness fact. See, like, these meet-and-eat places, they were real good, see. They got a whole bunch of surplus food, see, from the government. Now they're begging all over. Now the churches give to them and stuff, see, like the church is giving it. That's a bunch of hooey. Them people are born here, they should have food, and they should have a living. I might be all wrong, but... So there's this here. Yeah, yeah. That's the same thing. See, you can see. In here, it says now, every... A lot of people like to have their name down that they've given something. They serve a meal a day, but you have to pay for it, though. You have to pay some. Now look at here, all these names, see, now, they give to the poor. See, now, here's $50 to $199, see. And then down here it comes to donation, $5 or something to $1. And that money, who takes that money? That goes to this Meet & Eat program. And they serve the food at the churches, or where? No, no, they got... This is an old fire station, this paper comes out of. And then there's one building downtown where they eat, and different places. And then they have different ones at one time. But ain't that a bunch of hooey, why shouldn't the government give that? They don't give a thing? Well, they give some, but nothing like they used to. But see, they beg all over. I don't know. I think the people should be taken care of without looking like they're some individual. You can have your idea, but that's my idea. Well, it's probably a good idea you have. I mean, they should look into it. Ain't it better that they spend money for food than to buy war material? You would think so. So you remember Hoover? Yeah, I think you do too. No, I don't remember him. No, you ain't old enough. I'm too young for that. He didn't do anything, though. He was just sitting there idling all the time, without coming to the rescue. What was it? It was something about Finland or some damn thing. No, he helped Finland. Yeah. I don't remember what that story was. Well, there was the First World War. Some aid to Finland. Yeah. He lent some money, and they paid it back, though. Oh, yeah. That was it. But it's the same thing now. You know, Hoover, he was helping Finland. Reagan, he was helping Nicaragua. And the Jews. Oh, boy, the Jews have gotten a lot of money from us. Well, why don't they help the people in here? I don't know. They are too close. He said anybody can get it if they go out after it. That's what they say. Yeah. And anybody can get a job. All they have to do is to look for it. You can look. You got a job looking for it. So you look for a job there for five years in the 30s? Yeah. Well, I'd get a job once in a while, you know, maybe a week's work, a month's work, or something like that. Yeah. But... Did you join any other Swedish organizations then? I belong to Voss a little bit. But they got their ideas, too, you know what I mean? Like, they get a bunch that's in there, and they're the head of it. And what they do, they have a meeting and decide something, but the head ones do what they damn please. So you mean they don't have any democratic ideas? No, no. They're Republicans. The whole damn works. They're supposed to be unpolitical, you know, Voss. I know. And white people. Well, same with the religion. Yeah. So you have to think for yourself if you want to survive. I read a piece. You ever read Aby in the paper? Yes. She has some good advice. She told the old people that... that's about a month ago. But don't worry about anybody else. Take care of yourself. You know, somebody's got ideas for you, but if it ain't in your mind, forget it. There's probably a good rule you have to go by. Yeah. Yeah. Because... otherwise they can trick you into almost anything. Yeah. But it seems to me people believe anything they read or listen to. Oh, the TV and papers, they turn to people any way they want. They penny wash them. Huh? They penny wash them, yeah. Yeah. But years ago you had Roosevelt's fire jets on the radio. Yeah. Well, you have Reagan's now. They turned the people on years ago. Oh, you bet. They must need it. Yeah, you bet. He had good ideas. And Kennedy. Kennedy's had real good ideas, too. I think. I don't know. This is a Spanish story. Here you have Hoover. He was born in a small little house out in Iowa. Yeah. West Branch, Iowa. And he came from the poor people. Well, rather poor citizens, anyway. And here you have Roosevelt coming from the banker's family and Hyde Park, rich people. And same with Kennedy. Why did he see the need and Hoover didn't? Oh, I don't think Hoover could have done much different. Why? You know, all the money, see, it was against him. See, the banks and everything went haywire. Everything was, it was a damn much crooked business. They couldn't do nothing. So Roosevelt, he had to start a whole new system and to close the banks and reorganize the whole thing. I think so. So your opinion is that Roosevelt was a good president? Well, he was good for the poor people. Because look what he did. Look what I'd be doing if it wouldn't have been for Roosevelt. I'd be standing in some shop, taken away from some machine, or sweeping the floor, or cleaning the toilet. Boy, now I live like a king. If anybody says anything, tell them, go to hell. Well, you can see yourself. You would think that Roosevelt would be regarded as a good president, but a lot of people say that... That he ruined the country. But a lot of people wish he was back if he was gone. If all the things were taken away. They're taking them away now. They wanted to cut Social Security to beat the ban. They started with cutting the Indians. You know, now they've cut a little bit of everything, anybody they had relief. And who deserves anything in this country if it ain't the Indians? We took the land away from them. We took everything away from them. Up here at Lake Geneva, I don't know if you've ever been there. I was there yesterday. I liked that lake. But it was a big tribe of Indians that were around there. They put them in boxcars and shipped them out in the desert someplace and give them land. Now, a place like that to take away, what if they come up there now and took all that land away from them people up there and shipped them out in the Dakotas or someplace in Texas or something? It's really unbelievable. Yeah. They got away with it. Yeah. Most of them died on the way. A few of them come straggling back. And then they say crime doesn't pay. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I don't think crime pays, but... No, but it was a crime. Oh, sure it was a crime. But they got away with it. Yeah. So you remember now Bloom. He was a socialist. Yeah. He was a drug store owner. Yeah. Why did he become a socialist though? You would think he would be a Republican. He was a businessman not having a drug store. Yeah, but... Why would he mingle with the workers? Because the streets and everything, all that, you know, everything was a mess in a way, the way we see it now. Well, he seen that the people should have something out of it, see? And Hallstrom, he was a socialist to start with, see? But he turned Republican towards the end. Oh, he did? Yeah, Hallstrom did. He got 10 cents a bag. All concrete came in sacks then, see? And you got 10 cents for a cement sack if you brought it back to the lumber yard. And he got all the cement sacks. Yeah, that's the truth from what I understand. I'm damn sure it's true. He got all the cement sacks. He didn't take no graft, but he got the junk sacks, turned them back to the company, and he got 10 cents a bag for them, see? He got that from cement finishers then? No, no, not from finishers. From the company, cement company, see? The cement company brought the bags back, see? And they paid 10 cents a bag. If you ruined a bag, you was out the 10 cents, see? Yeah, but he being the mayor and all, he couldn't rule it all with the empty cement bags and stuff. He had guys to take care of him, see? That's what he got for kickback. And all this, well, on the other side of 20th Street, all that area was paved during Hallstrom administration. So he paved the rock for them, the sidewalks and streets? Well, there was a lot of sidewalks in before, but they used to put sidewalks in, and they were about that thick with concrete, and the rest was cinders or sand. Then they made an ordinance that the sidewalks had to be 4 inches. Well, then they made the 2x4s. They made them 3 5 8s, see? And then when the inspector came and checked for the 4 inches, see, then they had the 3 5 8s, but that went all right. They let them go get away with it. But then before the cement trucks come, they had a truckload of sand sitting there. And then they weaved their sand in in the center, and then if the cement guy come and looked, there was 3 5 8s cement, but in the center it was only about an inch and a half or 2 inches. See, that's how the contractors made their money. Sure. You would think they would guard themselves, you know, if they get caught. But they don't care. Was it outsiders or was it Rockford contractors? Rockford contractors. Everything was Rockford then. So who was selling the cement on the sand? Italians, Polacks, Swedes? Oh, there were Swedes on everything. Well, some Italians, too. There was a couple of Scandarolis. Because they are good cement finishers or bricklayers. There were a lot of bricklayers. Italians? Yeah. How did they mix now with the Swedes? Oh, they mixed all right. They did? Everything went fine. Even in politics? Well, I don't know about – well, the Italians were pretty much Democrats. I see. So they voted for a guy like Halston because they can get some kickback of work and everything like that. Oh, they didn't get no kickback. No, but I mean they could get some work. Yeah, they get work, yeah. Yeah. Like the Chicago politics, you know, you have different awards. You know, you get the awards and you get some extra. Well, I don't think they give out that so much, but then there was – I can't remember the name – contractors. There was a big – well, even some of the Rockford contractors went in Chicago and done work. Uh-huh. Yeah. They were pretty big then, weren't they? Yeah, Sjostroms. Oh, I see. Then there was two of them down by Charles and 20th Street, but I don't remember their names. It goes out. Uh-huh. So Halston, now he was in two times, three times? Two. Two times? Two times, I think. I think Blum was in a couple times, too, two or three. And they were able to get in on Swedish awards or they were – Oh, yeah. Swedish awards alone. Swedish alone would put them in years ago. Uh-huh. Yeah. Do you remember hearing them debating each other with opponents, Halston and Blum? Were they good both in English and Swedish? Oh, Blum talked like a lady. He was no good talker. No? No. He had a squeaky voice, you know. But he was a good, honest mayor. Blum, I don't think, took a penny of what wasn't supposed to come to him. You know, like Halston got the cement sacks. So he was better than Halston? Oh, 100 percent better. He was in in his 20s, and then he was out for a while, and then he was back in again. He was an alderman for a long time, too. But he was in in his 30s, Blum was, and one alderman, Bear, he says, Look what Blum did. He didn't do a damn thing. I says, Yeah, but look what your taxes were. How much did Blum get in? I says, He said he bought an old truck or something for some money and stuff. But they didn't have no money during the Depression to buy with. Nothing. I bought a bungalow on 9th Avenue, that was in 1938 or 39, for $3,500. And the taxes were $44 a year. Now I bet you they're $5,000, $6,000. For the same one? For the same one, yeah. But of course you get way more protection now, police protection and fire protection. But now the city hasn't raised their taxes for a couple years, see. But they put in a sewer tax, and, what was the other one? Sewer and water. Yeah, water's going up. You have a windsteaker tax here? Oh, yeah. You pay $10, $15? Real estate? No, I mean for driving a car, windsteaker. Yeah, yeah, that's $9 for senior citizen, $18 for... Where is that money going to? That goes into City Hall. City Hall? Yeah. But the sewer tax and water tax, the whole work used to be $3 and something for a house like this. Now I paid $26. So there's a steady increase. Oh, the water's besides that. That's just $14 for something. So you bought this bungalow in 1938? You got married then? Here? No other author? With that bungalow, 38. 38? 38, yeah. You got married then? The year before, I got married in 37. So you bought the house almost immediately? Well, yeah, well, because I got it, because I had a little money and then I borrowed $500. I had to have cash for the whole works. How was the feeling then? You can write all over the pression. Banks closing up, people losing homes and money in banks and everything. And you still had the future ahead of you. Oh, you felt like everything was going. Yeah. So you were starting to move there? Well, you hadn't worked for a long time and made any money. And you went to work and you got $1 an hour, or $1.12 and a half cents. And then, well, you could buy things, you know, and save. And everything went slick after you got going. How were the people taking this depression? I mean, it was a long stretch, David, no money, nothing to eat, many homes. Were they depressed? Oh, everything was down and down. But it depends what age you're in. You see what I mean? Like, I was in my 20s. You were in the young ages. Well, you didn't worry too much. We used to go to, well, down here at Stockholm Inn, you probably have eaten there. That used to be a pool hall, see? Well, we'd go down there and we'd play cards. And on Friday night or Saturday night, they'd all chip together and buy a gallon of booze, of moonshine. So it was prohibition time? Yeah. Then you'd, well, about everybody got drunk and racing hell, you know, and just hollering and having a good time. So the good time was still there, though, because the bad time didn't mean anything. You still had your good time. Somebody would always have a little money to buy a little, but that would relieve your mind, you know what I mean? Drinking ain't good, I know that. But when there's something bothering you, then I believe it postponed the agony anyways for a while. That's a good expression, postponed. Yeah, well. That's probably right. You forget everything, see, and you've got to forget stuff sometime when you have bad things. And your friends, now, you have a bigger circle of friends at that time who would like to help you if it was necessary? Oh, nobody had anything to help. Everybody had to take care of themselves. But it seems, though, that they were not afraid to help somebody if you needed a sandwich or a bowl of soup or anything like that. Well, most of them were on relief, you know what I mean? If you got flour, I ate more Swedish pancakes than you could eat a shag of stick at. And then we had gardens. Well, I still got a garden this year with my brother up at Lake Somerset. I don't know if you know where it is or not. It is? Up by Duran. Oh, I see. Yeah. And, well, I think we had four or five lots, me and Pa. And I was in the CC camp for a year. Twenty-five dollars went home, and you got five dollars a month. So you helped to pitch in with your whole family, then? Well... Your dad and mother. That was what it was for, you know? Twenty-five dollars went home, and I got five dollars there. And that was better than relief, you know? But twenty-five dollars now ain't worth two cents. But your parents, they had a tough time, though, coming to Sweden. Well, any time you're going to raise six, seven kids, you got to pinch and go. So you went through school, or... I didn't get through... You didn't go through the high school? I didn't get through seventh grade. What about your sister and brothers? The younger ones all went through high school. All high school. Yeah. Did they continue on to higher...? No, no, that's the most any of them went. And they married here in the... In this country, yeah. I got one sister in Chicago. She'd been in St. Pete now for about five years. She moved back to her family. Yeah, it's... How about the banks now? Did they close up to the people who lost money? Oh, yeah, yeah. Some of them paid pretty good, but most of them were pretty bad. Yeah. A lot of people even committed suicide. You know, they had money and stuff. Desperately lost. Yeah. So could you see the difference now between the poor people who didn't have anything and the rich, the affluent people? What were they doing? In other words, did they have everything cut off too? The factory owners, for instance. Oh, the factory. All of them were down. They were down. I think so. They didn't starve, though. They had enough money. Oh, I imagine they had enough money. I don't think anybody starved in this country, you know, because they had relief programs and stuff, but then they had these here flop houses. I don't know if you know what they were. There was one on 7th Street. No, I don't think there was one on 7th, but there was one on East 8th in a theater where people could sleep there. It was an old theater, and they took all the seats out, and then they slept on the floor in there. But you got some bums all the time. It don't make no difference where you go. I don't think, even in good times, some of them lay outside, but it ain't as much now. Like Chicago, I guess it's terrible from what they say. They have cardboard boxes and sleep in stuff. So that's... How about the churches? Were they helping out the Salvation Army? The Salvation Army did. How about the rest of the churches? Zion is doing more now than Salvation Army, but they're helping these here Vietnamese and stuff and bringing them in, which I think is all nuts. Well, why bring more people in when the people ain't working here? Let them stay and take care of their own country. So they're bringing in the whole family now? The whole family, yeah. Really, by right, we should have birth control to some extent. And here they bring in families 7, 8, 9, 10 and think it's wonderful. Put them on relief, and who the hell feeds them? So the church now, do they preach differently than when you went to church? For instance? I go to church now. What do they say now compared to years ago? They say more religion today or less? I think it's less religion, but I think it's more sincere now than what it was years ago. Years ago it was either you go to hell or you don't. So there was no alternative? No. Well, what did you find? Well, it's probably changed, there's no question about it. It was a scare tactic probably years ago. Years ago, I think it was. And the old-timers, they were scared. But like you now, growing up, you're a husky guy, you know, you broaden out shoulders and everything. Did you take this going to hell business when you listened to it in church? I never went to church until I got married. I was about 30 years old when I got married, see, not quite. But they do a lot of good, but there's a lot of things that I don't believe in too, you know what I mean? You get my age, hell, you're too old to sin. You can't get out, but you wish you could. You can't change religion either, it doesn't help. No, it's not going to help either. When it's like that, you're done. What's the difference now in business, sir? Because here you have the Polacks and the Italians and the Irish, the Archangels. And they seem to get away with things, you know, that the Lutherans can't do, for instance. They can pay off their sin, you know, to the Father and say, you know, you pay off, it's all clean. You can't do that to your pastor, for instance. Oh, yes. Yeah, all your sins are forgiven when you take communion. But when you get my old, it ain't no use taking communion because I ain't sinned to start with. See, you're too old. Like maybe when I was in my 20s, I needed it. Terrible. I know you don't feel you need it, so... I don't really think so. I think if you live a fairly decent life, there's a good God and he'll take care of you. Maybe I'm wrong. There's an awful lot of good... You ain't going to get into heaven just going up there once and say, I'm sorry. You know, I mean, then go out the next day and start screwing somebody else up by foreclosing on somebody or taking some money that don't belong to you and somebody else has to suffer. That ain't right. There's got to be a moral behind it. Yeah. But now, you mentioned Herr Holstrom, he became a Republican. Largely due to those extra sex he got. Yeah. Here you are, you are an affluent man now. You have done a good day's work. You have worked hard for it. I believe that you have been a good, honest worker. You have done a good, now shouldn't you change over to be a Republican then? There's the good, wealthy guys, you know, they are Republicans. I ain't wealthy though, but I got... You have a nice house and you have everything, pension and everything. I know, but you still got to see that people live and work right. You still... You still have that feeling. Sure. But Holstrom, now he became a Republican. How could he do that? Well, he let money talk. He probably wasn't against unions, you know what I mean? But he had to if he wanted to have money for his campaign and stuff, see. He needed that support. You got another guy here now who rocked for John B. Anderson. Oh yeah. What kind of politician is he in your opinion? I think he'd been better than what Reagan is. Is he so? I think he's got the poor people in mind, but he's still a... I think we'd have been better off with him. I don't think he'd have gone through all what they've pushed through now. So, and he's also a religious guy. The free church he belongs to? Oh yeah, but religion don't have much to do with it, I don't think. No politics, no. I don't think so. Because it helps them get votes. Can you really believe in politicians, I mean, to be honest? I mean, they seem to, whenever you need support, you know, you go over there and you go here. To the Teamsters now, for instance. Can you believe how they can be all Republicans pushing Reagan? No, but this Teamster, you know, they got murdered. What was his name? The big shot. Oh, Hoffa. Hoffa, yeah. He started a big thing down in Clearwater, Florida, see. There was going to be a, it's kind of an island. It ain't really an island because you can drive out there. When we first, no, I guess it was about, it must have been around 55. Then we used to drive out there and they'd put in water and sewer and everything out there, you know. And I think it was two buildings they put up. That was Hoffa's business now. And the real estate guys got, or somebody got behind them, you know. And pushed them right out. They got bad stories going, but he had a real good thing going there for all the Teamsters and stuff. And then the banks, mortgage companies and stuff like that got them pushed out of there through money and stuff. And it was a hell of a, going to be an awful nice place for working people to go. But big shots got a hold of it. We used to go out there and wash the car and we used to go out there and it was a dandy beach all the way around and everything. What was it in Florida? Was it at the? Clearwater. Clearwater, on the west side. Yeah, right above Clearwater. I don't remember the name of the island. Is it still there? It's still there, but I ain't been down there now in about three, four years. But it was still there and they started building up again now, see. But now, now it's great, now it's big shots buying, you got to have maybe 100,000, 200,000 to get in. But isn't this strange to you, you imagine the truck drivers driving across, you know, being for Reagan. It's kind of odd. I don't understand it. But Hoppe was never for, for him, I don't think. But the truck drivers are making good money now. Oh. What do you think about them air controllers or what it was? Yeah, they're, they are all the business. But it was damn close that, that some airplanes have wrecked on account of that, their business. Yeah. Maybe in Chicago that one that went down was 200 and some. It was a big one. Yeah. You know, it's sad when innocent people have to come in between. Your parents now, you mentioned here that your dad and mother, they were talking Swedish most of the time when they were, the last few years. And you also mentioned that your dad used to have it through Sweden, he never used it in this country before. But what was that? Tell me. That was a knife and fork. When he was eating? When he was eating, yeah. In the old country, I think they took the fork and put it on a knife and then put it in their mouth. Like we take the fork and finish up with the fork. But he, he, he come back to that after he was 70 years old, I think. I see. Or maybe it was right after he came back from the old country, I don't know which. Oh. Yeah. So he became Swedish again. Yeah. In his mind. So the people of Antilliaholm here, they have dropped off, one after one, of course, the last 25 years. And there's not too many left now. No. You and Manfred, Manfred Winil, he was born in Antilliaholm. Yeah. And Erik Johnson, he just died. And there's an Adolph Carlson that lived on 20th Street, he died about two years ago. And I had an uncle that died, he was 93, he died last year. Oh. And. How did they fare now, the people of Antilliaholm? They got pretty good jobs after a while and they retired and they stayed here all their lives. Oh yeah, a lot of them gone too, they're different. Yeah, but how about their children now? Have they stayed in Rockford? Most children haven't left. Left? Don't you think? Well, I don't know. You mean they got jobs, work somewhere else? Well, a lot of kids go to college and stuff like that and it seems like they go other places more so. Oh. So the youngsters born here, then they went to college after in the 30s and 40s. And then they've gone. Oh, there's a lot of them around too, but I don't know of too many. Well, Adolph Carlson's got two sons and a daughter, they're here. But you don't keep in contact with them, you know. You don't know where they go. Do they seem to have an interest in Sweden, or Swedish things, or is it just a... Oh, some of them, like what's called Baker, I don't know what his first name is. Aldot. Aldot. He's way great on the good Templars anyways. He just reams that, I think, both him and his wife did. But I don't know about Sweden, if he's so much on Sweden or not. Where did you join the good Templars? I don't belong to them. You don't belong to them? My sister and brother-in-law, Walt Johnson, you know who that is? Yeah, Walt Johnson. Yeah, he's my brother-in-law. I see. Yeah. And then every once in a while they have potluck and that and they ask if you want to come. Oh, that's what you're... Did you have any connection with Sweden, the correspondence or letters? No, no. You don't have anybody over there? Well, I got cousins. My sister writes to Sweden. And then there was one, my mother's cousin, she had a brother in, is it Bridgetown, up in New York, up around Duluth, up that way, and he got Parkinson's disease. And then she was a seamstress in the old country, so she came and stayed with her brother and sister-in-law for about 25 years in Bridgetown. I think, no, it wasn't Bridgetown either. It was up by Niagara Falls someplace, some city up there. And she used to come and visit every once in a while. But she went back to Sweden when, after he died. And she lives in Tidharp. She must be about close to 90 years old now. But she was always great. She was here about three, four years ago. So they seem to come up in the 80s and 90s, most of them, though. Just like your father-in-law, how old was he when he... He was about 80. 80? Oh, a lot of them died young, too, though. You know. You know. Of course, one thing, years ago, because that's probably one thing that drove the factories out of Rockford, too. They holler a bunch about the clean air and stuff, you know. I think that's something they need all over the country. And, like, they have vents on the grinding machines and stuff like that. And, of course, that all makes the product cost more. If they go south, if they don't have to have that, I don't know. So that's why they left. Well, part of it, you know, is the expense of running things. And, of course, up here, it takes money to heat the place. But if you're going to get the efficiency out of the people, when it's hot, you've got to have air conditioning. So which is cheapest? So that's always a catch-22, I think. Yeah. But down here in Oregon, you know, one factory closed up there. They made lawnmowers and different things. Or woods. Woods, yeah. Now they come back. They don't get enough skilled labor, I understand, from the other place. That's what they said, yeah. But I think anybody, you know, they claim now, like, if you're going to be an apprentice in anything, then you've got to have a high school education. I didn't get through seventh grade. And I was kind of shopped. I wasn't shopped for them. I was forming out in the field. And I didn't have any education, you could say. But you learned it on the work site, on the work site, so to speak. Yeah. All necessary things. But years ago, you know, anybody, if you got along with the boss and different things like that, you could get to be foreman or something like that. But now you've got to have a college education to get in. So that's to make people spend $30,000 in college before they go through. Yeah, I wouldn't doubt it. It's a high apprenticeship. Yeah. Yeah, you bet. For the parents to pay. Over here on Broadway and 20th Street. No. And... Allan Malquist. He went out and picked up in the farms the eggs and stuff, and then he handled them and went to Chicago and sold them. And one Memorial Day, we... Then he got together some guys in Chicago. I think it was six carloads all together. And we wasn't going to drink at all, but we got a heck of a drink. I don't know about the other cars. I know the car I was in, that was pretty well drunk. We got in there and it was, oh, just full of cars. It was a pretty wide street. And I woke up in the morning and I had a brand-new straw hat. I couldn't find Dad. It was a good hat, too. And that was back under the seat. And then there was a barber shop, and I went right over to the barber shop. And I got a shave and a haircut and a wash and all the works. But I felt way better after I got in there and cleaned up. But just think, you know, it was hot. Sitting in line in them cars, I think it was five in each car. You couldn't lay down. You couldn't do nothing, you know. Stunk booze, oof. So there was a lot of drinking years ago. Oh, yeah. That was in the 20s. No, that was the 30s. That was after the Depression. But where did they get the booze from? I mean, when there was prohibition. Oh, you could get booze anyplace. Italians run it. So the Swedes didn't have any distilleries over there? Oh, yeah. There was one down on 15th Avenue, down by the river. That was not yet Las Vanska, she said. When they didn't pay their bills. But that was not Snell Pee, not Paika. When they got them drank, then, oh, that was not Snell Paika. Then some of the guys would charge it. That was not yet Las Vanska Paika. Yeah, Mrs. Nelson. Oh, they were Mrs. Nelson? But mostly it was Italians. And the same with dope now. They was from the West Side though? No, no, no. That was on the East Side. Italians? Italians, yeah, down on 15th Avenue, down by the river. Oh, they were on the East Side too? Oh, yeah. And over here on 18th Avenue, across from the old sewing machine factory. They was bootleg joints. And on 11th Street. On the East Side? Oh, yeah. I thought the Swedes were solid on this side. I had one cousin, he got married to an Italian, and his father wanted to send him home to the old country. Yeah, that's a fact. But she was the best daughter-in-law yet, I think. So they worked out all right? Oh, yeah. She had to turn Catholic though? No, no, no. No? No, no. You didn't have to turn Catholic. How about the kids? The kids, I don't know what they are, if they're anything. So she was a good wife? Oh, you bet. Yeah. He's got arthritis terrible now, and she takes good care of him. So it's... Oh, it was Swede bootleggers, but it was more Italians than Swedes. They were more accustomed to it, I suppose, because of the winemaking. I don't understand. I don't understand. When they got up before the judge, they couldn't talk English, they couldn't do nothing. But the Italians? Huh? You mean the Italians? Yeah. They didn't understand? No, no. They didn't understand nothing. No, they could do whatever they pleased. Oh. But there was a Swedish police force there. Yeah. And the justice, I suppose, was Swedish too. I wouldn't doubt that, but what could they say to them? No, they didn't know nothing. So they had to let them off? No, they'd find some of them, and it was kickback there too, to some extent. I'm sure of that. But they had the right to brew their own beer in their homes. Yeah, I think. No, no, there was no objection to that. Anybody could do that. Yeah. But you couldn't make it too strong and sell it. No. You could make your own wine too. Oh. Did they sell it in gallon jugs, or how did they distribute it? Oh, they had pint bottles. They had? Yeah, and they had gallon tin cans too. You could buy straight alcohol in tin cans, see? And then you could mix it up. That's what we did at the pool hall. And we couldn't chase it after. Well, you could get a whole gallon for around three dollars, see? A little better. And then you could mix it up? With pop, orange or ginger ale or whatever you wanted. But some of it was bad, or they said, how could you test it to be bad or good? Well, it depends on how sick you got the next day. You had to get the pig? No. How was it they tested it? I don't remember. But you know, a lot of the guys, well, these here are alcoholics and drunks and that. They took Lucky Tiger, you know, and then they strained it through bread. Lucky Tiger? Hair tonic. Hair tonic? Hair tonic. Lucky Tiger. Lucky Tiger. Yeah. And they strained it through bread? Through bread, yeah. And drank it? And drank it, yeah. Well, they'd drink anything, you know, them alcoholics. And it didn't kill them? No, it didn't. Well, I suppose some of them died from it. They'd haul them away. So they'd use that bread to dip their bread in the pot at Christmas? Yeah. No, you wouldn't use that bread. My used to make kåkupiru, we had to dip in the grita. That's your mama? Yeah. You know, there was about... Yeah, I still wear it on the coat. No, they were about like that. And then there was a hole in the middle and pricked around. That's what the Swedes used when they first come over, you know, years back. When they come on them cattle ships and stuff, sailboats. That's right. They had so many kåkas with and stuff. They had to furnish their own food. And one old guy, he was some relative of the boss' wife, and he'd come over on a boat, there was no motor on it. They sailed it over. And he'd had so many kåkas, because that kept dry, you know. Yeah, and they could hang it on the pins. Yeah, yeah. Wooden pins. And he came over that way. Oh, wow. And I think Pa was on a sailboat from Sweden to England, and then he went on a bigger boat afterwards. So your mother, she kept the Swedish customs, cooking up food and... Oh, yeah. My sister still does. Oh, she does? She cooks all that old stuff, Swedish stuff and stuff. So at Christmas time, you had a Christmas tree? I don't have any, no. No, but I mean, your family, you had them all. Oh, yeah, yeah, we always got together on Christmas, when they were living together. And you had the Christmas Eve, then, there was a celebration. That's right, Christmas Eve, yeah. And light candles in the tree? No, no. No? No, not light candles. You didn't have it? That's way too dangerous. Oh, I see. Boy, they can ignite and go fast. But we did when we was kids, little kids. You know, we lived on a farm with no electricity. Then you had it? Yeah, but I don't know why they had it, to tell you the truth. Because there's no fire department or nothing, you know. It's silly. But we never had an accident, so... Well, I suppose they were people who were practical. Do you want a cup of coffee? The old guys, now they came from Sweden. Well, they were young, too, when they came, but did they use to smoke or chew snuff, or what did they do? Oh, in the factories, they all chewed snuff. They couldn't smoke. They couldn't smoke? No. It was against the regulations. Yeah, but chewed snuff they all did. But I never did smoke, you know, steady. But we... This Howie's friend that used to play the accordion, we lived on a farm, and then we went to this country school, and then we picked corn silk and smoked. And we went under the culvert because we only had one match. Then we rolled our cigarettes and smoked on it. And when we was under there smoking, his father came and caught us. So we all got heck for that. But I met him, I think it was about 60 years afterwards, I met him with Howie. And then he says, Do you remember the time we was smoking under the culvert? My dad caught me. Yeah, 60 years afterwards he remembered it. Then we had a swimming hole out there, too. We called it a law that we had a box made out of boards, and then we swam down in the creek with the mud and the cattle there and everything. Everything went fine. It was an old fishing hole. Yeah. Did you go fishing, too, down in Rock River or... We took crabs in that. Oh, crabs? Crawfish. Oh, I see. We used to get them by the bushel. A lot of them, even in the creeks. And did you eat them then in the fall? We ate them when we caught them that same day. Oh, I see. We'd start about this time of year and same, and then you'd maybe three or four times in the summer. So they were plentiful? Oh, you could get them by the bushel. But they're gone. They're all gone? Not all of them, but you can't get them anymore. Oh, so you had to... Yeah. Did you do any hunting or... Yeah, some, but not too awful much. How about your dad? No, he didn't do any hunting. But hunting used to be pretty good. You used to maybe go out and get about seven, eight rabbits. But I never done any duck hunting to mount anything. And there used to be wolves around here, too. Went wolf hunting a couple times, like down by Byron. They'd surrounded the whole big woods, and then they'd all come together and they'd get three, four wolves. But I don't think there's any wolves left here. So you remember that? There has been in your time? Wolves? Oh, wolves, yeah. That was in the 30s. Oh, I see. In the 20s, the first time. Yeah. That was down by Byron down there, in the woods down there. It's a girl scout camp and stuff now, and the Shriners have their horses and stuff. So it was a wild country then. Well, it wasn't wild exactly, but... No, but you figure, you know, wolves are a little bit exotic. I mean, different than fox and... Yeah, there's a lot of fox and coyotes around now, I guess. So they came up around here. Olle Skrattult, you remember? Yeah, yeah. Well, we used to get there with Swedish paper. That was the only paper we had. Svenska Amerikaner? Yeah. And that was as long as we was on the farm, and then afterwards they didn't get it. Did you read the Svenska Amerikaner? No, no. You never read? No, I never got so I could read right, you know. But your dad and mom, they like to read it and follow the... Oh, yeah, sure. So you never saw Olle Skrattult then when you came to Rappford? No, but Lapplis I saw a couple times. You heard her? Yeah. I had a couple of her records, you know, and we had some old people over. And the TV I got in the breezeway, we had a Rivek troll on there. You know, it's first when TVs come out, so it was an old guy here with a bunch. And we turned it on and was watching TV, and then my wife got coffee ready and stuff. The program was over, and I turned on Lapplis. So he says, get Ron, get Ron. I want to see her. But I had all the time to get him to figure out that it was a big troll I hooked up with him. But he wanted to see Lapplis. Lapplis, yeah. Do you remember if there were any Midsummer festivals in the 1950s, 1920s? I don't remember. See, in the 20s, then we were on the farm. So you were not too much in Rockford then? No. Well, we'd come in, you know, once in a while. Maybe twice a month or something. How did you go to the stores out there? You had stores out in the Belford? There was a store there, but usually we went to Rockford and bought. Bigger things? Yeah, well, big orders. And then you had to buy on credit and pay when the check came in. But it was tough farming then, too, just like it is now. But farming, they got to depend on the market. They don't know what they're going to get, you know. That's all screwy, too. Is it good soil out there in the Belford? No, it wasn't too good right there. It's a lot of sand. But down below, down by Desert Junction in Ogle County, is good land. All the way south, until you get way down south past Springfield in there. It's real good land. So you were on the east side of Rock River? Yeah, yeah, east side of Rock. South side of the Kishwauk. There's plenty of water down there with the Kishwauk being... Oh, when it floods, it goes all over. It goes over the whole park there. Usually the basement fills up with water. Every year, or... Oh, not every year, but I think four out of five. Maybe not quite that much. But the mosquitoes are terrible down there. Oh, wherever it's wet. Yeah, wherever there's grass and bushes. How about down on 7th Street in Rockford? There was a Swedish business street with all the stores and cafes and restaurants and different places. The Swedes, they were the king there. They ruled that 7th Street. Yeah, same with Broadway. Broadway too? Yeah. You could talk Swedish in any of the stores years ago. All the way up there from... From 7th Street and Broadway and all that stuff. Like you went to meat market or grocery store, any place. How about the Jews now? Did they own any store down there? They had downtown. Downtown? Yeah. But I think like clothing stores, I think the clothing stores bought the clothes from the Jews. I imagine. Because the Jews had charge of all that, I'm sure of that. But they didn't have any stores though? No. Well, no, they were all Swedish. But the Jews had their hand in anyways, you know what I mean? I think there's a lot of these people on earth. Don't you? They are tough to work with. Yeah, and tough to deal with. Yeah, but you would be tough too though. I mean, when you're in the business, you got to get the mark up there. Yeah. You mean they don't give in? They want to be first all the time. If you're standing in line or something and a Jew comes, you watch. You go in front of you. So they don't pay attention to what? To anybody else. We had two Jews in the CC camp and they wanted to be first in everything. Oh, we had three. One of them running clothing business. He wouldn't even go out and do his work. He would sit in his tent and sew and patch for the other kids, which was all wrong. He should have had to go out and work just like anybody else. Why did they cater to him so much? I don't know. I don't know. But that's the way they are, I think. Do they stick together though? Jews? Yeah. Oh, you bet. They do. Oh, you bet. But they see sometimes they fight each other though for competition. Oh, maybe for competition, yeah. To be on top. It makes them strong. Look at these Jews here in town. They're millionaires. They started with a little horse and wagon and picked up paper and rags and stuff like that. They used to come around the streets and holler, Rags and lines, rubber and brass. I don't remember exactly how it went. But they rode around and kind of rang a bell and hollered and bought their stuff. Now they're big operators. They buy up all the junk and stuff. Then you start a war and then you sell it for a big price. That's the philosophy. So they started from the bottom then. Right rock bottom. What's the difference? The Swedes can do the same thing, but they wouldn't do that at all. They wouldn't start with a little thing like that. Do you think he feels embarrassed? That could be. To his countrymen? Oh, you know, like a lot of Swedes, they wouldn't go out and dig a ditch. They wouldn't? No, they didn't feel right about it, see. So they were a little bit nose up in there then. Oh, yeah. Especially Republicans. In some cities, there was a saying, you know, if you were Lutheran and Republican, you always got a job. Well, that's possible. It helped. But I never was a Lutheran or Republican, but I worked most of the time except in the Depression. You may be right. But you're already over transferring over to Republicans though, because you're an upper. No, I ain't upper. But you have the feeling inside that they are not fair to the people, in other words, the Republican Party. Well, everybody knows that. You would think people would realize that, though. I don't know what it is. I don't know. They think a lot of people, I know one guy especially, he thought he was better than the rest of the kids, but he got started, he was a bandsawer. And he made more money than from the start. When he was 15, 16, he started and made money. And he felt more important than the other kids. But you know, he got to be about 35 years old.