 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Bernard Harvey, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So when you were growing up then, Miss Harvey, here in Rockford, there was no Swedish stress then in your home, actually, that you should speak Swedish or sing Swedish? No, my mother wanted us to speak correct English and we always used very good English at home. How about the table prayer? Yes, we said that in Swedish. And we knew we were Swedish. We knew we were Swedish. How did you know that? We have all the Swedish traditions. My mother wrote to her relatives in Sweden. We were very much aware that we were Swedish people and we had the Swedish traditions. Midsummer, oh yes. Midsummer for instance, what did you do then? Did you have a gathering at the church? Not at the church, but at midsummer eve, we'd go up to my Aunt Gertie's house, my aunt's house, and have coffee out in the yard. We had all the Swedish traditions. That Christmas we started in, you know, the 13 days before Christmas. And well, the advent, you know, we always had an advent wreath up and things. No, we were very, very much aware that we were Swedish and had relatives over there. So both your father and mother were very particular about the customs? Oh yes, yes. Well, my mother more so than dad. He wasn't that much. Were you dad? You weren't as concerned about Swedish customs as mom was. How about Christmas tree now? You had a real Christmas tree then? Always. With live candles in it? With candles? No, not the live candles, you know, that's too dangerous. No, no, no. We had them when I was little. The real live candles. You remember that, you had live candles and a pail of water in the room. How about Christmas Eve now? Did you get your Christmas presents? Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. Did Santa Claus come then? Yes, there was Santa Claus and we had a few things from Santa Claus in our stockings when we were real little. And then go to Jyllund. In the morning. And have lutefisk and all the Swedish food. And then the relation came over one of the holidays? Yes, they came. My mother worked for weeks and weeks getting the Christmas food ready. Do you remember if you celebrated the second day of Christmas? You know, you had the Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, but how about the day following the Christmas Day? Did you have day off from work at that time or was there a holiday here? No, no. Has there been that? No, uh-uh, no. Ingen andan dag jul? Yeah, no, we didn't have that, but Christmas Eve was more important than Christmas Day. And we always had the Christmas Eve meal at our house. My mother always fixed that. Did you belong to any organizations like LIRUN, IOGT, Vasa, Swichard? No. No, no. Only the church? No, no. They never did belong to those Swedish lodges. No. So there's no, in later years you belonged to the Swedish Historical Society, yeah? Yeah, but that's not a lie. No, no, that's like a society. Yes. My mother and father belonged to the Swedish Historical Society. From the beginning, when they started in the 1950s? Dad, did you belong to the Swedish Historical when they started? You've been on the board at Swedish Historical. No, I don't know. I've been on the co-courts for quite a while. I don't know. He's been on the board at different times, but, uh, and, uh, but, uh, no, we all, we, even, uh, even my nieces and nephews are, you know, know the Swedish customs and they know they're Swedish. Did you take Swedish in high school in Lappland? No, no, no. It was not offered? Yes, it was offered, but I didn't take Swedish. I would now, you know, now people are wanting to go back to their roots, but no, I took Latin for three years. So there was no interest to learn Swedish then in high school? No, not for me. We, we, no, I didn't have any, you know, my sister probably knows more Swedish than I do. You know, we'd pick up words and things that my mother would say, but she never talked Swedish to us. And as I say, I don't, she never had a Swedish accent even, but she talked Swedish to her friends. And sometimes she'd use a Swedish word and then I'd say, oh, now what does that mean, mother? And then she'd say something, she'd tell us. Her parents, were they living where you were growing up? No, her parents, well, her mother lived in Sweden. Well, it was only grandpa and... And her father died before she was born. Oh, I see, so... And then she came here when she was 16 and I went to Sweden before she did. I went to Sweden in 1951 with a friend of mine. We were in Europe for three months and then I graduated from college and took off and went to Sweden, went all over Europe and went to Sweden and for, I don't know, a week or two and met my relatives over there. And then the next year my mother went to Sweden. I don't know, but I think that maybe people came and they didn't go back. Did you find this true that people... Well, they probably couldn't afford to go back to... Well, but even if they could afford to go back, and I think some of them maybe could have, you know, saved the money and gone, but I don't know. I think a lot of times maybe it was too emotional experience to go back and then have to say goodbye again. Your mother, did she comment about that? No, no, no, she never went back though until after I had been there. What did she say then when she came back? She went alone? She went alone. She went alone. The first time. The first time she went alone. And that's when we went there. I think she wanted to go alone to kind of, you know, meet them again and kind of relive those things. There were sisters and brothers still over there at the time. Yes, she had, uh-huh, yes. I think for a lot of people it was just hard to go back and knowing you'd have to say goodbye again. If you said goodbye, you didn't know whether or not you'd see them, and that's hard to do. We had, Betty and Mother and I, we went to Sweden in 1972, wasn't it? Well, together. Yes, all three of us went in 1972. He had never been to Sweden, and in 1972 then... I got along fine over there with the Swedish talk. But your wife, now, she was able to converse in Sweden. Oh, of course. She had perfect Swedish. Why didn't she want to use it in the home, though? I mean, was she afraid for you to get an accent or... She knew people in this country whose children could not speak English by the time they went to school. So they were held back by that. Now, she thought that that was wrong. You were in this country, and she thought that you should teach your children English. And so we... she made sure that we... So she didn't push you to go to the Swedish English school then in Zayen? No. How about confirmation? Did you have English? Oh, no, they didn't have Swedish confirmation. It was all gone by that time. No, no, no, they didn't have that when I was there. But there were a lot of people, I think, that couldn't speak English by the time they started school, but that wasn't true at our house. Yeah, but that was one. Yeah, Burdette couldn't speak English by the time you went to school. He couldn't talk English at all. No, he... Yeah. He had too much Swedish, he didn't know. Oh, there were a lot of people that couldn't speak English by the time you went to school. And then they learned. But now, you know, it would have been good if she would have taught us both languages. We would have been bilingual. I think she was very... What year was it you come from California, Betty? In 1960, you mean? When I... When I come here to stay. Yeah. In 1960. She was in California for quite a few years. After college. And then my wife got sick. And the doctor said she couldn't walk in stairs at all. We had a home up on Robert Avenue, two-story house. So we sold that and tried to find something else. We couldn't find anything at all. We couldn't find anything at all. Finally we ran across this two-family apartment. So we bought that. That's when Betty came shortly afterwards in there. And we only had one bathroom. And so we decided we had to either sell this place and buy a new one or build a new one. So we went around looking for lots and they would run across this house here. And they had a big... They had an open house on this house in here. So the minute I walked in the door, the realtor got a hold of me and says, Mr. Harvey, this is your house. This is the house you should have. And I said, well, I said, we like it. But I said, well, I suppose the price is pretty high. Well, no, it's not too high. Yeah, I said, it's a little bit too much for my blood. But we finally wound up and got it. And no one else has ever lived in this house but us. And my wife just loved it here. She just loved it here. And I suppose your daughter, she's seen the roof, California style. Yeah, I like this house. I like this house. There's not too many houses with the shingle roof. No, not too many. There are some though. And then the weeping mortar too. Oh, that's beautiful. But it's easy to live in, I suppose. You don't have to walk steps and up and down. Yeah. But what do you, now I just heard on television tonight, they were talking about the tremendous drug problem all through Europe. You know, we think we have an awful drug problem in this country, but they said it is so much worse in Europe than it is in this country. What about Sweden? Well, they probably have their share too, you know, with the... You think it's worse in Sweden, the drug problem? I really don't know how it can be measured. You know, where it's worse and worse. Well, they know the number of addicts in these countries. They know the number that are in this country, or at least an estimate, I suppose. And they said that it was much worse. I forget they gave the figures, but much worse in Europe than it is in this country. This is a sad situation. It seems to be universal all over, though. It's really catastrophic conditions. But I don't know. Well, I suppose they tried to stop it, you know, the best way they know, but it always seems to be one step behind. Yeah, that's what they interviewed this man who had been the police chief in Holland. I guess it's very bad over there in the Netherlands. And he had been the police chief, and he said there was just nothing they could do. He quit. He just gave up. He said they won. It's become so rampant over there that laws don't mean anything. They just... Well, I suppose the world is a transit nowadays, I mean, they can fly, you know, from one city to another and all these drugs. There's a lot of money involved. So, I mean, $100,000, you know, there's nothing. So they can fly any way they want and everything is pushed on. And once they get hooked, you know, they get crazy if they don't get it. So they do anything for it. There was better years ago, Mr. Harvey, when Mr. Bargrain was the police chief in Rockford. He kept everything under... Yeah, I knew him real well. I was still in the engineer and he was chief of police. He became 1894 as the police in the police department in Rockford. And he served until 1940s, I believe. Until the 1940s? Yeah, it was in the 1940s he stepped on, Bargrain. He was during the Depression. Was he? Well, maybe so. I believe it was over 40 years. I mean, it was in the late 30s. My goodness. Yeah, that's about, I would say that's about the time he stepped down. Really? But he was an old guy then. Yeah. But to stay in that position all those years, that's really a record. We used to have a Swede, a policeman. Lindstrom. Lindstrom. You've heard a lot of his stories. I've heard a lot of stories about him. Well, when I was a city surveyor for the city, I was driving an old Ford, you know, and they had the coil up in front, you know, that it wouldn't work or sometimes you have to adjust it, you know. And I was coming down East 8th Street by 3rd Street in there. And I never realized I was close to the business district in there and I was going a little bit fast. You were too fast. Pretty soon now comes a policeman out there. Stoop, stoop. I stopped. He said, you can't drive so fast. I said, well, I had trouble with the coil in there. I tried to adjust it. And then he saw the name on the street department in there, said engineering department. He said, I don't care who you are. He says, you can't drive so fast. The law was for everybody. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you had a lot of different people. Do you remember Buss Albin? Who? Buss Albin. No. You remember him? He was a tough one. He was drinking a little bit too much and he was picked up by the police, you know, in this wagon almost every week. So you never heard of him? No. Never heard of him. He worked at the Rockford Forge Company, I believe. The hammersmith. Now you've talked to Carlson then. Yeah. And he showed you all the records down there at the Swedish Historical Society and things because there's a lot. So when did you come in on the board of the Swedish Historical Society? I can't remember when I came on the board. I don't know. A couple of years ago, I suppose. But I'm chairman of the restoration. Of this repainting and restoring every room. The downstairs, we're going to do all except the kitchen. You heard of the Lofgren's, Carl and Erik Lofgren, that were staff doctors or mayors? Yes. They're my same cousins. Oh, I see. Yes. Yeah. I remember their names because Carl Linda, I think, has one Lofgren as his doctor. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Is it Volker Lofgren? Volker Lofgren? No. Was his first Erik? Erik. Erik. Erik. Erik. Erik and Carl. And I don't know which one is doctor, is Mr. Lindy's doctor. No, there was one Lofgren. I think it's Carl. Are they retired now then? Yeah. Both of them are retired now. So they were born here in Rockford? No. No, they used to come from Sweden. Oh, I see. And settled up in the... No, they came here from Sweden, those boys did, and they were... And they were both doctors? They came here and they were young boys, and I suppose Carl was the oldest, maybe he was about 15 or something when he came, and Erik was maybe like 13. They were young, maybe they were younger than that. But anyway, they put them in first grade because they couldn't speak English. So they put them in first grade. They came here to Rockford? They came here to Rockford. And of course, they're very, very bright, very bright. But they still, I think Carl still graduated at an early age from high school, even though they put him in first grade. But once he learned the language, of course, he just went right ahead. So they went on then to college and medical school, both of them? Yeah, both of them, sure, sure. They both did, yeah. And they both ended up at the Mayo Clinic? Yes. Very nice, wonderful people, very bright. And he has doctors in his family over in Sweden, too. He had one relative who was a doctor in Stockholm, and his wife also was a doctor. And we went to see them when we were there, and they were very nice, although his relative who was a doctor was very old and a little forgetful, but his wife was not. She was lovely. But you don't need a doctor. You look so... What? You don't need a doctor. You look so healthy. What have you done now for 95 years? No. No drinking? I used to be healthy and strong, but I'm not anymore. You look healthy, though. Yeah, I'm not what I used to be. I mean, you've covered all his life, but I think the one thing about my father is he doesn't worry about things. So he is very relaxed, then? Yeah. Do you, Dad? No. Don't worry. He can always sleep. I, you know, I doubt that he's ever had insomnia or knows what that is. He can sleep, he can relax for a few minutes. If he has just a few minutes, he'll stay asleep for a few minutes. If I got problems, I can sit down and work them out and settle them, and that relieves the tension. But how about during your younger years now when you worked in the city here as an engineer? You have a lot of problems and a lot of people to meet and politicians. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Did they aggravate you? No. No. No. No. No. Okay. But there was a lot of opposition. Wasn't there, Dad? What? Wasn't there a lot of opposition to things that you tried to do? Oh, yeah. You didn't let it bother you, but I think that there was a lot of... I think people weren't ready for some of his ideas, you know? Well, usually they don't want to pay for it, otherwise they probably want it, but... Yeah. And we have pictures, you know, where the riverfront was made beautiful, you know, with paths and trees and everything like that. Well, nothing was ever done until now. They're doing it. Well, there was... Oh, he had pictures....prepared many years ago than the riverfront. No, no. They just did it now, but he used the pictures. I know, but he presented the idea many, many years ago. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In the 20s? Yeah. Yeah. It must have been in the 20s when you were working down there. Yeah. Because I see... we saw sketches of the, you know, of the riverbank and how pretty it was and fixed up and everything. Because years ago in the 1920s, you had an excursion boat going up to Beloit... not Beloit. Harlow Park. Yeah, that's it. Harlow Park. Why did they discontinue that one? Was that because the river got too dirty or what happened to it? Well, you know, when I was young, there was an island in Rock River. A big island opposite the... Sinsipi Park. Yes. Opposite the Sinsipi Park. There was a great big island. And that finally disappeared all of a sudden. Disappeared? You mean the water level went up? I don't know what happened or how it happened, but it just disappeared like that. Trees and everything were gone. Just a couple of days. It disintegrated and it ended up in Dixon. Yeah. Yeah. But Rock River was deep enough so you could have excursions boat on it back and forth. Oh yeah. With people, because I've seen pictures of it. Oh yes. In the 20s. They had the big steamers, the Yellow Loi Steamer. Yes. Go up and down the river in there. That's why they built the bridge high. That high bridge. Yes. Well, then later on when they started to design bridges inside the city, they started to cut them down. They made a big mistake. They can hardly get past the Jefferson Street Bridge. They can hardly get past that. They just sneak past it. But I think the Depression had a big effect on Rockford too. I think everything just was called to a halt because of the Depression. There was no money at all. Nothing grew. Nothing was done. I think that was, don't you think so, Dad, that the Depression had a tremendous detrimental effect on Rockford as far as growth or planning or anything? People were just trying to keep alive, not thinking of any city plans. There was no workers project in Rockford to beautify, for instance, the riverfront during the Depression. No. WPA. No. WPA, and they did do a lot of things that were worthwhile. But no riverfront work. No, no, no. They didn't do anything for the riverfront. That wasn't done until recently. But they did roads and things like that. Well, since Eppie Park is, that used to be what they called Rude's Woods. We had two cows. That would be my job to take them down in the morning into the Rude's Woods in there and then get them after I come home from school and bring them home so they can milk them. And then the next morning after you got through milking, bring them back again. That was big woods in there. So you had two cows then? Had two cows. Your parents had two? Yeah. And then a pump. And I'd have to pump water for hours and hours at a time, you know. Did you milk the cows too? Huh? Did you milk the cows too? Oh, I helped some, yeah. Yeah, I could milk. Now, what are you going to do with this information, though? You're not going to put it out in any book or anything? Well, it will be used for historical information so people will know what happened. For instance, his work as a city engineer is very important. I mean, we get some understanding, you know, all this down the road. But where are you going to put that then? In Växjö, Sweden. Oh, that will be in Växjö, huh? You know, so many changes in so many different areas. He remembers seeing his first car, and then, of course, there were the airplanes. And the radio. And the radio, that's right, came in. When did you have telephone in your home? Huh? Your parents didn't have a telephone? No. No? It was not until you bought your house. You didn't have a telephone then? I forget when or what we got telephone. Did you have one when you lived on East 8th Street? Yeah, yeah. You had one on East 8th Street when you lived there? Yeah. So did you buy a house then when you got married, or did you rent it the first time? I rented. First? First, yeah. So how long did you... Then I bought, then we bought a lot, and then I built a nice little cottage. Bungalow. Bungalow. What year was that? Before the Depression? Before the Depression. No, it was the last year I worked for the city. Yeah, before the Depression. Well, 27 then. Yeah. It was before the Depression. No, it must have been before 27 because we moved up to Robert Avenue in 29, and we lived there on Crosby Street for... how many years did we live on Crosby Street? I don't know. Oh, yeah. You must have built that house. We built that house, and the house got a little bit too small for us. We had three children. So then we traded that for another house on Robert Avenue, and we lived there for quite a few years. And then you had a phone, though. Huh? You had a telephone then in that house. Oh, yes. Yeah. But I think for a little bit during the Depression, I think we didn't even have a telephone then. For a little bit during the Depression. I had a telephone, Betty, when I opened up my engineering business in 1927. Yes, but on Robert Avenue, I think, Dad, that we quit the telephone for a little while because times were tough. And I think I remember that we went without a telephone not very long, but for a while we didn't have a telephone. And some of our neighbors didn't have a telephone. No. Some of our cousins didn't, and that was a nice neighborhood. But things were different in the Depression. Families lived together, and a lot of people lost their homes. There were many hardships. Yeah, the Depression years were hard, but I... Well, but you learned from them, too, you know, and families were close together. But there was no one that really was good off then during the Depression. How about the funeral undertakers, for instance? I mean, people died, and were they able to pay for a decent funeral, if we call it like that? Well, they didn't charge much for burying someone. A couple hundred dollars. No, but there was still a heavy price, though, for someone that didn't work or... Yeah, but I guess the undertakers in there carried them for quite a few years. And there was Fred Olson and Sundberg. So you remember P.A. Peterson, the old man? Yeah. He died in 27. Yeah. And living fast? What? Living fast. Living fast, I knew him, too. He died a poor man. And he was one of the well-to-be in Rockford. Well, all the Sunstrange boys are dead, you know. David and Oscar. And Olson, he was the head of the factory down there, the Sunstrange. Rockford Machine and Tool. Rockford Machine and Tool. How about Berlin? Do you remember him? Who, Berlin? Yeah. Oh, yes. He was also a well-to-do man. Yeah. And everything collapsed. Yeah. Yeah. And the furniture never came back to Rockford after it went out? No. It went down south and it stayed there. It'll be interesting when this book comes out now that the Swedish Historical Society is having written. That will be interesting. Because there was a big story of Rockford. Yes. And I think they're doing really a terrific job. It's taking them a long, long time to get through it. But I think when it comes out, it will be worth waiting for. Side two. So when the furniture industry left now, Scandia, they closed up down on East 2nd Street. Yeah, that closed up. And Landström closed up. And Rockford desk closed up down there. Yeah. And Empire was another one. Yeah, Empire. And they were all big and they... And the West End Furniture Factory. But Harry West, he continued on, though, to sell furniture. You remember Harry West. Well, he's still living, Harry West, isn't he? No, Harry West died years ago. I remember I met him in 75. Then he was living. Yeah, no, he died. Yeah, the furniture factory business was good business in Rockford. You didn't lose any money in the security bank on Broadway. The bank, security bank on Broadway. Yeah. And Truman, Engstrom and Gustafsson, they folded up, you remember. Yeah. You didn't lose any money in that bank. Yes, I lost money in that bank. You did? I lost money in the manufacturers bank where the City Hall is now. That closed. And the day before they closed, I made a deposit down there because I had a lot of men working for me. And the next morning in there, it was closed. The bank was closed. And I had just a few hours before it closed, I put some money in. You didn't know anybody working there. Why didn't they tell you? They wouldn't say. They couldn't. They wouldn't let, the government wouldn't let them do it. They just came in and closed the doors? Yeah, just come in and closed the doors, that's all. And you never got anything back? Never, no. I might have gotten a few dollars back. How did you feel then after a while, did you trust the bank to put in the money again after a year or two or so? Well... Did you feel, felt reluctant to do that? No. You would think you would mistrust everybody, you know. I think children did. I think that there were people who said they'd never put money in the bank again. Yeah. As a result of depression. And the children had money in the bank too. And it closed. I mean, we'd take money to school, put in the bank, you know. So you were one of those that lost money too then? Well, not very much. You know, they... No, but I mean, there was savings. Yeah, yeah. A few dollars. One day a week, you'd take money and they'd put it in the bank at school. I think we had all three of you children in one of them. Well, but it wasn't much money, but for us, you know, we'd take it to school, they used to have. But, yeah, but children said, oh, they were never going to put money in the bank again. You know, little kids were aware that the banks had closed and they lost their money. It wasn't very much, but still they, you know, put it away. So, but the Swedish-American Bank, that was good. Yeah. They never closed. They never closed. Oh, they never closed, huh? No. They took over the commercial national bank. But the People's Bank on the west side also folded up. Yeah. Rockford Trust stayed open for a while. Yeah, you couldn't get any money from the banks. You couldn't get any money from the people in there. It was really tough. Yeah, it was. So, how did, were you a Republican then politically? I've been a Republican all my life. Oh, but then during the Depression, why didn't you change over to Roosevelt like many others did? No, I couldn't. I didn't like Roosevelt at all. But I wouldn't vote for Reagan because I didn't like the way he went about it. In other words, we had no choice. I'm the kingpin here now. I don't care who you vote for. I'm going to be the president because no one else can be against me. And ever since then, I haven't had any use for Reagan. How did you get your Republican idea? It was handed down from my grandparents. Both your mother and... My father was a Republican. My grandpa was a Republican. I was a Republican. And my boy is a Republican. He still is. His wife is. How about your daughter? She's in the middle of the road. And the other daughter, she's a Republican. I'm still a Republican, but I wouldn't vote for Reagan. He was a Democrat, though, Reagan. He was a Democrat when he started off. Yeah, he started out as a Democrat. Yes, and then he shifted over. But I think, Dan, you vote now for the person rather than the party. I don't know whether or not you still vote Republican or do you vote for the person? I think right now, and I think generally people vote for the person rather than the party. I didn't vote for any president last time. No, but I think people are less inclined to vote straight Republican or Democrat, that they will vote at least locally where they know people more, that they will say, I like this person or I agree with that person. I think locally there aren't as strict lines drawn as there used to be, Dan. Don't you think so? Well, I don't know. I think so. I think now that people at the same level... Of course, I was reading in the magazine here about they'll send these ships down to the straits down there, you know, in the Meridian. And I read in the paper today that Reagan is going to put American flags on 11 boats and put in people to run the boat, the head of each boat in there. And the first time anyone gets hit in there, war starts, you know that. It's playing with fire. Now, do you have children? Yes. When you ordered the contracts to complete these works, were the Swedes favored then? What did you say? Were Swedish contractors favored? No, no. Not particularly? No, no. Because I see here are names of Italians and Rutledge. Rutledge. Rutledge. And then Northern Illinois Supply Company. They were not Swedish? Carrico, they weren't Swedish. Milburn Brothers was the only Swede. Oh, Milburn? Milburn Brothers, yeah. But they were Swedes? They hired... all Swedes worked for Wilberds. I see. The Jefferson Bridge, the model you made, it looks much better than it does today. Why didn't they go along with it? They wanted to raise the bridge higher up. But this looks better though. Yeah, yeah. It's a whole lot better. And there's plenty of clearance for all the trucks underneath here. Yes, here on the east side. Plenty of room for all the vehicles to go underneath the bridge. So this building here, is that the... The lumber yard there. The lumber yard. Lumber yard there. Here, but this building here. Is this the police station? Oh, that's still there. Police station? That was a wholesale grocery store. Oh, that big house? Yeah. Still there? That's still there. That house is still by the bridge. On the south side of the bridge, right near the edge of the water. How could they arrest so many people though? You have 261 people, 21 female, 240 male in the month of January. There's a lot of people. Were they drunk or...? I don't know. That comes under the police department. I remember 1,084 arrests in one month. That's remarkable. Well, they kept law and order those years and all. And violating state speed law, 390. They are talking about nationality. Arrested. Yeah. Lithuania, 84. Italy, 232. Sweden, 502. United States, 3,873. Yeah, a book like that gives you the history of the city, you know, at the end of the year. So Borggren, he arrested six. And Kavanaugh, 14. And Doberreiner, 136. He was tough. And Volker Bengtsson, you remember him? He was the police officer. Oh, yeah. He arrested 274. Yeah. He was a good friend of mine, Volke. He died young. He was a strong man, they said, very strong. Yeah, he was. He was a wrestler. He was a good man. And R.C. McKay. So if you compare the mayors now of Rockford, Holstrom and Blum, Bennett, and the rest of them, which one has been the best? That's according to different times, I suppose. Yeah, it was hard to say. I couldn't answer that. I couldn't answer that. All of them wanted to do the right thing. The problem today was different than it was yesterday. There's no way to compare it? No, you can't do it. There's no way you can compare it. But is it easy today to be a city engineer, for instance? Now they have computers and consultants and everything. You do everything by yourself. You didn't call anybody. Now they call in outsiders to do all the engineering. They do the figuring. Yeah, someone else makes the figures. So you did everything locally here in Rockford? That's right, yeah. So whatever you said... We had hand-operated Monroe calculators, you know. You put the number in and pull the handle down. Not electric, hand-operated. You didn't have Sunstrand? No, we used Monroe. How come Sunstrand didn't get into the city hall to sell...? Well, at that time, they weren't really in that... They were more typewriter-type stuff. So there was more... But the only ones that had it was the engineering department. We had one. And we had to break each one in and show them how to operate it. But we used Monroe calculators. And the slide rules. There were no computers then, you know. The computer was either the slide rule or the Monroe calculator, when they came out. You didn't... Did you hear anything about Samuel Carlson in Jamestown, New York? He was a mayor there for many, many years. You didn't hear anything about him or read anything about him? No, no. He was said to be the longest-running mayor in the United States. I never heard of him. And he had a municipal electric plant, water and everything. And it still is. But you never studied him or visited him? No, no. How about... You didn't hear Hallstrom or Bloom say something about this is the way we do it in Sweden or anything like that? There was no guidelines from the old country? The only one that would say it would be Hallstrom. It says Bloom was born in this country. He was born... Yes. But I mean, they read something about Sweden. They didn't have a teacher at that time? No, no. How old was Hallstrom when he came to this country? He came in 1908. And I think he was 19 or 20. I believe he was. He came with his mother. His father died in Sweden. So he made it pretty fast, though. In 13 years, he became the mayor. Yeah. And you wonder, you know, how fast he could... And another thing, you know, he was a socialist. Yeah. He could get the whole town with him. Well, I suppose the working people got behind him in there. And all the Swedes got behind him. Most of the Swedes, anyway. He must have got some Italian help, though, to Irish. He probably got some. But now John Erlander, too, started the first cooperative furniture factory in Rockford. Yeah, yeah, that union. That union. Now, see, that was a cooperative factory. So that's kind of socialistic, having a cooperative factory. So I think Swedish people, I think maybe were that way, you know, that they worked together and felt that people should help each other. I can see that they wouldn't be so opposed to Hallström. The fact that he was a socialist probably meant that he would work for the common man. But the party was not called socialist, though. There was another name on it. Progressive Party? I wouldn't know. I haven't seen any bells from that time, but... I don't know. But what ruined it was probably in the late 20s when the communists came in. Well, they were in the early 20s, though, at the time of the war. They scared the people away. Yeah. Because then they got the association with unreliable elements. Well, you have seen a lot of different things that are happening in Rockford, though. You can feel proud of it. The water is running. Yeah. The river is clean. Yeah. How about the crayfish in Rock River now? Can you see any crayfish down there? Kräftor? Yeah. I can think of a lot of things. Yeah, you have seen a lot of different changes. Yeah. Yeah, I changed a lot of things. But what you was with then in the 20s, it became a reality of good things came out of it. In other words, it's still working. Oh, yeah. And you were right on the button. I didn't do anything by fly-by-night stuff. In other words, if we're going to do something, we want to be sure it was the right thing to do. How was your... You were sure, though. How did you figure out you were sure? I mean, it was the first time you had done something like this. I know. Well, but... You had confidence in yourself. You can figure things out mathematically, a lot of things mathematically. I've always been a mathematician. You were not afraid to present it to the city council? People would come in and give me problems and then I'd solve them for them. So when you put the sewer plant, did you have any figuring in your head where you were going to put it? I had nothing to do with the plant itself. I was out then. You see, after it was confirmed in the court, then I was out of it. Then it was up to someone to take care of where I left off, whether it was me or somebody else. Well, I was city engineer at the time. And you couldn't have two... And I couldn't hold two places. So I said, I'll stay a city engineer and whoever they hire for engineers, I'll work with them. And I did. I worked with them for a couple of years or so, two or three years. I laid out some of the first lines that were put in after they took over. And you went in to work as a private consultant? Yeah. To Sycamore, Durand, and how did that work out? Did they also get new sewer plants and sewer lines laid out? Well, they didn't have any sewer lines there. They had water. Oh, water. Yeah, water. And Loves Park, I was appointed city engineer at Loves Park. Well, they had their own system? And I laid out the water system for them. And I designed the North Second Street Highway with the new left turns and everything. I designed all that. So they had nothing to do with Rockford and Loves Park? No, no, no. I was city engineer then. And then I started to work on plans for storm sewers. I got all the information I could and started to put it together. But then the next election they had, the fellow wasn't going to run for mayor again. I didn't want to be up there because I had my own business to take care of anyway. So I made a lot of studies on storm sewers for Loves Park, but nothing complete where I could say, this is it, period. Oh, I don't turn that on again, though. It is remarkable, though, Rockford now, it had a lot of Swedish inventor people. You have Swan Hillman, he came here. You have Uri Svensson, with the Jan S. Barnes. You had Erik Andresen was another one, entrepreneur. Lieven Faust, he was an inventor. And David and Oscar Sundström. Swan Hillman, I didn't mention him. And John Nelson, of course, a knitting machine inventor. And back in that time, they couldn't go to the local hardware store and buy what they wanted. They had to make everything from scratch. They were smart. They could see things in their minds and go ahead and do it. They didn't have an education, but they had it up here. So this seems they were planted here by some... They were smart people. Did Burdett Carlson tell you about his boy? Yes, I visited his place out there. He's a smart guy. He's a smart boy. He's something you know for the 80s. My father was very impressed. So you went out there to look at it? Oh, yeah. I had my son go out there. And when we got home, I asked my son, I said, what do you think of what you saw? Bradley. He said, he's a genius. He's a very smart young man. He's going to go places. He builds everything from scratch? Yeah. So he has a new one that is going to make some things going here. When he was going to school, he had trouble, you know. Not so much, though, Dad. Yeah, he'd see things upside down or what was it? He had dyslexia. Dyslexia, I see. But then mechanically, he's all right? Yes. But I always stuck up for him. I always told his mother and father, don't worry about Bradley. Bradley is going to go places when he gets older. But Dad always said, don't worry about him. He could always see that he had that kind of a mind. A very nice man. And Gladys said even when he was a real little boy, she was telling us, I don't know, he had a gate or something and he fixed that gate. Another thing he fixed was a bicycle or something when he was just a little boy. So he had it in him, you know, up here to view these things. It was interesting to talk to Burdette about national luck. Yeah. Because he remembers Strandquist and Høglund. Oh, yeah, yeah. Høglund. Sure, sure. Yes. He watched him from being a male boy. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I haven't seen Burdette for a long while. Oh, he lives up there on the, oh, you probably know where he lives. Yeah. Rabbit. So you were hunting then? Then I'd hang him up on the back porch and freeze him. And when we wanted some meat in there, I'd go out there the night before, take a rabbit down, thaw it out, take the skin off of it, and we'd cook it. And we always had meat because I'd go out hunting, I'd get ducks, geese, and pheasants, I'd shoot pheasants, and rabbits. I'd shoot one squirrel, that was all. I didn't want to get the squirrels. But we always had meat home. Sometimes if we got company, we'd treat them as a nice rabbit dinner with hind legs and all. That's the way I got the meat. But we lived through it, the wife and I. I suppose there was hardships many times, too. Yeah. Mother canned everything. Yeah. We always had food down in the basement. How long did you keep the cows, though? You didn't have any cows when you were married. No. The cows were gone then. There was only when you were a little boy you had cows. Your parents had cows. Had what? You mentioned you had two cows out in the pasture. That was when you were little. Oh, cows. Yeah, cows. Cows. Cows, yeah. Oh, cows. That was when you were a little boy. Yeah, yeah. Young boy. I was young then. No, but you didn't have them later on then. No. No chickens either? No. No. After my grandfather got so he couldn't take care of them very good, then we took and butchered one and froze the meat. That was the end of the meat, which was that way. But every year we'd get a calf and we'd butcher that. You always had something in reserve. Yeah. It's always brought up where you couldn't waste anything. Well, I suppose people are practical. Yeah. You have to be practical and... But I'm the same way now. I'm soon 96 years old. And she gets after me for saving this and saving that and saving this and saving that. And years afterwards, something comes up and I go out there and get it and then duck it over and that answers my problems. You can make use of it. Yeah, yeah. I always had meat around the house. And you had enough chicken so you could have eggs, but you didn't have eggs every day though. Well, when my folks were living, we had a big chicken coop and a big yard. And we'd buy corn from the farmers. And we'd raise a lot of chickens. And we'd get quite a few eggs. But did you sell the eggs or could you use them for the household? Oh, we could sell them, but we used them. You used some at home too? Oh, yeah. But many times I suppose mother took them down to the grocery store to... Yeah, trade them for something else. Did you drink coffee as a young... Coffee? Yeah. No, no. Never drank coffee. You never drank coffee? No. I told you he wasn't like the other sweets, he never drinks coffee. You never drank either, I mean, liquor? No, I'm not a liquor drinker. No smoker? Well, I used to smoke. I used to have a cigar in my mouth from the time I got up until I went to bed. During your working years then? Yeah. I see. Well, I had it until World War II when I was at Camp Grant. I got a call down there one night because they had a big freeze up, and I had to get some men together to take care of it, and it was bitter cold. And so I had to mess up, bring some coffee over to give to the fellows working for me to warm them up because it was terrible cold. So I drank a cup of coffee, and I got deathly sick from it. Oh, I see. Yeah. You were not used to that? No. And I haven't tried it since. Well, you're certainly shining a symbol of good health, though. I always have. You can't play with a liquor and tobacco smoker. I have been good health until two years ago now, the year of January. How about Dr. Urbom? Did you go to him when he was in practice with his sugar pills? I took my boy to Dr. Urbom because my boy had rheumatic fever.