 This is cassette three, side one, a continuation with Mrs. Ethel Pearson, Moline, Illinois. Cassette three, side one. Okay, where did I stop? He remarried, you said? Yes, he remarried. And my stepmother had raised three children. She had lost two children within a few days of one another when they were small, and that she still had three other children to raise. And she had to work, and these kids had to take paper routes, and they didn't have it very easy. And my father was very concerned about them. And every year, though we did not have very much ourselves, he saw to it that she got some money so that she could make some kind of a Christmas for the children. And then his brother-in-law and sister from Sweden visited us, and then they visited Anna, the sister-in-law, whom my dad married. And they said that she was having a hard time. Well, my father was alone by this time, and I mean, my sister had lived with him for a while, but he was alone. And so he asked her, when he knew that she was going to lose a position in a home for the elderly, if she would come and be his housekeeper. And then that materialized into their becoming a man and wife then later. And so I had a stepmother, but while I was then going to school, I was trying to help out. She wasn't well. She had a lot of rheumatic problems. And I can remember when I was—I had the semester off from school and I was studying, I had to go over there and take care of things for them. She was down and bad, and I was running two houses and taking care of them and studying. So that was a full-time job? It was more than a full-time job. Did your parents belong to any—they belonged to the Bätti School? Yes, right. Did they belong to any Swedish organizations? No, no. My dad and mother never did join. So they didn't have any kind of insurance then in case of sickness? My dad belonged—got some kind of a Swedish insurance—a little— Svea, I think? Svea, yeah. It was Svea. Now, I don't know how he happened to get that because he didn't belong. It was Old Norian, I think. I don't know where it was, but that thing kind of folded except that when he finally passed away, there was a check that came for about $200, I think. And he had never had that—the one who was to get it would be his wife. And he had always said—I have an older brother—a brother that's fifteen months younger than I who was a minister, and he didn't have any fabulous salary. And my dad at one point said, that should go to Stanley when I pass away. But then that was before he married, and then he never thought about it again. And of course my stepmother got it, which was fine. You know, she could use the money. But no— So your brother started to be a minister? Right. Baptist minister? Right. He's retired now. He also worked at a deer company where my dad worked. My dad worked for deer. And Stan, when he was in high school, took mechanical—manual arts. And he was very good in drafting, right? And in fact, while he was in school, he got a position from the time he was a sophomore with the Power Instrument Company here in Moline. And he did his drafting down there and got credit at high school for it. He was very good. And so he worked for deer and company. And then he was in the Army, Second World War, but never left the country. And then my mother passed away while he was gone. And he had—he came home for the funeral, of course, and then went back. And that seemed—two months later, he married our minister's daughter. And then it was while he was in the Army that he worked a great deal with a church in—what's— West Virginia. West Virginia. West Virginia. And they told him, they thought he belonged in the ministry. And that became his reason for going into active Christian service. And he went up to our seminary in St. Paul after he got out of the— Bethel Seminary. Bethel Seminary. After he got out of the Army and finished there. But he never did have any big churches. He had smaller churches. And never any big, fabulous salaries like some of the people get, you know. And—but he was very content. And in fact, he still keeps in touch, though he's retired. For a while, he was a visitation pastor where he goes, attends church up there. And now his own pastor is ill, and he is—so he is taking care of the Wednesday evening services, prayer services, and doing Bible study with them. Teaches Sunday school class. So you met your husband there, Gilbert Pearson. Right. But you also remember when the family came from South Dakota? Yes, I do. Because here came eight people down the aisle— As new members. Into one whole pew. A whole family. So they had already been members of the Bethel here in the Army of the Baptist Church. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. So they just came back then. Well, the folks were members here, but— They transferred them from— Yeah, they did, but not—and was Ethel a member out of— Out there, but not— Out there? Art was a member out there, but you weren't. Because Gilbert was baptized the same time I was. Oh, I see. Yeah, we were both baptized at the same time. So they were eight people then coming in. Yeah, eight people coming in and sitting in one pew. And so that's when I—and then his sister, Edna, is my age, and we became very good friends. And so we were back and forth between one another's homes, and, you know, he was there. So I guess we just kind of became aware of one another. And you worked together in church, at least two, I suppose. Yeah, and then we started dating just before I graduated from high school. But that was Depression then, right after, you know, in 29. We couldn't get married. We went together seven years before we finally got married. A lot of people did it during the Depression, because they used people before to settle down. That's right. So you stayed at home then, and he stayed at home too then, or— Yeah, well, he was at home, and all of the—you know, a lot of them were without work. In fact, he got without work, but he had savings, so he— The CCC. And then he was in the CCCs for a while, while I—when I first was teaching. And then he came back, and then he got a job at International. And then we decided we were going to be married. And then after we decided this, I had the date all set, then he had a feeling that he was not going to have a job, but he never did. Well, I got laid off, and the next week they hired me back, so— Yeah. And then after we got married, they even had—they put out bids for work to some place over in Davenport, right? And you worked over there evenings. Well, that was a side job. Yeah, a side job. He worked over in Davenport. So we never really suffered from any unemployment. There was always some solution. Right. After we got married, I was never out of a job. No. No. So now you look for a teaching job. Was there any kind of discrimination because you were a woman at the time, or the male teachers, did they have a preference or a preference to get into a job? I don't believe so. I don't think so. Your chances to get a job was as— As good as the next one. And I had a close friend who had gone to Macomb with me who lived in town. She wanted to get that job at Irving School, too, and I got there. But she did get in a half a year later. That was when we were still on mid-year graduation times, you know. They had January graduation in June. And so in January, they had to open a room down at Irving School, and she came in. So I got her kids then the next semester. She was one grade down below me, you know. So now when you've been a schoolteacher, you had Swedes and Germans and Belgians and all kinds of different nationalities. Right. Did they differ anything, I mean, if you see in the classroom? Well— Or were they just a bunch of kids that are all alike or Americanized right away? Did you see any— No. Well, I think all these children came from homes where English language was spoken. So you didn't have anyone that talked Swedish when they came to school then? No, no. No, no. I had a Negro child my first year, and he became a good basketball star for Moline High School. Calvin Anders. And he has since passed away. And then I had a pair of Greek twins who were holy terrors. They were terrible. They were terrible. I had a number—and here I was a new teacher with a room full of 42 children. So there must have been a bunch of— And it wasn't easy. It wasn't easy. And when—and that year in December, my brother, who was also in the fourth grade, which I was teaching at the time, my younger brother, fell coming home from a sliding party with his sister, younger sister. And he fell, and he broke his arm in two places, here and here. And by—that was on a Saturday, and by Thursday they had to amputate. Two inches above the elbow, because gangrene had set in. The doctor told him—he set it under a fluoroscope, and he said, this will be a patched-up job at best. And so they had to amputate. And here I was dealing with children the same age as he, and knowing that he was lying up there minus one arm. That was very difficult. And he didn't realize that it had been done. He just knew that he had to go back into the operating room. And so my father and my older brother went on Sunday afternoon and broke the noose to him. And of course, you know, you still have the nerves that would go down. So he had the feeling of having an arm, of having hands and fingers, although he said—and he never talked about it a whole lot—that his thumb was kind of coming out of the center of his palm. That it was twisted, see? And my father and Brother Stan broke the noose to him. And of course, he let out a terrible yell as I heard it. And then he said, well, I can be a teacher or I can be a preacher. And he became a professor. He's a professor at the State University of Washington in political science. He taught for a long time at Bethel College. And then he was in Washington, D.C. with the American—the Baptist Joint Committee on Public Affairs for a number of years. And then he went out to Pullman. And his name was not— Walford. Walford Peterson. He has his doctorate—in fact, he has doctoral candidates in his teaching. He's head of the department, I guess. And nothing he can't do. He does everything. He just wasn't going to be licked by the fact that he had—and he never did get an artificial arm. Never. He didn't want one. And he has managed very well. He's— So back then, I suppose, operating procedures were a little bit— Yeah. I suppose if they would have done it today, the arm would have been saved, you know. And as I said, I was teaching, and that was a difficult time. We had to—my mother went up to the hospital every morning and stayed all day. And he didn't come home very quickly because the stub healed very rapidly, but the poison wasn't out of his system. And so the doctor was afraid he would have to amputate the rest of the arm. But then an abscess formed, and they took him up and cut that open. And after that poison was out, then he could—it healed, and his temperature went finally back to normal. But he was in the hospital from December 9th until January 31st. It's a long time, and it was a cold, cold winter. So he had an experience then. Yeah. His young life. That's right. But he weathered it. And I think it's due to my parents' outlook. They weren't going to let him be licked by it. In fact, I suppose I didn't think that he was going to be able to do as much because he used to make little model airplanes where you made the little—and had that thin paper. And I put all that stuff away one day when I was cleaning. And he came home, and he said, where is my model airplane stuff? And I told him I put it away. And he said, well, I want it. And he started putting model airplanes together again. And he still likes to monkey with model airplanes. He does. He has a yen for them. So he's able to do it with one hand? Oh, yeah. And he holds the paper down with his stub and cuts. He's— Innovative. Yeah. He's pretty good. He went to Bethel College, and then he went to the University of Minnesota. And then at Bethel, he was the dorm—in the boys' dorm as the director of the whole boys' dorm. And I have a sister, and she was the one that—she married a Canadian Baptist, and they went out under the Canadian Baptist mission board to Bolivia, South America. Sponsored by the church? Yeah. Well, yeah, the Canadian Baptist Church up in Canada. John, her husband's family came from Bolivia originally, but then they went up to Canada. And he—and then was at Bethel and got acquainted with my sister. He has a twin sister who's also a missionary. But this Canadian board that they were under, they were there for three terms, 15 years. And then in 1938—yeah, 1938, they came home for the last— Thirty-eight? Sixty-eight? I mean, on—thirty-eight was when we got married. On our thirty-fifth. You're talking too much. Yeah, okay. I'm too long-winded. George Hirschnader was the Swedish Baptist from the beginning. Right, right. How did it—have they arranged any Swedish meetings or programs over the years, or has it died off more or less the last 25 years, you think? No, we don't have much Swedish now. Because now you are integrated with other people from other nations. All Swedish was discontinued in 1944, 45. During the war? We had one meeting a month, but then that was discontinued, so there's nothing. And when the old timers died off, then that was the end of it. But when I was a child, and up until 1944, they had Swedish services every Sunday morning. And if we—we'd go home from Sunday school. We wouldn't stay, but sometimes we stayed, and we'd have to sit through the Swedish sermon. And we had a pastor that came that didn't know Swedish too well, and he would write out his sermons and then give it to—did you ever know Carl Swenson? He went out to California. He was from Sweden. He would translate them, and this man would practically memorize them. And then he would preach on Sunday morning. Did they have a good sermon, though? Yeah. Sunday evenings was English, but Sunday mornings was Swedish. Did you understand the Swedish sermon then if you—? And there was no conversation. In other words, conversation you understood, but not when they were talking. But we both sang in the church choir. My dad sang in the choir, and some of his sisters. His mother didn't sing in the choir, but she had a lovely voice. And we sang Swedish hymns. Oh, did you know what it was? Oh, yeah. We knew what we were singing. Did you go to Sunday school in Swedish? Pardon? Swedish Sunday school? No. No, no. No, no. The Sunday school was English, although we had little textbooks that had Swedish on one page and English on the other, so that the older classes could conduct themselves in Swedish if they wished. But you know, back in World War I, my dad just kind of told us, we're American now. We're not going to speak Swedish. I think it was because if you spoke a foreign language, you were a suspect in those days. And so he dropped Swedish. And when my younger brother and his wife went over to visit relatives in Sweden and other places they visited too, but Rolfrid said to my father, why didn't you ever teach us Swedish? We should have known your native tongue. He was disappointed. It was because of the war, I suppose. Yeah, I think partly. The war had some effect on that. In Iowa, they couldn't preach in foreign languages in the churches during the First World War. It was still all by the governor there. Yeah, I think. In Illinois, I think you couldn't preach though. Oh, I think we all had. There was a feeling that you should not stress it. Right. So there were no Lucia program at the church that you remember of in the 40s? No. No? No Swedish programs like that? No. I think the old, old, old man used to meet and have a Swedish Sunday school class, but with Mr. Wilson, you know, and some of them, my dad, they used to speak Swedish a lot. But then when they died off, then they... That was it. There was nothing to follow up then. That's right. That's right. You had new ideas in a new land. Right. And that was new for you, you were right in it, going into it. So that's... How about this place? Somebody mentioned the name Halvega, Donnie Moline. Halvega? Have you heard that? Halfway? Yeah. It was on the third street or somewhere around there, sixth avenue. I just wonder what it meant. It was halfway to something. Well, I've heard of it, but I don't recall any... You heard of it? Oh, would that be in connection with our church? No. Well, it could have been. Yeah. Maybe it was somebody that lived halfway. No, I don't think so at all. Well, you know, but in our church, are you aware that our church was started by a man who came over here from Sweden, Pomquist was his name. Yes, in 1852 in Rock Island. Yes. And the people that went to that church were from Moline and even way out to Silvis. And then Moline, Rock Islanders were there. And then they would go back and forth. And yeah, that... It would be halfway. That was the halfway. From Silvis to Rock Island. Right. I don't think that's true. Because this person that mentioned to me, they heard it so many, many times, but they didn't know the meaning of it. Well, it could be. I'm not too sure. That's how our church was started, really. Yeah. And then our church finally broke away. So they had their mission out in Silvis at that time? No, the people that... They just lived there. They lived there, and then they went to the Rock Island church. But then finally, our group, finally the group on this side of Rock Island came, decided they were going to have their own church. And then the Rock Island people joined the Moline church? No, no. Rock Island people became... The church existed for some time. I don't know how long. I thought the members, the Swedish members, went over to the Moline church. Well, some. Yeah. Some of them. Some of these people were in Moline. And they broke away from the mother church, or sister church, or whatever you call it. And then, yeah, I think that they would go halfway and meet once in a while. I think... I don't know if that's a significant... And our women's ladies' aid, that was formed before the church was formed, because those women would get together and have their own organization before the church was formed. Well, they've been there in many places. The women started first, and they got the credit for it, though. No, no, no. That's a strange thing. Our women's organization was older than the church itself. So then you remember Axel Reynald, the old Baptist minister up in Minnesota. He was probably down there a few times. Yeah, we knew it. Stanley and Lillian. Yeah, we know Stanley and Lillian. He was a pastor in Bethany, wasn't he? No. No. We just had him here last fall for our seniors' meeting. Yeah. I see. When he retired, he was in that area of service. Who's going to be 100 this year. She was born in this country. So your mother was the last Swedish immigrant that left in the... Yeah. Probably, as far as I can see. Yeah. So you're going to be that age. You have another one you said is 100, but she's born here? Yeah, she's born in this... Nyquist was her maiden name, Minnie Ead. She lives with a daughter now down in Cambridge. But she'll be 100 next October. She's the oldest member that we have in our church. And she still belongs to the church? Oh, yeah. She still belongs. Oh. Her daughter brings her when it's convenient. She's still very clear in her head and pretty well. So they were mentally all right, but the age are varying one year after another. Yeah, right. But you asked Gilbert about Christmas. Yes. I remember... How long was it in your home? How long was Christmas in our home? We always had all the traditional Swedish things. Ryskuddin, Svelling, and all those old goodies that... And we had to finish everything at the table before we could come in and have our Christmas. But then we always took our Bibles and read the Christmas story. In Swedish? No, not in Swedish. In English. In English. You read it or your parents? Well, sometimes we went around the circle and read a verse each one of us. We each have a Bible so that we could read. And then we lots of times go to the piano and sing a few of the Christmas carols before we opened our gifts. But always gifts were at the... You know, the gifts came last. That wasn't the most important. On Christmas Eve. On Christmas Eve. Right, right. Never in the Christmas morning? No, no. We never had it in the morning. Then you went to Jyrota? Yes. Five, five-thirty, six o'clock. You walked into the church. Was that too far? Well, you know, I can't recall, but I remember going to the church. I think by that time maybe we had a car when we... Well, my father didn't have a car until we were pretty big kids, so. I don't know. Yeah, I guess we did have a car when we still lived over on 30th Street. So the Christmas tradition was all Swedish? It was all Swedish. All Swedish. And mother decorated a tree or did you help out with... No, we all kind of helped with the tree. And yeah. But you don't remember anything about Lucia? No, no. No. No. No. We never had that tradition in our home, but my younger brother, he's very fond of the Swedish traditions. He and his wife both. And they would have Lucia, their daughter, would wear the crown and they'd have guests in and they had a real... A table set with all kinds of Swedish dishes and my father made some things for them that were typically Swedish, you know, so that they carried on that tradition in their home. But I never did. We never had Lucia. Do you still have Lutece for Christmas? Not to ask you. No, no, not for a couple of years. We've had it. We have it often enough. But patatas carb. You know, frozen. Patatas carb. We have that. And then we have... How about your boy and daughter, do they carry on any of the traditions? Not really. They've mostly gone to Christmas morning, Christmas day for their gifts even. So, this is done a little bit differently than the... Yeah. Are they married to non-Swedes or? No, our son is married to a Swedish. In fact, his wife and his son are married to a Swedish. In fact, his wife and her mother and sister are going to go to Sweden on a three-week trip now at the end of this month. So she has a Swedish tradition in her home? Yeah. They have a Swedish background. Oh, yeah. They have a Swedish background. Are they able to put on a Christmas table then like your mother? Well, they never have. But in their church. And our son goes to the church where his wife grew up, which is Covenant. They have Lucia. And they have a thing on a Saturday morning. They go for breakfast and they have the tuktugub. And that part of the tradition that they do every year in that church, they carry that out. And they have a group of women who sing that are Swedish singers. And they sing the Swedish songs, you know. And they call themselves the Lucia Choir. So it's still in the family to that degree. Did you get some of it? Yeah. And you have been back to Sweden? I mean, been to Sweden? We went there in 72. 72. It was the first time. Right. So you found your ancestors in your home? Yeah, we found them in our home. We found a lot of people I didn't know existed. You mean cousins? No, I had an aunt that was still living. I loved her sister, her younger sister. Were you able to converse with her in Swedish then? Well, yeah, we got along. We got along. No, they were surprised at how much we knew. And you went to Innsjön? And we went to Innsjön and saw I had three uncles there. Two uncles and an aunt, and then their spouses were all living at the time. And then I had three cousins. And one of the cousins had two children. So I saw all of the family from my father's side there. Have they been over here visiting you in the morning at all? Well, two of your cousins have, yeah. Yeah, my two cousins were here. And before that, my uncle and aunt, my father's sister and her husband came and visited here back in... 1952. 1952, yeah. So your mother was living at the time, so... Oh, yeah. So she could talk Swedish with them. So we got together with them. And then after we had been there, we've always sent Christmas cards every year. And I don't always do it, but I try to write a little note to them in Swedish because they'd rather have something they can read for themselves than have somebody translate it. So we tried to do that every year. That's the only connection. So you had the connection made anyway. Yeah. And you're keeping it up. Yeah. And that was the end of the interview.