 Yeah, this is cassette three, side one, continuation with Mrs. Hilfrey McBride, Omaha, Nebraska, October 13, 1987, cassette three, side one. So that means that you can go back in time and have your trips over here. You know, the older, yes, we showed movies of our trip of Sweden and so forth down to Jocelyn. Cinema 16 used to put on about four or five programs a season that were open to the public. Did your husband add any sound to it? Well, we did after he had been a narrator first, of course. The first ones had been narrated, but then he added the soundtrack. So we've got quite a few of those. So you can have full-time job, not to do to some of them because you are the only one that remembers what it is on that black and white screen there. And yes. How about your children? Did they also become interested in... Oh, yes. They're all, the whole family's interested in photography and music. All three families are, they maintain a very strong interest in those. So there was an active family McBride in it. Oh, yes. Yes. My two daughters learned, had singing in high school and they both, they had a good teacher and they were good. They really, they really both sing very beautifully. And my son is a very accomplished pianist. He can play anything and if he's interested in, he was interested in opera and stuff back there. And if a pianist accompanist wasn't there, he'd sit down and play the accompaniment for when they were practicing for operas or whatever they were doing. But he's a very accomplished musician. So you live close now to your, both your daughters? No, just one daughter here. Just one daughter here. The senator. Nancy's always lived, when she married, she moved to New Jersey and Lyle has always lived in the East, that is working for TI. And then also he had the... TI, this Texas Instrument. Yeah. And then, well, when he worked for Proctor & Gamble, he was gone, you see. He was gone for six months in Marseilles, France, and six months in, outside of England, and six months or so in Belgium. And then he had nine months in the Philippines. But he was building tied plants, you see. And he's responsible for all the mechanism inside. And when he left, it was supposed to be operating and running with people in the country able to handle it. He was a supervisor for the whole thing. Well, he, and he bought and designed and the inside, all the workings to make a tied detergent. So have you been able not to follow along with all these new gadgets and... Yes....specifications? Because you are taking part in it, you are interested to... Well, we've been together with the family at least once a year. I think all through the years, either they came or Lyle and I went East. We used to drive East a lot. And then we made, you know, we'd stay a week with Nancy and then we'd stay a week with Lyle. So you have any grandchildren then that you spend time with? Well, Mom, I have contact with all my grandchildren. All the grandchildren. Uh-huh. And one of them was just here a couple weeks ago. And I go to visit them and I've... I'm close to all my grandchildren. And they're awfully nice to me and they do so many nice things for me. And my eight grandchildren, you see, I've got 12 of those. Twelve? Twelve. And they're so interesting and they're all such a lovely bunch. And they're all up and coming little kids, you know. And they, like I say, all my greats have good homes. The parents are the kind that are interested in the raising of their children, you know. That's an important thing to them. Your daughter-in-law, Carol, the politician, what really got her interested in that kind of... Her husband. Her husband has always been in politics. Al's always been in politics and enjoyed... Here in Omaha. Yeah. He wouldn't leave Omaha. He likes Omaha. And he was... he has always been interested in politics. And she was a... a justice of the peace at one time before all that area went into Omaha. They had a justice of the peace and she was the justice of the peace. Al was instrumental in getting her into that, I'm sure, too. And the experiences she had as a justice of the peace would make the funniest book you ever heard because of things that happened and she married so many people, you know. And the incidents that happened along with that were just riotous. And, well, it would be a long story, but the one time when the couple came and they waited and waited for their folks to come and they didn't and they called up and they still didn't get there so they went ahead and got married and they appeared just as they were going out of the door. And Carol said she'd do the ceremony over for them, you know, if they wanted. And they were mad. The parents were so mad. But this was about an hour, an hour and a half after they'd called. And they were so mad and they... the groom and the father got into a fight and one of them had a sharp ring and drew blood and then they wanted both to go to the police and everything. And then just as this fracas was going on, another van drew up and they had some people inside singing Happy Days Are Here Again or something like that. And they were the couple, another couple that were going to marry, get married, you know. And there were lots of funny things happening. This human behavior. Yeah. But, of course, you see... So there are quite a few couples then that doesn't go through the religious wedding ceremony. Yes. Sometimes, yes, there were quite a few. And I met many times if just the two of them and Lyle and I would be witnesses if we happened to be over there and they hadn't brought witnesses with them, I would be witnesses to the... because you always have to have witnesses. There are a lot of people short of friends. You know, I think sometimes when people got... they wanted to get married and they didn't want a big affair out of it, you see. And Carol would just... she'd give them the words and she'd look them straight in the eye and she made it serious for them. Who taught her this, you know, just the piece to marry people and... Oh, she just naturally learned. She's, you know, she just lost them as a senator before that. She was a homebody and everybody and things, but... Her husband, what kind of work line is he in? He has a brokerage, food brokerage business. Is he also an active politician? Oh, he's... He's elected to the... No, he doesn't have an elective office. He's never been on an income? No. But he's... he's very active as a political worker in the parties. So and what kind of nationality background is he from? Well, I think... probably goes back to German. Probably German. I think... I think it's German. And your daughter now, Carol, she wished to make bride because it was a good... Name to stand on in politics. Yes. Because we... my husband and I would be pretty well known and that would identify her, you see. So they would be easier to get more votes, of course. That's exactly what it was all about. And you mentioned that you are creative in your thinking of bringing in new ideas, you said. Well... You gave that to your daughter too, then? Yes, I... Isn't that kind of a person outgoing like you are? She's... she just amazed me since she became senator. And she just, you know, talking off the cuff. I heard when the election... before the first election and the paper wanted an acceptance speech if she won. They got one from each of them so they'd have it ready and whoever won, you see. And she gave such a nice acceptance speech and she talks... she has no problem doing all the speech making that she has to make. And she's well respected down there. I'm sure that they all think... all her fellow senators respect her because she's like her father. She has her principles and she sticks with them. Do you discuss politics with her sometimes? I don't get to see her only at family dinners because they're always going out somewhere. There's always so many things they have to go through, you know, all the time. Do you follow in the papers then what's going on down there in Lincoln? Oh, pretty much. What they are deciding about. Do you object to some of it sometimes? Well, sometimes when I... I wondered twice when I said, but Carol... and she'd say, but Mother... and you see she's gotten letters from both sides. So she really considers all the information that she gets and then she makes her decision on that. And she's pretty independent. I think I did teach them all to be pretty independent minded. But my husband was too. I mean, he had... he was very quiet, but he had his principles and he lived by his principles. So you being a much older person than she is, is she able to understand your needs as an older person in today's community? Well, transportation is about the only thing that worries me. And my granddaughters make sure I get to Vasa and my other granddaughter makes sure I get to movie club. And in the daytime I can get myself there. And if I need transportation, they'll always see to it. And priest... they... both the granddaughters will call up and maybe suggest going somewhere like going to something at the Orpheum or something like that. But short trips to the store and so on, don't you take care of yourself then? I take other people. I have two friends that I take to the grocery store. You go to Vasa, no, you don't take a drink there, I mean, so you can't drive home. You don't drink anything? No. No? No. You are sober driving? I never drink. I never... see, that was one of the things... well, both families, Lyle's family and my family were dead set against any kind of liquor. My mother wouldn't have anything in the house. Anything to do with it? And I don't like having anything to do with it. But you know, some of those gatherings like organizations, they like to serve... Well, I know they do quite a little, but nobody drinks too much. They just have... most of them have wine or... Well, I suppose if they are older, they have to be careful though when they drive home so they don't get... Well, I guess that's their problem. They can snap the driver's license away from them, you know? I don't think anybody at Vasa ever does that. They are moderate? I think so. I don't think anybody just has a little, you know, I don't think... I've never known anyone at Vasa to have too much. So then you meet some Swedes up there at Vasa? That's one of the things I thought would be nice, was to just meet with a bunch of Swedes. Do you have something in common with them then? Does it recall some memories to you or... Well, we... The way they talk, I suppose, you can detect that they are Swedes. Well, not most of them. You see, and the thing... There are very few who know how to talk Swedish anymore. Most of them, you see... Do you have what I'm talking... If they're beyond a certain age, they didn't have an opportunity to learn Swedish, you see, like my sister. Because it was forbidden to have a Swedish language. And we've had classes over there and... In Swedish? Yeah, Ulla came from Sweden about three years ago or something like that, and she gave classes. And we had the most fun in those classes. There were two, the beginning and the advanced. And I was in the course in the advanced. And we just had more fun. They've had them since, but they're in the evening. And I... Getting over there would be a problem. In the night time, yeah. Yeah. But we had more fun in those Swedish classes. Just... We were talking Swedish, of course. So that brings back memories, those childhood days. Yes. I'm definitely known in all my circles. It's definitely known I have a Swedish background. I'm kind of known, you know. Because I suppose I have emphasized it. Or I mean, I say whatever I happen to say. Do you go back often to Swiss City anymore? Well, since my sister died, I haven't been... I used to go back at least maybe even a couple times a year or more when my sister lived. But after she died, I have three nephews up there. And well, of course, I've been so busy that I haven't... But as quick as I get my new house, in my new house, my... Sue City will come down here. I mean, I'm very close. I feel very close to my three nephews. And this is very nice of you to make it known that you will be home that day. Well, you see, that's just... They will knock on the door and no answer. Well, it's an old-fashioned idea. Back in the years of maybe at the turn of the century when society women didn't do anything but send cards around. I don't suppose they did that in... You're calling cards. I don't think they did that in Sweden ever, did they? No, I don't think so. Well, I can remember in books where society women each day... Each society woman would have her day at home. And then everybody else was supposed to come and call and leave a card. But nowadays, you see, they don't do that. That hasn't been for 30 years or more. Or maybe 75 years. Yes, I think at least 75. And they were all... It was only the society... Well, yes, you know, it was the people... Like your family. Your mother didn't have a card. No, no, no. Did you have it when you were growing up? No. No? No. It's a storybook idea, I suppose. But it was true. But of course, that would be under... That would be the very, very, very rich. You see, I always read a lot of books. And it's true enough that in those very, very early days, that's the way the rich people... I mean, people who had... These women had all this time and they didn't work. They didn't do their own housework or anything, you see. They had to do something. And nowadays, all those women are doing volunteer work. You have to, you know... You have to. Practically anybody that has any idle time is doing volunteer work. Or else they've gone on with their careers. You know, nobody has idle time to kill anymore. I don't think... Nobody wants to do that anymore. So most of the housewives nowadays, they work? Most of them work now. That is the big problem. And the grandparents take care of the kids then? No, they have to have babysitters and that's a big problem. No, most of them don't have anyone to turn the children over to. Some of them do, but on the whole, they have to depend on... Do you think there's a good system? No. But the economy is such that it takes two salaries to maintain the style of living that we've become accustomed to. They will go too fast at it to have all the good things. No, you see, everybody has everything from a microwave to every electrical thing. Convenience. Convenience. That's the big word. They don't want to... Well, everybody has everything. Nobody seems to start out with just a few things and add something next year. You have everything to start with. But there's nothing left to... There's nothing to strive for then anymore. Well, they have to maintain the economy then. I mean, they have to have two salaries to keep everything paid up. And they have to have two cars. So your parents now, and also you to a certain degree, followed a different pattern. You went from the scrub board to... Well, there wasn't anything else available. That was all there was then? We were, when anything was available, every time the power company added something, like Mix Master or any kind of new thing. But you didn't buy it until you had the money though? Did you buy it on time like you do today? Well, my husband worked for the power company and so we didn't actually buy it. And I've got electric... You were a little bit spoiled to be a horsewife actually. You got all the newer things ahead of other people. Well, I don't know. But anyway, we had... Whenever anything... You see, my husband working for the power company, whenever they came out with something like... Like a new iron, for instance? Electric... Well, yes, I had this ironer thing, you know. Mangle? Mangle. And I had... And then, of course, when it came to... New vacuum cleaners? No, you see, my good old Hoover... Oh, you didn't want the Hoovers? You can't beat a Hoover. To this day, I just... You see, I'm still a Hooverite. You were already Hooverized. A Hoover will still do as good a job cleaning as anything. Didn't your husband question you sometimes? Don't you need a new vacuum cleaner? He never asked that. No. He'd just say, well, I haven't looked at that recently. I'd better oil it or do something with it. And the same thing with my sewing machine. I had... In fact, he gave me my sewing machine as a gift before we married. Or anyway. And he was always the kind, well, I haven't looked at your sewing machine recently. I'd better look over it. And so I never learned to take care of anything because he just took care of everything. But I had everything. There isn't anything I didn't have. And of course, we always had a car. And of course, I always drove. You started early to do that. Well, first time anybody let me under the wheel. Out to Deadwood City. Well, that was much later. That was... Good old days. Yeah, well... What are those days good, if you think back? You know, because you were young and you were hopeful and everything was new. Well, yes. All through my life, I think things have been... Interesting times. Yes, I've had a very good life. So you don't complain about any shortages or any conveniences and so on? But if you've seen all the young people growing up today, you have so many grandchildren now. You had 12. I have 15 grandchildren. 15. They will also have an interesting life, of course, because... Yes, they all... They were all... Of course, they had good homes, you see. Lyle, Nancy and Carol gave good homes. So I'm proud of all of my grandchildren. And they're all doing very well. And my great-grands are... Of course, they're all small. And they're all... But most of them are big enough so you can tell kind of how they're going to be. And they're all very healthy and bright. And they're getting good home training and they'll get the maximum of help. I mean, making sure they get good education and all those kind of advantages. So I can be very proud of my whole family. But there is one thing you had to be certain of, though. You got to take a break to Cafrica Los once in a while to come and see you when you have an open house. To relax, think. Well, that is... Now, this is just my idea. But I do think... You see, I know a lot of people. And I think it'd be nice when I won't be going so much or driving so much, then they can come to my house and I will get to visit. And we'll just have a good time visiting. And we all miss that, you know. We all like to visit with each other. So I think I'm looking forward to that. You want to bring back an old custom. Maybe they call in cards, too. Oh, no, no, no, no. I know. The whole thing is... It's just that I will... That there's one day when I'm prepared to give them coffee and so forth, time and something to eat. You have to have something to eat when you're together. Oh, it's just... No, there's nothing elaborate about it. It's going to be very simple. And it's not going to be a display of anything. It's just they're going to have a chance to eat and have coffee or whatever they want. And that's about it. And then I'm going to have two study clubs. Two study clubs? Yeah. Well, I really... What subject, then? Well, I want to have a Bible study club and I want to have a group of my closer friends. We like to discuss politics and we like to discuss what's going on. So you are an active Republican, then? Oh, yes, absolutely. And anyway, I've got about six or eight friends, very close friends. And I've talked to some of them and we meet about twice a month around the table and talk about the things that are going on in today's world. You see, I think you need to keep your mind very active. And when your activity is curtailed in your later years, you miss a lot of things if you don't have planned things to do. And I think, of course, all my friends, you see, I've got one friend, the one that I pick up for church every Sunday. She's 93 and she still sees very well and she's very alert. And this other friend who can't hardly get around and is blind, I don't know how she manages to keep abreast of so many things. And we discuss political things. So what do you think about today's politics, the next election? Will it be a Republican or a Democrat? How do you see it? Well, I think the Democrats are in, they're kind of taking over, you see, after the... In the Senate and the House. Yes, you see, they're getting... And I think it's awful what they've done to Bork. I think it's absolutely awful. I have no respect for Kennedy or for... Biden. Biden. Biden. Because I don't think that those... Of course, I never did have any respect for Kennedy. But then... No, I'm strong. I have strong political... What do you think about those religious entrances now, like Pat Robertson and... Well, I think it's... Can you mix politics and religion in that sense? Well, I don't think you mix politics and religion. But you have, as a person, you have certain religious principles. You reflect those religious principles in your voting and who you vote for. But I don't think religion ought to get messed up in politics. And I don't think that if they're going to get all this money, I think they should be held accountable for all the money that comes in. I think it's good that they're going to be investigated and find out exactly. I think the way they get by with it legally is they write the books. Well, then, of course, you're entitled to remuneration from the books. And so I suppose that's legal for them to get that money from the books. But when people write in to buy the book, they really think they're helping the organization rather than an individual, I think. So people are seduced by... I think that's about it. And it's amazing how people become so attached to some of this. They don't think they're... They believe everything they hear. Well, I suppose people are reaching out for something. And that satisfies their religious desire. So that means that everyone has to be awake. And you are one of them that stays clear of everything. And you read the newspapers every day? Oh, sure. I've got about six or eight magazines. You watch the TV and the news and... Yeah. Oh, yes. And then, of course, now, like I'm going to this Republican luncheon, well, Hulk is going to be the speaker. And you are not afraid to ask and raise any questions? Oh, of course not. Did you see something that's wrong or... No. You question something? No. I sure like my Republican club because we get to meet all the candidates. And when they get up there and speak for three minutes, you get their number pretty well. And so we always have an opportunity to meet everybody who is a candidate, any Republican who is a candidate. So you will be part of shaping America tomorrow? I just, you know, I just live an interesting... I just have a fun life. Mother's home was Bringetofta. Bringetofta? Mm-hmm. I think... I couldn't recall exactly her... But it was this, Bringetofta. Bringetofta is a big town, but her home was in Bringetofta, and her home had just been torn down a year or so before we were over there. But her school was still there. And the church, beautiful church. And we went out across the graveyards. So here you are dealing now with the politics of the world, and you still have the memories back of where they came from in Sweden. Yes, I think I have a strong... Attachment to the past? Yes, that's it. I think... I'm proud I'm Swede, and I never hesitate to say, and I'm kind of known, you know, I'm kind of known as a Swede. They call you that? Well, I mean... Did they call you a stubborn Swede or a persuasive Swede? No, no, they just all know that I have a strong Swedish background or that I... It was the end of the interview with Hilfry McBride, Oma, Nebraska. And we have the 13th of October, 1987. End of interview.