 This is Cassette 3, side 1, continuation with David Nelson. We are in the registration. Cassette 3, side 1. So you went on to Texas, you said? Yeah. You were married in 19... 1933. Yeah. 1933. Built my first house in 1936. I bought my first house. So you had made it pretty good then. You were also a citizen, I suppose. Oh, yes. Yes. When you became a citizen, after five years? 1928. 1928. Yeah. I had been here for five years then. You were supposed to be here five years before you came. And you had been in the same location, so you didn't have any problems to qualify, and you had no problem with English. No? You were a judge, then. No? No, I had no problem. I took some courses at the University of Minnesota, too. I should mention that. Oh, you did? When I worked for Noyes Brothers & Cutler, my first job, in the evenings I took courses in advanced chemistry at the University of Minnesota, and also physiology and related subjects to pharmacy and pharmacology, also. And then also I took English for engineers. But finally that got too much to study. Too much study. It cut down English for engineers. You had an ethical interest in beginning to be a physician. I didn't follow that up. I studied some books that we had. We had a library in the companies that I worked for, and I usually studied some of those. But electrical engineering, I'm still not electronics. That has come on later. I know enough to build a simple set, but that's about all. I made a set when it first came out. I bought the set with one tube, the box about so, with one tube and a separate speaker. And I put in one tube extra to make it louder. I could get more stations in. And then I put in a third one, so I had three tube sets. And then I could get KDK, Pittsburgh, and I could get all kinds of, lots of stations. But later on I bought, at that time we used to listen to Amos and Andy, remember? A face like that. So it takes us now, what was the... Then, yeah, you asked me about if I made one for myself. I made, in my basement, I made some, some lotion that was very similar to bar magenta. And that was sold through the beauty shops, see? But when you don't have, when you don't have advertising, you know, you get nowhere with the toilet. So I discontinued it and I took a job down in Texas, in Dallas, Texas. There was a company by the name of, I advertised, I should have mentioned that I answered an ad in American Chemical Society's journal, you know. And that ad was Superior Products Company in Dallas. And they had a whale of a business. But it was all low-priced stuff. It was dime store stuff. And they were buying materials in carload lots, you know. They had a whale of a long, big business. And they needed a chemist because the owner was not a chemist, neither was his son, and they didn't have a chemist. They had an outside chemist, a pharmacist, who made up their formulas for them, see? And he had, well, they had mostly cosmetics, but they had some drugs, too. They had mouthwash similar to Listerine. We made 2,000-gallon batches, great big glass-lined tanks. And business increased considerably, so they had to add to building while I was there. And I made new products for them, several of them, and improved some of the old ones. The milk and magnesia we made in the way, according to the way that I first originated over at Noyce Brothers. And that worked out fine, too. And then I made a lotion, too, that we colored pink. They wanted us colored pink to make it look feminine, you know. And I had to cut down on the lanolin and cut down on some of the expensive perfumes to make it so that we could sell it in the dime stores, you know. But we didn't sell it for 10 cents. We sold it for more than that, of course, a dollar or something like that. And, you know, they sold so much of it that Juergens Lotion, they came out after we came out with the lotion. Juergens Lotion threatened the company with imitating their products. They had made new products, not the same as what they had, that was soap solution, old-fashioned soap solution with a little glycerin in it, you know. That had gone down pretty much. They had made a new... The vice president, after I had quit there, they wrote me in Minneapolis and asked me what date we put out that lotion. Because they were going to sue us, sue the superior company, because we were taking away some of their business. They thought that we had imitated them. Was it so similar then? Yeah, I hadn't seen, I never saw their lotion, but they claimed that it was so similar to the one I had made. Just four months earlier, we checked on it when we had... They were so similar that, except the perfume was different, of course, but the texture, the viscosity was the same, and the feel was pretty much the same. They must have put a lot of perfume. They probably analyzed my lotion over there, Bourbon Magenta. So what happened with the lawsuit? Did they sue or did they... I don't know. I think they settled somehow. They just told us they didn't pay. No, they didn't pay anything in law. How do you protect yourself now? I mean, this is risky business. You've got to touch the skin, your face, you can lose all the hair. How about lawsuits? How do you test it? You can analyze it. If it's too similar, then you are stealing the formula. There's no one that's first in the market, then. The first in the market has to... But you can't patent it, because you're using materials that have been used before. You have to have absolutely new material in there. So there's no such thing as a patent, then? No. But how about lawsuits now, I mean, for damaged suits? People lose their hairs. How do you try it? How do you test it? Well... It's too strong, you know. You lose the hair. Well, if it can be proved that it takes away business from the originator, if you can prove that, then you can sue. But how about if I buy a bottle of hair tonic? And suddenly my hair is going to start to fall off. What happens then? How do you test it to be safe? How do you test it? Well, you can't accept it by use. Use test. Furthermore, you have to reveal the ingredients to the patent office, you know, if it happens to be patent. And will they tell you it's safe to use them? Yeah. They can tell if there's something that irritates the scalp. And you can also tell by yourself if your scalp gets red and irritated from something, then you know that it's... But people are so different. You know, one can take it and one... Yeah, that's true. Skin is different from different people. You know, a coal miner in the soot all day, he can take anything. And the office worker, he's more sensitive. Yeah. So how do you... Well, you can test it, you know, yourself. If it agrees with your hair and if your scalp doesn't get irritated... So when you were fabricating or... We always had a......proved yourself with shaving cream, do you use it yourself and everything? Oh, sure, sure. And I had some friends of mine use it too. Yeah. But I know by the ingredients in there that it was soothing. It was safe. I put soothing things in. But I shaved... This is what happened with our shaving cream that I have, after I improved it. We've got a letter from a professor at the University of Minnesota, and he had been using the old shaving cream for many years. And he wrote us an unsolicited letter saying that, I have used your cream, I notice you have made a major improvement in your cream, he said. And I am still continuing to use it. I'm glad you have made this improvement, he said. See, he lauded it, you know. And one of the sons of Washburn, who owned the company at that time, he came and showed me the letter. And they were pretty much agitated about it, you know. It was really lauding the product. You got approval. Yeah. So he had noticed that his face got smooth afterwards, and didn't with the other cream. Here's another thing, though. When did they start to use deodorant? Nowadays you have those roll-ons and spray cans and everything. Was that used during the 1920s and 1930s also? Deodorant. Deodorant product. Deodorant? Oh, yeah. When did that come in the market? Oh, that was been on for quite a while. They made it in the form of a soap, you know. Oh, I see. Soap base. So they used it on their arms. Yeah, on their arms, yeah. And they usually made with aluminum salts. Aluminum salts, yeah. They constrict the pores, you know. That's what they do. Is this good for you, though? I mean, you're supposed to sweat. Well, it's debatable. You don't use it all over your body, you know. You only use it in certain places like this. Sweat limbs. Yeah, sweat. So that doesn't really make too much difference. It doesn't help too much with the sweat? No. You might sweat a little on your neck or collar or something like that. Instead, you might sweat a little more. So you've been in the sensitive business. Yeah. How long did you stay in Texas? In Texas, I stayed from 1939 in the fall to 1943. 1943. That was during the war, you know, when it started. And I did, in Texas, I started a laboratory, a testing laboratory. They didn't have any testing laboratory there. They couldn't test anything. They bought, just took what they got, you know. And they had a pharmacist who was making the formulas for them. He had his own business. He was also representing an essential oil company that made perfume oils and regular oils, all kinds of essential oils and other materials too. And he was, his name was Illes. He was an elderly pharmacist. And he did a lot of, he didn't draw any, I guess he'd draw a little salary too, lower. But otherwise, he got big commissions on his oils that he sold. They used the oils by, oh, by 50 gallons at the time, you know. Big business. Yeah. They bought alcohol for some of the products they made, so astringent lotions like, you know. They bought that in 6,000-gallon railroad cars. They had a spur in, you know. We had big, huge tanks, you know, for that. And we also made nail polish too. And we're a nail polish remover. We sold an awful lot of that. And mixed it with a little oil and a little color and put it in bottles. You had to have glass bottles for that. And that was the ethyl acetate was the basis for that. But then the war came along, and then the government told us you can't buy. There's a short supply. The government needed for the defense plants. So they told us to get only half of what we used to buy. And a few months went, and then they cut it again, half of what you had before. Finally, we couldn't get any at all. Oh, you've been shopping? Yeah. So how long did you stay there in Texas? I stayed from 1939 in the fall to 1943. Then I went back to Minnesota again. Then an old schoolmate of mine from Katrineholm, he was a mechanical engineer. He was in the paper business. He was living in Muskegon at that time. And he had worked for the paper company there. What was his name? His name was Carl Folke Egerstrand. He was from the northern part, from the Umeå area. Well, he had started a defense plant a couple of years before that, three years before. He had 300 people working night and day during the war, making parts for planes, tanks, and so forth. And that was practically all government work. He had to have a testing laboratory for hardness, you know. A lot of parts had to be hardened. And a lot of parts had to be partly hardened and partly soft. And so they had to plate parts of it, you know, electroplate. Now, I didn't have any experience in electroplate, but I knew the theory of it, you know. So my friend Egerstrand, the owner, he wrote to me in Texas and asked me, please, come and work for me. I don't know what to do. The man he had, who was a graduate of Michigan University, Deeds, the pressure was too much for him. You know, everybody worked night and day, practically. He had gone on one dark night and put the bullet through his brain, killed himself. And he had a wife and two children. And he had nobody, not Carl Egerstrand, had nobody to do his work. So he asked me if I wouldn't please come and work for him. I'll take care of the salary for you, so you don't need to regret it. Well, I worked for him until 1946. Then the war was over. And during that time in Muskegon, I met Hilma and her husband, Howard. He was the cashier for Brunswick that makes those bowling alleys, you know. And we got to be good friends. They went to the same church as I. I went to the same church as they. And we had a lot of fun together. We went to parties and everything, you know, all the time. And I worked night and day almost. I was on call during the night because I had the heat treat to take care of, heat treat department, and the plating department. And we did chrome plating and copper plating and tin plating and cadmium plating. I had to familiarize myself very quickly with that so I could do that, supervise that. And then I had the laboratory testing for hardness and grains and so forth, you know. And I had to familiarize myself with that. But he had that hardening business he had done before. He started a little shop in the garage. He bought some old machines, you know, when he started the defense plant. But he had some experienced fellows since that time, you know. So they could do pretty much when you were told how high to heat it, you know, and so forth. They quench it, you know, in oil. And they had cyanide pots too where they heat sodium cyanide to liquid and hang stuff in there. And it put the case on, you know. You know what the case is. And that's what happened. Oh, I was there until 1946. We had a good time there with Helmer and Howard and several others. They went to church there. And then I come back to—and after, after war was over, then Carl Agustin tried to get into the farm machinery business. So he put up a foundry, a small foundry, to make those disks, you know, that they make. Somebody had a patent on the outfit that had a row of disks, you know, like so, you know. And then another row and another row. For a disk arrow. Yeah, for disks, you know, disking. And when you pulled a—you had a tractor, you pulled it with the outfit. And they all come back, so one row and one row and one. You can go through gates with it, you know, like so. And they come together. And then you pull the rope again, and then they spread out again, see. And that was not a bad idea. He even hired a salesman, but he was never able to deliver, see, because it didn't go too good. The distribution was lacking, perhaps. You had to get distributors for it. Right. He couldn't sell it, so products for— He sold the whole thing. He sold the foundry and the whole business to Oliver Machine. They bought it. They bought it, yeah. And then you— Then he was always interested in the Lutheran Church, you know. He always had an idea that he'd like to be a minister sometime. And now he sold out everything. He went into the— He had made a lot of money during these years. He started a foundation that he named after his mother, Augusta Carlson. He put thousands, hundreds of thousands of dollars in that to be used for church work. Then he went as a missionary to Baghdad, Iraq, and started a Lutheran hour there, and started a home for children, and did some missionary work. But then during Eisenhower's time, then there was going to be trouble. Eisenhower was sending troops over there. They were afraid it was going to be rough for them, so they took him back. So he went to school again in St. Louis Park. And—no, not St. Louis. St. Louis. Missouri. Missouri. It was Concordia College. They have a Lutheran seminary there. So he got some more in. He supported himself with the profit he had made before, during the war. And he had two churches in Minnesota. They were the first two churches he had. One in Wisconsin later on. And then he moved to Montgomery, Alabama, and had a colored church. And then he was up in age. You know, he was my age, just about a year younger than I am. He was there at the retirement age in Alabama, so he retired and moved back with his wife to Muskegon again. Then I was back in Minnesota. When I came back to Minnesota, I started to work a year for General Mills in their plating department. I helped to put in those great big machines, automatic plating machines. That was all electric plates. They had a Betty Crocker name. You've probably heard of that. They had iron that they put out, you know. That the iron is closed with. And they had a patent on it, so you lay it down on the side instead of standing it up, you see. And they had a patent that switched, too, you see. And we had to first nickel plate. First, well, first the sole plate had to be, that was cast iron. That had to be cleaned off perfectly so you could plate the whole thing with the chrome. First the nickel and then chrome on top of that. And that was done by hand mostly. They had long tanks, you know, that were hanging the stuff down. But later on they had great big tanks. They were standing on the tank, all rubber lined, you see. And on the bar that went, you know, the pusher that went, pushers that went, and they had hooks. And like a tree, you know, where you put those articles that you want to plate on this, it looked like something on a tree, you know. And they were all covered with rubber, except the tips, you know, that they were hanging on. And a whole thing like that had to be hand done, put on the stuff. Probably about two dozen or three dozen, something like that, small thing. And then there was a copper hook, and that was on the copper line on the pusher that went. I don't know if you're as thirsty as I am. So you stayed with that business for how many years, until retirement, or...? No. I was with General Mills. That's as far as we got. And I had to do the testing as well as supervising there for eight hours a day. We didn't run through the clock, you know. They buffing. They had to buff you somewhat, you know. That, they did two shifts, you know. But the plating, they didn't do more than one shift. So I was working there for eight o'clock, seven o'clock in the morning to five o'clock at night. There for about a year or so. Then there was some politics. During that time, we put in those two plating machines, one for nickel and one for chrome. They had to go through the nickel first. Of course, first the stamping was done in one end of the building. And then the huge stamp with two foot. Just a three, side two. Well, I was with General Mills for just about a year. And then they had, another company had been doing war work. And they had a chemist, a plating superintendent, that they wanted to replace me with, you know. So they put him in there instead of me. So I took off, you know. And then I went back into my regular line again. Drugs, you know. Physicians and Hospitals Supply Company. They had a, it was actually a jobbing company. They were sold all kinds of things, you know, like beds for hospitals. And all kinds of materials that the hospital used, including injectables and drugs and everything. They also sold to drug stores too, but they didn't emphasize that too much. They emphasized clinics, drug clinics and hospitals. And they were downtown. When I came there, it was a relatively small company. It wasn't a huge company. And they had only two floors there, downtown. And then they decided in 1951, I started in 1949 with them, and the name of the subsidiary, which was the manufacturing company, it was Ulmer Pharmacal Company. U-L-M-E-R, that's the name of the company. That's the name of the owner. And he owned 95% of the stock. His sister owned 5%. But they were the only owners. But they had quite a good business. Excuse me. I think I'll have to take another drink. Well, I applied for a job there in 1949. And I got the job too. And I had to supervise manufacturing. And I had another fellow, a pharmacist, who had been there before. He was working there too. So we worked together pretty much there. And I did some experimenting with some of the products, especially a surgical jelly. They had a surgical jelly that they were manufacturing there before. But that didn't work. When you squeezed it out of the tube, it fell off, you know, and didn't hang together, you know. And it's kind of like a gel that was hardened, you know. And they made it from a certain kind of gum they called tragicanth. And at that time, there became available what they called hydrocellulose. And that's a gummy product made from wood. So wood cellulose. But it's pure. And that's what I started to experiment with. And I made quite a few experiments. And we found out the doctors liked it very well. But they had one drawback. It was hard to rinse off. They put it on an instrument, you know, for rectal examination and so forth. And when they rinsed it off, it wouldn't rinse off good enough. So we had to go back and experiment some more, which I did. And then they become available a sodium salt of this cellulose, sodium hydroxycellulose. I'll try that. And that worked first fine. Then we started to make it in a liquid, semi-liquid form. You could put it in a bottle instead of a tube. We put it in a tube, too. But it was the doctors in the offices there, they're very sloppy sometimes, you know. They forgot to put the cap on, see. Well, there was a little plug formed there, see. And then you squeezed it, and off went the plug. So we decided to quit. It was a message. You have to have a special machine for closing the tubes. You fill the tubes and it was bottom up, you know. And then had a tube that put in a number. You had to have a lot number of everything, you know. And you had to set the numbers there correctly and everything. And it's a very touchy machine. The girls finally got how to do it themselves, but a lot of times I had to help them with it. Well, we used to make a product, a lotion, back rub lotion, that they rub on the patient's back, you know. They called it lobana. My Ph.D. who worked in the testing lab, he had originated that. So that was done, but the only bad thing about it, it didn't smell good, see. So I've improved the odor of it and consistency a little bit about it. That's lobana. But I was going to tell about this Surgel. When we started to make it, we made only 50-gallon batches. Then we started to make 100-gallon batches. And the thing took off, you know. And we had good success with that. They're still making it. You might remember in the Swedish-American newspapers, did you have any Swedish-American newspapers when you were in Minneapolis? Svenska Posten. Oh, that's dead long time ago. They're dead, but at that time when... Oh, yeah. Years ago, they had... They had ads for Curico. Oh, yeah. That was not one of your products. No, no, no, no. Oh, that was lame. They cured everything. Yeah, that cured everything, yeah. And they had oleoid ointment, too. Yeah. That was a standing... No, I worked for 25 years at this Palmer Pharmacological. That was the last job I had. You retired from there, then. Yeah. And when I retired, they didn't like it. But I wrote in my resignation letter that I'll be living around Twin Cities and I'll be willing to do consulting work. So they called me back five times for consulting. And then I said that I think that I'll quit it altogether. So then I retired 100%. So if you compare all the different places you... Gamlebo, and Muskegon, Minnesota, and Texas, which one is best? Well, I think retirement is the best. Here in Grand Rapids? With Hilmar. Uh-huh. You are happily married. Oh, we had... Did you go back to Sweden? Yeah, I've been back several times. The first was 1929, when I lost my job at Norris Brothers. Then it was 31 years before I got back. I got married to Peggy Swanson in 1933, my first wife. We have one son. He lives in Minnesota. By the way, he was visiting here yesterday. And then we went back, Peggy and I, in 1960. We took it... We made up our own tour. We went by Transworld Airlines. That was one of the most experienced lines at that time. There was no Swedish lines at that time. So we went to England. We flew from New York to England, to London, England. Lost our luggage there. They sent it right on to Portugal. We didn't have shaving cream. We didn't have anything, any bedclothes, any pajamas or anything, any other shirts or anything. Just what the clothes we had. We checked in with the hotel. And not until half past eleven, we got the phone call at the hotel. And then they had found it down in Lisbon, Portugal. So they wondered what to do with it, if we would come and pick it up. No, I said, send it over here by cab. So they sent it over to the hotel by cab. And then I explained the reason why I wanted it here, is that we are going from here to Paris, from London to Paris. So we stayed in London a couple of days, and there was sightseeing there. Then we went to Paris, and there we met the luggage. And, yeah, well, that's where we got it in the middle of the night. That's when we... I have to correct that, because that was after they had discovered it, and they wanted to know if they should send it back to London or some other place. So I told them, send it to Paris. I got it to Paris. And then from there we went to Belgium, and that was during the Congo War. During that time we were supposed to go. Our schedule was with the Sabina airline, Belgian airline. Well, all they told us when we checked in the day before, they told us they don't have any air service, airlines, because all the planes are in Congo War, ferrying soldiers. But we have helicopters. So I said, well, we'll have to take a helicopter then, because train services wouldn't fit the plane's schedule, you know. So we could have taken a plane, I suppose, otherwise. But then we would have missed the connection. Well, we went to Belgium, to Brussels then, and stayed there for a couple, three days. And then from there we went on the plane to Denmark, to Köppenhavn, they call it there, Köppenhamn, Pursuenska. And from there we went to Malmö, and there we met my brother and his wife. And his daughter came from a vacation, had been in Vienna, Austria, on vacation. So we all got together there. So you were the only one that left Sweden then? Yeah. Well, my brother, my older brother was living at that. And my youngest brother, you see I had two brothers over there. Yes. My three brothers, I should say. My oldest brother, Conrad, he was alive then, but he was a widower. And then my next to me, younger, Rudolf, next to me, who lived in Jönköping, he is gone now. And Philip, he lived in Gnosher. So they were still alive. But my mother and dad, they were gone. They were gone in 1931 and 33. So you recognized the whole area then, where you went to school and to church? Oh, yeah. I went to visit everybody then. But my three brothers were still alive then, but my sister was gone then. She had died, she was actually a foster sister. She had died earlier in about 1936 or something like that. How about the farm, Auguste? One of your brothers had a farm? My oldest brother had taken over the farm and his wife had died. And he had still had the farm. No, he had sold the farm then. He had just sold the farm, that's right. But he was actually a trader for a house not too far from Gnosher, outside of Gnosher, not far from my home, Gamla Borg. How is your opinion about politics with your brothers in Sweden? Was it different than yours? Are you a Republican or a Democrat? Well, I tell you, I was really brought up in the middle party. They have so many parties over there, you know. They used to have three main parties, if you don't count the Communists, then there were four. There's the Hörger, the Friesen, that's liberal, that's in the middle, and the Socialists and the Communists. My dad was in the middle of it, the Friesen. My uncle, he was Hörger. They got together, you know, they had some vital, lively discussion, but always friendly. They never got mad at each other. My uncle, who lived in Ullrösam, he was a congressman in Andra Cameron. A riksdagsmann? Yes, a riksdagsmann, from 1914 to 1924. What was his name? Alfred Larsson. Was he...? He was Hörgermann, but not the extreme. The People's Party, then? Yes, no, the Friesen, the middle party. This is just one step to the right, Wahlmannsverbundet, they used to call it, Wahlmannsverbundet. That was a moderato, they called it moderato. They had Bundeverbundet also? Yes, they had that too. He got in that year, he was elected that year. And he was a riksdagsmann ever since, until 1924. You haven't been interested in politics over here? Not too much, you know. I do think that I have made a lot of observations during all those years, and I found this out. When the working man has good pay, you have good times. When the working man and the farmer don't have good pay, then you have depression. I found that out. I lived through the first depression in 1930, in the 30s. I saw people lose their homes, and they didn't have any organizations to help until they put up a kind of an organization called Homelown. They were doing it all sorts of things? Something to... Also up in Minnesota, the governor there started to agitate for something to... The Homeowners Donut Association? Yeah, yeah. Minnesota, they've always been the head of the rest of the states though, in reforms. Why is that, you think? Is it the Scandinavian people, you think? They used to be quite conservative in years past, but after the depression, it's been the other way. It's not socialist, and it's not communist, but it's... It's very close. The Democrats, Hubert Humphrey came from there, and several others. He was the vice president, remember? He was responsible for Medicare and so on. Years ago, when they started with Social Security, the Republicans in Washington, they voted to amend, to not go ahead with it. It was completely done by the Democrats, the Social Security. We wouldn't have Social Security now if we didn't have... if it wasn't for the Democrats. So you consider Roosevelt being a good president in the right time? Roosevelt was the one that did something. I remember the time when Roosevelt took over, and we couldn't cash our checks. The bankrupt... the whole country was bankrupt, practically. All the banks, most of them anyway, they had to close, because they couldn't pay. And we couldn't cash a check. I had to carry a check for a week at least in my pocket, so I couldn't cash it. But they reorganized it so fast, you know, that after a while we could cash the checks. And the banks were helped by the government enough so that they could take care of the immediate... but then immediate needs. But then later on, of course, came some improvements, this and some improvements, that. And a lot of the improvements that were done in the next 30 years there, they were made by Democrats. The Republicans are good for stable... they are good for the millionaires, all right? They get tax reduction, you know, so that they can spend a little more money. And they hoped that that little more money would set the thing moving again. And it doesn't. They spend it on... instead of building factories and employing, getting people employed, they go and spend it on stock and bonds and vacation and building big... Yeah, they go abroad, you know, and spend it on luxury. Of course, that helps a little bit too, you know, but not very much. And if they hadn't passed the Social Security in 1936... There wouldn't have been any Social Security. They voted against it to a man. There wasn't a one Republican voting for the Social Security. There would have been a disaster later, if all the old people didn't have... Yeah, there would have been... There would have been a worse depression in 1930. Right. That's right. They sometimes had to do things that weren't absolutely necessary, but it was good to do. Up in Minnesota, they had a shoreline of some of the lakes inside the city of Minnesota, in Minneapolis. And they put stone walls, you know, on the shore, see, so that the shores wouldn't be eaten up by the water. Bridges. They built bridges. Yeah. And a lot of things that needed to be done. But people were eager to work, though. There was no work, but they were eager to work. Today it's a different story. Now they don't want to work. Yeah, I suppose. A lot of people, they refuse to take a shovel in their hand. But the hourly work nowadays is usually about seven, eight dollars, or ten, twelve dollars an hour. I think most of them would want to work if there was work. But there's a chronic... Chronic unemployment seems to be around six or seven percent of workers who can't get a job. A lot of people can't get, even skilled workers can't get. And our General Motors lays off a thousand an hour and a thousand another time. Doesn't look good. No, and they can't get jobs. They want to work, but they can't get it. And the management, they invest in foreign stock. Yeah. Right. Outside, see. And then we send our money over to Japan, see, and Korea, and over to Germany and Japan. And Japan comes and builds factories here, you know, so that takes the profit away, you know. But that helps to get jobs. It helps. But I'm not strongly a Democrat, you know. If I see a good president who is, I think, is good and has sensible ideas, you know, then I'd vote for a Republican, too. I voted for Eisenhower. I voted, I'm ashamed of it, I voted for Nixon. I'm ashamed of it. Nobody knows, though. I mean, how can you know if a person is good or not? That's pretty hard. That's pretty hard. Because you can't believe what the press is saying. No, you can't believe anybody anymore. It's... They've been talking about Reaganomics, you know. Yes. They're looking for relief to put the millionaires on relief, you know. That's what it amounts to, you know. Millionaires, they haven't suffered much, except the oil millionaires have lately, yeah. But boy, look at the fabulous wages they pay the presidents and big corporations like General Motors and Ford and Chrysler, too. Look at it. They can afford to pay if they want to. But you see, that's the way it is.