 He was born in 1915, 1st of March, in Trail, British Columbia, Canada. He came to America in 1927. Can you tell us a little bit about your father, Erik Oscar Eugene Ericsson, who was born in Skutskär? What did he work in Sweden? Must I speak in Swedish? No, you can speak in English if you want. He came to Halifax, he landed in Halifax on the Empress of Ireland, I remember that, in 1910, I think it was. Then he went all the way across the Trail because there was a big smelter in Trail. It's the biggest non-ferrous smelter in the world up there. That's where he got work. The reason he came there, I think, is because my mother had a sister that had gone on before her. He was working up there, and of course, they went there to work because there was work there. My mother also had two brothers and two sisters that came to Trail from Sweden. Two of the sisters emigrated up to Quesnel, British Columbia. That's about 400 miles north of Vancouver on the Fraser River, and they homesteaded up there. Do you know how they get the idea to go that far away from home? On account of work, I guess. In relation, their work hours. In relation, yeah. It dates a little back further than that when they had the big labor strike in Sweden, I think 1905 or 6. My uncle, that would be my mother's oldest, my mother's wife's husband, was blackballed in Sweden. He couldn't get a job because he was with the union. He was the first one to come over to Trail, and then the rest followed over there because there was work there. That's the only reason that I can figure out why they ended up in Trail. How many Swedes do you think there were in Trail when he came there? Not too many. I think probably only the relations, really, because when I grew up there, I left there when I was 12, 13 years old, and I think at that time there was probably maybe half a dozen Swedish families in the town. There was probably about 7,000 to 10,000 people there. So they were a minority. Oh, yes. Very much so. Very much so. And the other nationalities, Irish? There were a lot of Italian, Irish, English, and Scotch, and that's about it, I think. How far is Trail now from Nelson, B.C.? 50 miles. 50 miles? We're just 50 miles down the river. So there were more Swedes, though? Oh, yeah. Nelson, yes. There were more Swedes there, but in Trail, there weren't that many. What kind of work were they doing now, then, the Swedes? Everybody worked up on a smelter. It was a copper, zinc, and lead smelter. Big place. Everybody worked there. That was the only place, you know, that there was any industry to speak of. So your father, that's the work he stayed with then? Yeah. He ran the big cranes up on the plant where they picked up the big ladles of molten metal and dumped them. That was his job. Yeah, everybody worked up on a hill. There wasn't anything else there. And how about the women now? Did they work outside their home, or did they stay home? Well, in those days, the women stayed home with the families. Oh, yes. So there was no families that could work up there? No, no. Just mostly all men working up on a hill. They might have had some office girls. That I don't know. But, no, my mother never worked at all up there. And I had a sister and a brother also. My uncle lived next door to us. He had three kids. And he worked down there. Well, everybody worked there. So you went to school there? Yeah, I went to school through sixth grades, through elementary school. And then in 1927... In 1927 we came down here because... The whole family? The whole family came down here because my dad had a sister living in Rockford. And she was up and wanting him to come down here. So that's how we happened to come down here. So she had found out about the work opportunity here, you think? Well, it was work here, all right. But then we came down just in time for the Depression. But your dad had a job up here? Oh, sure. That plant has been running up in British Columbia since 18... Around 1890, I think. It's been running 24 hours a day, steady. Never had a shutdown. Were they unionized? No, not at that time. I don't know how they are now. But not at that time? No, no. Absolutely not. So your dad, was he the only one with his family that moved down here? Yeah. The only one? The only one. Because my dad had a sister here. So what did the rest of the family say then? I mean, one left there and... I didn't like it down here. I threatened to run away and go back up there again. So you were big enough to understand what was going on? Oh, yeah. You missed all your friends back there? Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Yeah. Uh-huh. Yeah. So you remember then... And we lived right on the Columbia River. The Columbia River right through our backyard. Oh, yeah. Tremendous fishing in those days. Yeah. So I... And the mountains, you know. I missed that kind of country. You didn't care for the corn? No, I didn't care for the river down here. That dirty river. When I saw that, the rock river. So that was a bad thing for Keswaukee for... Oh, yeah. For Keswaukee. I remember when we rode down the station up there, my cousin told me, he says, take a look at the river. He says, you'll never see another one like it. And he was right. So you came down by rail then? Yeah, we came down by rail all the way from North Port, Washington, where we went across the border. Oh. You didn't have a farm up there in Tremont? Oh, no, no. We lived in a home. In Tremont? In the city, yeah. So you made a sale then of the... Yeah. Most of it, and then you moved on here. So then you... They rent an apartment there first in Rockford, or how did they... No, my dad bought a home. Bought a new home up on 18th Street, brand new place. He had his home all paid for up there, and he took what money he had and put it down on a new home up on 18th Street. We lived with my uncle for a week or two weeks only. And then he was out looking for a job, or had one? Yeah, he got a job as soon as he come down here. What kind of mechanic? Well, no, he worked in a foundry out on Keswaukee Street, Salt Brothers. You know, it was all Swedes that were running the business in those days, so if you're a Swede, you got a job. So he had no trouble then finding a job? No, no, no trouble getting a job at all. What did he say now, the first year or so? Did he regret his move? I don't think he did the first year or two, but then when the Depression come, he lost everything, lost the home, everything. And then he deported my mother on top of it, back to Canada. Why? Well, we had gone to the American consulate up in Fernie, British Columbia to get all our paperwork, you know, our visas and passports, and my dad thought everything was in order. So we were here for about two years, and we had a letter from the government saying that my mother had to get back to Canada inside of three months or she'd be deported. But you went through the custody? But we assumed, or they said, that my mother would go on my dad's quota or passport. It didn't work that way. Us kids did because we were all underage. We were all minors. So my dad went down to Senator or Congressman Buckby. He lived in town here at that time. And he told my dad, don't worry about it, he says. They cannot take the mother away from the children as long as they're minors. Don't worry about a thing. One month later she was on her way. They said that they had nothing to do with the immigration laws, you know, the congressman. So she had to go back up there for a whole year. And my dad had the three kids going to school in here and no work. That was during the Depression, see? Who supported her then, the Canadian government? Well, she had a brother living up there. She had two brothers living up there, so she stayed with one of them up there. But how could they break apart the family? They did. They did. The congressman said they couldn't do it, but they did it. Yeah. So that was a bad situation. Oh, it was a bad situation, I tell you. And your dad didn't have a job. No, that was right in 2029. Nobody was working in Rockford. Were they too close to the home then? Oh, sure. They took it away from him. He lost everything. There was a bank they owned then. Yeah, the bank down on, well, it was a bank on the corner of 7th Street and Charles at that time. Commercial Bank. So they just took everything from under him. So then he had some second thoughts. How about, he was not thinking about going back though? No, not at that time, no. So she stayed with you then about a year, two years? She stayed up in Canada. No, but I mean down here in Rockford before they deported her. Yeah, about two years. Two years. Yeah, from 27 to 29. Because she was not a criminal, of course. No, no. Like I say, now they take a thousand people and put them in a stadium and they raise their right hand and they become citizens. And she had to go back there and wait a whole year. Oh, sure. Yeah, she had to go through that whole rigmarole. And sign new papers again. Yeah, oh yes, everything. So, you know, I don't forget those things. I was, well, I was 14 years old at the time. My brother was 13, I had a sister, 15 and a half, 16 I guess. So you had three children then in the family? Three in the family, yeah. Two brothers? No, one brother, one brother and a sister. My brother passed away about, oh gee, that's 10 years, put her 10 years ago now. My sister lives in Wisconsin. So you were the youngest one? No, I was the oldest boy, yeah, yeah. So what kind of work did he get then, eventually, when he came here? Well, he worked in mechanics, Universal Joint or Rockford Clutch, that's where he ended up working. So you had to rent an apartment then? Oh, yeah. We stayed with our neighbors for about six months, I guess. Before you got another place? Yeah, well, before you could even find enough money to rent a place. Was it hard to rent an apartment at the time? No, no, he just didn't have any money. So there was plenty of apartments, but nobody had money, so... No work. You know, Rockford was about 35% unemployed in Rockford. It was really bad. So you were through with high school and... I got out of high school in 1933. 1933? And there was a high-level depression. Yeah, and then I started running to Chicago with my brother-in-law, selling eggs, butter and eggs. In Chicago? In Chicago. Door to door? Oh, yes. We went out here to the small towns around here and bought eggs, you know, from the farmers. We bought the eggs for, I don't remember exactly what we paid for them, but maybe 8, 9, 10, 11 cents a dozen. So you lived in Rockford then, and bought the eggs in Chicago? Yeah, I sold them in Chicago and sold them for 35 cents a dozen to the Jewish family, see? Because it seemed like the Jewish people in Chicago were the only ones that had any money during the depression. Was it in the suburbs then, or...? Yeah, in the north of Chicago. I bet you I run up and down every apartment building in Chicago on the north side. And you could make a living out of it? Oh, sure. Yeah. It put food on the table. That's about what it amounted to. The first job I got was down at, working for a company, was with the Cutty Haight Packing Company. That was shortly after that. How long did you do this egg paddling? Oh, gee. Off and on, I guess from 1933 up through, ah, 32, I guess. About a year and a half, I guess, something like that, yeah. Then I went to work for Cutty Haight Packing Company for about six months, candling eggs. Then I got in at Elk O'Toole up here. My uncle was one of the big wheels up there, Broberg. On your mother's side, or...? No, no. My dad's sister was married to Broberg. Oh, I see. And he was one of the fellas that started Elk O'Toole years ago. So I worked there for nine years during the war. Then I went to Camp Carr when they started. I was there for six years, and then we started our own place. We had that for about 13 years, and we sold out. Your own place? Yeah, screw business, heading business. You had a companion then? Yeah, it was four of us who started it. So you were all experienced then to know what to do? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I had charge of the tooling, tooling end of it. So you had learned the tool and die then? Yeah, I took an apprentice course at Elk O'Toole for about six years. So you supplied bigger industries then with the screws? Oh, yeah. We had customers all over the country. So you had sales? Our building, the building we had is out on Whitman Street there. It's called Specialty Screw now. It used to be Time Screw. That was our company. And we sold out. Sold out in 1963. Then I stayed with them until 1978. As a consultant? Yeah, well, I was in charge of the tooling and that out there. So they eventually ended up all right then? Oh, yeah. And your dad, did he continue then with Rockford? Yeah, he was there until he died. But Rockford Clutch over there in Harrison and over there. And your mother came back then? Yeah, she came back. That was a happy reunion when she came back. She went over to Sweden in 19, what was the first time she went over there? It was 1937, I guess. My brother and I were working, so we were both single at the time. We sent her over there for a trip. She had a twin sister in Christina. She was married to a fellow by the name of Fahlman. He was an engineer on an electric train over there or something. So during this time, do you remember there were people coming in from Chicago, socialists, selling New Teed and Swedish? Oh, yeah. They had an organization in Rockford, I understand. Were they strong enough to make an impact? I don't really think so. I remember I think they met down at the SM&SF club upstairs and they used to put on plays. The reason I say that, I remember one fellow they called Dramatiska August. And Dave Carlin was very active in that. Yes. And there was quite a few of them. Dramatiska August. Yeah, that's what they called him. I don't know who he was, but that's the name. I remember that my folks talked about him. My dad and my folks used to go up there, too. But do you think they will get a lot of followers now during this bad time? Nobody can get a job. Well, I don't remember it making any political impact or anything like that. Because the unions, they came much later, after 1935, 1936. But you know, Elka was never unionized. They tried to put the union in. And Rockford Products were not unionized, either. And now the trend is going the other way. There was too much union. There was only National Lock and Sundstrans. They were unionized the earliest. But the rest of them stayed outside. Were they able to pay the same wages? Oh, sure. They paid the same benefit. In fact, better benefit. We weren't unionized in our shop. How about pensions, though? Were they the same? We had profit sharing. We didn't have pensions. We didn't go into pensions. No, no, because you open up a whole can of worms with pension plans. Like us now, we sold our business. But what's going to happen to the people who are on pension? I mean, the new company may throw it out. It's better to have a profit sharing because you get the money. That's right. When you leave, what you put in there plus the company. Profit sharing is a good deal. They can take that lump sum and put it into an annuity or be the same thing as a pension. Quite a few of the manufacturing plant in Rottenburg had that idea then. Oh, yeah. Profit sharing. If there's a loss, also the workers take the loss. Most of the companies are going into that now. And once they pay the profit sharing every year, they can't touch that. But maybe next year their business isn't so good, you won't get as much. But it doesn't affect what you've already put in there. No, I think that's a good idea. When they first started it, this company that bought us out, they started the profit sharing and you could put in up to 10% of your wages into it if you wanted to. Now they've cut it down so you can only put in about 4 or 5%. Is that tax exempt? No. Oh, no. You've got to pay tax on it. Yeah. But how about the pension? Well, the government takes out their tax on your wages anyway, so what money you put in there can't be retaxed. But the money that the company puts in after, that's taxable. Even I, like me, when I took mine out, I took my money, the share that I put in, that was absolutely tax-free. But the money that the company had put in there, they matched it practically dollar for dollar. That was taxable. I think a profit sharing plan is the only way to go. But look what the pensions are doing to the government in this country. These army men drawing these pensions and triple-dipping. So they've got to be back to the drawing board again. That's right. And the young people, they don't understand anything else. They've got to have security and everything. Oh, yeah. So during the 30s, there was no job security. No. No job security, no unemployment payments, nothing. What are you thinking about when you read the newspapers now? Every bargaining session they have, we've got to have job security. Does that really mean anything? Well, today, if you're running a business, it used to be that they'd tell you what they'd give you. You know, I've got a business. I can give you so much money and incentive programs and so many paid. Now they come and they demand. They want to know what they're going to get before they even talk about getting a job. So it's going to be a tough going because the competition is hard enough for them. Oh, yeah. And they want everything right away. You know, another guy who worked for 15, 20 years to get something, and they want the same benefits when they start out. They get it, too, I guess, a lot of places. But it seems to backfire lately, though. Well, yeah, they're taking a second look at it. When your parents came to Rockford, did they join any church then? No, my folks never went to church, but they saw, too, that us kids went to church for confirmation and things like that. You were baptized in the trail? I was baptized when I was 11 years old. Oh, yes, that's right. Oh, I see. Because they, well, we went, the first church I went to up there was Presbyterian. There was no Swedish churches up there at all. There was one in Nelson, though, but it was too far away. Yeah, it's 50 miles. We didn't have any cars. And there was no railroad between. Oh, yes, there was railroad, but that would be impossible in those days. The first church I went to was a Presbyterian church. I went to Sunday school there. Well, then they had a Swedish circuit rider, we call him. He had come from Nelson, I don't know, come down the trail. So he got the Swedes together there. There was myself and my brother and sister, my two cousins, three cousins, and another Swedish family. Got them up in Mrs. Nelson's living room up there, and the ladies aide there, the old Swedish ladies were there, you know, the ladies aide. I was 11 years old, and there was a kid there, 9 and 8, and my cousin was older than I was, and they started giggling and laughing, you know how kids are. And I can remember Mrs. Simonson was sitting there, and she had a pitch pipe with her, you know, for a tune, to get that tone. So she blew on that, you know, and they were going to sing. I can always remember that, they sing, Po andra strand, I can always remember that. And us kids started laughing, you know. It was more like a three-ring circus than it was a religious circus. And you were going to become a new member? Yeah, well then I was baptized. Was that Methodist or Baptist? No, Lutheran, Swedish Lutheran. Swedish Lutheran? Yeah, oh yes. I see. Well then when we came down here, I was confirmed as a Zion Lutheran, and then when I married Marian while she was more active in church, I went to the Broadway Methodist down here. So, but your parents, they were not attending this baptizing? No, no, no. Well, yeah, my mother was there, sure, but my dad was working, you know. But it was very informal, the Ladies Aid Society was here, I remember that. So the men, they didn't partake in it? No, no, uh-uh, it was all women. The men didn't. They had other ideas, yeah. Yeah, there's something else that I don't like. You go up the highway in Wisconsin, you see these road signs in Spanish. I say, if they're going to spend money doing that, why don't they put road signs up in Swedish and German and all the rest of it, too? I don't know, it's, there's something that's, I don't think it's quite right, but there's nothing you can do about it, I guess. But when you came to Rockford and there were a lot of Swedish, Swedish-speaking area on the streets. Yeah, you go down Broad and 7th Street, all the way down, everything was 100% Swedish. Every store down there was Swedish. Oh, yeah. When did you start to like it now? I mean, you have a homesick. Well, I don't know, I really can't say. The nature? I suppose when I started going to school, you met, you know, friends and that. It was just, you know, I knew right then that I wouldn't be going back until maybe after I started working or something or got old enough to leave, you know. But not when your mother went back. Yeah, she went by herself. Didn't you think about joining her and go back with her? Didn't have the money. My dad had to sell furniture and everything else to get money to raise for a ticket for her up there. And I think he borrowed money from my uncle at the time, too. So, people don't think, realize how tough it was here. It was upending your whole family. Oh, yeah, like in Michigan now where Marion was, you know, they really didn't feel the depression up there like we did down here in an industrial town. Because it hits hard. Oh, they say they had a recession here. That was absolutely nothing. And now, you know, if you get out of work, you go down to sign up for unemployment and get $125, $50 a week. $100 in those days was a lot of money. It lasted seven months. Yeah, that's for sure. So, you missed the outdoors, of course, in British Columbia. Oh, yeah. You were fishing. How about the athletic? Were you interested in soccer? Oh, I played soccer. I played soccer for 17 years down here. Here? Oh, yeah. Did you start it with it in BC? Well, I used to go out when I was a kid, yeah. I watched the Scotch and the English, you know. Did they play soccer up there? Oh, yes. A lot of soccer. But you did not participate in it down there? No, no. I played hockey and skated all the time. No, I didn't play any soccer, but my brother and I used to go over to the field there and we used to shag balls for the guys, you know. But I joined the Baltic Lodge down here. Viking? Viking, yeah. And I played with them. I played all over Malin and Milwaukee. During the war, I played double headers in Chicago. They used to pay me to come in there to play ball. I see. With the South Side Swedes in Chicago. South Side Swedes? Yeah, down on the South Side. There's a Swedish club there. So, you were in the, what do you call it, A-Team then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. They had a pretty good team. Oh, yeah. We had some good teams here in Rockford, too, boy. Yeah? Yeah. Then during the war, I didn't get drafted. My brother did. I didn't get drafted on account of my work, see. But we had some fellas from Camp Grant that were from all over the country. Good ball player. We had a real good team here then. So, you also played during the war then? Oh, yeah. Were you able to get guests and to get to one place or another? Oh, yeah. The Moulin and the... Yeah, I used to ride the train. Used to take the train. They'd play for my train fare and they'd give me 15 bucks. For a Sunday? Yeah. I would have played for nothing. You would have seen my professional then. I would have played for nothing because I loved the game so much, see. But, yeah, I played outside, right? Yeah, I played a lot of soccer. Played the Italians, Scotsmen, Mexicans, you name them. And were they all Swedish guys? Swedish and Norwegian. And Norwegians? Yeah. Swedish, Norwegians. And they came during the war, the Norwegians? No, they were here before. A lot of Norwegians... The Norwegians? Oh, yeah. There were a lot of Norwegians here before that. Oh, yes. There were quite a few Norwegians in Rockford. A lot of Norwegians came over here during the 20s. In fact, one Norwegian family that I got real close with, they came over the same year we did. And they had five kids in that family. How did you practice, now? Did you practice like they do today? I mean, running and... Well, we went out every Tuesday and every Friday at the park, down at Black Hawk Park. And we'd scrimmage, you know. And then we'd play against each other. We kept in shape, that's for sure. How many players were there? About 30, 40? Well... You had to pick from? No, we had... I would say we probably had maybe 18 to 20 guys. They were steady on the practice? Steady, yeah. So you were never short of any? No, no. And the people that came in after Sweden in the 1920s and 1930s, nobody came but in the 20s. Were they good soccer players? A lot of them were, yeah. So then you played in teams in Moline and... Yeah, I've been on Moline and Davenport, Milwaukee, and Chicago. We played all over Chicago. North side and the South side. So you knew other players in Moline, like Gus Magnuson? Yeah, and Ol' Tammer. Roy Moose Peterson? Moose Peterson, yeah. Oh yeah, he was a good ball player. Played... Shorty Iggstrom? Iggstrom, yeah. Yeah, I remember him too. I haven't played in a year. Gus Wick? Gus Wick, I don't know. There's so many guys, I can't remember them all. You remember... Nils Karlsson was another one? Nils Karlsson, yeah. And then Chicago, they had a lot of guys too. I'm trying to think of this one guy that was a real good ball player. His brother-in-law, Torsten Karlsson, lived here in Rockford. They called him Swede. Swede. They had a center half in Chicago, a big tall guy, about 6'6", 6'1". Was a good ball player. I can't remember his name either. I think his last name was Johnson. And Helge Gunner. And Nils Karlsson. Helge Gunner. And you remember, I don't know if you know Ted Stang or not, do you? The Stang family? He was a Norwegian. Yeah, he played fullback for us. But he was kind of old when he retired. Oh yeah, yeah. He must be about 80, 81 years old. 81 or 82 now. But he continued up in his 50s. Oh yeah. So he was... He didn't hang up his shoes. Sven Nelson was another good one. And then he had another little guy by the name of Oli Blomquist. He played with Moline. I think he came from Moline up here, but he hit the sauce too much. And Folkey Widen was another guy in Rockford. He came over here just before the war. He was a tremendous ball player. But he drank like a fish. He'd sit down in the tavern. I'd come in there on Friday night. I'd come in there to cash my check. He'd sit there. He'd been sitting in there all day. And he'd sit there looking at the Marion on it. He'd say, Well, fine, I better be small, he'd say. And during the war he disappeared and the FBI was looking for him. His folks in Sweden, I guess they hadn't heard from him. All I knew I could tell them was that he'd gone to California or Los Angeles. So he disappeared? He disappeared. I don't know. I never heard a word from him. And they were looking for him. I don't know if something had happened in Sweden or what. But I told them, well, he had gone to Los Angeles the year before. I said, that's all I can tell you. Were there quite a few guys that left Rockford during the Depression or West and California? Oh, yeah. Yeah, a lot of them went out. Especially during the war here. During the war? Early war years. Because there was a lot of job opportunities out there. So they left them out there? Yeah. Went to the Navy Yard and they went out there and set up tool and dye shops. And did real well, a lot of them did. Yeah. So there was an expanding territory. Yeah. They tried out. So you continued to play soccer even after the war in Chicago? Oh, yeah. I quit about 1953, I think, so 1954 was the last time I played. I was just going to go in and watch a game and they were short one minutes, so I played. But here in Rockford, it folded up early? It folded up. No, they kept going. We had a bunch of young kids coming up. And they played for a while into the 60s. The children or the boys of the soccer players, were they interested to follow in their father's footsteps to play soccer? Not too many of them. Do you remember any here in Rockford? Uh, yeah, Stang, Ted Stang had a son that played soccer. No, there was not too many of them that took an interest in it. What happened there? I mean, why didn't they? I don't know. They were more interested in baseball. Why? Is it easier for them, you think? Well, it's easier for them, I suppose, and it's not half as much work. And it's more popular? More popular in this country. Oh, yes. Soccer players, you go back into the 30s and 40s, they were looked at like some kind of, you know, you're crazy playing that game. People just don't understand it, for one thing. So there's no way to explain it? Even to this day, I know people that are as old as I am, they just can't follow the game on the offside and things like that. But personally, I'd rather see a good soccer game than a baseball game any day in the week. Yeah, but baseball now, I mean, a lot of people watching baseball on the TV and they make comments about it, that they probably never played baseball in their life. Why are they so interested in that particular game and not soccer? Well, it's probably an easier game to follow, and they figure maybe it's probably more action. I don't know. In baseball? That's what they think. But it isn't, really. It seems to be the opposite. Yeah, well, everybody's got their own opinion, but I can't see, I played a lot of baseball myself, but I'd rather play soccer. Oh, yeah, it's not hard. I played hardball with the Industrial League here, and then softball for many, many years. No, they'd rather watch a basketball game or baseball than they'd play soccer. How about the… The World Cup soccer games on TV? Nobody paid any attention to them here, really, except some of the old-timers that were into the game. You watched it? Oh, I watched it, sure. I watched it every chance I could. But most people say that's dull, you know, they don't even look at it. I don't know why. But it is 90-minute section. Yeah, that's right. You know, a baseball player takes a few fast steps and he's got to sit down and rest. You hear the commentators talk about these pictures. Sometimes they have it run before them, they don't even run. Well, that's true. They have somebody doing the job for them. Maybe it's because baseball is a big business. I don't know. They're especially made for TV, where you can have commercials in the breaks. Oh, yeah, yeah. But even hockey now is hard to understand if you don't play it yourself. Yeah, oh, I like hockey. I'd rather see hockey than soccer. You didn't play hockey here in the United States, though? Not professional, no. I played with some hockey teams around here. They don't do that anymore, either. At the skating rinks in the wintertime, they used to have hockey boxes built, you know, when I was growing up down here. So that part, that's gone by the board, too. So hockey came in early to Rockford, then? Hm? Hockey came in quite early to Rockford. Oh, yes. That was here when we came down in 1927. At Churchill Park. They had a big hockey box with lights on it. Did the Swedes play, too? Oh, yeah. The Swedes were playing, too. So, did you have any followers at your games here in Rockford? How big of an attendance do you have in there? Oh, I don't know. Maybe we'd get... 500? Oh, we'd get more than that. More than that? Oh, yes. We had pretty good crowds out there for our soccer games. I wouldn't say they ran... maybe 500, 600 sometimes. Oh. Yeah. And one, during the war, we played a benefit game out at the old Byer Stadium out there for Camp Grant, for the recreational fund out there, and we played the national championship team from Dulcell. And we got beat out there 2 to 1. But we had that, and the stadium was full of people. Of course, that was a war during the war. See, people come out to support it. No, it's... But they peed it off and left in the 1950s. Yeah. Or even before the war. Yeah. Yeah. We used to go to Chicago, you know, before the war, and we used to get some pretty good crowds at Winamax Stadium and that. But mostly Swedes, Norwegians, and maybe... Well, it all depended on what team you were playing. If you were playing a Polish team, they'd have a... People had roots from the old country, or the ones... Ethnic groups are the ones that supported it. Kids born in this country, I'd say 90% of them wouldn't go across the street to see a soccer game. They don't get the feel of it. No, uh-uh. If you haven't done it since you were a kid, there's no interest there, for some reason or other. But now in the late 70s and 80s, the interest has grown up again. Oh, yes. They have it in high school now. They're starting with the little kids now, you know. And it's a good sport, and it doesn't cost much to run it. You know, a football player, you've got to put about $1,000 worth of equipment on him. You know, pads and... And you don't have to weigh 300 pounds or 250 pounds to be able to play the game either. You didn't play football? No, no, no, no. No, my dad would never sign for me to play. Was he interested in soccer? Oh, yes. He used to go to our games quite often in Chicago and all over. But during that time when you played in the 30s, there was no insurance to cover for you? Oh, nothing. Broken ball? No, nothing. That was unheard of. We played because we liked to play. You know, if you got hurt, too bad. Oh, they might run a benefit for you or something on the club, you know. There was no insurance. That's another deal, too. But there was a different game played in those days, when you watched soccer? Oh, yes. They came up with a stretcher right away and they fell down, you know, with yellow cards. You didn't see too many yellow cards? No, no. Never heard of it. There's too much show today. Sure, that's right. Did they play rough, though? No, I don't think so. The Italians and Germans? Oh, sometimes you run into some teams that were a little bit hot, you know, especially the Mexicans. We had one of them pull a knife on us in Chicago, on our goalie. Did they ever play you soccer in the Mexicans? Oh, yes. Yeah, well, we had the Polish, Italian, the Jewish Maccabees, and the Mexicans, Yugoslavians, and the Norwegians in there, of course, and they had the Swedes. So, they had all kinds of teams, all ethnic clubs, every one of them. We always had good times with them. I remember in Moline, they said they left on Saturday and stayed overnight for a dance or a event. Oh, yeah. You remember the same thing there? Yeah, they used to come up to the Baltic Lodge up here. Yeah, we used to have some real good times. It was real, real good. We enjoyed that. And we always had a nice dinner, you know, and they treated us real nice, and we tried to reciprocate the same way. And it was run by the Vikings? Yeah. Baltic, I think. Yeah. So, most of your activities then with the soccer, they was with the Baltic? Yeah, Baltic. There where you had the dances and everything? Yeah. How about the IOGT? Good Templar? Didn't they have a gymnastic… Yeah, they had a gymnastic… But you were not involved with that? No, I was not involved with them at all. And then we had the Swedish Gym also in Rockford down on 3rd, I don't know, I think between 7th and 6th Street. That's where the Sandberg boys were boxing out of, you know. Oh, I see. Bobby Sandberg, he was quite a boxer, and his brother Floyd. There were a lot of Swedes that belonged down there too, and they used to have dances down there Saturday nights. And they had a wrestling team there? Wrestling and boxing, yeah. But that all died out too. There's nothing left like that anymore. So, no one of the kids then took up the interest of gymnastics or boxing or wrestling? Not that I know of. Same with the Swedish Lodges, the Bollig Lodge, I've belonged there since 1937 or 1938. It's not Swedish anymore really, it's a mixture, it's all mixed up now, you know. So, there's not enough Swedes coming over, I guess, for one thing. Swedes stay in Sweden. What do you think the second generation of the born here? The first generation born here? Well, they marry off to somebody else, and you know, that's the way it goes. They just don't come down to the clubs anymore. I don't go down there. I go down there and pay my dues, that's about all now. Because, well, all the old timers are gone, you know. It used to be all Swedes down there. We knew everybody, see. Now you go down there, you're lucky if you know anyone down there. Yeah, you are one of the younger ones though. Well, I was when I joined, yeah. But I'm just about a 50 year member there pretty soon. Well, there's a few left, but some of the good hard workers, you know, the Swedish guys that really worked and put that, really did a lot for the club, they're all gone now. No one seems to take an interest in it. But how about the first generation born here? Are they as hard workers in other groups or organizations then? Oh, I think... What do they join? Masons? They join the Masons, and they join the different rotary clubs and Kiwanis. So they are more interested in that part of it. Yeah, yeah. And they've gone on to school too, the second. They had opportunities to go to college and get better jobs, to get into professional jobs. And they travel with a different... and they belong to the country clubs and, you know, this sort of thing. And that's what the young people like. They like to go to the country clubs and get in where, you know... In the in crowd. In the in crowd, yeah. I think the most active, or the best, I don't know how to put this, but what we like the best is the Vasa organization. I think they're more truly Swedish than any of the clubs in town now, or Scandinavian. So you belong to Vasa? Yeah, we belong to Vasa. To them, we belong to too long, but we certainly enjoy going out to the park there. And it seems like there's more Swedes or Scandinavians get together out there than any other club in Renfrewd, any other Scandinavian club. So that's... But... Keeps them together. Yeah, they do all right. There are other nationalities like the Italians, the Italians, Polacks, do they have any other... Oh yeah, they've got clubs in town, oh yes. What are they doing? Are they having trouble? Well, they tell me that all the clubs have trouble financially, you know. But they do have their own clubs. The German, Germanic club, and they got the Birdie club, they got two different Italian clubs. Social clubs, most of them. And there are a few workers, hard workers there too, they can... Oh yeah, they do. Oh yes, oh sure, yeah. But like in Vasa now, you know, there's some of the old timers that work like the dickens, but I keep thinking now what's going to happen when these guys quit. But they seem like they're more ethnic oriented, orientated out there than they are in any of the other clubs. So, I know we enjoy going out there. Some of them, even Vasa of course, the Vikings, the Vikings, they had an insurance program, but they were... They have insurance....hospitalization. A lot of people joined for that reason. Well, years ago they used to, but... It was good to have... Yeah, but now, you know, the cost has gone up so high that... They couldn't follow along. They can't follow along with it anymore, see. I remember my dad up in Canada, he belonged to... they had what they called the 1500 Club, or Trail Rosslyn Nelson 1500 Club. I don't know what they paid, a dollar or something a month in those days? And if anybody should die, they got $1500, you know, for a funeral. Well, that was a lot of money in those days, $1500, and you could afford to belong to it. But now, you know, it's impossible to... They wouldn't even look at you for $1500. It's expensive to die today. Yeah, that's right. So there are changing times. And have... Your parents, did they go back to Sweden, you said? No, my mother visited there. Your mother and your father? My dad never went back. Well, he was a good man. Marion and I went over in 64, that's the only time I've been there. I still have a... my dad still has a younger brother and a sister living over there. But they must be up around 85, between 85 and 90 now. One of them lives in Uppsala, and the other one lives in Skidshare. So you met them there when you... Oh, yes. So you went back in... 64. We went over both ways. We were there for two... gone for two months. So you could see both sides of your family. Yeah. Well, I've only got one cousin on my mother's side left over there. That was my mother's twin sister's daughter. She's the same age as I am. She's the only one I've got left over there on her side. But my dad, I've got... I've got my aunt living over there. My mother's sister, she's got a little sister. My dad, I've got... I've got my aunt and uncle, and I've got a cousin and his boy living over there. So then you watched some Swedish soccer and football, didn't you? Oh, you know, that's what I told Mary now. When we got into Gothenburg, I was on our way home. We stayed there for a week by ourselves. And I said, I'm going to go over and... We were crossing the soccer field, the O'Pollen Hotel there. We stayed at the O'Pollen. And I saw the soccer field, so I went over there. And there had been a game there the night before. Then I... I missed it. Then I went down to Weckwe. And they had some good teams down there, you know, but then it rained. That's the only time it rained. That game got rained out, if you can believe it or not. So I didn't see any soccer. And then in Stockholm, was with Herb. There... and we had been up to see some of his relatives. So we were riding in a taxi back to the hotel. And I saw them at the stadium there. They had a big banner out, some... National meet with Czechoslovakia. And I thought, geez, I bet you they're playing soccer. So we told the cab driver to take the girls back to the hotel. Herb and I got out and went into the side. It was a track meet. So I didn't see any soccer there either. Yeah. So some of your cousins, now, were they soccer players? No. No? No. My... maybe my cousin in Sweden did. He played a little bit, I guess. But in Canada, no. Not there? My... one of my cousins got to be a... He was a real athlete. He got... good swimmer and also a boxer. In fact, they wanted him to go professional when he was 18 years old. But he went off to school and said, No, none of the one... None of the one... Nobody in my family that I... All the cousins I got up there, none of one of them ever got into that. Of course, up there I can understand it because... The Swedes were... There weren't too many Swedes around, see? And the Swedes... Seems like the Swedes and the Italians, they were always fighting, you know. So they were fighting up there, just like in Rockford? Oh, sure. Yeah. But when you came here, then there was a... died down, or... Oh, yes. No fumes over the... Yeah. State Bridge or... No. Uh-uh. And Busal, do you remember him? Oh, sure. I know him. I knew him real well. He was a strong man, they said. Oh... Tremendous. That poor guy. You know, he went to Florida after, you know. Made himself a fortune down there in real estate. He did? Quit drinking, just like that, you know. He just died here. Oh, gee. It wasn't too terribly long ago, maybe a couple, three years ago. I used to know his one... Well, one of his daughters died up here. Cancer. And I saw the other girl, she... I know her real well, both the girls. He was married to... Mutala Svaka Anna, he used to call his wife. Boy, she was a pretty woman. She was from Mutala. Oh, I see. Yeah. Her name was Anna, and I could always remember my dad and my mother saying, calling her Mutala Svaka Anna. And she was a pretty lady. Oh, I see. Did she marry him? Alvin Peterson. Yeah. Or Bruce Alvin. They called him that in the... Yeah, boy, I tell you what, he used to drink, you know. He used to say... One time up on Broadway, I... He got into trouble up there on 9th Street and Broadway. This was years ago. That was long before I was married. I mean, I was married. That was long before I was married. Maybe it was during the war years, I don't know. And he was drunk, you know. And they took about six cops to take him down. Boy, he used to hit them with his head like that, you know. And I think he had a... Didn't he have one leg or something? He had a peg leg too? Oh, I don't know. Yeah. But, oh... Well, they were scared to go and get him because they used to send at least a half a dozen cops up to take him down. So he was known in the police department? Sure. Luis Albin. But they boxed him in there for a night and then he was out the next day. Yeah, they threw him in a tank down there, I guess. Sober him up. But that was only when he was drunk, he was... That's right. Oh, yeah. Otherwise, he was just as nice as apple pie. Then when he went to Florida, I guess, he just turned over a new leaf. And he worked at Rockford Forge? Rockford, I think that's where he worked. He had all these muscles and then he worked. So there were some real big Swedes at that time. Oh, on the police department too, you know. This Eric Eckbaum we were talking to yesterday, he was a police secretary, you know, for many, many years down there. He was not on the force outside? No, when he first started out, he was on the beat, but then he got to be secretary down there, made the payroll. And he set up the fingerprint department for him. He also set up the photography department for the police department in Rockford. And they had Fokie Bengtsson, and of course Bargain was chief, and Balmer. All Swedes? Oh, big guys. You had to be about six foot, over six feet or more before you could get out of the police department in those days, you know. They could pick up a guy in his hand. So they had Bursch out, he was the one that... He was a match for him. You got to match him. Oh yeah, he was a tough one. He was a tough one, boy. So he didn't let any Irish over the bridge then? No, I don't think so. That took place before we got down here, but I can imagine he could handle himself there all right. So he was from Sweden, he was an early one, I understand. He came in early 1900s. Where is Motala in Sweden? Östergötland. Östergötland, yeah. That's where she was from. So he married a Polish girl in Motala? Motala Svakaard, I can always remember that. She was a beautiful woman. I don't know how she got mixed up with him, but she did. Nobody else could come close. No. Being bad, Albin. So he had children, didn't he? Any boys? Two daughters. Two daughters. Yep. Inez? Yep. Inez is one of them. I can't remember the name of the one that died. I can't remember her name. One was blonde and one was dark. What year did you marry? 1946. 1946. And you met your wife down there in Rockford? Yeah. She came down here with her mother. I worked with her brother up at the shop. I went in to see if I wanted to meet his sister, go to Chicago to an Aragon ballroom, I guess it was, or some place. So that's where we went. Met her in, what was it, November? Met her in November and got married the next June. I saw you about three or four times. I saw you about three or four times only. Did she like the soccer play? Oh, I don't know. Real well? Not real well, I don't believe. Although we met a lot of people going to the games. Yeah, I don't know if you remember, you probably never met Fokie Johnson. No. He was with us down in Maligne. He came from Sweden in 1940. Well, he served in the Swedish Merchant Marine. And then he got to be first mate on a U.S. hospital ship toward the end of the war, and that's where he met his wife. His wife was a nurse on the board ship. But he came down, was standing down there at Black Hawk Park one time in 1948, I guess it was. And he went in to go student goal for us. He was a good ball player. He was a First War Bridegroom. Yeah, he was a First War Bridegroom in the United States. He was. First War Bridegroom. He got married in Pittsburgh. You hear a lot of soldiers marrying girls from England or whatever. But he came over here and married an American citizen, so he got to be a War Bridegroom. Helvik Charlotte Johnson, 1880 it says on her. This is on your wife's side. Yeah. And then he came up to East Pemmingen. To settle up in the upper Michigan. So you, being your own manufacturer then, you didn't have too much to do with the unions. It was easy to handle the... We had no trouble at all. Did you also employ the Swedes? Oh yeah, a few Swedes. Well, a little bit of everything, really. You got to understand that we were just starting out in the small business. And a lot of these workers had been at Elko and Screw Products. And they had their seniority in there and time in there. And a lot of them didn't want to leave. But some of them did, did come down. Ernie Nyberg was one of them. He was quite active in the clubs here in Rockford, Swedish clubs. And his daughter was quite active too with the younger Swedish. Like Vasa Bornen and all that. And they lived in the same house. Vasa Bornen and all that. And they lived outside of Stockholm. They moved outside of Stockholm on the islands out there. What do they call it? Archipelago? Yeah, they lived in there. Her husband owned an island out there or something. So they moved back to Sweden then? Yeah, she did. The daughter. She has since died. Of course, Ernie passed away too. But they were real active in the Swedish organization in town here. Big Erlending. He worked for us. He left Elko and came down and worked with us until he died. And of course, I was a Swede. All my three partners were Swedes. They come from Elko. Yeah, one came from Skru Produkts and the other, the three of us, come from Elko. We started. And you founded this company in 19... In 1949. 1949. And we sold it in 1963. To a company out of Cleveland, Ohio. Or Astabula, Ohio. And I stayed with them until I retired. And then a year after I left, they sold the business to a Rockford company, especially Skru. A lot of these companies, Skru companies, were started by Swedes. Most of them were all spin-offs from my company. Most of them. So you had the know-how and you tried it out and it worked. How would it work today in this unemployment time? Well, I don't know. A company like that? Off cold and just get going. You don't eat too good for maybe a year and a half. But people don't want to do that. Oh, no. They won't take any chances like you did. No. There's a few of them that still do it. I know a young fellow that worked for me out there before I quit. He was 18 years old when he started there. He was just a natural mechanic. I could tell that he was a kid that was going to be good. And when I left, I had him in charge of the night shift out there in the tool room. And now he's thinking about starting up his own place. So there are some of them that are really, you know, he's a Swedish fellow. He was born in this country but his folks are Swedish. His dad had a tool and die shop in Rockford but he didn't want to work for his dad. He wanted to be on his own. Independent? Yeah. All the Swedes are independent, you think, compared to Irish and Italians? Yeah, they are. Quite a bit so. And stubborn? Oh, yeah. There's some stubborn ones. I guess we're all a little bit stubborn once in a while. But in politics, it's interesting to see, you know, you also mentioned that the police force had a lot of Swedes on it, and the city council had the Swedes on it. But nowadays you hardly find a Swedish name. No. Maybe in the alderman position. But what happened? The young ones didn't want to follow? They didn't want to follow, I guess. I don't know. Get involved? Get involved, yeah. I don't know. Now there are McNamaras and Ferraris. Yeah, Italians and the Irish are taking over. So they are more hot on it to get in the city council. A lot of them think, well, I don't know, maybe they look at politics as a way of making a living without having to work. Like the union guys. You know, they can get good benefits and pensions and things like that. If you go down and be a state senator or representative for a couple of years, you got it made. You're all in the gravy. Yeah. So, you know, I guess, you're all in the gravy. Your father, now, was he a Republican or a Democrat? Democrat. How about you? Did you follow in the same... I... well, I suppose basically I'm a Democrat, but I don't like to vote a straight ticket. I never have. That's why I'm against the primaries, because I vote for the man. I don't care what the party affiliation is. You'd like to know who it is. That's right. Some people vote straight Republican because their father voted that, and their grandfather voted Republican or vice versa, and that's the way they vote. I don't believe in that. No, I've always voted a split ticket. I don't think that politics or parties should play any part in that. During the Depression, did you vote for Roosevelt then? Well, see, I couldn't vote. My dad did, I know. I didn't become a citizen until 1940. Well, you had to take out your own. Oh, sure. See, my brother... my dad, of course, my dad couldn't afford to take out his papers during the Depression time, so when he did take them out, my brother got on his papers, because he was under 21, and I had just turned over 21, so I had to go down on file. I had to wait for my first papers. I got my first papers in three years, and I got my final. It took five years for me to get my papers. That's the way it used to be. So I got my papers in 1940, and then, of course, from then on, I started... Oh, I voted for Roosevelt, and I've also voted for Republican President candidates, but I can't say that I'm a Republican or a Democrat. You've got to watch them both. That's right. You can't always rely on them. Your dad, now, was he bitter about this decision by the government? Oh, yeah, I can imagine. He lost everything he had, everything he'd worked all his life for up in Canada, he wiped out clean. That's not too easy to take, I would imagine. He never went back to Canada. Well, yeah, I drove up there in 1940. Did he go with you? Oh, yeah, my mother and my dad, my brother and I. So this is the rest of them, then? Yeah, we went up there, and then we went all the way up from Trail up to Cornell, and I had never seen my... well, when I was a little baby, I guess, but I don't remember. So they lived over 600 miles.