 Dahlstrom, born November 22, 1867 in Sweden, came to the young city of Des Moines in 1886, when Des Moines, incorporated in 1851, had a population well over 12,000. This ambitious 19-year-old left Sweden in the hope of escaping from his seeming lifetime doom of a lower-class citizen and sheep tender. Sweden had a class system where merit counted for nothing, consequently the great influx to America, the land of promise. But when he arrived in our country, times were very hard and jobs scarce. For three weeks straight, he left his boarding house to go to the starchworks every weekday morning, trying to get work. Each time, he saw from 50 to 75 men in line trying to see the foreman. On May 9, 1881, he heard about a section gang job at Berwick, Iowa. It was on a Saturday. He walked the 16 miles there, and the foreman told him to come back Monday. When he walked back, the job, which paid 90 cents for 10 hours, was taken. And then, returning to Des Moines, he invested his savings in a livery stable at 609-611 East Grand. For this, he paid down $600 in cash and took a $300 note from a friend. Upon arrival in the USA, he had worked as a farmhand in the summers and in the coal mines in the winters. He was so anxious for an education that he enrolled in first grade with the little tots at age 19 and traveled his own speed up the grades as he could. Because he had learned so quickly in Sweden in this one year of schooling there, his father concluded that was enough. He sent for his true love to come to this country from Sweden. Her people were an affluent family, and he had not dared seek her company, but they had been confirmed in the Lutheran Church together, and somehow he conveyed his love for her. He had vowed she should not marry a poor man, so he applied himself diligently to his business. He was successful and sent for her in Pennsylvania, where she lived with a brother, until they could marry. This happy day came in October 15, 1898. In 1905, our dad, Alfred Dahlstrom, who had been in the liver business in Des Moines for several years and had accumulated 42 horses, some hacks, surreys, buggies, sleighs, bobsleds, with his foresight realized that horses would soon be replaced by cars. The arrow was pointing. He was 40, had a family, and knew how he must engage in a different occupation. Those were the days livermen and furniture store owners became undertakers. The reason was obvious. So dad, in 1976, went to Worsham's Embalming School in Chicago, from which he graduated. He returned to Des Moines and secured his license, which was number 879. We have had women working in our funeral homes since 1906, when dad first started. Now it's 81 years ago. Our little mom, at that time, when dad would call for her to come to help, would stop whatever she was doing, washing, baking, and anything, and go to the office to help with the hair, cosmetics, and dressing of the ladies. The crepe for the door must be pressed also. On the day of the service, he had all of his clothes in readiness. Tails, silk hat, collars, usually three on hot days. You'll realize there was no air conditioning in churches, where most services were held. Dad would change collars during the service. They must look well-groomed, well-dressed. No wilted collars. At least three large handkerchiefs must be at hand. When necessary, mother stayed overnight in a chair with the deceased, so that the family could get some rest. Most deceased were kept in the home until time of service. Then two or three days following the service, each family was invited to our home for dinner. Restaurants were not available for such. She didn't serve just sandwiches and coffee either. It was a complete delicious dinner. Our mom was a wonderful cook. September 11, 1899, I was born, brought in by a midwife named Miss Emma Honette. A physician was called also. This occurred on East Grand in a five-room cottage. William McKinley was the president. He was killed September 4, 1901. We soon moved to an apartment over the funeral home, where we lived until 1906. I started school at Bryant School, just a block west of the Capitol. I had only a block to school. In 1906, I moved to Lonefellow School, where I attended from second grade through the sixth. Seventh and eighth grades were in the old East High building, which became the Des Moines Grammar School. In 1913, I passed to East High, the two-year-old high school, which had been built for $1 million and could seat 1,400 people. Then I was secretary of my senior class, and I was on the Quill staff as associate editor with Bruce Ashby, the editor. I received the Quill from Bruce Gould, who later owned the Ladies Home Journal. Next, I entered Drake, where my tuition was $50 a semester, and I graduated in 1919. While in Drake, I sang in the Drake League Club. I was called out of assembly one day to be interviewed by the superintendent from Montezuma. It was early in the year, and my credentials weren't even in. The next Saturday, I was told I had been accepted at a salary of $80 a month. Salaries had just gone up from $45 a month. My father thought this was great. So for Christmas, he sent me three savings books, which required a savings of $5 a month for Scandia, Linnea, and Dania. Fifteen from $80, I had to do my own sewing. My room cost $15 a month. This was in the home of the president of the school board, Dr. High. We were six teachers in my building. I had first grade. Evelyn Gallagher was in my first class. I sang in the Methodist Church Choir and also sang at the Opera House a few times. The seniors tried to date me, but that was taboo. These were two wonderful years. But Des Moines was beckoning. Do you want me to stop? But Des Moines was beckoning me. In 1921, I became a teacher in Des Moines at the Webster School. During all my 16 years in the teaching, I was never free from study. The summer of 1921, I attended Columbia University in New York and then went in by train, no conditioning yet, slept in the Pullman for the first time, and ate in the diner. In 1922, five of us girls went to Colorado. In 1923, I attended summer school at the University of Chicago. In 1924, I spent seven weeks at Grand Canyon, Mexico, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Catalina Islands, and so forth. By 1925, I had been in 24 states. Today, I have visited every state except Alaska. While teaching in Des Moines, I lived at home. My school was just five blocks away. Then following my Columbia experience, my eyes were opened. The newer methods were coming in. I was young, and so I abandoned the... but I never abandoned phonics. Projects in first grade were challenging. I don't have to read some of that. Then I taught French at Des Moines University. And then there were visitors. When I taught at the demonstration school, there were visitors every day. In 1926, I went to Chicago to sing for Jerry Reeves' wedding. And I wasn't needed at home, so I decided to apply for a teaching position there in Evanston. Then I applied in Evanston, Winnetka, and Oak Park, Illinois. The contract to Evanston came first, and so I took it. But later, I had the contract from the others. My contract to Evanston said, this ceases with marriage. In the fall of 1926, I was assigned to Dewey School, where I taught for nine years. And here, Miss Frances of Ding Dong School was my assistant. I trained 60 girls for teaching from National College of Education. Northwestern University sent classes often for observation. They were very challenging, and they called for some elements of newness. I took groups for visiting every Saturday. Carl and I sang in the North Shore Festival Chorus for seven years. Professor Lutkin was the maestro. In 1935, I was invited to teach at Northwestern University's Demonstration School. Dr. Witte was in charge. Then Professor Grace Storm at the University of Chicago asked me to make annotated lists for her books and publications, which I did. And we met every Saturday. Carl and I had been going together for seven years, and he wanted to graduate from the University of Michigan, which he did. He worked in Chicago following graduation. Then came the Depression. Carl and I came back to Des Moines to start a business with his brother George. What kind of business was that? Bakery. Bakery. He was an accountant, but his brother was so anxious. He was president of the bank here. He was so anxious to get Carl back here, and so that's what happened. Then one morning, Dad called the three of us to breakfast one morning and announced that he was giving the funeral home to us. Alice and Roy, Roy who was licensed, were already working with him. He said, Mabel, I wish you would become licensed because there's a threat of World War II, and Roy might be taken. Carl and I talked it over, and the decision was made to go to school. One of the youngsters in my Sunday school class told my mother, Mrs. Borg is going to war. War, said the mother, yes. She's going to bombing school. Here I was thrust into an entirely new field of endeavor. I had graduated from Drake, attended school in Columbia, the University of Chicago, the National College of Education, but these would not qualify me for my new vocation. It meant three years of preparation. Since Dad, foreign-born, had graduated from Worsham in Chicago in 1906 when he had a family and was age 40, I couldn't let him down. School and the subject I knew little about was gross and microanatomy, nothing, and pathology, and now there were organic, inorganic, and biochemistry, embalming, pathology, and so forth. I was with young men who had just graduated from college, hoping to complete their work before they were called into service. The younger ones called me Mom. I was 40. I had my first year of apprenticeship and was now enrolled in the College of Mortuary Science. There were 27 schools in the USA, and I gave it all I had. I came back to Des Moines for one more year, then I passed my state board. I've lived through the years when we had gas lights, electricity, came in generally in 1914. I saw the lamp ladders come morning and evening. In 1920, radio hadn't come in. My first set was made in a recipe box for $1.25. Car rides were available to the state fair for $1. We had gas meters that required a quarter for use. How long did it last then, a quarter? Well, quite a little while, quite a little while, depending on the amount of baking you were doing. Well, let's see. Carl and I moved out here to Valley View in 1973, and he passed away in 1976. Never one day in the hospital for him. So he was healthy all the way up to his death? He was on his way until I broke my hip and my arm. Then in 1952, the International Business and Professional Women's Meeting was held in Stockholm. Helen Irwin, who was the national president, begged me to go with her. We were the only two from Iowa. I felt I couldn't afford it, but she won. I was on my way, this time without Carl. But highlights in Sweden were the formal dinner of 1,400 at the city hall. I met and talked with Queen Louise, talked on the radio for one half hour by invitation. Then I went to visit with relatives for the first time in Sweden. People weren't traveling as extensively in 1952 as they do today. I gave 90 talks when I returned. With Mary Jane on radio at the Arts Center, 300 were turned away, and later 100 had to be turned away for the next time I gave it. In 1960, Carl and I both were gone for nine weeks, and we visited nine countries. In 1960, Carl and I both were gone for nine weeks, and we visited nine countries. In 1961, Alice, my sister, went to Mayo's in May and was told out of the blue that she had only four months to live. It was a blow. She lived eight months. In August, she had said she had done everything she wanted to do except visit the relatives in Sweden. I asked her if she would go if I made the arrangements. She was delighted. She had a blood transfusion, and we were on our way. She, Carl, and I were gone two weeks, and they were perfect. We came back the last of August, and she passed away December 17th. She was in bed only four days. In 1974 and 75, we took the ship Kungsholm for Christmas, and those 36 days were eventful. When we were to move to Valley View, we took a six-week trip to Hawaii. My last large trip was to Korea in 1976 to visit my daughter and family. A fabulous trip. Of course, Young was not adopted, but she had adopted us in 1959. We helped her get her master's degree at Drake, and we stayed with her in Korea. I stayed with her all the way. She married the maestro of the Korean Symphony Orchestra. Now her daughter has just gone to Italy on a scholarship. Music, of course. She also gets her room. Today, Young is teaching in Seoul, Korea, in Ewha University. Her husband also teaches in addition to being the maestro. Many years have passed since this business was started. The original building of Dad's was burned in 1948 when Western Auto was the occupant and was rebuilt and is now a storage area, but now it has been torn down for the new library. The new, well, it's not, well, it really is a library. The old funeral home on East Grand has been torn down. The Dahlstrom Funeral Home was moved to the McVicker Freeway. Mother and Dad have both passed away, also Alice. She was a vital part of the establishment as receptionist and co-partner. Mr. Dahlstrom did have the first self-starter on a Ford in Des Moines, and the cry was, it will never work, but it did, and it was on the running board. He couldn't afford to break his wrists with this kind of time-consuming work, so that's why he had to buy another one. Ours was the first funeral home in Des Moines built for that purpose only, and our air conditioning was a first also. One day, Dad was driving, I love this, driving down East 7th Street, probably 10 miles an hour, poor pavement, and a neighbor, Paul Linfelt, of the glove manufacturing people, hailed him and said, how about a ride, Dahlstrom? Sure, hop in, said Dad. Paul did. When they came to West 3rd and Locust, Dad said, I think I'll stop, Paul said, I think I'll stop here. Dad said, get out the same way you got in, I don't know how to stop it. Little traffic and no driving for teachers, but no accidents. Often I heard Dad say, be thankful you were born in this country, because when he was born, you see, there was the caste system. Merit counted for nothing. Dad was of the poorer family, mother of the better families. Her families didn't need to come here. Dads all came because they couldn't rise above their station. But now that's how socialism came in. Well, this is very interesting, what you have right here now, and you have a follow-up in the 80 years of visiting the place of your fathers and mothers. Right, right. Birthplace in Dahlstrom. And of course, I've been there four times. What did your parents talk about their beginnings in Sweden? Like your father, for instance, what was his father doing for a living? Farmer? He was working for others. In fact, he was a slave, you know, how they sold the boys at age... He was a statare. That's right. And he always said, my boys will never do what I have had to do. And they never did. So your father, he started out to work then... Very early. Very early. And only one year of schooling. That's right. And he learned so fast, that Grandpa said that was all he needed. He used to go volley, you see. Go volley, ja. Ja. So that must be in Blåland, then. Ja. So how did he get money to get over here now? I don't know. Did somebody send a ticket for him? No, nobody sent it. He got it his own somehow, saving as best he could, I suppose. And I think it was $228 to come then. A crowns. A crowns, crowns, that's right. But he had it. And he was alone. There was nobody else in his family that... No, there were four brothers. And they, all four, two came at one time, two came at another time. And first they went to Minneapolis. But Uncle Gus and Dad came to Des Moines because it was too cold in Minneapolis. Well, they reacted about the climate. That's right. Who did they knew down here then? Nobody. They just went on. That's right. They probably heard about the coal fields and there was money to get. Yes, and the land of promise. And then I read what happened, looking for jobs. And the coal mines at that time, was it down in Eddyville or was it north of... Somewhere, even, no, they were right here, some in Des Moines, ja. And the coal mines under the state capitol, they tell us. Oh, I see. Yeah, yeah. Capitol City. Yeah, right. And, yeah, what you are telling me here now is really interesting, how he could pass all those hindrances and hurdles. Right, and then you see, yeah, I know, and you see he'd work on the farms in the summer and in the coal mines in the winter. And he saved up then, and so he had the $600. And then his brother was working also, and he started a grocery store. Did they live together then? No, Uncle always lived with us. He never married, but he was with us for 28 years. I see. Yeah. So they stayed together then when they first came here. Right, right, and they lived in boarding houses, you see. And they was right like downtown Des Moines then? Well, they were a little, yes, near Des Moines, near the city. The city. Yeah, but the ladies would have the boarding houses to make money that they could, you see. And then they'd have rooming houses, and of course many men would be in one room. And when one got pneumonia or scald or fever, they all did. Yeah. And did they join the church? Right away. The First Lutheran? First Lutheran, right. Right away. Yeah. And I was baptized and confirmed and married in the same church, the one with the tall sepal, First Lutheran. And you were born 1899? 1899. And what date and month? September 11th. And it was right in Des Moines? Right, yeah. And you were born at home then? At home, midwife. Midwife, yeah. Was there a Swedish midwife? Yes, Emma Honette. Emma Honette. Yeah. So the Swedes, they had the... Taking every precaution. Yes, and you see, that was another interesting thing then. When the Swedes came here, they had Dad's name somehow. And he would meet them at the train and get them into a boarding house or someplace, you know. So, yeah. So, but you mentioned earlier that Dahlström was not the name for Sweden. No, no. It would be Swanson. Svensson. Svensson. And you see, my mother was Augusta Svensson. But they said, coming over on the boat then, there were so many Svensson's that an uncle had taken the name Dahlström, and so the four brothers all took the same name. They never mentioned the reason why they took the name Dahlström? The uncle had taken it, but I don't know why. So they followed his advice then? Yes, that's right. And there was no problem to change the name at that time? Not a bit. No, not a bit. Did it on the boat, and that was it. How long did he work in the coal mines, your dad? Well, until he went into delivery. That was in 19– well, 18-something. I forget now. 18– not too long, though. He– when he couldn't get that job in 19– well, I forget now. You were born then at that time. He had married then. Yes, yes. So at that time, you were born– No, wait a minute. He hadn't married until after he was in delivery. Oh, I see. No, he wasn't going to marry until he had saved $5,000 because he wasn't going to have his wife be married to– So $5,000? $5,000, even in those years. But it was a high– Indeed, it's high today. But you see, mother's people had means, and he didn't want her to marry a poor man. So they weren't married until he was 29. I see. He didn't want her to marry a poor man. But at that time, to raise $5,000 would be tremendous. I know it. I know it. But he invested, and he was very, very far ahead of his time. And I've often thought, I wonder what dad would have done with an education. Did he go to school here in the evening, for instance, to learn English? He went to– you see, he had his eight grades. He took a few grades at a time with the little kids in first grade that they let him go to school. So he was able to– He was, and anxious. And your mother, now, she also came to Des Moines. Mama had had 11 years of schooling when she came, you see. With her parents? Yes, with her parents. So she all left then? No, no, no, no. They didn't. They didn't need to leave. No, but why did they come, her parents, then? Well, her parents never came here. Oh, she came alone? She came alone. I never saw any grandparents, you see. I didn't ever see one. And how old was she then when she came? She was– well, she stopped in Pennsylvania first with her brother. And I think it was 1882 that she came. One year after your dad. Yes. He wrote for her, and then she went to this brother in Pennsylvania and stayed until he sent for her. And she came from Sundance River? She came from Sundance River. So they were well off, then, her parents? Yes. Well, for people like that, they had their farm, you see, and it's still in the family. It's gone from son to son to son to son. And I still– How many children were there in her family? In Mama's, there were 11. And my grandmother died at 49, carrying her 12th child. She fell and injured her back and died. And Grandpa never remarried. So they left, and one left after the other for the brotherhood. Not many came, though. Not many. They stayed this one? They stayed many of them, uh-huh. And you see, the oldest one got the farm, and then they kept enlarging and enlarging. It's a lovely home now, just lovely. So they're still in the family? They're still in the family. And the one that owns it now, what is his name? Gunnar. Let's see, Gunnar Karlsson. Gunnar Karlsson. You see, his father was Karl, and his father was Odinson. Yeah. And is there a special name on the farm where they live in Sunda Street? Do you know it? That's all–I think that's all– Sunda Street, that's it. Sunda Street, yeah. But you've been visiting there? Oh, I've stayed in there overnight. They had the flag out for us, and really, we've celebrated. And I still call them about once a month. I see. Yeah. On the phone? On the phone. Mm-hmm. Oh. Yeah. So you're really keeping up the contact? Indeed I am. Why is that? Now, you know, there are so many thousands of Swedes that came here, and they have lost the contact with Sweden. And it's too bad. But you were able then to keep it up. That's right. How many were you in your family now? Just the three of us. Three? My sister, brother, and I. Oh. The three to whom Dad gave the business, you see, in 1937 for $1. For $1? They had to have– Mm-hmm. Yeah. When you were growing up now, in the early 1900s, there was horses and buggies and– That's right. No cars. No cars. But in 1906, Dad began seeing the cars coming in. And so he decided he better get into another occupation. He was 40. He had a family. And so that's when undertakers– Yeah, what happened then? How did he get into that business? Well, you see, the livermen and the furniture men were the ones who went into undertaking because the furniture men had the materials for the caskets and the livermen had for transportation. And all they needed was a funeral director. That's right. Was he the first Swedish– No. The– Side two, continuation with Mrs. Dawson-Boyd, Des Moines, Iowa. Side two. You said, how did it take off? Did he have problems in the beginning or– No, because he was– There were a lot of Swedes here. So he knew a lot. And they were loyal to him. And the other man didn't like it a bit because they came to Dad. I won't name him. But they– He was very disgusted that Dad went into the work. Dad was well-liked. And he helped many people who couldn't pay for their services, too, you know. And so he was a marvelous person that way. How much was the funeral in 1910, for instance? Oh. Do you have a– Well, I've had a book, and it would be maybe $50. $50? Yeah. Was that a high sum for an average family? Well, no. No, it wasn't. And they could pay piecemeal. Why? They didn't have to pay cash right away. Dad would always give them plenty of time to pay. Yeah. And that's why he was so well-liked and respected. So here in this city now, was the funeral always at the funeral home? No, no. In the early days, it was always at the church. At the church. Always. And there were times when he'd have six and seven on Saturday and Sunday. And then they'd have two different churches, you see. So at that time, they had funerals on Sunday? Many would die on Monday and wait till Sunday for the funeral. I see. But nowadays, you don't have the– Not on Sunday anymore. They must have spent the year– That's right. Right. Why was that taken away on Sunday? Was it– I don't know. And then, of course, they couldn't open the cemeteries. The cemetery men refused to open graves. Smaller towns, but not in Des Moines. That was another time, too, that was difficult for Dad. During World War I, Swedish people had difficulty in their businesses because the Ku Klux Klan were very strong in Des Moines, too. I see. And the Swedes were taken in as foreigners, I suppose. Yes, businessmen. Businessmen. But that didn't mean that– They weren't taken in. They didn't join Ku Klux Klan, but others– They tried others. Well, I mean, they included Swedes and Germans and all foreigners then. Yes. Well, Germans especially. But they were hated. Yes, they were. Yeah. And they couldn't talk in Swedish either at meetings. No. And I used to give programs, singing in costume. In Swedish? Yeah. And my dad said, Mabel, we better not do this anymore because it's hurting us. But I had two years of Swedish in high school since 1917. So what were they doing then, Ku Klux Klan? Did they come out to– They'd have their meetings out at the fairground and have these big crosses burning. I didn't ever see them, you see. I didn't know what they were, but I heard about them. And did they harass people then at meetings and gatherings? Well, they must have, but of course I wasn't included. So how about the Swedish services at the church at that time? Were they disbanded then? No, no, they kept on. In Swedish? In Swedish. And we had Swedish in our church many, many years afterward. So there was a bad– It was a bad time. Bad time. But it was only during the First World War. That's right. Peter Althor disappeared. That's right. So you had to be a little bit diplomatic then, especially to people– Very. For my father's sake, you see. Right. So you couldn't continue with your Swedish programs then? No, no. Having the funerals on Sundays, that was a good idea, you know, because more people could attend. Well, Saturdays they can now too, though, because most people don't work on Saturdays, or many people don't. Many don't. And he also got the best of the other churches, the Methodists and the Catholics. Right, right. He was well-liked, well-respected. So how many years of schooling did he have then? Did you have more schooling in mortuary science than he had? No. He didn't have to school? Well, he didn't have to have quite so much, but he went to school in Chicago, and he had a year there, nine months. And the system used when you went to school, was it about the same as your dad? It was the same? The same ideas, yes, and for public health. So they always been like that, they had to be involved? That's right. No, they don't now. They don't? No, no, no, and if you bury within 48 hours, you don't have to involve. I see, it's only when you keep them for a week. That's right, for public health. I see, so that's the only reason. So that's why they have them on the third day then? Often, often, yeah. How long did he stay in business then, your dad? Well, he gave the funeral home to us in 1937. 1937? Yeah. How was the depression years then? Were they hard years for...? They were the hardest he ever had, but he never pressured anybody, and we'd have people come 20 years later and say, your father, we weren't able to pay at that time, we want to pay now. Is that right? Yeah. So there was hard times then for people? It was, it was, but he put them on the books and that was all. So he was able to do them because he had the volume to work with. Right, and you see, he built during the depression, the funeral home during the depression. I see, so there was also hardship too. Well, but he had saved up and the bank let him have it, and so he paid cash. So he was very particular about not buying anything unless he had the money. Exactly, exactly. And he used to say, there's really no investment in furniture, so when I started teaching, I bought the new Davenport, and I bought the washing machine, and I wasn't paying board and room, you see. And so I did some of those things. So you three children, he was eager, or your parents were eager for you to have education? That's right. All three of you? He said, you can have all you want, all you want. But I seemed to want the most of it, but that was all right. They graduated from high school and attended college, but didn't graduate. But you were eager to learn from one school to another. Yes, right, right. And for improvements, when I'd go to New York, it was not for a degree, but for subjects that I wanted to improve my techniques. Who gave you the idea? Was it your own search of a school? And I had good supervisors, very, and I think they recognized that I was not a bad teacher, and so encouraged me. And while you were so close to Drake University, of course, it's well known. I graduated from there. You were right in the back, so to speak. Yeah, at $50 a month, you know. So you lived at home then? I lived at home. How did you commute then? Did you... Walked, or streetcar. Were you all that close you could walk? Not very often, because I had 8 o'clock classes. But the streetcar was always available. So there was good transportation in those days. Yeah, it was, yeah. Took about 45 minutes to get there. First Lutheran Church, that was the main avenue for organizations that you belonged to, and your family. Did they belong to other organizations of Swedish background? Well, of course, Mom and Dad were in Vasa. They were in Vasa? Oh, yes, yes. Did they join early then? Yes, yes. They did? Mm-hmm. And then you see, we had three saving societies, Skandia, Linnea, and Dania. Oh, three of them? Three of them, yes. Dania was Danish? Yes. And the other two were Swedish? No, one Norwegian, Linnea. But the Swedes all joined them, you know, $5 a month in each, you know. It was a good way to save. Many built their homes that way. Oh, I see. Yeah. And were they all hospitalization insurance companies? I mean, in case you were sick, you get the... No, no, no, just savings. Just the savings? Just savings. So there was no organization of... No, no. You had social gatherings and so on? Yes. You had it all? They did have. They did have. And then, of course, they had big picnics at Union Park, and there'd be as many as 600 there. But, of course, most of those are dead now, you see. They don't do that anymore. So the Swedes, Norwegians, and the Danes, they cooperated pretty good then, together in Des Moines. There was no competition in Des Moines. Yes. Not competition, no. You were talking about you had Swedish in high school. Did they also offer Danish and Norwegian? No, no. Only Swedish? Just Swedish. They were the pushers. Were they active in the politics, now, the Swedes? Oh, some of our people became very active in politics. And you'll see it in that book that you have on Sweden, Swedish people here. It's right there. So you remember that they were active in the... Oh, yes. Were they more active than Norwegian and Danish? Oh, I think each had some. But I think there were more Swedes. So they were eager to join the school board and... Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And to become treasurers of this and that. Yeah. How about your dad, now? Was he instrumental in being an officer in Vasa, for instance? No. No, he didn't have the time. He didn't have the time. No, and it was the same way with me. I didn't have time because we had... People would come in, and we were very, very careful to be there when our families came in. So there was a 24-hour business there. It really was. And I answered the phone all night, and when a call came at night, I got up to embalm, yeah, whenever it came. And you also had to pick up the... I didn't go on the pickups. You had people. There were men who did that, yeah. And my brother, of course, was licensed too, you see, and he'd been licensed longer than I. But you had to be there to comfort your family after when they needed assistance. Right, right, right. And I... They still ask for me, but we've sold, and I keep all of it now. You don't need it. Right. You had just a few months to live. How would you accept that verdict? At first, it was staggering because there had been no specific indications. Always there were the yearly checkups, but there was surgery and recovery, and she was told she could return to work. There was no need to give up and mope. At least one knows there is no need to worry about retiring at 55 years of age, and there will be a relatively early terminal point. So we talked a little about the last trip, except we took the model, God leads, wait on the Lord, He never fails, and we never asked why. The will was made, the shots had been taken the year before. There was a trip to Europe that had been a wish always, but never materialized. So we called Carl W. Johnson in Washington, D.C., and he told us he would arrange for our going in three weeks, and he arranged it. He was the former Grand Master of the Volvo. That's right, that's right. You knew him personally? Very well, very well. We flew to Jitiburi and stayed two days. Then he had a Volvo waiting for us, and we drove to Dalsland and the 29 relatives. We stayed at the hotel in Brolanda and then visited in the relatives' homes for eight glorious days. There were two and three parties a day. Alice said it was second heaven. We worshipped in the church and visited mothers' and dads' homes. Her dream had come true. Never once did we mention her limited time. Then we returned to the States in 14 days from the time we left until we returned. In another six weeks, we took another plane trip to Chicago for four wonderful days. We never missed a Sunday at church. She never complained. There was no pain at any time. Her own minister came to call occasionally, as did other good minister friends. On the first Sunday in Advent, the three of us had communion together in our home. She could give the confession of sins without an error and with a strong voice. Likewise, the Lord's Prayer. Never did we sit down to plan the funeral service, but hints were dropped all through the months. Our Christmas tree went up December 5th and all the Christmas decorations. The Advent candles were lighted, all except the last one. Then on the morning of December 15th, the changes began to come rapidly. We had managed the nights ourselves and with little help, but now special nurses were needed. In spite of the approaching Christmas, we had round-the-clock specials, our good friends willing to give up some of their holiday plans, with ample remuneration, of course, but we needed nurses for only two days. Each day now, she asked for additional help with devotions and prayers. On Sunday morning at 11 o'clock, we saw further changes, weakness but still consciousness. Dr. Lack, her pastor, was summoned and he came at the close of the service. He realized her weaknesses and said, Shall we have the benediction and give you peace has never meant so much as it did that day. That night she left us. We realized these months more than ever the work of the Holy Spirit, but comfort to comfort her. He had never left us. Jesus Christ never failed and God was there. Her going was so quiet and we knew she had walked in. She was absent from the body, present with the Lord in faith. Over 650 people came to call the night before her service. There were over 800 at the church service. She had put her hair clip in the text, Luke 12, 40. You also must be ready for the Son of Man cometh at the hour you do not expect. She knew but was prepared. Her songs she had chosen were her favorites and they were sung in English, but the one was Om Yag Eg De Alt Meninti Yesus and Blotten Dog et Oiganblike Sender. Memorial gifts and flowers and money have been overwhelming. Alice Dahlstrom, Des Moines, Iowa, has completed her work here. She was a faithful VASA member for many years. Her memory still remains with her family and friends many years. She must have been a remarkable person. She was. She was. You would think, I mean, having this terminal illness. She took it beautifully. And I was with her alone when she passed away because the nurse had asked to be taken to go to her grandchild's program. So she and I were alone. Over all the years now you've been comforting people. It's been wonderful. In this case, like your sister, you probably never met a person like her before, because everybody seems to be loose when somebody dies, you know, the sorrow and sorrow. I know. I know. But how could she be so calm though and take the trip to Sweden? I know. I know. But, you know, I had everything with me so I could have embalmed her to bring her back. She didn't know it, but I had everything in a bag. But she had no worry about it. She didn't have to think a thing. She knew I would take care of it, but she didn't know how. But the doctors, now, why did they tell her she had only four months to live? Well, it was up in the mails. Do they really do that? I mean, the time limit? Yeah, they do. They do. You would think that... But they told me. They told me. And they had just vaguely told her that the time would be short. But it lasted eight months instead of four. And was there cancer then? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And she was only how old now? Fifty-five. Fifty-five. Yeah. And she was not married? No. No. But she had done... traveled a great deal and, you know, she was a happy kind of person. Yeah. So when she came over now to see your relation in Sweden, in Sundalsry, especially on one hand, she was able also to converse in Swedish like you? No. No. No. No? You see, there wasn't time to teach Alice and Roy when they came seven and nine years later. So you were separated from the... I was Mabel and the children. I see. So you were the only one that kept the Swedish, then? That's right. So you had to be the translator to her? Right. Right. But she still enjoyed... Oh, but she could understand. She could understand. Yes. And they did... We did very well. I did some of the talking, but we got along beautifully. Just beautifully. Yeah. And they were farmers there in Sundalsry? Yes. Right. One of them owns an electric shop, though. And... In Brolanda? In Brolanda. Yeah. And his name was... Well, he is married to a granddaughter. Oh, I see. Yeah. I've... So her wishes came true, then? Right. Oh, and we had the best time. And she... Staying at the hotel... We had always stayed in the home. But staying at the hotel, there were three of us, and we didn't want to discommode them. And so we stayed in the hotel, and she rested in the mornings. They didn't know a thing about it, though. They were as shocked as anybody when they learned that she was gone. So who did you meet now, the closest relation? Was there any aunts or... There was one... There was one cousin. First cousin. First cousin. No, no, no, no. There were more than that. There were... five first cousins. And the others were... Yeah. Yeah. What did they ask about now? What were they interested to find out what happened to their... To Alice? Yeah. You were also about your mother, for instance, when she left Sweden. Were they interested to find out how the moin looked like and what they... Oh, yes, yes. They were. And I had pictures with me, you see. And where we lived and what the business is, and yeah. And your mother and father probably had correspondence going... Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes. Especially your mother. Mother. Mother did, yes. But dead. I found no relatives of dad's. Not one. Not one. Not one. They had all come to this country. Did you see his place where he was born? The house was gone. It was gone. Yeah. But mother's, it was there. And I saw the... I knew where dad was born. Yeah. But your parents, they never said too much about it. No, they didn't, because times had been so... Now, mama, mama talked more about it. And dad knew everything about her family. So we talked about that, but we didn't talk about his family. And his mother and father had died... Well, they were all in their 80s, though. Yeah. Except grandma. She was 49 and fell, you see, when she broke her back. Yeah. She died young, yeah. But grandpa, he had tutors for them in the home, you see, to teach the children. And always somebody would come in to sew their clothes and to butcher. Yeah, he had that means to do that. And they had a big lotta garden. Lotta garden. Yeah, a big one, because for the cattle. And then now, when I go back, they all have milking machines, whether they have three cows or what. Yeah. When you went to high school here, were there many taking Swedish at that time? Well, we were just about 20. 20. Yeah. It was enough to keep teaching. That's right, uh-huh, yeah. Was there an interest to be Swedish at that time? You mentioned Kuplesklen during the First World War. That was probably a setback. It hurt. It hurt. And there were many who wouldn't admit that they were Swedish background. So the younger people then avoided to be a Swedish. They did. They did, for a while. But your parents, did they stress the Swedish, that you should learn to read it and... I was... We couldn't do anything on Sundays but read, so I learned to read Swedish, the Bible and everything on Sunday, you see. Were you able to write it, too? Yes, yes, I do now. In Swedish? Yes. And, of course, I do to my relatives. This one, the younger ones all can speak English, you know, but the older ones, no. So both your mother and father pushed a little bit to be proud of the Swedishness. Exactly, exactly. Despite all your father's hardship, he didn't knock anything down? No, no, he didn't. No. But he did say, be thankful you were born in this country, because the opportunities were here. Yeah. And when he said, you can have all the education you want, that was it. So there was the door to be opened. That's right. So you took advantage of it. Yes. But you mentioned there when you got the contract from Evanston, marriage cancelled the whole contract. Yes, and so when I was... What did you think a little bit then? I mean, wasn't that hesitating from your part? Yes, yes. Should I start school there? I can get married. I wasn't married. Well, I didn't worry about that. But anyway, when I was going to be married, I went to my superintendent and I said, I will be married and leaving. He said, this doesn't mean you. So I stayed five years longer. I see, you broke the rule. That's right. I did. But it was in the contract. It was in my contract. Why was that? Nurses, teachers, there were no married teachers, no married teachers. And nurses would marry secretly. That was off the rule. And you see, women didn't have the vote when I started to teach in 1920. I voted with the first ones. And I never missed since. So this was also a peculiar law that they couldn't vote. It was, it was. So how was your political affiliation? Are you Republican or Democrat? Republican. Republican. Always. How was that your father was Republican? Right, right. Because of being a businessman. That's right, right. And you never changed that? No. Not even during the Depression? No, no. They always say the people that Roosevelt saved the nation. Well, now wait a minute. During the Depression, yeah. I don't care what they say. Yeah, but there was a Republican that leading into the Depression. Yeah, but he probably couldn't help all of it. But wasn't it the feeling that Roosevelt was the savior of the nation? Didn't you hear that? Oh, we heard that in the New Deal. Yeah, New Deal. But we questioned it a little bit. The 99 days. Right, right. You know, there are a lot of doors to open, and people are curious to find out where it is, and most of us look in, but we don't continue anything more. But you have looked into a lot of possibilities, and you stayed with it. Can you tell me now what you have belonged to and what you have been doing here? Well, I decided when I gave up teaching and came back to Des Moines, I wasn't just going to play bridge every day. So I have been president of the Des Moines Business and Professional Women's Club for two years. I was on the Good Government Committee when we changed to our present form of government. I've been on the Civic Music Board, on the Drake Des Moines Symphony Board, on the Library Board for 18 years, president three times. I've been on the American Association of University Women's Board. I've been a patron of Mu Phi Epsilon for 40 years. I've been a member of, PEO member, 40 years. I've been the president of Questors. I've been the president of Magical Music Club. I've been in the Order of Eastern Star for 40 years. I've been program chairman of the Des Moines Women's Club. I've been co-chairman of the 100th anniversary of First Lutheran Church in 1969. I've helped with 70 weddings, and in that, there's only one divorced. I taught Sunday School for 16 years. I've been president of the East High Alumni Association. I was on the Adult Education Council two terms, three years each. And then I toured the state for the Funeral Directors Association in 1947. I talked in eight different districts on women's place in the funeral home. I've been on the committee for dedication of the first log cabin in Des Moines. Did that mean that you also were an officer on those organizations? Well, no, I didn't have time to be in PEO. And I didn't have, yes, I was in Questors, I told you that. And I was on the boards, and I could have been on, but I didn't care to be for civic music and Drake Des Moines Symphony. But I was on the board for several years. And especially now with the Des Moines Library here, they were going to honor you to have a library in your name. I know it. You see it. Wait a minute, I'll tell you that. I'll read that little portion to you. So you must have known a lot of people over the years, of course, through your father's business and that, when you started yourself. We've always kept in touch with everybody. I mean, our home has always been open. The door has been open. And when we'd have an open house, we'd have a lot of people. And we'd have a lot of people. And we'd have a lot of people. And we'd have a lot of people. And we'd have a lot of people. And it's always been open. The door has been open. And when we'd have an open house, we'd have maybe as many as 90 or 100 people come, don't you know? You have a yearly smugglers board, I understand. Yes, I always had at least 300 during that time. In your home? In my home. Not at one time. 50, 25, 30. But I'd have to help in catering, you know. You used to get the Swedes together. No, no. They were mostly from our churches, yeah. So you had, what do you call it, Rilsburg or Schoenberg? Oh, yes. Or Syngta. Rice pudding. So your mother, now, had she learned to do this home-made Sweden from your mother? She was a marvelous cook. But she was... Her mother died when she was nine years old. And so then they had everything... Grandpa hired people to come in to cook for them, you see. And she learned that from them, wasn't it? Some, but she learned that when she got here, too. And I understand you are a great risk-rinse. I have been. But that's kind of past right now. But it's been fun. Do the other people now, the Swedes, also like the Swedish smugglers board? Oh, my. We have the Norden singers twice a year, they give a smugglers board. They are wonderful. They just have everything. And now the younger ones have taken over the recipes from the older ones, or gone, they can't do it anymore. But they still have them twice a year. There are still a few of them that can keep the Swedish board. Oh, yes. The Norden, they have 600, 700 on a Sunday. Your generation, like your sister and your brother, did you all eat lutefisk? Roy didn't care for it but once a year. He didn't care for it but once a year. We always had it at Christmas time. But it was funny, they intermarried with other nationalities, and they liked it better than the Swedes. Did he marry another Swede? Yes, a German girl. A German Welsh. How about his children? They are all married. Are they interested in Swedish background? Yes, two of them are. And one has just married a Dane, you see, and they are just back from their honeymoon. And when they were in Denmark, it was kind of interesting, they were at the church there.