 This is cassette two, side one, a continuation with Mr. Concord, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. All right. Now, just about a week ago, I got a letter from the Concord denomination appointing me to a historical commission of the church. Were you in Rockford? No, the whole denomination. Were you in Chicago? Yes, the whole denomination. So I'll be on that commission, and therefore I'm interested in history. You mean you're going to work with the office in the historical commission? Yes. I see. And there will be a research in history regarding the denomination and its institutions. And I hope to gather information like that. Now, maybe the information that you have gathered will be real helpful to a denomination in finding out the history of some of its organizations. Especially for, you know, the peoples. Yes. When the Swedish people came over from the United States, a lot of them, the reason they came over, a lot of them, was because of the results of the Pietistic movement that happened and started in Germany. It spread to the British Isles, and it spread to the Scandinavian countries and all over Germany, the northern part of Europe. So a lot of the people came over, and it spread over to Sweden, and therefore it was not popular for the Christians in Sweden to read their own Bibles. It was up to the Lutheran Church to interpret it for them. How did you learn about this? What kind of books did you read, or who told you about the history of Sweden? Well, I learned this by reading. But the thing is, when they started reading, when they started reading, you know, a lot of them started getting together, and the Lutherans started more like a revival of the Christian faith in Sweden. And therefore they had big prayer meetings, and then when they became interested, some of these people became interested in the spiritual welfare of the immigrants who have already come over from Sweden to the United States. So they went over to minister to them. That was the idea, see. So when they came over there, they organized what was called the Mission Societies. So when in Kansas, Iowa, Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan, and all around the Midwest there, they started a lot of these Mission Societies. So then when all these Mission Societies got together, they formed what is known as the Mission Covenant. But our Mission Covenant, our Mission Society in Rockford was called the Rockford, no, the Evangelical, Swedish Evangelical Mission Society of Rockford. What's the one downtown? Swedish Lutheran Mission Society. Yes. Then we met at various places in town, and then all of a sudden we got so big, it didn't get very big, but we built a building anyway, and it was only 25 members. But we had a building on Fifth Avenue near Kishwaukee Street, and then we were there until 1885 when we joined the Covenant denomination. When we joined the Covenant denomination, we moved into the tabernacle on Kishwaukee and Third Avenue, and there is where our first church was there as a church. Before that, we were just a Mission Society. We were called Munchensvänner, and the people who came over from Sweden were last because they were reading, because they were known as Bible readers, so they called them last. And there was a little bit of persecution because of that, but most of it was a big blessing because a lot of the pastors themselves, Lutheran pastors themselves, became last. How about your grandparents? No. Why did they join the French? Were they French soldiers in Sweden? No, they weren't in Sweden. My grandfather, I guess, became saved at a Swedish salvage now. In Rockport? Yes. And he became a Christian then and joined the ---- Was your mother belong to Emmanuel Lutheran? Yes. My mother went to Emmanuel Lutheran. We were basically Lutherans because Lutheran church was the basic state church in Sweden, so everybody was Lutheran. So we naturally went into the Lutheran denomination, but outside of those who went to the ---- And then the pastors that we received from the Mission Societies were mostly Lutheran. But then we organized a synod called the Mission Synod. So then we drew pastors in from the Mission Synod from then on, Mission Synod, because that was no Lutheran. It was not Lutheran-oriented. It was ---- And the school in Knoxville and Keokuk. Yes. You know all about it. So then we became the Hoonsvenet. So we still call ourselves the Hoonsvenet because When did you join now? Was that when you married your wife? Yes. When we got married, I joined even before that. I joined in 1937, I think I joined the Mission Covenant Church. Were you confirmed in the Covenant Church? No. No. I was confirmed in the First Lutheran Church over in Oh, you were? Yes. I was First Lutheran Church. Pastor Seedorf? No, Reverend Lorraine. Lorraine? Yes. He was my pastor at that time. And then when I joined the Covenant Church, then Frickman was the pastor. How about ---- You remember Seedorf, though? I had seen him. I had seen him. You never heard of him in church? No, I never did hear him preach in the church, no. But I did see him. He was very Swedish, because he kept on Swedish sermons. Oh, yes. They had quite a revival over there. I remember hearing him tell that he had to preach, he had to get up in the morning sometimes and preach services because people were just so anxious to hear the word of God. And they had a tremendous revival over there. It was just unbelievable how they went on. And Reverend Lorraine was kind of interested in our activities, too, because we had cooperative churches around there. Cooperating churches, we held tent meetings. And Reverend Lorraine used to attend some of those tent meetings. You mean the Covenants? Yes. What was that time? Yes, tent meetings. That was the whole tent meetings during the summer out in the lawn. We owned a great big tent. You mean the Covenant churches? No, no, all churches. All churches? All evangelical churches. There was the Salvation Army, and there was an evangelical Methodist church, too. There were a couple of Baptist churches joined, and the Elam Baptist joined. And they all came together? Yes, we came together just for, it was an organization, see, just for spreading the gospel among the people in the city for summer meetings. And then we had, all during the year, we had meetings like that. At that time, there was only one Covenant church, two Covenant churches in the country. The one on Washington Street, Bethesda? Bethesda is in ours. In the first? In the first, yes. So there was only two at that time. So there was a... Bethesda was one of them. What you call an ecumenical feeling here in Rockport when you get together? Not ecumenical, that's a different connotation. Ecumenical has to do with accepting people, accepting people, you know, we only accept people on one basis, and that was on the Bible. And we all had that common belief, accept people on one basis, not on any other basis. Now ecumenicals, they accept you on any basis. Oh, but you met all those different churches now, the Baptist, the Covenant, and the Lutheran. Yeah. That was quite unusual. The Lutherans didn't go, but the pastor. Oh, you mean Dr. Lurie? Lurie did this on his own, this is his own personal... He was an easygoing man though, wasn't he? Well... He was well liked, they said. He was well liked. His doctrine was very good, and he was basically an evangelical. He did conduct liturgical services in the church. He didn't persecute any other denomination? Oh, no, no, no. He was very open. Yes. If he disagreed, well, he spoke at our church many times, you know, we'd have him over at meetings, and he'd speak to the young people, and sometimes he even spoke to the evening services. He was very good that way. And I don't remember whether our pastor ever spoke over at his church or not, I don't remember. Do you remember Gustav Johnson? I don't remember him, but I do know a lot about him. I wrote a small biographical sketch of him. He was well known all over. Yes, he served at our church, he served at our local church here for 12 years, then he moved to Chicago. You didn't belong to the church at that time? No, at that time, that was before my time. I joined when Carl Westerdahl was pastor. He had only been here a couple of weeks, I guess, or less than a year, anyway, I don't know how long it was. But he hadn't been here very long when I joined the church. And then I'd seen him go from there, and I saw Reverend Swenson came in, he was a champion, he was there for 25 years. Then he retired, and then Larson came in. And Larson was only a little over a year, three years. So if you look back now, being a historian, as you say, you were on the council, or the board of the covenant commission. Yes. When you look back now at all those pastors, how did they strike you? Which one was the best? Who told you the most? I mean, in the best way. Well, I think that the best pastor we ever had was Reverend Westerdahl. He was one of the early ones. He was Westerdahl was the one that was pastor when I first started. Oh, you first started, yes. And I met and I've been very friendly with the other pastors here. God bless them, I think they're wonderful pastors. But Reverend Westerdahl was the man that was responsible for the big revival that we had in our church. Now, you know, we don't only have one, two covenant churches now. We have how many covenant churches? We have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight covenant churches now. And he inspired these people and he preached his sermons in such a way that the men went out just to fight on fire for the Lord and went out to save souls. They started Sunday school classes in the outlying district. Now all these Sunday school classes now turn into churches, with the exception of one. They all turn into churches. And now they are independent. For a long while, a lot of them were dependent on our church for existence, but now they're all independent. And they have their own pastors and they have their own boards. Were they independent in those days, you think? They were independent of the first church. The first church had first subsidized them, you know, gave them money to survive. Has it changed anything, I mean, the delivering of the sermon? Is it better today or is it more open? No, it's like there's no sense of revival now in our churches as it is. There was nothing compelling now for the young people to get out and preach the word. There's no compelling. There is always the workings of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is always at work. But there was no excitement, no drive, no force. The young people are, as far as I'm concerned, are dead in our church. There are a few alive ones, true, but I mean there's no corporate... Or people... Yeah, you see, when I joined the church there, the Young People's Society was the strongest organization in the whole church. And they're the ones that had the drive. They're the ones that went out and preached the word. It's because of them that we have all these churches here in town now, the covenant churches. Same thing happened to the free church. Probably the result of both, I think Reverend Westerdahl's influence, influenced a lot of the free church to get out and do this too. So now then, when all this is done, then you look back at it, how do I say that Reverend Westerdahl did the most? So he was a good pastor? He was. He preached the word of God and people responded to it. And he must have been the best pastor because that's the best response we've had. Of course, other pastors are good pastors. We haven't had any bad ones today. But I think he was the most effective. I think he did more to spread the word of the Lord. What about the Pentecostal church? They seem to be growing like leaves in a balsam. Yes, the Pentecostals. That's what Westerdahl was. He was like a Pentecostal. He was like a fireball. He was. And he preached the word. I tell you, when he preached the word, you could almost see the sparks flying. And people responded to it. I've got to say one thing about today that was different than it was those days because the Depression was just over, or still on, and these young people didn't have ambitions like they have now. Almost every young person now goes to college. They have ambitions to go to college. And as soon as they get working age, they get a job at least. They don't go to college to get a job. And they're not available around. They disappear from the society. They disappear from the young people's society in our church right now. There's practically nothing. Perhaps education is a weakening part for the church. In other words, they don't want to commit themselves like they did years ago. There are some that think that. They feel they're a little too much. I haven't been taking that view too much, but I can see why anybody would take that view. Yes, that it may be weakening the church. You get your priorities wrong. Like you should seek ye first the kingdom of God, and all these things will be added unto you. But I feel that young people are seeking education, and they're seeking security more than they are seeking the Lord. You remember years ago, you told me about Grandma. She was in the sea for a year. And I'm sure she spent a lot of hours scrubbing the floor, the underneath, and she was not afraid to tackle anything. But people today, they wouldn't think about doing things like that. They'd send a custodian to do it. In other words, they ought to be served. That's right. Rather than serving themselves. And the custodian doesn't do it either. He's got to hire somebody else to do it. Custodians hire somebody else to do it. I guess every once in a while I see a custodian with a map, but it's mostly his helpers that do it. We used to get along on Kishwaukee Street with one custodian. Now I think we have four or five. Of course, we don't have a yard. We have a lot of yard work down here that we didn't have there. We have a lot more square feet to occupy. We don't have so many Sunday school rooms on Kishwaukee Street as we did out here. So things are a little bit different too. You can't expect one man to take care of everything down in that big church because there are too many rooms and too many square feet. It's hard to even overlook it. But the Symphony, the women get together and so I guess they had the other projects for missions. And the same with our church now. We have mission societies. They are dedicated to doing things for the missionaries. But now the men of Brotherhood, they play golf on Wednesdays instead of working in the church. Well, they're going to have to do as they please. I don't even know how to play golf. Quite a few do that, though. Yeah, yeah, they do. But I don't even know how. I've only played a full game of golf my life. You haven't been having any kind of sport or athletics or anything like that? Oh, yes. I still hold a third degree black belt in judo. You have? Yeah, I teach judo down in my basement. I do that now. Oh, you do? Yes. How did you get interested in that? I got interested in it because there was a demonstration one time on television. I saw a demonstration and I thought, well, that's something I always wanted to do. So I took it up and I went over and joined. And that was about 25 years ago. And I worked myself up to a third degree black belt. Have you ever been injured? Oh, I've been injured. It looks dangerous. I was walking on crutches there one time, but only once. And I didn't break any bones, though. I just strained my foot a little bit. But you're still practicing it? Yes. And I'm practicing. I'm supposed to be working out right now for the national tournament. You should have a sign on your door, judo instructor. You don't have to lock the door. Well, I have people coming on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. They come to your home, then? Yeah, they come down to the basement there and practice. So you're occupied, then? You don't have any... Well, then I'm an archivist at the church down there. At the church? Yeah, I'm the archivist down there. Oh. And so I'm busy with that. And I'm a poet. I write poetry. I'm publishing a book and poems now. Oh, you do? It should be on the press about this fall sometime. Coming to press? No, no. It'll be at press somewhere else. I don't really know. The man is taking care of it. I don't even know what printers he got. He's taking care of it for me. So you're keeping busy? Yeah, now that my wife broke her arm, I got to stick pretty close to home. Otherwise, I usually keep myself pretty busy. I'm on the board of... I'm the secretary of the board of directors of the American Christian College Summit Ministries. I've been in Massachusetts, Colorado. I just got back from that for a meeting there I had on the board, and the board of directors there. So I've been keeping busy with that, too. I make the correspondence. I just write the minutes of the meetings and see that all the things that we did are taken care of. Otherwise, everybody but the secretary forgets all about the meeting when it's over. They forget what we decided to do, so it's up to me to remind the president of what we did. You've got to be the wake-up. Yeah, I've got to keep awake. ♪♪♪