 I get about 40 acres. You can go there and you can live there and it ain't going to cost you an awful lot just so you live there. Okay, my mother said. So we had never had so much fun in our lives since we got out. We were born in Brås, so this was a Chinoma, and it took us 20 minutes by car from Brås to Chinoma. A school bus. So Adelaide or Adelaide? Yes, Adelaide, L-I-D-E. Yes, that's... Norwegian, that's Russian. Russian? Yes. What did your father do? Papa, I don't know where he got it, but he thought it was a very good name, so he wanted me to have it, and I got it. Then he was mad at me. Otherwise, it was his. In Sweden, and my mother had a couple of brothers here and they thought my dad should come and see what it all looked like. Well, then one of my uncles was going to go, so they decided, oh, why don't you go with us, Sandqvist, for a little while. So he was here. So the home shoe company on 7th Street, my dad opened that, because he was a shoeman. So that was the store he opened, from Esther Henriksson. So there was a little bit involved in that. Yes, it's the 14th of July, 1986. I'm sitting here with Joel Jernberg and his sister Esther. Yes. Esther was born... Adelaide. Sandqvist. Sandqvist in Brås, Sweden. Yes, that's correct. 1896, the 1st of October. That's right. So tell me a little bit about Mrs. Jernberg. So, your dad went with you to Rockford. Well, he was here, let me see now. He and my mother's brother, let's see now. Because he was here when I came, because he thought he should have one of his children over there, being I was the oldest, I got elected. And then we had an uncle doll that wanted to go, and my father thought that we should both go together, which we did. How many children did you have in the family? In mine, we were six. Esther, Anaïs, Gustav, Stina, Greta. My mother used to say when she got mad, Esther, Anaïs, Gustav, Stina, Greta. We had five of us. Four girls and my brother. He didn't have a very happy time with all these girls, I can tell you that right now. You had six children? Yes. Five girls and one... Esther, Anaïs, Gustav, Stina, Greta. So you had five girls and one boy? That's correct. And you were all born in Sweden? Yes. Every one of us. What did your father do in Borås? He had a shoe store and a shop, and he had three men working, so they did shoes and made shoes for... We had a fat Louis, he had a valet with him, and he had never seen his feet, so this valet took him in and my father made his shoes. It was here in Irak? In Borås. What was his name? We called him Fat Louis, but that wasn't fair. But he was so huge, the biggest man I have ever seen, and he couldn't see his own feet. So this valet led him by the arm in town, and every day they had a walk. So this valet held him by the arm and they walked. And every time he needed shoes, he'd go into my father and he would make him a new pair of shoes. So he could never see his own feet? Not without him sitting on a big shelf, his feet, to put it that way. I remember it as a kid, you know. He could make shoes just from leather? Yes. From the beginning? Yes. From scratch? He got the size of the foot, and from there on he made shoes. He made me a pair of shoes, too. I have found an old letter in a drawer. One of the first letters I got when my dad was gone to the United States. He wrote me home and he reminded me of the shoes. Have you still got the shoes I made for you? And I'd forgotten about it until I found that letter. Were you the oldest one in the family? Yes, I'm the oldest out of the six of us. So your dad, he left in one day for the United States? Yes, that was my uncle, well, who was it that went? My mother's brother, Klaus, Norum. Klaus it was, the oldest. And the reason for that was just for curiosity? That's my... That's all it was? Very much so. My father was very... He couldn't leave anything alone unless he found out what it was all about. So that's what... It was interesting. But he had a big family, though. I mean, there was a tremendous... Oh, my mother could handle... She could handle anything. No question about that. And then I was the oldest, you know, so, Esther, you can do that. Ska du diska idag? Jo. Så ni fick leva i allihopa? Oh, we could do it, I tell you. Then my mother said, well, if you're going to go, she said, I'm going to move to the country with those kids. I'm not going to sit in the city. So we did. So my grandpa says, oh, I know a farm you can go to. It's a kind of dilapidated house, but he said, you can live for little or nothing there. Var i Sverige? Ja. Jag var i Kina då. Is this recorded? Ja. Isn't that terrible? Oh, I knew it was. See, I got it right here. Didn't you know that? I've had it here all the time. Sure. And anything I say, it's... Så ni flyttade ju på landet då, till Kina? Ja. Morfar sa, du ska inte sitta i stan med de barna. Du ska komma ut på landet. Det är ingen plats för barn. And he was right. We were running all over the place, and we got on the farm, and we had more fun than a circus. Hur bar mamma sig åt nu? Mamma? Oh, my father sent money regularly. Oh, we always had money. Vilket år åkte han över? I think... Let me see. I was... I was about 14. No, I was about 12 when he went the first time. Jaså? And I'm born in 96. Så han var borta då, till jag kom hit, och sen gick han hem. Så ni flyttade ut då, till... På Kina gården. I Kina går man. Ja, morfars går då. Det var mor... Nej, det var inte morfar. Morfar bodde en lång nandre på byn, som vi säger, än vad vi gjorde. Men de var vänner hans som hade det här stället. Så ni bodde där då, på... Kina gården. Vi bodde där, till jag kom hit, när jag var 17. I had mid-17 years. Vad arbetade ni med då, ni barn? Det var hemma. Väl, det var den äldste utav sex, så jag hade plenty to do. Vi åkte kaos, så nej. Och ni hade kor också? All my dad says... My grandpa says... Alla dina unga springer i stan. Nu finns det en plats på Kina gården, och den kan du hyra för hundra kronor om året, så bara du bor där, med barna. And so we ended up with pigs, chickens, cows... Everything! Så ni hade mjölk då? Oh, everything! Hur många kor hade ni? I think it was three of them, just enough to take care of the family. So one came in now and then, so we had milk all year round. Så du fick hjälpa till med mjölk? Åh, herregud, yes. Ja, men det var ju fem till i familjen. Ja, men jag var den äldste, så jag fick... Esther, nu har du tittat på mjölken. Och vi hade barn här, och vi hade djur här när vi flyttade in. Så vi hade ett par kors, så bra, mjölken, separerade. Vi hade mycket roligt. Vi var här 1940, tror jag, när vi bytte plats. Så min datter bor nära. Så mamma trivdes bra genom alla barnen där ute? Åh, mamma, hon tyckte alltid om arbete. Hon gjorde ingenting. Åh, det gick så bra. Men det var ett par människor som kom och gjorde arbetet. De plånade och tog på. Och den som ägde platsen som vi hade rentat, han sa att han skulle komma och ta hand om det. Vilket han gjorde. Han hade ett barn som var äldre än jag. Han gjorde allt det tunga arbetet, så det gick bra. Och de yngre syskorna, de skolade i sina rummar? Ja. Så jag hade de sista tre årena i sina rummar. Och så blev min skolmester rädd. Han kallade oss stavungar. Det var klart, stavungar. Så han blev lite rädd, och sa, Estradill. Så jag såg, jag heter inte Estradill, jag heter Estrad Leder. Så jag minns honom om det, när jag kom hem 1920. And I went over and I met him and I told him, jag heter Estradill. Och herregud, så hade han vett det. Oh boy. So that's how that goes. Det var inte alltid så lätt då. Oh, we had a lot of fun. Nothing ever bothered us. Du gick och läste i kyrkan då i 20-åringen? Jaha. Ja. Så vi hade, we walked across the woods and met my cousin and another girl, neighbor, and we walked the rest of the way and we had lots of fun. We stopped in to my auntie Matilda, and she'd have some coffee and some good stuff, or saft in other words, you know what they had. So then I'd continue on home after that, cross country. Och pappa nu, han sände hem pengar då regelbundet. Ja, oh ja. Vad fick han för arbete här i Lappgård? Han öppna, he owned a shoe company. He was a shoeman and he used to make special shoes. So he took care of that, run that for, opened it for a home shoe. That was on 7th Street. My father opened that for him. Many years ago. Och han skötte om det då, så han gjorde jobb. Oh ja, he managed it. Så då första gången när han kom hem, då hade han varit där i två, tre år eller? Ja, tre, tre. Ja, when I came and he was here, he stayed about a half year, a little more, and then he went home. He went home about 1980. Så du gick hem på egen hand? Ja, ja, jag kan berätta, de sa... Vad hände? Min far had a brother-in-law that kind of liked his liquor and they thought that his family would probably, she had two, three kids, would be better off if he got here and my father could keep track of him, which he did. So when my father was here, he was a model person. Nothing went wrong and he worked and he sent his money home. My father hadn't been home six months before he got back and he's all track again. And I tried, and then my... So you went with your father back then? Oh no, he came home on Saturday morning to me and he says, no on Friday, Friday he says, I got my ticket, I'm leaving for Sweden tomorrow. I said, huh? Oh, he's well. So he came home, my mother had a fit. Well, she didn't say she wanted to go, so then I wrote and said, well, he never told me till the day before. She says, huh? Well, he said, I didn't think she wanted to go. You mean going to the United States, then you said Sweden? From the United States back to Sweden. But the first time you went over, you went with your father? No, my father was here and I came with an uncle. Oh, I see. Over here. So I had been there about a year before my dad decided, well, I guess he's going home. He always made quick decisions, off he went. And you had to go with him then? Nope, I stayed here. You stayed? Yeah, and so I went to work and met some friends and eventually I met him. Do you think your father had in his thoughts to stay in Sweden then if you had gone with him? Well, no. I would have been all right, but he came on Friday to tell me I was leaving in the morning like a bomb. Hell, I wasn't even ready with anything. So what do you do? I guess I was not supposed to go. I was going to stay and bother him. Oh, you had met him then? Not until about, when was it? When you lived on South 4th Street and we moved downstairs to a couple of girls. What year was that? Yeah, I don't remember. That's how I met him. He lived upstairs. When you came to the United States the first time, you remember the boat you came on, was that? Hillegola. Hillegola? That wasn't a Swedish boat, but it left from Gothenburg in other words. It left from Gothenburg? And straight to the United States? Straight to the United States, yep. So there you saw the first lady of the freedom? Yep, when I saw her the other day I said, hi, I've seen you close by. But did you know anything about her when you came there the first time? Well, we had that in history many times in school. You never paid attention to it though? No, but it kind of registers, you know, it lays there and it all of a sudden shows up. And then of course, corresponding with our dad and all the news. Oh, he told about it? Oh yeah, he wrote very often and told us about lots of things. What did your dad tell you when you were going to go through Ellis Island? Well, not much of anything. He thought, oh, she can handle that. He never worried him at all. Ah, she can make it. So I had my... You had no trouble there? Nah, no trouble. Did they examine you, the doctors? No, you had your references from the doctor at home, so you could show that when you went on board. And that saved them a lot of trouble. So you had that with your passport. And you were already vaccinated? Oh yeah, you couldn't go unless you were vaccinated. Did you do it in Utrecht? No, they did that at home. In Bordeaux? Yeah, and then they got the bad habit, you know, they would do one big thing and then one small one, and my mother, she just had a handkerchief and she wiped off one of them. One is enough in her idea. She did that all the time. Oh boy. So you had no trouble reaching Lantford? Nope, I had no trouble. So you met your father here and you stayed with him then? Yeah, well, he had an apartment with an elderly lady, so I stayed there for a couple of weeks until I got organized. And I had to do some things, and I had lots of relations here, so my auntie Fina said, Ah, she says, you come and stay with us a little while. Then I have an uncle out in Sheridan on the farm. Ah, you come out here and stay here for about a month or so until you get organized, so that's just what I did. So I didn't have to. There was an uncle in Sherry Valley? Well, in Sherland. Sherland? Mm-hmm. Oh, this is outside Rockport? Yep. There were a lot of people in West Utah that were also farmers here? Oh, my mother had two brothers, Uncle Klaus and Uncle Aaron. And they were both there, lived out in Sherland. They were farmers? No, Uncle Carl and Auron, it was. Were they farmers out there? Yep, out in Sherland. Yeah, so they lived there for a while. So then you helped them for a while? Oh, I had more fun. So one day my auntie Louise, she wouldn't touch anything, you know, so my uncle says, How about you? Do you know how to milk cows? Hey, I said, I do. Okay, you and I go into the barn. So from there on, I got stuck. Then you were in trouble. No, I didn't know. Why did you say that you know how to milk cows? You could just say, you know, I don't know. But you, the last three, four years we had lived on the farm, they knew very well I couldn't get away from there on. I enjoyed that. I didn't mind. So then Uncle Aaron, he says, Hey, how about you and I go out to the barn? I said, Okay, let's go. Oh, boy. And then the whole family came over? Your mother? No, just my dad and I. That's all. Would the rest stay this week? Oh, yeah. My mother wouldn't go for anybody. But all these five kids, she said, Nope, I'm staying right here. They're going to go through school here. So she raised them by herself then? Oh, no. Dad went home about, I had been there a year. Then he said, I'm going home, leaving for Sweden tomorrow. He said, Will you come and pack my trunk? I said, Huh? So I went and packed his trunk, and he took off. So I was left. And he never came back? No. So he stayed in Sweden? Well, sure he did. He had his family. So he probably wanted you to come with him. Well, he decided with all the kids, we got one of you come being the oldest. I went. So I was here about a year before Dad left again. Well, she didn't say she wanted to go home. She told my mother, and she was so mad. So you stayed then? Well, what do you do? You were working, and they took a little money to get the ticket together. And a few extra things, you know how you do. And so then I got interested and got some work and met some people. And got interested in lots of things. And then I met him. But for a fact, we lived down, we roomed downstairs with the family, Lita and I. And he lived upstairs. And this is where you met him? Yep. He used to sit on the front porch and smoke when it got hot. And I'd come out and sit there too, Lita and I. So finally we started to talk and visit, and his little mom upstairs, she was a little bit of a thing. Used to tease her, and she didn't like that. She'd say. Yeah. She didn't like that, your humor, huh? Well, she was a little serious and didn't think, you know, the snips didn't know. Was that little snip going to do that to me? So did you join the church when you came over here? Well, we didn't join. We kept going. Some girls and I, sometimes we'd go to Zion, and sometimes we'd go to First Lutheran, and wherever we felt like going. So we didn't really join. We just went. So we weren't tied down. In other words, to one church we could go if we liked. Which was all right. Them days, nobody objected to that. So when you married Joel here, then– Yep. That was 1919. 1919. And who married you? We went to– Where was it? We went to Detroit. What's the matter with me? Detroit, yeah. Yeah, Lisabeth, a friend of mine, Lisabeth I met, and then she met a friend of mine by the name of Alfred. So one day, Joel wanted to go and get acquainted with the bigger factories in Detroit, because he was a machinist. And he thought, well, how about you girls going with us? How about you going with– So I told her about it. Well, Lisabeth, oh, she says, okay, she says, I'll go too, she says. So the four of us just took off. Orfrid went with two. And then you married at the same time? Yep, in the courthouse in Detroit. That was kind of fast. Well, we couldn't– Oh, I don't think it was, because I think we had that in mind anyway. Lisabeth and Orfrid, not for sure, I didn't know, but we did, I knew that. Why didn't you have anybody marry you here or– Well, because he– I tell you, he– All of a sudden, in a couple of days, hey, do you want to go with girls? I'm going to Detroit. Do you want to go with? We didn't have time to even think. I packed my suitcase real fast. Off we went. So you married in the courthouse then? Yep, in Detroit. And it stuck. It stuck. Both Lisabeth and Orfrid, I bet, married with us. They're both gone. What did the church people say now from Västergötland? They went to church every Sunday here. I didn't ask. I came home– It was in 1920 I went home, yeah. To Sweden? You had Joel with you then? No, he stayed home. He was in business. He had to stay. He couldn't go. But you went home? Yep. I had a buddy. Boy, we were quite a relation, I can assure you. So we had really– Were they still living in Kindergarten then on the farm there? Oh, yeah. My mother did. And we got the old– The old farm. It was a big place that my mother was born at. So one of the youngest grandsons bought it. So it's still in the family. So whoever comes home can go over there and use it for a summer home. So your dad was still living there? Oh, yeah. My dad came– He was– What did he? When I was home and I told you, Dad wasn't feeling good. He died the same fall. It was in 1946 or something like that, I think. That's when my dad died. Remember? I can't– Well, it was around that time, approximately about that time. So he got another job then in the shoe business? Oh, he opened his own when he got home again. In Borås? No, in Kina. He had an extra room. And two factories, a rubber factory and a textile mill. It took about three-quarters of an hour to walk across the woods to that place. So all of a sudden, they found out. So three, four men had to go by our place to go to the village where they lived. So every so often, here they come with two, three pairs of shoes. So we just sew and sew, want this, sew and sew. And when they'll be ready, they will bring it back. So we went by hand longer, like we call it in Swedish. So he was busy. So he could stay home, which he liked. And how about the rest of your sisters? Oh, well, my two youngest were gone, and us four, I'm the oldest. And then we were two girls and my brother and another girl. Now one of the girls died, so now it's just two of us and my brother left. And they married and their families stayed? Oh, yeah. You should see the gang when we got together once in a while. We hired a hog. And they never had any thought of going to the States? No, nobody wanted to. They were all very happy where they were. Now my brother lost his wife, and one of my favorite sisters passed away about three months ago, I think. About like that. So Eric is alone, but he's got children living right by, so he's well taken care of. But he's going to stay in the place. He's not going to leave it. So anyway, it's... So you went back then in 1920 because you were married at your old age. I've been back three times. Three times? One time I went home and... Well, I didn't know how long I was going to stay, so I went to a cousin of mine in Satele, in other words. And we went to pick blueberries, and he came back from the woods with blueberries, who was sitting in the front room. He was. So then... You mean he came to wonder what you were doing? He didn't know where I was at at the time, but the people that picked them, that... They know that... Well, a friend of ours notified this family that Joe was coming in on such and such a plane, but they meet him at the airport. So they did. And that morning she had called me to come down there and spend a weekend with them, and I said, No, I can't because I'm already invited to Satele, and I'm going to go there, and they're going to come and get me in about an hour. So that's how she knew where I was at. So when he came, the following day we went to pick blueberries, and when we came back, well, my in-law came up in the woods and got us, and he said, Hey, you girls, you got to come home quick. We got company. Oh, okay, we'll come home. So we come in. There he sat, and who was with you? My mom. And who else was it that brought you over to Satele? When you came? Helmersons. They lived in Gothenburg. So he surprised you then? Well, sure, I didn't even know it. He came to see you a couple of times. So then we came in, and of course, we had old clothes on because out in the woods, you know, you get all tore up. So somebody loaned me a pair of heavy socks and stockings and so on, and we couldn't understand why George came and got us. Well, we are still, no, he says, you're supposed to come home now. He wouldn't tell us what it was. So when, looking at the hesperus of all of it, and walked in, and there sat Helmersons, and there sat Joe, I said, for goodness sakes, what happened? Well, he decided to come, so he called these people, but didn't call them friend of mine here. She wrote to them and told them to meet him at the plane, which they did, and the same time they knew where I was at, I talked to them that morning, so here they were. Coincidence, really. We didn't have a airfield, did we? No. That's right, we didn't. I left from Midland Airport. That's correct, you're right. Midway? Midland. Midland. Midland. Where was that located? I can't tell you where it is now. Outskirts of Chicago, I think. Yeah. Because we came back in there. So that was in the early 50s or late 40s? What time was it? What year was that when you came home? DC-6. Douglas. Small place. DC-6. 19, let me see. What year was it, do you remember? Oh, I'd have to stop and think. But during the flight, we were close to England at that time, and I noticed they had louvers on them that opened up. For air, for the— For the engines. For the engines, there's four of them, two on each side. I sat back of that. Exhaust? Yep. Boy, flames going all over it, they threw them for a loop. That engine was quite hot. Quite hot. Yeah, it did that. So my stewardess come through, and I said, say, is there something wrong with that engine? She went and got the co-pilot, he came over. No, that's all right. I still couldn't understand that. No, but they did though. They did white. They turned white. First time I saw it, I thought, oh dear, how safe are we? But it was all of a sudden— The engine gets quite hot. Yep. And being a mechanic, that's how they threw him. I worked in a garage in 1913. I took a course in automotive engineering. So I couldn't understand it. Still can't. And we stopped at Copenhagen. Denmark. Them days, we had to go by Denmark. Now listen, first thing I saw when I got off the plane was two DC-4s. Standing there. Army planes. Army planes. Yeah. Well, I never did question why they were there. And here they had a little door, a corner, about that size, that wide. And the airport had about 20 church benches in there. Yeah. In Denmark. Changed a lot since then. And I had to wait there two hours. But that was a jumping off place for people. And chasing planes. Even a monk stood back of me. Oh, they were there a lot. I was half up, open shoes, you know, a monk. You saw them all the time up there. Chinese, Japanese. It was a melting pot of all planes going all over. And then the next time I came over there, that airport had grown so big you just couldn't imagine it. The last time I was there, it was bigger yet. It was two stories. And it was in? In Denmark. Copenhagen. In Denmark, yeah. Copenhagen. Copenhagen. That one you have to stop off there. But then all of a sudden, the SAS would go directly to Gothenburg. So the last trip I did, or two, I went directly to Gothenburg. And one time we went from Denmark to Stockholm. But I didn't like that, but then after that, it was from Denmark to Gothenburg. And that was really the right thing to do because I lived close to Gothenburg. It isn't far from Copenhagen. No. He was the first one to fly. On the new SAS. Your wife. When SAS went, excuse me, when SAS went direct, then I was the first one from Rockford. Was the first one to fly directly from Rockford. On SAS. SAS. So when I got to board the plane in New York, somebody says, you've got to stand there, you've got to have a picture taken. I said, what? What have I done? And they said, well, am I supposed to do that? So then the agent here in Rockford, Mr. Aldeen, he was the one that had made those arrangements. So this is what I got when I got home. So I got this that's telling them all about it. So this is from Isle of Wight Airfield, New York, September 1, 1950. Yep. So this and that one. So this I tasted, I got for that. I couldn't believe it. I thought, what in the world is this all about? So I was the first one to fly from Rockford. So this is what they gave you? Yep. They didn't give you a free trip or anything like that? Oh, no. A discount? I was just the one that flew first from Rockford to there. So your mother was still living at that time? Oh, yeah. And your father too? My father was living then too. The whole Durham family. So we really– I don't know if there is any– So this is your mother's house, your son's family? Yeah, this is my family. Well, you met those people now back then, your dad and mom and– Oh, I went there and had a lot– What kind of changes did you see in Sweden from that time? Well, it was just from– 1950. Yeah, and yeah. Well, it changed a little each time, not an awful lot, really. No? No, I don't think so, because everything looked the same every time I was home. No, but for instance now when you come into the house, the kitchen, it was different in 1917 when you left than compared to 1950? Not too much. My mother, she liked it the way it was and had it, and it wasn't– And when we moved out to the country, my dad decided nothing doing, then he wasn't going to be bothered running back and forth and so on, so that's it. So he took one room and made a shoe affair out of it, and he worked there. So we were kind of fun to have him close by. That was my husband's first– That isn't what I really was looking for. I had my– I remember that we had to hire a hall for the gang. You wouldn't believe it. Somebody says, you're not telling the truth now. I said, well, I can name the name on every one of them. I said, I don't know. What did your dad ask about Rockville when you came back in 1950? Well– Was he interested to find out if the old shoe store was still there? Oh, yeah. He wanted to know if Henrichsen's was there, so every time I came home, I'd been in two, three times. Yeah, Henrichsen's is still on the same corner, Dad, but now, of course, the last time I was home. No, I said, I don't think Henrichsen's is there anymore. I think he's gone. Your dad, now, he was here about five, six years? Yeah. Did he learn enough English then to make– Oh, he learned very good English. Oh, he had no trouble? No, not him. He was very– and then, of course, you see, he opened the shoe store, and he was always there, and he waited on trades as well, you know, so he had no problem. But, you know, on 7th Street were mostly Swedes, though. Oh, there were Swedes and English and quite a few a little bit Finnish, and heaven knows who all it was. Somebody asked me if I got a family in Sweden, so I said, yeah, I have. That was, what, years ago when I was home. But, there's more than that. Some of them are gone. Four of them are gone. I just lost my favorite sister the other day. So, here in Rockford, there's always so many Växjöta. Yeah. You had a special club, you know, Växjöta Klubbun. Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Did you belong to that one? Oh, good Lord, yes. Me, I should say I did. You joined them in 1938 when you started? Yeah, I was there. I used to go there a lot. They had a Swedish costume, so I even let them have my one Swedish costume now, so they could have it for their dance team. So, I got a tanker card for the other day. So, they had a dance team in Växjöta Klubbun? Mm-hmm. And you belonged to the dancing club? Them days, now I don't. In my younger days, I did, but not now. So, I let them have my costume. Did you join any other organization than Växjöta? No, I was not a joiner. I'd go a lot with some of my friends, but I only joined it. Like Vasa, Swedish? Oh, yeah. Oh, excuse me, Vasa, yes, I should say so. You joined Vasa? I donated my Växjöta costume the other day to the dance team. Two weeks ago, a friend of mine called me and she said, Hey, can we borrow your suit? We're going to have a dance team. And one of them doesn't have a costume. So, they came and got it. Do you know something else? I said, I'm going to give it to you. You don't mean that. I had made it, embroidered it and all, you know, just very perfect. From where in Växjöta is that? Buros. Buros? So, that was a regular Växjöta costume. So, I got the nicest tanker cut. Are you sure you want to give that away? Well, my daughter is not interested. Who else is it? So, I'd rather that it goes to the dance team so they're using it. So, they said they've already had two parties and the dance team was performing and your suit was right there. So, it made me feel kind of happy. Did most of the members of Växjöta Klubben have costumes? No, just those that were in the dance team. And then you'd have all certain things, you know, when the girls had to be there with their costumes. And somebody could volunteer or sometimes they asked you, would you come there so and so, we're going to do so and so. And so, we did. That was first years I was married, first ten years or so really or something like that or even before that. But it was really very, very interesting. And there were only people from Växjöta and they could join? No, they couldn't. From the beginning? Some of them got in through... Like if you're married through... In a marriage, uh-huh. So, they got paid. What were you doing then at the meetings? Oh, they had a meeting and we'd have, sometimes we'd have a banquet and sometimes we'd just visit or sometimes we'd have a dance. And then we'd had a dance team and perform a little here and there quite often. Did you have a program about Växjöta in certain places? No, not really. We done by memory a lot. I see. Yeah. And they represented all the different towns? Yes. Little all over Jönbrås. Jasse, one of the men came and he said, Jasse, you're in Brås, are you? I said, yeah. Oh, I... So, they shoot a club in today then? Yeah. Yeah, they still got a dance team because one time, I forgot it, through Joe's brother's wife, Venora. And she said she was going to go, she said the dance team are going to perform tonight in the Vasa Park. Oh, they still are? Yep. I said, ask them if they want a costume. I got a Växjöta costume. So, she called me the next day. Do you mean it? I said, yep. I said, my daughter is not interested, nobody else around here is and I certainly ain't going to keep it in the trunk. They came and got it. How about the other members now of Växjöta Klubben, are they interested, their children interested? Yeah, yeah, they got, some of them do. I don't go too much anymore because, well, for one thing, I wasn't allowed to get a driving license on the count of my eyes. So, from there on, you know, when you can't go on the car and get going, then you just don't go all over. Boy, that was a blow. It took me a year to get over. How about your husband, old Joel? Yeah, he's still got three years left on his driver's license. He still drives? Yep. Oh, yeah. What did you say? I said, you still got your driver's license, another three years. I was saying that I couldn't get mine on the count of my eyes the last time. You can ask him very politely, though. He will take you to meetings. Oh, he, oh, no, he never was a meeting man. No? Oh, Joel's sister-in-law, Elmer Dermuck's wife, she would come, but I think, oh, well, I stay home with Papa. He gets left all alone otherwise. He said, oh, come on. I said, yeah, I ain't gonna go. So, when you married Joel, then, you stayed home. You didn't work anymore outside of home. Well, I used to be at the Rockford Country Club. I was a head waitress on there for years because you'd get called in, you know, in the summer, and then special doings, big banquets and such. Would you please come so ever so often? No, but four or five times a week, a month, sometimes oftener. So then, of course, I had my little car so I could come and go as I like. So then I took care of all the flowers and washed the sea. Everything was right at the Rockford Country Club. So that's a few years ago now. I kind of missed it when it was over because I used to enjoy it a lot. And how many children did you have then? Just one. Just one daughter? Yep, and then she has, you know, three boys and a daughter, and there is five, six great-grandchildren now. It expires. Like your daughter, now, is she interested in the Swedish background of customs? None whatsoever. No? Nope. She does an awful lot for church. I see. Very serious about that, and anything that comes up, and she's on the Christian Women's. There is an organization there, and boy, they're all over the place. They go to all towns. How come she became interested in the religious? Well, it's just so she went to Sunday school. Of course, the minute she was big enough to go to Sunday school. What Sunday school is this, Sangen? No, First Lutheran up here. First Lutheran. So that little church up there on Elphind. And we started out really with a little old schoolhouse to start with, and then now we built the church, and now they added to it. I've got to go and talk to Scott. Oh, Scott's still there. Well, you better catch him. No, Chris. Oh, Chris. Son-in-law. So, how about the customs now in Sweden? Well, last time I was home, things were very little different from what I was used to here. Really, it had changed. Well, every time I've been home, I've been home about five times, I think. Each time, it has changed a little. But now I lost one of my favorite sisters. We were three girls and a brother left now, and she died just this, oh, what, three months ago, I think. All of a sudden, which was a blow to everyone, because she was the vivacious one out of the whole place and got her on where nobody else didn't. So, got a several hemorrhage, quick-like. So, I was just writing a letter to her husband, Eric. So, you never felt that you could have stayed in Sweden at any time you visited? No, because I got tied up, you see. Married Joe? Yeah, because when I was home in 1920, Joe had a little brother, was nine years old. We left, and then his mom, and of course, you didn't desert them. You saw that they were taken care of. So, then 1920 or so, I worked at the county club and had practically made my own money. But Dad says, I'll buy you the ticket. You can take care of the rest. I says, okay, because he was in business. He didn't have time to mind giving much things anyway. So, then Mom, of course, was kind of happy because then he was home with her. So, up till then, we stayed with her because I didn't think we should really. But I got busy and got to work when we were married, so she had her own home to take care of us always. So, her husband had died then? Oh, yeah. Joe's father died when Joe was about 14, I imagine. 15, something like that. His brother was nine. I don't know that much. And his sister was two years older. So, really, he was her support. So, when we were married, oh, she says, what am I going to do? How much shall I live? I said, you're going nowhere. You're going to stay with us. Oh, she says, well, of course you are. I said, you're not going to go anyplace. What's Elmer going to do? Well, he's coming, too. He's nine years old. He's got to have a family. She couldn't believe this. I said, Mom, we don't do things like that. We take care of our families. Oh, that made her feel so good. Poor Mom. A little bit of a thing. So, you took in the whole family then? First, we moved in, where they were living, and then I was busy working. And he was working, so I said, Mom, don't worry too much about cooking. I'll come home. Well, it kind of bothered her. I said, well, you know, I eat anything. Dad knows if he can eat it, so can I. And then we'd cook, and we'd bake over the weekend. And I'd bake a bunch of cookies and cakes and helped her with it. Oh, she thought she was going to lose her happy home. I said, Mom, we don't do those things. Oh, poor Mom. A little bit of a thing. She reached me to my shoulders. And Joe's father was six foot tall. I said it to him. I called him Mutton Jeff. Now we got a grandson. He is six foot. And his wife is about the size of Joe's mother. I said, here we go again. Here's Mutton Jeff again. You never saw your husband's father, though? No. Because he died when he was 14. He died when Joe was 14. How was it not to live together with the Mutton? It wasn't hard at all. I was busy. I was working. A lot of people are worrying about that, though. No, I never do. I never do. She was my mom, and she couldn't understand. She says what she was going to do. I said, Mom, you're going nowhere. You're going to stay with Elmer. What's Elmer going to do? I said, he's going to stay here. He's nine years old. He's going to school. He's going to do like he always has done. She couldn't believe that. No, I was working. I said, I ain't going to be home. I'm going to go to work. Which I was doing. So I told her that, oh, is that my penny? No. So that worked out all right, then? Oh, it worked out. It had been wonderful all the way through. Was she a religious lady? Mom, oh, yes. First Lutheran church. Oh, yeah, it was very important. She'd go to church all the time. She went to church when I didn't. She looked at me. She says, aren't you going to go? I said, Mom, I said, you go with your friends. I said, you go. And then I'd be left in the radio when you come home. So you went there every Sunday, then? Oh, she was very regular. Did people go to church more regularly? Oh, yes, they did. Yes, they did. Because I'd go with Mom occasionally and First Lutheran church. That was before they built this new church. But that was full of people. But were they more religious people at that time, you think? They were more serious about it, I think. I think so. I really do. I know Joe's mother was very serious about it. So you lived down there close to downtown, then? South Fourth Street, Second Avenue. That's where Joe's mother lived. Of course, I stayed with them the first year for that reason, that I worked. So they had their house there, then? Well, they were rented upstairs in their place. And really, a friend of mine lived downstairs. I rented the front room from the people, Ellison's, that lived there. Because they rented out front rooms them days for an exchange. And so Lita Hutchinson, as I say, she was from Elizabeth, Illinois. So we were working. We were told, you know, they took all the men to war, and they asked the rest of us to go to the shops. So we went to Clark's Manufacturing Company, where they made all those tin cans and so on. So I said, well, okay, that's where we'll go. So that's what we did. So Lita and I went there and worked, and came home at night like we always did, and had a little bit to eat. Sometimes we'd bring something, and sometimes we'd stop and eat. The lady we stayed with was awfully good. She'd say, come on, girls, I got a little extra supper. Would you like to have some? So then we'd slip her a little extra money when we paid for the room. During the Depression, how was that time? Not bad. I always worked. But how about your husband? Did he still have the factory? Well, he's, yeah. He built that one on 17th Avenue. We were married then. It was about 1930, I have an idea, something like that. And he built that shop. So he was always being known all over town. He was an exceptionally good dying tool man. So everybody that had trouble, they'd go to Jernberg Hill straight now, which he did. Sometimes in other shops around, a little all over, Wisconsin. Oh, call Joe Jernberg, he'll take care of it. Joe Jernberg did. Every so often, come home, well, I got to go so-and-so. I said, oh, sometimes I rode with just for fun. If he wasn't going to have too big a job, then I'd go just for the ride. So he was able to straighten out the troubleshooter. Oh, you betcha he was a troubleshooter. He was all over the place. How many did he employ? Let's see, what did they have on 17th Avenue? Oh, golly, that's a long time ago. Oh, he had about 20 guys, I think. Something like that. Were they unionized? Oh, I think they finally did. But they were very congenial and very nice about it. Because, like I said, well, I said, well, I don't have any trouble. No, I said, because you're fair with them. You don't tell them this is it and this is it. I said, you see what they can do and you give them work to do? And he never harassed anyone, easygoing and fair, really. So he never had any trouble with anybody, ever. I never had any trouble. Was he able to keep it open during the Depression? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. They were still working? Oh, yeah. He was in the city, go and get Joe Jornbrigg, he'll take care of so and so. The machine broke down, yeah, call Joe Jornbrigg, he'll come down and fix it, which Joe Jornbrigg did. So he was known all over. I think he was born a machinist. Right now, he doesn't give a darn. And a good politician. Now we're going to talk to you, Joel. Your parents now, they came from Sweden, your parents, both your mother and your father. Yeah. One from Dalarna and one from Småland. Yeah. And one here in Rockford. Yeah. Your dad now, do you remember approximately when he came to this country? Yeah, I'll tell you. My dad worked in the iron mines in the old country. And then when he came to this country, he and his two brothers, Frederick and Gustav, and my dad, Erik. And so they settled up in Ishby, Michigan. And they worked in the iron mines up there. And they, yeah. In the mines, there was French, Canadians, we called them Canucks. That's right. And Irishmen. They had no use for Sweden. No? No. Oh, no, they didn't like the Scandinavians. I'll give you an example. They had some machinery come in there one day, mining machinery. And so my dad uncredited it. And he asked the captain, they called him captain, the supervisor of the mine, if he could have the lumber. And it was good lumber. Sure, he says, you take it. Get rid of it. So he uncredited it. And he tied up the lumber. He was going to put it on his shoulders and carry it home. A big Irishman, Uncle Gus told me this, a big Irishman, grabbed it. He started to go to work. He wouldn't hear. He says, I got permission from Captain Bacon. That's mine. You try and take it, he says. He dropped the bundle. He made this pass that dad dug. And he knocked the tar out of them. Can you imagine your dad fighting? It was a calamity. He's going. Yeah, he said, that's the only time I ever saw your father in a fight. He defended his honor. So in two years' time, they had accumulated enough money that they sent for the rest of the family. The boys. All of them. Up in the Michigan. Yeah. East Pimming. East Pimming. And Uncle Andrew was the youngest one. That's right. And he was only 11 years old, so he had to go to school. That's right. And he learned things. He changed his name to Wayne. That's right. The first name, Wayne? No. The last name? The last name's Jernberg. That was for his self-protection. Smart. Irishmen hated the Swedes. Oh, I see. So we visited him out in St. Marie's. Idaho. Idaho. St. Marie's, Idaho. And we came in there and we had quite a time. There was no guardrail down below on the left-hand side. I didn't dare look at all. Way down. And then they had a rock slide up above. And there was big boulders. I had a new car. And I got along all right, put it in low gear. And I got in there. So I picked out a place. A tavern. No old buildings. Well, an old saloon, in other words. And it was a butcher shop. So I asked him if he knew somebody by the name of Wayne. He asked, he says, Andrew Wayne. I said, no man with a little beard on him? I don't know, I never saw him. He's an uncle of mine. So that was your dad's youngest brother? Yeah. And his first name was? Andrew. Andrew? Wayne. Wayne. Yeah, I'll get mad at him. So he says, but his... Andrew Wayne's son is a postmaster. He was appointed. His name was Harold. That's right. Right next door. So I went in there. And it was five minutes to 11. That's right. And he was through at 11 o'clock. Two windows in the post office. Nice little town. Old train building. I liked it. And so I went in and introduced myself, finally. I said, Shake hands with a cousin of yours from Brockford. Never heard of us. No, didn't even know we existed. So, he says, I'll be through here in five minutes, he says. And then we'll go out and see the wife. Of the farm. So, okay. They had an old school. And they were... Hal and probably other men, there was 13 men, organized a golf course out there. And it was Ladies' Day. A little bit of a town. But we'd rather go out and meet her anyhow. So we did. And they put me up in a hotel, the only hotel there. I couldn't pay for my keep. You couldn't do that naturally. Well, he says, I suppose you want to see Gramps, they called him, the old man. Yes, that's what he came for. He never told anybody he was a Swede. Not even the kids knew him? They didn't know to be up there. And listen, that was a Norwegian settlement up there. That's right. So, Jack, he was the oldest boy. I think he was around 20. He was a marshal out there, deputy marshal. He says, Jack, take Joe out to see the old man. Have some fun with him when you get out there. I didn't know what he meant by that at all. He drove out on the sticks, you know, narrow roads. He drove like a neckerchief. And he says, you sit still. So I did. I went and get the old man. Out comes the old man. And he says, say, this gentleman's looking for some claims. You got any claims? Mining claims? Yeah, the old man looked at me, beady-eyed. He said, well, what claims you looking for? Oh, I'll drop the bail, I said to him. Well, come on in, he said. And he had a 50-acre farm there. He said, I can grow more on 50 acres here than you can on 100 in Illinois. Oh. And there's a good storage cabin up below myself. I could see daylight through it all over, see. A little cabin he'd built. He had pegs put in there. He had suspenders on his clothes. He'd hang his clothes up there. He had a little stove there. And I sat and talked to him for three hours. I didn't even meet the people that were running the farm he had there. My wife and daughter, they met him. I didn't meet them. And I sat and let the old man talk. So that was the first time you saw him? Yeah. And he didn't know anything about you? Nope. And he married a cousin to Mackenzie King, who was Premier of Canada. This Andrew Wayne? Yeah, Andrew did. And he had nice boys. And how did he get away from the rest of the brothers? He never kept in contact with them like your father, for instance? Well... After he left Michigan? Well, see, when I was out there, my dad passed away in 1910. I was 14 years old. So you had no idea what they were doing before that. And he was also born in Sweden? Yeah, sure. But he was young enough when he came here, so he learned English fast. Yeah, he had to go to school here. The other thing about this, now he wants to drop his Swedish. What was the reason for dropping the Swedish Yanberry? Just because... Just to protect himself. To make it easier for himself? Yeah. What did he say when you said you were a Yanberry? Did he look at you? No, I told him who I was. Come in, he says. And you sat together with him for three hours? Sure. Did he ask you any questions about your parents, for instance? Did he know that your father was dead?