 The young sinner together with Mrs. Dorothy Beale, Moline, Illinois, and she was born 1913, 13th of June in Moline. And it is today, 22nd of April, 1986. So your story starts with your dad in Sweden, in Lid, Sköping, Sweden. Yes. Where he came from in 1909. No, he didn't come from there. He came, he moved to Fallköping when he was like seven years old. With his parents? With his parents. And in my father's family there were nine children. First there were seven girls and then my father was the first boy and then another boy. So there were two boys. But when my father was about seven years old, they moved to Fallköping to a place called Sallaby. His father worked there. And my father lived there then until he was 19 years old. And then he went down to Gothenburg to work for the streetcar company. He was a motorman. And being Swedish, you would know this. Most people that I know don't even know this. They had a big strike in 1909. You've heard about the Storstreak. Yeah, the Storstreak. And the Union lost the strike. So they told any of these people that wanted to come to America that they would pay their way to America. So my dad and two of his buddies decided to come. Who gave the idea to go to America? The Union was going to pay the fare of anybody who wanted to come to America because they had lost the strike. So they offered to pay the fare for these men that wanted to come to America. Do you know the name of that Union? No, I don't. It must be the railroad or the streetcar. Streetcar Union, I'm sure it was. Yes. They were offered the free fare to the United States. And my dad and two of his buddies decided to come. But at the last minute, the other two fellows decided they weren't going to come. So my dad was going to come anyway. I think it was kind of an adventure for him. But he didn't have anybody to come to him? He didn't have anybody. He did not know anybody in America. And he had to have somebody who would sign that they would sponsor him. So he had—my dad had this good friend who lived in Teterhome. And this friend of his had a brother who lived in Mitchell, South Dakota. So he wrote and asked his brother if my father could come there. I bet you never knew anybody before that ever went to Mitchell, South Dakota, did you? Yes, I met a few. Have you really? Yes. Anyway, my dad came then in November of 1909. And he lived with his family in Mitchell. And I don't really know what he did, except he probably took any job he could get to make money. Well, then the following year, his friend and his wife from Teterhome were going to come to America. And they were coming to Moline because they knew a lot of people in Moline. But on the way, they stopped in Mitchell to visit the brother. And my dad told them he wasn't very happy in Mitchell because he said there weren't any Swedes up there. And he didn't know the language at all. And he told me the very worst thing about coming to America was not knowing the language. He said that first year was horrible because of that. Anyway, Otto and Mia came to Mitchell. And my dad told them he wasn't very happy there because there weren't any Swedes. So he couldn't talk Swedish or anything? He couldn't communicate with anybody? No, no, really he couldn't. What kind of work was he doing then? Well, I think probably just like labor, whatever they needed done around. You know, people used to take any kind of a job to earn money. My dad never took welfare in his life. He took care of his family always. Anyway, so Otto and Mia came to Moline then. And then they wrote to my dad and said, come to Moline. There are a lot of Swedes here. And also, there's good work in the implement factories. So my dad came to Moline. Well, back in those days in the implement factories, they worked – we didn't have unions here then, you know – and they worked to get the implements out and usually closed down for like three months in the summertime. Well, again, here was my dad. He wasn't going to say – well, there was no welfare that I know of. Anyway, he got a job as a hired man out on a farm at Geneseo, which of course is not too far from here. And he still had his contact with all these Swedes here. He liked Moline, you know, because they had Swedish churches, Swedish lodges and everything. What year did he come to Moline then? He would have come in 1910. 1910? Yeah, 1910. And anyway, he had this one old bachelor friend. I don't know where – well, I suppose at some of these Swedish gatherings he met him. And this fella introduced him to my mother, who was a young widow with two small children. And so eventually they got married and they had me. Well, my dad worked for Dears in the implement factories his whole life after he came to this country then. So they married in Geneseo? But they moved to Moline because he worked for Dears. Yeah. So were they married in the Lutheran Church or in the – Well, I think they might have even been married at the courthouse. I'm not sure. And I was born over on 16th Avenue and 10th Street in Moline. And when I was two years old, my folks bought this house. So I've lived here for 70 years. Anyway, I'm sure that in this time my dad would have liked to have gone home to Sweden to see his family because they were very close. And my reason for being so interested in Swedish is because of my dad. He's the one that told me about his family. And he and his brother had the best communications always. So by 1939, my brother and sister were both married in their own homes. And my mother and I decided my dad should go home to Sweden for a visit after 30 years. So, well first he said no. He always said if he went he was going to take his family with him. Well, we may never get enough money for the whole family to go. You better go now, he said, when we can do this because I was working then. It was 1939? Yes. So my dad went to Sweden for three months, June, July, and August. You went with him? No, no. He went alone. I was going to keep the home fires burning here with my mother. You were the only one that brought in money for the family. Yeah, that's right. So he went over there and at that time his brother, who was younger, was still living of course. And four of his sisters were still living. And they had such a good time. And he met all of, I have six cousins over there. And the youngest one is a year younger than I am. And the three oldest ones are five years older than we are. So you see we're all within an age range. He had such a good time. He told them, Dorothy will come to Sweden someday. I know she will. Well, anyway, he got home here on the first of September. And on the morning after he got home, the newsboys were crying on the street, Germany marches into Poland. So this stopped any commuting we did to Sweden then. So it wasn't the last minute he took that train? Yes, yes. And I certainly believe in fate. I mean it just seems to work out that way. Well, anyway, I was real fired up about Sweden because he had been there and met these kids and we were communicating. And if you want to know how much Swedish I know, I learned most of it second hand from hearing my folks and all these Swedish people around here talk. I can understand anything. And I like to talk so well that I really talk it too sometimes. Well, I do when I get over there. Anyway, I signed up for a Swedish class at Moline Community College. You know Margaret Swanson. Margaret was our teacher. I have to admit we didn't learn much Swedish, but we sure had one heck of a good time. And made real good friends in there. Well, one by one they were going to Sweden. So I came home from one of our get-togethers one night and I said, I'm going to go to Sweden. And I heard my mother say to my dad, she says she's going to Sweden. He said, there's nothing in the world that would make me happier than to have you go and meet my family. But he said, you got to think about how much this is going to cost you and you might want to buy a car. I don't want a car. No, I don't want a car. I want to go to Sweden. And I worked at Minneapolis Moline. So I had told my boss then that I was going to go. And he went in and told the general manager. And I said, well, I can't go if you don't hold my job for me. Oh, don't worry. Go ahead. We'll hold your job. What year was that? 1950. And I went for four months. And of course, we didn't have travel agents like they do now on every corner, you know. Mildred Carlson took care of getting my ticket. She helped me get my passport. And I'm financial secretary of the Clara Lodge of Vikings. She took care of my job in the Vikings for the whole four months that I was gone. So I really got to know Sweden then because, and when I, but by the time I got there, only my dad's brother and one sister were living. But I, I feel so close to those people. And you had no trouble understanding what they said? Oh, no, no. Oh, I can understand anything. And I remember somebody saying when I went, but I worry about her because she can't talk the language. And this friend of mine said, I'm not worried about that. Anybody who likes to talk as well as she does will learn the language. So now since then, I have been back four times, but I tell them once in a while, now I know this about Sweden or that. And they said, well, you ought to, you came here and lived for four months one time. But each time I've gone, it's been different. But I, I went on the grips home. And as we are going past the Statue of Liberty, you know, I'm standing there, tears are streaming down my face. And I'm saying, all my life I wanted to go to Sweden and here I'm going. And the lady next to me said, I never wanted to go. I'm only going because my husband wants to go. But I really have gotten to see, and it's because of my dad, I keep saying this, that he had always good communications with his family. And when I got over there, I saw a lot more of Sweden than he ever did in his lifetime because this place where he was born at Leedshirping, and as I say, there were nine children in the family and they lived in a two-room house. And then the, is that what you call him who lived? He lived off on the farm there? Yes. Outside Leedshirping? Yes, yes. You have the specific name of the place? Yeah. Or as a con? Stola, S-T-O-L-A. Stola? Uh-huh, Stola. And I have been there, so I have pictures of my dad's birthplace. And so you see, I really feel it's kind of a good story. Connected, yes. Yes. So how old was your dad now when he came? He was 29 years old when he came. Quite old. Yes, and this is why the fact that he, well, he went to night school when he got to Moline. Yes. So he learned to read and write very well, and that's pretty old to do that. Yes. And he didn't come to avoid the conscription like some people did. In the military service? No, no. He had already had that. Where did he go for that? In, uh... Well, not to, now, if I would hear the name of it... Cree of Death? Cosbury? No, Cosbury. Yeah, uh-huh. And I should tell you, too, that when I went over there, then that first time, this, my relatives over there are just the best as far as I'm concerned. They, my uncle and aunt took me to this, uh, Salibi, where my dad lived from the time he was uh, seven until 19, you know. And here were some of these old fellas that had known my dad when he was a young man living there. So they could tell you what his price was? Yes. And in fact, the fella that owned the farm, uh, had us in for coffee, because he thought that was kind of interesting. Oh, so you found out a lot of his, uh... Yeah, and he would write and tell me, you know, when I was over there, and I have this whole set of letters that I wrote home that they wrote to me while I was there. Nobody's going to want them someday, but as long as I live, I'm going to keep them, I'll tell you. So, yeah. Did he tell you anything about going through Ellis Island? Yes. And now I have to tell you this in all fairness, I don't come from a family of pessimists. My dad didn't make it too bad. He evidently didn't have any problems getting through there. He was healthy, you know, and he went on a train. Oh, this I think is interesting, too. He went by train from New York to Chicago, and this was like 1909. In 1933, we went to the World's Fair in Chicago, and he took my mother and I down and showed us, where he came into Chicago, where he had to change trains. I thought that was kind of interesting. You remember that? Yeah, yeah. So he changed to Mitchell South Academy in Chicago. Yes, yes. The Union, now they lost the strike. Did he tell you anything more in details there? No, no, I really don't know any details of that. There was no way for them to go back in Sweden? No. They were ousted. Yeah, and many years later, then, as I say, he worked for the John Deere plow works in Moline, and the Union came in here then, you know, and oh, everybody was real concerned about it. And he said, it will work out. I know it will. But if my father could see today what the unions have done in this country, he'd never believe it. And I can remember they went out on strike down here at Deere. I think they were out three months on strike. And my dad and I had a real good, a real good relationship. And I said to him, well, the last time you went out on strike, you came to America. What are you going to do now, go back to Sweden? Anyway, they settled the strike. Here, so that was all right. But he came during a time, though, that was very difficult to even talk about union activities. They didn't. They couldn't. Because then they were out. They couldn't return the next day. So he worked there from 1910 until what year did he retire? He retired in 1947. 47, so he came in there when the union. He was there when the union came in. In the 1940s, 1943, 1944. Yeah. And you know, I always felt maybe I could be kind of fair about this because I worked in the office at Minneapolis Moline. So I was seeing management side of it. And on the other hand, he saw labor side of it. But he was one of the most fair people I ever knew in my life. So Minneapolis Moline, did they have any labor problem? I mean, with unions? No, the union was in there by the time I came to work there. What year was that? I went there to work in 35 and the union was already in there. Were they earlier than John Deere? Yes. Yes. What happened there? How could they get the foothold in Minneapolis Moline? Well, because you see, actually, the main office for Minneapolis Moline was in Minneapolis. Yes. We were. A subsidiary. Yes, that's right. You mean they couldn't check the activities as good as John Deere then? Oh, Deere's fought the union for years, you know. They really fought the union. So there was a hard battle to fight out them before they finally came in. And when there was a law then, Roosevelt put on the law that you have the right to organize. Yeah. But before that, no union talked to each other. No. So how did the union work down at Minneapolis Moline then when you came in? Well, fine. You didn't have to belong to the union? No, no. Because you were in the office. Yeah. We took a vote one time. You mean the office vote? Yeah. But they voted it down because we got all of the privileges that the factory got. You know, every time they got a raise, we got a raise. But wasn't that kind of unfair though? Sure, it was unfair. Well, a picket sign's there. Sure. No, they never had a strike at Minneapolis Moline while I was there. Never once did they have a strike. Did they pay more then during 1935, for instance, than 1935 for John Deere? Well, now, I'm not too sure about this. I really don't know. But I do know that when I started to work at Minneapolis Moline, they didn't pay overtime in those days, you know. If you had work to get done and everybody helped everybody else, you didn't, but you never got paid overtime. Like we might work, well, we couldn't work over eight hours a day. Women weren't allowed to do that. But we could work Saturdays, you know. There was overtime and no extra pay. No. Yeah, but the first year that I was there, and I had started in the fall, so when vacation time came, I was only really entitled to one week's vacation. But they were fair about this. They had kept track of those overtime hours we put in, and they gave me an extra week's vacation. I see, so they didn't abuse it then at all? No, no, they didn't. Well, and I maintain that all of this was simply because of our manager at Minneapolis Moline. He was the most fair person I've ever known in my life. I worked in payroll. So in those days, if you worked in payroll, if they had a complaint, they came to you. They didn't have to go to the foreman about it, you know. And I can remember Mr. Ross saying, I would rather overpay any man than underpay him. And I think that's why we had such good relations down there. So there was, how many were employed in all? About 700? At Minneapolis Moline? Yes. You mean in the shop and that? Yeah. I think that. 700? I think about that. So there was a close-knit family then, the operations? Oh yeah, yeah. You had no unrest between the... No, everybody liked everybody. My mother always said she could tell if we went to the grocery store, anybody that I gave a big greeting, she knew it was somebody I worked with at Minneapolis Moline. We knew all their families. It was, it really was a very good place to work. Even the workers down by the first night, there was not a number. It was also... We had a lot of Swedes working there, I want you to know. More than more Swedes than Belgians, because there are... Yeah, there really were. There really were. More in majority. Uh-huh. Were they in foreman's position? Some of them. And I have to tell you how I got my job at Minneapolis Moline. When I was in high school, kind of like my dad, I told you he'd take anything to earn money, you took care of yourself. When I, after I finished my first year in high school that summer, I went into, we had kind of a little employment office at the high school, and I got a job, well now they call it babysitter. You know, you went into somebody's home and worked. And this Mr. Ross, that I tell you was the manager, for two summers while I was in high school, I worked for them in their home. Babysat, did the dishes and what have you, you know. And he told me when I finished high school, which was depression, 1931, you couldn't go out and buy a job. But he said to me, the first job that opens up in the office, Dorothy, it's yours. And he kept his word. So that's how I got my job there. So it helps to know somebody. Yes, yes. And take advantage of it if you do. If you feel you're capable of doing it, it's all right if you know somebody. Yeah. So did you have a typing skill then and shorthand from high school? Yes. You didn't go to any business college to accounting? No, no. We had a very good commercial course in high school. So did you know some kind of accounting background too then for the payroll? Oh, I took three years of bookkeeping. We had single ownership, partnership, corporation, salesmanship, cost accounting. I took all that I could get, every bit of it. How old were you then when you started in 1935? 22 years old. I was out of high school four years before I got a real job. And that was during the height of the depression. Mm-hmm. And your dad now, was he working off and on then with John Deere? He never lost his seniority with Deere's. If you worked so many weeks out of the year, you didn't lose your seniority. So he never did lose his seniority. He got to work at least part of every year during the depression. Did he go off in the farm jobs even then and during the depression? Oh, yeah. He and my mother. Because, see, my mother came from this farm family at Geneseo. And she was a farmer. And they would go out, and my dad would work for my uncle on the farm, and my mother would help my aunt in the house. So I remember saying to her afterwards, because I had a job, a full-time job doing housework. One of the 10 top students in the class, and I was out doing, you couldn't buy a job. There just was not a job to be had. I wasn't above doing housework. I think it was kind of good. I learned a lot of things I didn't learn at home. Didn't you get unrest for four years from high school graduation until 22? Did you thought the end of the world was near? Yeah, I really did. I really did. And then finally, in 1935, my dad said, because he felt, you know, that there were probably going to be jobs opening up. And he was back at work more then than he had been before. And he said, we'll try to send you to teacher's college this fall. Well, and what do you suppose happened? I got offers for three jobs within two weeks. So then I didn't go on to college. Because you thought it was better to take the chance to get a job than lock yourself up for another year. Yeah, well, again, my dad came to my rescue. He had said to me then, in early, in 1935, he said that, if you don't get out, you're never going to get out of there. You're going to be trapped in something like this for the rest of your life. So he knew the alderman from our ward here, who was in charge of the parks. And I got a job as playground supervisor that summer. Best job I ever had in my life. I went out to the parks every day and played with the kids, practically. But then at least I broke the pattern. The pattern, yeah. Who was the alderman? Was he a Swede? Sure he was. He was a Swede? Naturally. Lilligran. Edgar Lilligran. Yeah. Well, when I was a kid, I guess most of the people we knew were Swedes. Even in the city government? Yeah. Policemen and sheriffs and also the mayors were Swedish. Oh yeah, we had several. We had Sandstrom, who was mayor, and... Oakleaf. Oakleaf, yeah. We got one now, too, you know. He's a Swede. Yeah, I'm not bragging about him, though. Well, I suppose they come of all kinds. Yeah. Well, here I've been yacking away. Yes, but here, could you keep the job all year round that morning in Minneapolis? You were laid off in the summer. I was never laid off. Because... Shop workers were laid off, though. Well, by that time, you know, when they came in with this unemployment bit, then the shops managed to spread the work out. No, I never. In all the years I worked, and I worked at Minneapolis Moline for 20 years until they closed the Moline plant. It was in 53 or 54? 56. 56. Yeah. And then I went to work for Deere's. Oh, I see. Well, I had... Then you had a lot of experience in the office. Yeah. No trouble to get the job. No, there was not at all. What happened then in Minneapolis Moline? Why did they close it down? Oh, it was... There was no union trouble. No, it wasn't union trouble. It was... I think the top management, the ones who had been up there in Minneapolis, were ready for retirement. You know, sometimes when a younger crew comes in, they're going to do big things. Well, of course, eventually Minneapolis Moline... Closed off the whole thing. So they didn't sell off anyway. But you know, I was going to tell you, I sound like I'm bragging. I don't mean to brag. No, no, this is just you telling the way you saw it. But when I... This Mr. Ross came up here then when I was still working out at the playground, said, there's a job open at Minneapolis Moline, come down Monday. My dad... Signed to North Dubeat. My dad had talked to Wally Swanson. There he got another good suite. He was employment manager at Deere's. So my dad had talked to him. Well, my dad was a good worker. They knew what he was like, you know. So my dad had talked to him about me getting a job. I guess my dad took pretty good care of me, didn't he? Anyway, so two weeks after I started at Minneapolis Moline, Wally came to my dad in the shop and said, tell Dorothy to come down. We got a job for her. And my dad said, she just started at Minneapolis Moline two weeks ago. And he said, just tell her to stay there then. One job's as good as another. What difference does it make? So I stayed and loved every minute of it. Well, then when Minneapolis Moline was going to close down, you know, everybody in the place is running around, applying for jobs, you know. I thought I was going to get the summer off. I was going to collect unemployment insurance. Well, they had unemployment then. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. They had it then. And I thought, that's good. I'll get laid off. I can have the summer off. And in the meantime, my cousin's wife was coming from Sweden to visit us because she always wanted to come to America. And her husband said, well, you can go now because, you know, Dorothy, it's okay, you know, if you go. It'd be just great. I'll be off during the summer and everybody's out around looking for a job. And I'm saying, well, I guess I'll call over Dears to see if they still got that job open they offered me 20 years ago. Laughing, I think it's real funny, you know. And I came home from church one Sunday morning and my mother said, Harry Youngberg called you. He was our employment manager at Minneapolis Moline. He wants you to call. So I called and Harry said to me, Wally Swanson wants to see you. They have a job open at Dears. So then I'm kind of a smart aleck anyway. And I said, I told you, they'd probably hold that job for me for 20 years and they did. So I went over there and worked in payroll. You got the job immediately. Were John Deere expanding his business then during that time or? No, but, you know, Deere and Company was such a big outfit. Outfit that they needed. But they didn't take in too many of the regular workers though. Oh, no. The shop workers. They had to move to California and. Well, and you know, now that's why I guess I'm not too sympathetic about like when Farmall closed and all. We went through this ourselves. I don't recall that I ever got too much sympathy. Well, I never was out of a job because I went right over there. In fact, I went before Minneapolis Moline closed and I went over to Deere. Did you have any pension plan then in the office, personal? No. Nothing at all? Didn't even get any severance pay or anything. They just told you this is the end of it. But I had 20 good years there. I know, but it's a lot of years working for the company. Well, this is what Mr. Ross said one time, you know, that it was just too bad it couldn't have gone on. But then I worked at Deere's for seven years. I didn't get married till I was 49 years old, you know, and then I quit work. After all, my mother was still living. We were living here with her. So the last five years of her life were real good. She had me to shag her around and that. So I didn't get a pension from Deere's either. No? But you got Social Security though. Social Security. But like this Ross now, did he get the pension? Did they have a pension? Yes. They had pension plans? Yes, they had. And the men in the shop did too. But like in the office, see, we didn't belong to Union. Yeah, but if you think back then, did you discuss with your friends now at the office? Because how many office personnel did you have at Minneapolis? How many? Oh. 50, 60? Yeah, at least that many. Didn't you discuss later on that was bad you didn't form a union in 1935? Sure, and I have to confess to you, don't tell this to everybody else, but they called us in once. We were going to, when we voted on it, you know, and there was only two yes votes. And this, this. Two yes? Yeah, this one. That's all there was? Yeah. Did they get fired? Nobody knew who voted. It was a secret ballot. Blank. So only two for Union? But if we had had a union, we would have gotten severance pay. And now they had a pension system set up, like the top men, that was set up. That must have been under Minneapolis. And the factory got it, but none of the rest of us got anything at all. But the workers now, they were unionized. Yeah. They didn't get any pension? Yeah, yeah, they did. It didn't amount to too much, but they got it. They got a pension? Mm-hmm. Depending on how many years they had? Yeah, yeah. So there was a, they didn't sell out to anybody, it was closed the whole thing up. Yeah. And moved on. Mm-hmm. What was the factory located now in Third Avenue? Third Avenue. And Wall Street? Mm-hmm. And Wall Street. Between 14th and 15th Street. In fact, Deere and Company bought the building eventually. It was on the south side of the street. Yeah. So how was International Harvester doing at that time? Real good. They were growing all along? Mm-hmm. So then when they closed down and there was only two competitors in the farm business, Moline and International Harvester. Yeah. Only two left. Mm-hmm. They continued over the years until Farm Outlet closed down in 1980. And I think there again it was probably management, don't you think so? I think that with Deere and Company they had, you know, pretty good management. But they branched out to so many different people outside of it. Yeah, yeah. Mm-hmm. And you have never heard me complain about Deere and Company because, as I say, my dad worked there and during the Depression my folks were buying this house. And it was not easy. My dad, I said, married my mother with two small children who raised them. But anyway, when the Depression came along, Deere and Company took over the mortgage on our house. For four years my father did not have to make a payment. During the Depression? During the Depression. And during the winter, Deere and Company paid for our coal. He paid it back eventually. Did they do that for a lot of workers? Well, I think if they had enough seniority and they did that. Was he a foreman, your dad? No, no, he wasn't a foreman. He was a plow polisher. Plow polisher. Mm-hmm. So they took care of the... Yeah, they really did. I think more than they do now. Well, that used to sort of be the way of the world anyway, wasn't it? That people did take care of each other. But the war houses, they were foreclosed on. Oh yeah, yeah. They had to walk away. Well, for four years, not then, but before that, after the end of World War I, there was a period of hard times. You can't tell it to most people because they don't even know about it. But then the shops were down. And then my dad got a job as a hired man. So for four years, they rented out the house here. And he got a job as a hired man. We all lived out on the farm. In Geneseo? Yeah, Hooppole for one year. Hooppole, yeah, yeah. You know where Hooppole is? I've never been there, but I know where it is. I lived there for one year of my life. From the time I was, what, nine to ten or something like that. And it really was, my dad said he felt... 1920s? Yeah, yeah. In Hooppole, Minnesota. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it was not a big town, I suppose. Well, it didn't amount to much. But anyway, when you're a kid, you know, and the people that he worked for, they had three kids. And my brother and I, well, I know five kids had more fun than we did then. So how many children did your mother have in the first place? She had two. Two. She had my sister, who is 11 years older than I am. Yes. And then my brother, who is three years older. And he was only a few months old when his dad died. I see. Yeah. He was a Swede? Yeah. In fact, their family... I'm nothing but a Swede. As far back as you can go, I tell people, I could never belong to a family like that. I could never belong to the DAR because all I am is a Swede as far back as you can go. Your mother's side now, she comes from Geneseo, but her parents came from... Oh, her father came from Värmland, and her mother came from Småland. Where in Värmland? Well, I say Karlstad, but it isn't. What is it? Kristinehamn? Kristinehamn, yes. Yeah, that's where... You see, her, as I say, her dad was only four years old when they came. He had an older sister, and then my grandpa was four, and his one brother was two, and his one brother was only six months old when they left Sweden. But then there were also, I think, the grandmother had been married before, so she had three daughters from her first marriage. So they all came, and they had to bring their own water and food on this ship, and all this time they spent coming. And they settled in Geneseo? Yes. As farmers, or...? Yes. My mother's family were all farmers. So is there a farm still in the family, or...? No, no, that's been sold. So were you especially close to your father then? Yes, very close to my father. Well, after all, I was really all he had, wasn't I? You were the only child. And, you know, I have his political beliefs and everything. Yeah, we know a lot about his political beliefs, and we haven't... Oh, all right, we'll discuss that then. With my father, he applied for citizenship, you know, as soon as he could after he got here. So then when he went, the day he went to get his citizen papers, they had to be here five years, and this would have been during the period... First World War? After... no, it was before the First World War. And my mother, who was born in America, was not an American citizen, because she married... A Swede? Yes. But when he got his papers, and she was... that was... I don't know how many years that went on. You mean her citizenship went away? Mm-hmm. How come it didn't... You didn't know about this? No, there's something new I never heard. Uh-huh, uh-huh. They changed the law afterwards. She signed it away then, when she... Yeah, that's right. And we kids, of course, were... Well, we weren't affected by this. We were American citizens always. And... but when my dad went to get his citizen papers, my grandfather, my mother's father, went with him. So the judge said to my dad, Well, I think there was an election coming up. Now, who are you going to vote for, August? Well, I don't think my dad ever voted Republican in his life. I'm sure he didn't. Anyway, he's telling the judge, you know, that... who he thought he'd vote for. And my grandfather is standing there and saying, He will vote Republican. My family are all Republicans. But I don't think my dad ever voted Republican in his life. So they were Republicans on your mother's side? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Why do you think they settled for being Republicans? Who told them anything? Who told them anything? You know what my idea of this is? I keep... I say I'm an independent. I hope I'm an independent, that I would vote for who is who. But I'm kind of inclined to be a Democrat. But I maintain that the Republican Party is the party that has the money. And I keep telling people to this day, When I get to have that much money, I'll vote Republican too. So the farmers then, or the people that came from Sweden, you think, they had a farm, they felt that they were a little bit secure. Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. And they went to the state, they went to Republican voting. Mm-hmm. I see. But your father, he was more on the... Well, kind of socialist, if there would have had a socialist party about that time. But he never expressed the opinion in the work talk. Oh, no. No. Oh, no. Because there was a no-no. Oh, no. He never did that. And my father was... I would say my father was the typical Swede. You're a Swede, so you understand this. Like, the Swedes are not outgoing when they're out in public. They are warm as can be in the homes. But my father was a good example of that. He was one of the warmest people that ever lived. But you didn't get too smart with him, you know what I mean? He had a certain reserve about him that... He didn't want to open himself up for anybody. Now, his brother over in Sweden wasn't like that. His brother, he talked to anybody on the street you ever met, you know. Now, my dad wasn't like that. He was real warm with his own family. But he didn't go around shouting at everybody on the street. He liked to know a little bit more about him before he came to America. And that's pretty typically Swedish, isn't it? Yes, it probably is. Yeah. You know, the reserve. Yeah. They like to be introduced. Well, then... Yeah, and I have to tell you this, because you'll appreciate this. You know how we Americans, we always say, oh, I'm so happy to meet you when they meet you for the first time. Well, the Swedes don't do that. See, they say, how do you do? And that's it. And I said something one time to one of them about that. And they said, well, how do you know you're that happy to meet somebody the first time you ever see him, you know? That sounded pretty good, you know. So a couple of weeks ago now, I got invited to lunch with, do you know Florence Anderson? Yes. Well, you know, her cousin has been here from Sweden. Folke. Yes. He was really charming. And I got invited to a lunch for him one day, and he is saying, g'dag, g'dag, okay. So I laughed and I said to him, well, I know you Swedes don't say how happy you are to meet us. And Ethel Anderson was saying, well, one time she said that to somebody, and they said, she said, oh, I'm so happy to meet you. And this fellow said, whatever, England thing. She's opposite. But anyway, this Folke that we had had lunch with him and then spent the afternoon with him, so when we were ready to... So your dad, he never expressed himself in that way of being happy to be with you or to meet you or anything like that? No, he was... He was more reserved. He was reserved. He was reserved. Even my aunt in Sweden, my dad's brother's wife told me when I was over there, because this is for me, it's been fun to have met all of those people and gotten to know them so well. She said one time when a bunch of young people were out on a picnic and they were coming home on the streetcar, and she said, oh, everybody was laughing and talking. And she said, my dad got up and went and sat in front of the car. He didn't want the rest of the people to know that he was with them. He said, oh, I'm so happy to meet you. He didn't want the rest of the people to know that he was with them, see? And she said she knew he liked the girl he was with that day, but he never asked her out again after that. Well, I wouldn't be here today if he had, you know. You got to think about that. So that's your background on your father. Now, you said that he knew the alderman here, Lydia Christ. You said, was he a Republican? Yeah, I think he might have been a Republican. Because most of the politicians among the Swedes here, they were Republicans. Oh, yeah, most Swedes are Republicans. But still, like your dad, he was probably known then as a Democrat or more liberal. Well, he didn't talk too much about it, but there was no questioning about it. And in my grandfather's family now, I think on my dad's side, there were only seven of us cousins. But here on my mother's side, there were 29 of us cousins. And I think out of the 29 cousins, I think there might be four of us that claim to be Democrats. Yeah, all the rest of them are Republicans. They followed grandpa's teachings real well. So when the Union came in, then, was he active there as a... No....going to any Union meetings? No, no. No? No. He stayed out of that? Mm-hmm. He joined the Union, but I mean, he never... Whatever he received and paid, that was the Union scale, and he was happy with it. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. How about the Belgian people? Now, were they also Republicans or... There were more Democrats, though. Well, I'm not sure. And you know, this is a Belgian neighborhood up here. Very close, yeah. I have lived in this Belgian neighborhood my entire life. This is a Belgian neighborhood, huh? Oh, yeah, up here up on 7th Street. Why did he buy Haas Air Army, settle right here? Who knows? Probably it was cheap. I think to Haas... He was in the middle of the Belgian people, then. Yeah, but they were good neighbors, you know that? Yeah, but the Swedes were probably a little bit more... Well, the Swedes......go over to 7th Avenue. The Swedes, I don't think, congregated that much. They were more scattered out, because... So you don't think there is a real Swedish clan somewhere here in Molinde? No, I really don't. Right all over. Yeah, I think... And this is like somebody told me that... Like, down at Penny's years ago, that if you could talk Belgium, you could get a job down there. And I said, well, what about the Swedes? And they said, no, because the Swedes had a reputation for taking up with whatever they came to. Like, most of the Swedes learned the language, you know. Yeah. More time for the Belgians. Yeah, they stuck more by themselves. Do you think the religion kept them more together than the Swedes? Because they were usually Catholics, though. Yeah, they were always Catholics. They didn't belong to any Baptist churches or Lutheran... No, no, they were all Catholics. Yeah. They did, they were Belgians. That's right, that's right. So, because the Swedes now, like your family, they didn't join any church then? After they married either? I mean, they didn't? Well, I got to tell you about this, too, then. Well, my dad in Sweden, you know, they went to church. Yeah. Said they used to walk seven miles, well, a Swedish mile to church on Sunday morning. Went to church, came home again. And then he said, then they didn't get to go out and play in the afternoon. His dad used to read out of the Bible to them. You know, so when my dad grew up and he said, if I ever have any kids, boy, they're not going to be forced to go to church like that. Well, I want you to know, when I was two years old, they had a branch Sunday school from Salem up here at William Carr School. They took me there when I was two years old. And I said to my dad afterwards, what did you think I was going to turn out to be? You took me to a Lutheran Sunday school when I was two years old. You think I was going to be a Catholic? And he said, no, but you were never forced to go. You went of your own free will. But I was not baptized till the day I was confirmed. I had been very active in my church, always. The Salem church, the Salem church. Salem. And I was baptized the day I was confirmed. My mother worried to death I might die in the meantime, you know, and I was never baptized. The other two kids had been baptized. No, no. My dad said, she's going to choose her own church. Oh, I see. How could I have been anything else? So he was the boss in the family all your life? Yeah, he was the boss. Yeah, there's no question about it. So he gave you the freedom, you know, and choose yourself. Yeah, but... It's probably the right way. This very democratic. Yeah, that's right. Because when you are one day old, you know, there's no way for you to tell what's right and wrong. No, no. But then my dad himself didn't go to church. I went to Sunday school and I went to church, but then... He never joined the church? Yes, he did. He never joined the church. And then... He never joined the church? Yes, he did. He did. Because Reverend Magnuson was our minister and he used to come and see the folks, because I belonged to the Sunday school, you know. But he never tried to force it on my dad. And finally, my dad said, you know, I think I'm going to join the church. He's not making a big issue of this. But I'll tell you, after my dad joined the church, he never missed a Sunday until he got sick. So how old was he then when he joined the church? Oh, he was in his 60s then. And the pastor never visited him in the house here at home? Yeah, he used to come and see. I mean, before he joined. Yeah, he used to come all the time and see. But he never forced him into it? No. No? Probably, with respect to that. Yeah. It was his decision to join. But your mother, did she go to Salem? Well, she went, but she didn't belong until my dad did. But she was, her family, her grandparents were charter members of the First Lutheran Church in Geneseo. Charter members? Uh-huh. There were 13 charter members and eight of them were members of our family up there. But she didn't belong to the church then, after she married my dad, until he joined and then she went along with it, you know. So the family members on your mother's side, they actually settled in Geneseo then? Uh-huh. Regarding this church? Well, now I have to show you this. Quality folks, we were just the quantity folks. Of the Johnson's? But you are a big relation of the church? Oh, a huge relation, yeah. And there were a lot of Germans also in Geneseo, weren't there? Yeah, there were quite a few. In fact... Lieberknecht was one of them. Yeah, oh yeah, they were real prominent. And my mother's sister married a German, his name was Gotthard. Uh-huh. And two of her brothers married German girls. It wasn't quite so bad to marry. If you didn't marry a Swede... Well, what did the grandmother's have then? When they brought them home for dates, the Germans? Well, I guess it was all right if it would have been anything else, you know. Were they neutrals then, usually? Yeah. The Germans? Uh-huh. I see. So, but you're living now here in, right in the Belgian neighborhood. Did your mother warn you against dating Belgian people? No, I think maybe I was supposed to have enough sense not to do that. Because I think, well, I can remember... How did you get that sense, though? Well, you just heard this, you know. And I don't think my dad, even though he didn't go to church, would have been very happy to have had me marry a Catholic. No? Because, see, my husband, of course, was Missouri Synod. Bieler is a German. Yeah. Strict German. Yeah, that really is. How did you meet him? Oh. You met him here in Moline? Well, I met him once. I told you, I was a German. And I met him once when he was 18 and I was 22, and he thought I was a real old lady then, I think. But then, many years later, I was at his sister's house one Easter, and he came there with his folks. And that was the beginning of our romance. By the time we were, we went together 10 years before we got married. But I think, you know, by that time, age doesn't make so much difference to you. And your father and mother, now, they were so used to him then after all these long times? My dad never met my husband. Oh, he was dead? Yeah. My dad died the year after I went to Sweden the first time. 51? Mm-hmm. And I just feel then, well, I might not have had, if I hadn't gone, I might not have had all this contact with my relatives. And until he died, nobody from his family had ever come. But now, since then, most of my cousins have been here. Oh, I see. Yeah. And some of them, you know, several times. But you know how times have changed. The distances are shorter now because of flying and everything. Yeah. Now, where are you from in Sweden? Your dad, now, did he talk quite a bit about Sweden? He talked a lot about it. Do you think he was homesick? I mean, he was almost 30 now, in any case. Yeah. And he never made us feel badly. As I say, I'm sure that he did feel badly to think that, because he was, his family are real close. And for me, it's real fun. Even the first time I got over there, you know, they insult me just like they do each other. I'm one of them. They don't treat me like I'm anything special. And they think the best thing was when I came that first time, and I was just a little girl and they said, the best thing was when I came that first time, I didn't look like an American. Boy, that's good. She don't look like an American. How about your mother now? How did she take all this conversation between you and your father? Because she, did she understand what you were talking about? My mother learned to speak Swedish after she married my dad, because she was associated with all these people, his friends, you know. And she spoke very good Swedish. So they were all Swedish friends visiting your home then? Oh yeah, we didn't have anything else. Did they have any Belgians? No, no, no. We didn't have Belgians, Italians, anything. Because my dad joined the Vikings. What year or how early? Well, probably not too many years after he came here. And in the Vikings were his very best friends. He was active there? Was he on the... He was very active. Was he on the board? Yeah, he was on the board. He was very active. And that's the only, he didn't join Vasa? No, even I joined Vasa after I was grown up, but he never did, the Vikings. And they were his best friends. And you know, they were really good, upright people. I think they were, at least they always seemed that way to me. Yes, but did you go with them to Viking? Oh, I spoke my first Christmas piece at a Viking Christmas party. And I told this to somebody. I said, there I was, five years old, standing up there speaking this piece. And I said, boy, was my dad proud of me? And my cousin said... In Swedish? No, no, it was English. But my cousin said to me, your dad was always proud of you. I said, he was? Yeah, he was always proud of you. I hope I never did anything to... So he...