 1992. At the same time? Yes. See, my father was married twice. His wife died. He had two daughters. So my mother accompanied him to take care of the children on the boat. And then they got married over here. Oh, I see. So when he came here, then, his name was actually Magnusson then? Uh-huh. It was. And then he changed it when he came here? The reason he changed it was because the other boys had already changed it. See, at one time, some of the boys used Turnblom, T-U-R-N-B-L-O-M. Some of them used T-O-R-N-B-L-O-M. And then, in later years, it was changed to T-H-O-R-N. More Americanized, I suppose, they figured. I'm sitting together with Hilma Turnblom in Moline, Illinois, and she was born 1907, 17th of July, in Hillsdale, Illinois. And we have today 18th of June, 1986. So, can you tell me a little bit about your father, then, Per Victor Turnblom? What was the reason he came over here, you think? Well, the reason he came over here was because his brothers had come before. And he came over because of better work, better advantages, which, of course, he always agreed that was better here. Although, you know, he liked his home country, but he had a better life here than he did there. More advantages. So, his father, he worked in an estate, you said, around Kalskoa, outside. Yeah. Did he have to work there, too, you think, before he left? Well, I don't know if his father worked there, but my father worked at his... Oh, he did? Your father? My father worked there. It was... I don't know that it was an estate, but I would imagine it was a big farm, a big estate, or something like that. Because there were several people employed there. He wasn't the only one. So, he came in 1892? In 1892. How old was he then, at that time? Well, let's see. He was born in... He was born 1864. So, I can't figure it right out, but he was born in 18... And he was... Of course, he was born in Kalskoa, but he lived there his whole life. And then... And my mother did, too. They were both born there and lived there until they came to this country. So, his brothers, how many were here before him? Well, let's see. I think there were three here before him. Either two or three, I can't remember. But his youngest brother was the first one over here. And then, Erik, my uncle Erik, he was the one who sent money for my father to come over here. Oh, he sent for the tickets? Yeah, he sent for the tickets for him to come over here. So, the first one that came over here, did they come to anybody, like an uncle or aunt or anything? Or did they just come without no... They came because of Deere and Company. See, in Kalskooga, they had a kind of an advertisement or a placard or something. And they came through Deere and Company, really. Because that's where all the boys worked to begin with, when they came here. Even my dad worked there to begin with. So, they knew about John Deere, then? Oh, my. That's really why all the boys came. Because John Deere advertised over in Kalskooga or over in Sweden, wherever they got the advertisement from. But, of course, these boys were all farmers. They were not factory men. They never worked in a factory before they came? No, no. They all always worked on farms. So, they started in the factory and worked there for a few years. But, eventually, all the boys went back to farming. So, your grandparents, now, they stayed in Sweden. They never came over here? No, they never came over here. You never met them? No, I never met them. Your father, did he correspond with his mother? Oh, yeah. Of course, they corresponded all the time. And we sent, when I was a very young person, things were tough over there. They didn't have much. So, we sent all our old clothes back over there, which they appreciated no end. Because things were hard for them. So, when your father came, he was the fourth one in order to come down? Well, I would say so. Either the third or fourth. I can't remember just exactly. Was he the last one? How many children were there in that family, in your grandfather's family? I think there were eleven. Eleven. I see. So, they had to... How about the sisters? Did they come over here? They all came over here, but the two oldest girls. The two oldest girls never came over here. And the one girl that came over here, she never changed her name to Thornbloom. She kept the name Magnuson. Because when I was doing this research for the family tree, I had to go through the courthouse to get her marriage certificate. And on that marriage certificate, it was Magnuson, not Thornbloom. So, she kept that all her life? Yes. And she also came over here, you said? Mm-hmm. And she never married? Oh, yes. She married. She married. And she had two children. Did your father talk much about his background in Sweden at any time to you? Well, yes. He talked a lot about the background. And of course, when I was younger, we talked a lot about Sweden. And we always spoke in Swedish, because I have always loved the Swedish language. I think it's a beautiful language. And we always... He talked a lot. But of course, then, if I had the same feeling then that I have now, I would have gotten a lot more information. But you see, when you're young, those things don't mean a thing to you. It's as you grow older that you realize you should have paid more attention. So, but he took time out to sit and explain to you. How many children were you in your family now? We were eleven. In your family? And I am the youngest and the only one left. Oh, I see. So there were many children then. Oh, yes. In your house. Mm-hmm. And when he came first here to Moline with his wife then, or your mother, Hilda Matilda Bergqvist, did they rent an apartment then, or did they spread it eventually? They farmed in Port Byron, Hillsdale, out in through there. Oh, so they got themselves a farm then? They rented a farm? They rented a farm. So all those years they stayed on the farm from the time... Well, I can't remember, or I don't know that I ever knew what year they went out on the farm. But they weren't in Moline very long, because like I say, they were farmers. They didn't care for city life or for factory work. Before I go on now, I forgot to ask you, did they tell you anything about the travel over on the boat, and Ellis Island, and things like that when they came through New York? Well, it was terribly hard. I remember that much. And my mother hated it when she first came here, because she said everything was so dark. And of course, you know, they traveled, the steerage class, so it was no easy traveling. But my father adapted very well to the language. He learned to speak very good English. And he was very interested in reading the newspaper, learning more about the government, and things like that. He was very interested in that. I can't say that my mother cared much about this country. Of course, after she had all the children, then naturally she cared. She never had the chance to come out either, I suppose. She had to stay at home and take care of the children. So she spoke Swedish then, all the time you remember, growing up. We always spoke Swedish. All the kids? All of us. All of us. In fact, when my oldest brothers and sisters started school, they didn't even know any English. Or very little. So you started school then out in Hilsted? No. I was four years old when we moved to Moline. So I went to school in Moline here. Did they belong to a church out there? Because there were no Swedish churches in Port Bayern. No, no. They didn't belong to any church. My uncles did, but not my father. Because it was too far away to go into the city. Was there... no, there was no streetcars going out that way. Oh, no. No. It was just open country. And horse and buggy. Do you remember going into Moline at any time, horse and buggy? Well, vaguely I remember. Not too much. But I remember that, of course, this was after we came to Moline. I had a cousin, I can remember that very plainly, that died and we went to the funeral. And that was horse-drawn. So that was a long time ago. But the hearse was horse-drawn and we rode in horse-drawn carriages in the funeral procession. That's really about all I remember about... That early time coming over there. So when your dad moved in then, he got a job at John Deere then? Yes. He got a job at John Deere and worked there for... I don't really know how long. But he did work for John Deere because I think that was the agreement when they came. That's how they arranged for them to come over here. I'm not sure about that, but I'm reasonably sure that's how it was arranged. So he did work for John Deere and so did all his brothers that came over here. But they didn't work there very long, like I say, because they didn't care for factory life. I see. They looked for something better. Did they work in a wagon shop or in the plow and... Well, they worked... It was in Moline at that time. I imagine it was the plow works. But that is no longer there now. And you moved into Moline then and what did you settle down then? You rented an apartment or... No, we rented a house. We rented a house. We lived in a house that now... Do you know where Swanson Swedish Gift Shop is? That's where our house stood where we first moved to Moline. 1532 6th Avenue. So that was a single dwelling house there then? It was a big house. But it's torn down now. Oh, yeah, that's torn down. And then later on we moved to 12th Street and 6th Avenue. Do you know where the Salvation Army building is? Well, we lived in the house there. And that was also a big place. That's where all these soccer players gathered. So then what you said, there was a slinging that came into your house and... Every... Do you remember that then? Oh, yeah, everybody stopped there and we had a little room off of our kitchen where the boys kept their football gear, baseball gear, whatever. And it was kind of an open house. Anybody wanted anything, they just stopped by. So your brothers, now, they were soccer players and then... I had one brother that was a soccer player. And I had another brother that did a bit of coaching. He didn't play, but he did some coaching. But my one brother was a goalkeeper for the Moline team. My youngest brother. It was the Swedish-American Athletic Club. So you met all those people then. Well, Gus Mangusen, of course, he is related to you, and Arne Pearson. Oh, I went to every soccer game that was ever played. Oh, you did? I went to every one that was played here in Moline, and I also went on the road with the team when they had a game out of town. Were you helping out then? No, I wasn't helping out. I just was a fan. So they had a group of followers, and they went with you. Oh, yeah. It was a very big thing. We were very interested, all of us, in the soccer team and its progress. You were born in 1907. You don't remember if there were any other soccer teams before this team that was started in 1929. No. You can't remember that? No, I don't remember that. There may have been, because I didn't become interested in soccer until the Swedes started their team. So your brothers, now, then, Gus Mangusen, they were instrumental to organizing this. Yes. And how about your father now? Was he interested in it, too? No, no. He didn't take part in it? No, he didn't take part in it, because my father was hurt at one time. So he was semi-crippled. He could walk and everything, but he had a toe that was hurt, and he walked with a limp. Was there from work he got hurt? Uh-huh, uh-huh. But he took part, though, in, I remember, Frances Peterson said she was playing the piano for those players, and they met at your house, and old Mr. Thurmblum, he was interested to listen to the old music. Oh, yes, uh-huh. He played, and Combadien's Offscheid. Yeah, well, you see, my father was, he played accordion. Oh, he did? My father was very musical. He was very... He took part in those musical gatherings. Did you dance, too, in your house, or...? Sure, sure. We just rolled up the rug in the living room and danced when we felt like it. So you met there during the week, or Saturday or Sunday, or what time of the week? Well, everybody worked, so it was usually on the weekends when everybody had time, you know. But we had, we always had a house full of people, because we had a fun house. Everybody had a good time when they came to our house, because, you know, in those days, you didn't drink, you didn't smoke, all you did was have a real good time. Like, you'd sit and talk, or maybe you'd play cards, maybe you'd sing around the piano, which we did an awful lot of in those days. Were you also playing the piano? Oh, yes, I played. Oh, so you were a musical-dance student with your father. Oh, yes, I played a lot when I was younger. Of course, now I don't anymore, but I played an awful lot. How about your mother-in-law? I mean, she was captain of the whole team there with all these... Well......wanting calls from the movies and... My mother, she... my mother was a quiet person. She was a very quiet person, but she loved to sit and listen and to watch. Because when the Swedes used to have dances, she'd go with me, you know, to the dances, and sit and watch the dancing. So, the dances, now you said you danced in your house, but there were also other gatherings like the Temperance Group and the Vasa and Viking. They all had dances. Oh, yes, they had dances regularly in those days. And so it was just loads of fun to go, because there was always a dance, you know, at some place or other. Now, there used to be... in Rock Island, they had the Vasa, and that was a good place. And Turner Hall was in Moline, which is not there anymore either, but that was right downtown Moline. They were the Germans, though, at Turner Hall. Mm-hmm. But they... The Swedes went there, too. Yeah, but they rented the hall from the Germans. Oh, I see. I see. They rented it. How about the eagles? Were the Swedes participating in their doings? The eagle... Well, yes, a lot of Swedes went to eagles when they had their doings, because at that time, eagles did have a lot of dances, because at that time, dancing was very, very popular. And, of course, you know, they did all the Swedish dances, and that's what we were interested in. Now I wouldn't be caught dead going to a dance-away-to-dance, I tell you. I don't call that dancing, nor do I call the music they have nowadays music. Of course, that's only my opinion, but that is my opinion. So you think it has changed over the years? Oh, believe me. So when you were growing up now, going to dances, it did not change too much during your lifetime up to 1950s, or, well, 1950s, for instance. There was the same kind of dances. There was foxtrot, or the Swedish hand-born shawty. Yeah. But then, after that, in the 60s and 70s, it started to change. Then it just went simply away. It was just nothing anymore as far as I was concerned, because this type of dancing, I mean, like I say, I don't call it dancing. And I don't call the music music. I call the music noise. But, of course, that's, you know, how time marches on. That's the way they are brought up, and it's the only way they know it, I think. Yeah, uh-huh. Like, you know, my great nieces and nephews, they go for all this music. And, of course, I have a lot of recordings, both Scandinavian and English. Well, they don't think any more of my recordings than I do of theirs, so you see, we get along real good on that score. It sounds about the same to them. You were going to high school then in Moline. Yes, I graduated from Moline. Did you take any Swedish lessons there? You didn't have to. I didn't have to, but I did take Swedish for two years in high school. Miss Graham or Graham? Yeah, uh-huh. In fact, I graduated with special honors in Swedish when I graduated from high school, which is really no accomplishment. I knew Swedish very well when I started high school. But then you were able to write it also. Oh, when I was younger, I could write and read very well. I'm not that good now anymore because, you see, when you don't have anybody to practice with, you get rusty. It's hard to find the words. And after high school, did you go to business college then or anything? No, no. I immediately went to work. I stayed home for about a year because we had a lot of work in our house. And then I had no desire to go to college. I could have gone to college, but I didn't have the desire. I was anxious to get a job, go to work. And so I worked in a department store for about a year. Then I applied to the telephone company and got on there and started there in 1928 and worked there until 1970. You weren't ever laid off during the Depression, though? No. You had a steady job. All those years I had a steady job. The only thing during the Depression, we made an agreement in our office that we would take one week a month off, thereby nobody got laid off. And that was arranged through the higher-ups. But we all agreed to it. And you had a union then, of course. No, we didn't have a union. But our office in Moline was run by a chief operator, a woman, who far surpassed any union head that they will ever have, ever had or ever will have, because she was a very fair person. And if she would have lived nowadays, she could have taught the unions a few things about how to handle things because she was a marvelous woman. She was the supervisor then for the whole... She was the chief operator. Chief operator. And she was your spokesman then on that line? She was our boss. How were you paid now in comparison with the outside business, for instance, in the department stores? Were you better paid? Well, no, I wouldn't say we were better paid. I would say it was average. But you looked for the security rather than higher pay, because there was a security to be with the telephone company. Yes, it was steady work. They had the pension plan. How early did they start with that? On vacation? Well, that didn't come until much later. I can't really tell you when the pension plan came. But their pension plan and their benefits are... I don't think there's any company that can surpass them. But they came much later? Oh, yes, they were much later. In the 50s perhaps? I would say so. Maybe in the later 40s. I can't really recall. But see, their pension plan, we don't pay. Most places, they paid into the pension plan, not the telephone company. And your brothers now, and the rest of the family, where did they find work? There was a big family for your parents, though. Well, now, my one brother, he worked for Deere for many years. And one worked as a butcher. He learned the butcher trade, so he was a butcher. And they just kind of fanned out. And my one sister, she worked for the city, as did my father in later years. When he came to Moline, he worked for the city. He worked capacity then? What did he do then, your father? Well, he was just a laborer. But he was on the city payroll then, right? Yeah, he was on the city payroll. So during the Depression, how did he fare then? Was he laid off then from work? It was a rough time then for many. All the men were laid off. My sister and I were the only two people working in our household during the Depression. She worked for the city, I worked for the telephone company. So you had to park with some of your earnings then in your home? We had to park with all of them. So you stayed at home then? Uh-huh. We both stayed at home. So you were the breadwinner? We were the breadwinners. And it wasn't easy, but we made it. But there was no question about it? There was no question about should we or shouldn't we. The rest of them had to be taken care of, and it was up to us to do it. And we didn't question. How about politics during that time? Was your dad, now, was he a Republican or a Democrat? Well, he always voted. I can't really tell you whether he was a Republican or a Democrat. But he always voted. Every election, he always voted. That was one thing he took an active part in whatever was going on because he was an avid newspaper reader. He read Swedish newspapers, he read English newspapers. And he voted. He believed that everybody should vote. So he became a citizen quite early on? Oh, yes. He became a citizen in... Oh, I can't really recall. But he became a citizen right away because he didn't believe that anybody should live here without becoming a citizen. And he was always interested in becoming a citizen, interested in what went on in this country. And he went back to visit in Sweden in 1905. And was that just for a visit? He didn't intend to stay? Oh, no, no. Just for a visit. And that was the only time he went back? That was the only time he went back. And your mother, she never went back? No, she never went back. What did she say about the... Well, I suppose when she gets so many children, she knew this was her place. Did she comment about feeling homesick for Sweden sometimes? She was always homesick. So she wanted to talk about the old times back? Yeah, she... I think, I don't really know. Of course, after the children came, she wouldn't have wanted to go back. But she always was a little bit homesick for Sweden because I think more so the climate. Was it too hot, do you think? Yeah. So you think your mother missed the climate and the nature most of all? Yeah, I think she did. She wasn't a complaining person. I could just kind of tell always when she talked. She never talked about it too much. But they always corresponded for years. Like I say, she never complained because she was happy with the children and everything. But I always figured that... In fact, I know when I was really young, she'd say... When they landed in Ellis Island, she said if she could have, she would have turned right now and gone back. Because she saw all this commotion and people and the smell and the black color, you said. Yeah, the darkness. She said if she could have turned right then, that was as far as she would have come into the United States. That I do remember. But they had no trouble though at Ellis Island? No, they had no trouble whatsoever. Now I think, I suppose, either Deere and Company or my uncle arranged this. But they had no trouble at Ellis Island. This is Saito, a continuation with Ilma Tromblom, Morning Illinois. Saito. She left sisters and brothers in Sweden also though. But after she came over, she helped two of her brothers come over. And then one sister. And then, of course, many years later, Gus Magnusson's mother came over. So she had a lot of connections with the family over here through the Morine. There was a big clan of your father's brothers, so you had a lot of cousins. You would be surprised how many relatives I had. You would be surprised how many relatives I have now in Sweden. Plus what I have over here. We are a big, big family. So you went together then on small parties and bigger parties, I suppose, in the summertime? Yeah, picnics. My oldest brother lived on a farm, so we'd hire a truck. And about 30 or 40 of us would go out at a time. And we'd go out and have weenie roast. They'd build a big bonfire. They'd save wood, scraps and everything, and build this big bonfire. Then we'd have weenie roasts out there. So you were always occupied with something? Always. Nothing was idle? Never. We always had something to do. All you had to do was get on the telephone. You could call together a gathering in nothing flat. But like I say, in those days, you didn't need what you need now to have a good time. Because in those days, nobody drank. You didn't smoke. So there was what you call a sober crowd that you came together with. They were all like that? You always said that boys liked to drink, though. Well, you know, like when you went out to dances, of course the boys liked to drink then. But nothing to excess like it became in later years. Not when I was much younger. Of course they liked to have a drink. But the women wouldn't think of having a drink. You never saw a drunk woman? Never. You never saw a woman take a drink, let alone get drunk. It was unheard of. And they were not in the bars either. What do you think made a change there? What happened? Do you think it was the Depression? Well, I can't really say what made the change. I really can't say. I think it's just that they allowed it to happen. They allowed women to come in bars. If they would have just told them no women in the bars, it probably wouldn't have gone that far. I don't know. During the Depression, the Swedish-American Athletic Club and the soccer team that you followed, you said often and most of the time, there was a good instrument against the Depression. A lot of people had problems during the Depression. They had no work, nothing to do. But the soccer players, they had their thing. And they kept them together and united, so to speak. Do you think there was a good way of solving some of the problems? It was a very good way, a very good way. Because, you see, the younger people had some place to go, something to do. They were occupied. They'd keep them occupied. They could play soccer, they could dance, they could play cards or whatever. But they had a gathering where they didn't have to be by themselves. And everybody was always welcome. It didn't matter. If you wanted some place to go, well, come on. That was how it was. Do you remember seeing young people in trouble, in other words, during the Depression, 31, 32, 33? They couldn't, had no way to go. They were bachelors and they were alone. Some of them probably started... Oh, I think, I imagine there was just an awful lot of them. But everybody was always welcome at our house. My mother never turned anybody away. There was always a cup of coffee for everybody in our house. But there were... But it... There were exceptions, I believe, I mean, like... It was tough. It was really a hard time. Because it was impossible for a young guy that wasn't married, he had no relation. What did he do then? Do you know what he did? Well, I would imagine they did what they're doing a little bit of now, go to the Salvation Army, the soup kitchens, because they had those in those days, too. I really don't know, but I would imagine that's what happened. They had to have something to get some food. How about the old-timers now? They were alone and sitting in their houses or in their dwellings. There was no social welfare at that time. Who took care of them? Well, I think in those days, people were more generous in that respect. You reached out a helping hand faster in those days than you do now. Because in those days, you had tramps come to your door, you know, men riding the rails. Did they come often? Quite often, quite often. And they knocked on the door then? They knocked on the door. We had a lot of them when we lived downtown in Moline. And they came in then? Were you invited in or did you give them a door? Well, my mother never turned anybody away. She'd fix a plate and let them eat on the doorstep. Or sometimes she invited them in to the kitchen table. But she never turned anybody away. But you see, nowadays, you don't dare do that. But it was safer in those days, because that's all they wanted was something to eat. But nowadays, you wouldn't do that on a bed. Did they offer to do anything instead of this treat now, for instance, if they get the sandwich? Well, I imagine they did. I can't really recall that. But I would imagine if... So they were riding the rails from other cities then? Well, we never knew. But, of course, you know, then you had train service. We had full train service. So we would imagine they were probably... I really don't know, but I would think so, that they were, you know, people riding the rails. So when you went down to the rail station in Moline at that time, there was a hustling, bustling place. There were people going and... Oh, yes. It was a busy place. What I miss most of all is train service. Oh, I wish they had it yet. Because I think train service is really a service. And it brings life to a city, I suppose. I think so. I think so. But it just seemed like it just couldn't make it. The automobiles, I suppose, killed it, more or less. And the politics. Your father, he was not... You don't think he got the urge to be interested in being red and so on? No. Because he was a foreigner? Well, I don't know that was the reason, but I believe that was the reason. Because they... I can't help but feel that because they were foreigners, they felt inferior, which they never should have. Because my father was, in my mind, a very intelligent man. Because he could read, he could talk about a lot of things, and understood a lot of things. But I think underneath it all, they felt it wasn't their place in this country to go for any offices like that. It looks like the Fruitvillers struggled to plug that they wanted to be on the ticket, for instance. But there were some Swedes, though, that were on there. Oh, yeah. Oakleaf was one that was elected mayor. But, you see, Oakleaf was not born in Sweden. He wasn't? I don't think so. If he was born in Sweden, he came here as a very young man. For instance, you now would have had it easier than your father, for instance, or your mother, because you were bilingual. You could understand and talk Swedish, and you also could talk and write English. It would be much simpler for me. Simpler for you. But it was hard. In fact, I give those people more credit than I give anybody in the world. The hardships they must have suffered coming to a strange country without, and I'm sure they didn't have much money, but how they brought up all these children, never one bit of welfare. Whatever they had, they got from their own efforts, their own work, their own planting, their own reaping, sowing. You see, they'd done wonderful things. I don't think anybody thinks about how much credit they should have for that. But you see, I never could have done it. I wouldn't be able to do it now to this day. But they did. They were strong-minded, in other words, to do something for their children, for the ones that came after them. They knew it was up to them. They had nobody to ask for anything. I imagine they got some help now and then from their brothers and sisters, I suppose. But they took the responsibility of providing for all of us. Your family, though, was a big family. You had a lot of relations here, so you probably felt more secure than many others. But were the Swedes helpful to each other, you think? Or was it jealousy that somebody got a little bit more, or somebody bought something more fancy? Was it that feeling? The so-called sjuk, as we call it in Swedish? Well, yes, I think there was a lot of that. But with my family, I think that everybody took care of themselves and their own first. But they always lend a helping hand if anybody needed it. I'm sure... Naturally, that's a well-known disease. But I don't believe too much of that existed. But they would reach a helping hand if anybody needed it badly enough. But if somebody was in need, did they really... They really come through. They go together and see that they got what... How about the store owners now in Molin? There were several Swedish ones. But you had... With the Swedes, you had the Jews and the Germans and the Belgians. Did they favor the Swedish stores in... No, I never felt that anybody favored the Swedes at all. Which is why... When anybody makes a big joke of imitating a Swedish person, they're not going over big with me because I'd like to smack them right in the mouth. To me, that's not funny. It isn't funny a bit. But I don't think that anybody patronized the Swedes because they looked down on the Swedes. That's the way I always felt. But I let it be known they didn't need to look down on me because I was proud of my heritage. How about... There is a knowledge about the Swedes, hardworking and honest. I think everybody, every nationality, more or less, had that stamp on the Swedes. Wouldn't they help him in the business? Do you think he was an honest businessman? If I mention some other group of people... Would they help, do you think? Would it make a difference? I never felt they would help anybody because he was a Swede. You just go to that store, something you need... You went to that store because it was something you need, and if he carried what you wanted and gave a good grade of service and good grade of material, you went there. But I don't think anybody ever did because he was a Swede. Now, that's only my opinion. But I never felt that anybody patronized you because you were a Swede. Because I always... Of course, now I don't think they feel that way because the Swedes have proven themselves in many areas in life. But I think, to a certain extent, they still think the Swedes aren't up to snuff as a lot of nationalities. In other words, in the business world, he is not tough enough or brave enough? Well, yeah. Perhaps he's too honest? Well, that I think he is too honest. That's what I think he is too honest. That's why he's a bad politician? I think so. Because... Well, my opinion of politicians... They are not honest in this day and age. So it's hard to be honest and politician at the same time? I think so. I think it's very, very difficult. How about the church now? What kind of role did they play in your family? Did they belong to a church? No. We weren't church-going people. Outside of my oldest sister, she was a religious person. And of course, as children, we all went to church. Now, my two sisters, they were baptized. They went to the First Lutheran Church down there, the one on 13th Street. They were confirmed. They sang in the choir and stuff like that. But outside of that, we were not really a religious people. Did your parents go to church then? No. My parents didn't go to church. So you were not baptized in the church then? I wasn't baptized until I was 21 years old. But then I was baptized in the church. So they were not interested in... No. We were not a religious people. Although I will say, in Sweden, things were different for them. Because my father knew the Bible as well as any minister that was ever in the pulpits. My father knew the Bible every which way. Did he read the Bible at home? At times, perhaps? Or he read it by himself? I have his Swedish Bible, which I have read twice through myself. But like I say, he just wasn't a religious man. But he believed in the Bible. Maybe he was a religious man in that respect. But he did know the Bible. Did he discuss with people his findings in the Bible? Well, the only one he discussed it with was a cousin of mine who went to Africa as a missionary. And he came to see my father every now and then when he came back to this country. And this missionary said he didn't know that his uncle knew that much about the Bible. I said, he probably could teach you a few things. Which he agreed. He was amazed how much he knew about the Bible. But he didn't discuss religion, if that's what you mean. He didn't discuss it. But if you asked him a question, he could answer it. So he was more reserved than we can imagine. So if he had had the means to go on to, for instance, Augustana College for a few years, he would have been a different man and a different person. I think that he would have been somebody very important because my father, in my estimation, had a very good mind. But his family then, growing, and then also... Well, yeah, it was hard times. It was hard times. We were always poor, more or less, you know. We weren't starving or anything. But, you know, everything that was made, it took to keep going. But you growing up under those circumstances, did they make you a tough person or to stand for your rights and see what you can suffer? It made me realize that I always could get out and work for what I needed. I didn't have to depend on welfare like people do now. And no work was too menial for me. If I needed money, I worked for it. That's what that taught me, which it hasn't taught a lot of people nowadays. How about the church people now? What kind of role did they play in Morine, you think? Were most of the people churchgoers or were there a lot of them? Well, yes, there were a lot of churchgoers, and a lot in our relation that were churchgoers and still are. Were they easier to get a job, you think, through the church or did they help you or anything? Well, I'm not familiar enough with the church because I'm not a churchgoer myself. So I really don't know. I couldn't answer that. Did they belong to any of the organizations in Morine, like Vasa, Viking, Switzerland, Odd Fellows? Well, not my parents did. They didn't belong? They had no insurance then? Because there was one other reason they joined those organizations to get two dollars. No, no, my parents didn't belong, but of course I belonged to Swithuyan Vikings. You joined? But they didn't belong? No, they didn't belong. They just, well, I really can't tell you why, but they just never were interested in it. But of course I have been a Viking for 60 years. 60 years? How did you come into Vikings? Was it through... It was through my mother's sister. She was a Viking. And she took me in as a candidate when I was 16 years old, right before I graduated from high school. So you got an insurance policy then? Mm-hmm. So how about the rest of your cousins and of the Magnussons and Torgrums, did they join any organizations? Well, I think they, I belong to Swithuyan, but I think I'm the only one that belongs to Swithuyan. And I have belonged there for about 40 years. And that was through a friend of ours that we used to know that took me in as a candidate there. Did you feel, you started very young at the telephone operator service, I guess. Mm-hmm. Did you feel that you were bypassed by somebody else because you were a woman instead of a man? No, no, no. There was no discrimination in the work? Mm-mm. Not in those days. And, well, I don't think in the telephone company there ever was that feeling. Because I think they had it set in such a way that so many women, so many men. And if you could handle the work in the telephone company, you got the promotion. So this lady you were talking about, the supervisor, she was a lady. And she was at the top. She was at the top. But she was at the top because she deserved to be at the top. Because she knew how to handle people, which is something that very few people know how to do. It's a gift that they are born with. I think she was born with it. Because, like I say, we were not Union then. We became Union after, while she was still in charge. But she ran it better than any Union shop was ever run. Because she was a very fair-minded person. Was she able then to talk to the management for you in a good way, so you got almost as good as being a Union? She talked with everybody. Because she handled everything. And everybody knew that. They looked up to her. But this town of Moline, there was a lot of Union problems there with the International and Jambier. Oh, we had a long strike in 1947. I think we went, oh, it was weeks. So you were on board then? Yeah. Walked the picket line. So you were striking then for better pay and hospitalization, vacation? Better pay. It was a stupid strike, because when I sat down and figured it all out on paper, the raise we got after we went back, it took me three years before that raise counted for anything for the money I lost while I was on strike. Now that, to me, doesn't make one ounce of sense. But that's how it figured out on paper. It took me three years. I had to work until I could count that raise to mean anything to me, taking back what I lost. Were you asking for any future benefits, like pension plans or anything like that? Maybe it worked out that way. I can't remember what we asked for. But I do remember that we would have been just as well off to stay in and work for what we got. So then is the question, if people don't complain and raise hell, will they really raise you according to what you are worth, you think, coming to the time? I think, don't misunderstand me, I think we need unions. I'm for union, and I was a union member all my life, and still would be if I would be working. But my objection is the unions ask for too much at one time. If they would go slow and use their heads, they would get everything they ever wanted without ever going out on strike, ever. But you see, they're too greedy. They've got to have everything right now, which in my estimation is the wrong way to handle it. If they would settle for a little less and take a little less and gradually work up to what they want, there would never have to be a strike, ever, and they'd still get everything they ever wanted. But there seems to be a gap between the leaders and the union, Rangenfeild. Why is it like that? Because you have to vote on it and the majority goes with the... Because the union leaders always preach this, maybe not out loud, but silently, hate management. You do not get along with management. Now that's another stupid thing. Management is who you work for. And if you've got a brain in your head, you do get along with management. That doesn't mean you have to cater to them, but they're the ones that are paying your wages. You better get along with them. But you see, that is not what the union preaches nowadays. But it's strange though, they bite the hand that feeds them. Right. And that's just, to me, a stupidity. You don't bite the hand that feeds you. You get along with that hand. There's a lot of ways... Maybe you don't like a lot of those hands, but that doesn't mean you have to defy them. I never figured that way anyway. So you think now, like in 1986, there's a lot of union meetings going on with the management. They really are up against each other, biting the throat and... They really mean what they are saying. In other words, they are devils on both sides. Sure. Without trying to reach an agreement. I think strike has become a way of living. If they don't strike, they're not in style. I think that's all it amounts to. I think it goes both ways, both for management and for the union. If you don't go out on strike, you're not with it. You're not modern. That's all I think it amounts to. It's like the new music. Right. Just about. Just about. It's hard to understand. But it's interesting, though. They always ask for people's sympathy when they go with the picket sign. Do you really think they get the sympathy today? The workers on strike, with $24 an hour? I don't think they're getting any sympathy. Because in my book, there are very few people that are worth $24 an hour. And they better learn to get along on less, because one of these days they're going to have to. I don't say that people shouldn't have a decent wage. But what is a decent wage and overpayment is two different things, the way I look at it. So there's a different world than 1920s and 1930s. Oh, my. Is it too complicated now, you think, makes it less interesting to live than it was years ago? In other words, it was a hard struggle when you were growing up. But you still had a future to look forward to. What did you really look forward to when you started work? I was just glad I got a job. That's what I wanted. I wanted a job. And I always... I was always grateful that I had a job to go to. It's where I could save a little money, buy what I wanted to buy, and take trips, you know. That was what I looked forward to more than anything. You didn't hesitate to leave most of the money with your family? No, never. From the first paycheck I ever got, half of that paycheck went to my mother. There was just no two ways about it. I wouldn't have wanted it any other way. So you felt responsibility to... Nowadays it's different. The grandparents have to feed the grandchildren. That's right, that's right. But I just never thought of it any other way. Every week when I got my pay, my mother got half of it. Which wasn't very much, because when I started with the telephone company, I started at $11 a week. But of course, you know, a dollar went a long way in those days. And did you have vacation then? Well, we had vacation, but it... The vacation improved as the years went on.