 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Ernie Bengtson, Genesee, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. Here is one thing now that I always wonder about if we go into the politics. The farmers, they don't really have a voice in Washington because that guy, he is elected by the party and he is running the party's errands rather than the independent farmer. What do you think about that? They have some bearing I guess, but really how strong. I think they have some influence surely with these farm groups that lobby and push a little bit there, but it has done some good, no doubt. Not anything really powerful, not anything very positive and strong I don't think. You can really push along, push through with the farmer vote, but it helps to complain a little bit sometimes I think. But it doesn't really have the bite like the rest of the department heads. No, no it don't. We feel kind of bad about that sometimes, but that's about how it is. Farmer goes down by, when I came here, the farmers was to feed what was it, 65 people? Was it more than that? And now honestly, I don't remember the figure, but now the farmer feeds a tremendous lot of families. The farmers are down and they produce more food and more efficiently like we've gone through before with this high class machinery we get. It has helped us and hurt us both, as I've said before. And we wouldn't want to go away from it. You can't go away from it. How can you go back hill? You can't go back hill and start back where your grandpa started. You can't do that. It just won't work. So it's going to have to be done some other way. The way I see it is that there will be more land owned by people that are not farmers that have money, and that kind of grease the farmer here. This happened so much in about the last year or so, especially last year, foreclosing on land that— But there's no good either, though, because they wouldn't farm until it pays. No. Then they leave it. The farmer, he can— Well, that farmer likes to stay there. He's used to the work, and he likes to stay there. But if he can't financially do it, what are you going to do? It's hard. Because like your son now, when you have a sign outside the house that says, been in the family 100 years, that means more than money and anything else in the world. I mean, there's a pride. A corporate farmer, he doesn't care about that. He just wants to have every nickel out of that farm. And if he can't get it, he just won't be a farmer. That's true. Yeah, that's about it. That's about it. So there's a hard dilemma the farmer is in there. Yeah, it is. Now, I'd like to think it's on the bottom, but some people think that maybe we're not quite hit the bottom in land prices yet. The land, at least unstable here. I would think here that I would guess, don't you, 40 percent, maybe it dropped in the acre here, probably not half. But that place where it dropped half since the high point was in value. And then they come back with about the same amount or more, amount of taxes, their appraisal, want to go by that last value. So their appraisal's got to get up on that land just the same, because they've got to have the money for schools and stuff and jails. So the taxes, a little harder to meet. And what we find harder is, what I've said before today, is buying high-priced machinery mainly, that we find hard to meet. It don't quite make sense. Hasn't done for a couple years to buy machinery. So this is going to be in the holding pattern for many years to come? It's hard to tell. I always, it could happen, something could happen in the world that changes these things. Something that happened in Russia here a while back, that something worse than that could happen, people would not get trapped someplace, a terrible thing could happen. I hope never does, but it could change things in this world quickly. But we don't like to see that happen neither. We'd like to go on solidly and steadily like we do, and people live and let live. But as now, it's an uneven thing in America. I'm proud of America, but I'm not proud of hearing people hungry in America. It don't make me proud to hear that. Why are people hungry in America today? That's hungry people in America. People out of work and people hungry. And it's hard for us to understand why that is. It's not so in Sweden. Sweden they're supposed to be taken care of, whoever you are. Sweden are very good to outsiders and foreigners that come in there. They're too good to them. They're really good to them. It's a wonderful country that way. We do that here too, but there's such a big, so many people here. We have what, 240 million people. It's a mess. And I think the biggest thing that I see in change in America is the Hispanic people coming in from the South and moving in more and more. And especially in Mexico today, I think it's just a bomb to me that the people are so tough in Mexico now. And these people try to cross the border all the time. They try to run them back. And I'm afraid that the communistic system could set in there because of that. That worries me sometimes. I hope it never happens. But if people starve so long, they'll be uprooted. And somebody will come and say, hey, follow me. I'll do this. That's what happened in Cuba many years ago. And we have Cuba the way it is today and properly all right. I don't know. Now, the Cuban lady has changed more. It's mellowed up more. He's not quite as, but he's doing his work in the Southern Hemisphere. He's Southern American all over. He's doing his work trying to make his influence heard. There are always some stirruppers all over to instigate problems. And I suppose the masses, they have it rough in many places. They just follow a leader where it sounds good. We like freedom. I like freedom. In fact, freedom is, well, when I left Sweden, when I left Sweden, I used to hate to be a little fella. I used to like to be able to say a word, be somebody a little bit in the world. And the feeling there was, when I grew up, that the little boy wasn't worth nothing. You could strike him on the cheek if he didn't work. You could do anything with him. And you said hello, and you took your cap off to the guy that had $10 more than you had. That makes me mad. Well, that isn't the way to, not mad, but that makes you see the system as it was, not likable when you grew up. So I didn't like the Swedish system when I grew up. I say that for you. But then I heard that in America you could talk, you could talk to people that was well off. He wouldn't hold you down like they do there. And it was true when I came to America. I liked that in America. And it's still here in America. I can still go and talk to a millionaire like not nobody, if I want to. I'm not too much of a talker, but I mean, I don't get out among people that much. But I like that. There's not that stuck-upness that we had way back then. Now that is gone in Sweden, I think. Many years ago it's been gone, because the times of the system have mellowed that out and erased it pretty much, I think. But there was the parents who instilled in you, you were supposed to be curious, you know, to old people and the one that had a little bit better aspect. It was nice to do that, yeah. Not enough of it here. Not enough of it here, really, in a way. So I talk against myself there. You know the pastor in Sweden, Kyrko Hedlund? Yeah. You had to take your hat off and... Well, it was good. It was good. You had respect, you know. It was good, I guess. We had, in a Sunday school, we worked in a Sunday school a lot. She was... In Geneseo. Yeah. So how different was the pastor there compared to the one in Sweden? He was Swedish enough, so he was pretty much like Sweden. Yeah. You mean he had respect for... Yeah, more so. Now it's changed. He shook hands with people. Who was that pastor? Burton. Burton. Burton, he was born in Jämtland in Sweden. He had... He just passed away now, last year. But I remember we were... I was superintendent of Sunday school for a few years in our church, and the kids there, some of them, was calling me Mr. Bengtsson. And that's never happened since. There's one or two yet that come and say Mr. Bengtsson, not anymore. Then soon, you didn't hear that anymore. They say Mr. Bengtsson to me. And I thought it sounded nice to hear that. Now it's Ernie. My name is not Ernst, it's Ernie. I'm known as Ernie, Ernie and Ruth. And that kind of disappeared. It's all right. As far as our church is concerned, it's... Can you say anything? It's liberalized. We are liberated now, I'll tell you. So the Sunday school is different now? My boy has the high school kids, and he can hardly handle them. He can't sit down with anybody, and they're so lively and wild. You know how that is. You can't handle those kids hardly. So your son is also interested in church life then? Yeah, he's on the church board. I was for many, many years. Now he's there. There's more than him, of course, but he has a lot to do with church. We have two pastors, and two pastors here now. One lady pastor and one more or less soon-to-be-retired pastor that helps there. And they're doing well, I guess. But there's not the same spirit in church as it was when I came here. At that time, I remember if a kid went inside the altar around in church, that was not allowable for a kid to be up there. Now, gosh, you do anything. You go up there, and the kids play around and have a good time. But then that wasn't allowed. You have respect for the altar up there. And now, I don't know whether it's good or bad. I couldn't say, but that's how it is. Changing times. Mm-hmm. But I was foolish enough in Sweden one time to talk to a pastor in Kauve after the service. He came out and remarked to him that the dumb thing to say that it was not too big attendance in church, you know. And even at Christmas, you know, he—I wasn't smooth enough in my—to say that, I said, The jurors are the scar jurors. The jurors are the scar jurors. You know what that means. And he was right. And I mean, there was no compromise. Don't come in here and poke your nose in my business. It don't work. And I wish you wouldn't record this, but you know, the Swedish archbishop was here last year, I believe. Yeah. Wasn't he here last year? Yeah, Wegstrom, yes. Wegstrom. Bishop Wegstrom. But he was in Tennessee with who? Yeah. Andover. Andover, oh yeah. Yeah, I saw him out there. And he was that same known man, guy, I think. He was not—he didn't make a good impression on me at all. Did you talk to him, or—? No, no. You just heard him talk. And heard a lot of responses from other congregations where he had been, and how they all—how they all found him— Cold. Found him cold, and not to— But don't you think the Swedes are like that, though? That they like to— Yeah, they are. Schutz-Weiss, Schutz-Weiss they are. Schutz-Weiss they are. No, no. The other people you get to know, they're all okay. But as far as the Church is concerned, I think it's so much different. We have—I guess I like it better here, in a way. The Swedes, they have—they had a big office in Sweden. They got a lot of book cooking to do in those big congregations, remember? And they can't run around like they should do here. We have around a thousand people here in our congregation, and we don't even here ever see the pastor come out to see us or anything, do we? But it's a different world. So how many are of Swedish background in this congregation out of a thousand? Not too many. There are some. No. Two hundred? No. All in background, possibly. All in background, yes. I'm sure there's more than a hundred. We have some born in Sweden, three or four? Well, yes. You and Ben Nordstrom and Ellie Hageberg. Carl Anderson. Carl Anderson. And Gustafsson. Yeah, both Gustafsson. Zabaria, that's a few. There's a few. There's a few that are born in Sweden, but they're getting less and less. Fewer and fewer. Have you been on the council of the church? Yeah, many years. Thirty-five years. Thirty-five years. It was a year. First year deacon. Well, yes, they had deacons, but I don't know why they called them deacons. But they had, I was much interested in the church, and coming from Sweden, they thought there was stuff to bring in, you know, I tell you. And I don't know if my ideas was any better. That wasn't the case, but they, it's many years ago now, but I remember when the pastor read from the pulpit, then we have Ernst Spangsen from the State Church of Sweden. My goodness. The young women started to look at me, who I was. I guess, I don't know. He was from Jämtland. The pastor was from Jämtland. At that time. That's the last Swedish pastor we had. And the last Swedish service we had was in 1947. We had an evening service. His niece was here from Sweden, and she could play the organ, and so they had a Swedish service in the evening. We had, you looked, two years here, about the time our church was 125 years old. So he read the gospel from. Yeah, that's the last time. And they had one song in Swedish, I believe. Yeah. That's the last time. And I think we'll be probably the last time. It was Husanna David's song. They sang that at the balcony. That was kind of nice that morning, but that'd be the end of it. That has to be the end of it. It has to be the end of it. It's a shame. So the number of Swedes then, understanding the Swedish, have diminished in over the years. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. They really and truly, when it comes to church, a lot of people, it seemed like, because we are more associated with church than all these other Swedes, I think. And when it comes to Sweden, Ernie is the Sweden out here. I'm the Sweden. Ruth and I, she understands Sweden well, too, and she can translate the letter just as good as I can. And to us, they come with the Swedish questions, you know. You are the reason. So it's dying out, of course, that it's bound to be that way. So there are no Swedish celebrations then, like Midsummer or Lucia? Not particularly in the last year. Well, we had Lucia here a few years, and my cousins live out by a lake. And they had, the last two years, had a Swedish Midsummer affair, dance and the maypole and so on. But I don't think they're going to have it this year. Well, and then the year we were 125, then we had the Swedish bell ringers here, and we had the Midsummer dance by the preschoolers. So once in a while, we happened to have a pastor's wife of Swedish background, and so she organized it. But I don't think there will be too much anymore. Now Pastor Eklof has Swedish background, I guess, in him, but I don't think there will be too much of the Swedish celebrations. This was the first year they didn't have Lucia. I thought it was too bad. We didn't have it. No. We had Pastor Spong. He had Swedish background, and his parents have been in Sweden, and they have relatives in Sweden. Of all the changes that have taken place, when I first came here, you didn't know whenever you could go back to see your folks again. You didn't know for then things. And it took a long time, but since then, to be able to travel easily, that has put me close to Sweden, just like Sweden is there to my eyes. Nothing to me now. I can go. We've been back there seven times. Seven times. I crossed the ocean 15 times. That's a lot of times. But anyhow, you got to be able to fly across. Then people get closer to you. It's just like one world. You don't mind. I tell my boy that sometimes, and he says, well, Dad, nothing to have some relation on the other side of the ocean. He says, well, love, far away sometimes. Has he been over to Sweden? Yeah, he was with me once, when he was 14 years old. His wife and three daughters at that time, and they left the other one home. Yeah, with three girls. He's got four daughters. Oh, the cutest girl, the nicest one is married now. And they were with us in Sweden when we were there once. And last year, our older son got to go because he worked for Bell Labs, and they sent him to Finland. They sent him to Helsinki? To a seminar for a week, and then he asked them if he could stop in Copenhagen and spend four days in Sweden. So he saw where his dad was born and lived, and most of the relatives, not all of them. Do you and Mrs. Bengtsson have a relation? Yes, they're third generation cousins. They're my grandfather's brothers. Did you correspond with? Yes, with some of them. I've met some of them, and then my other cousin has gone and met more. And then I also have some on my father's side. Well, it's really just one now that is left of those. And we have met them at interesting times. Well, you now, Mrs. Bengtsson, your name is Ruth, and you were born 1909, 27th of March, in Geneseo. Yes. And your parents, now, they came from Sweden. My grandparents. The grandparents came from Sweden. And then they expect them to– what year? 1860? 1868. So your grandparents now came 1868 from Sweden, and your father was born 1869 in Moline. Yes. So they came then from where in Sweden? Skåne? Skåne, near Kristianstad. And did they have any children with them from Sweden? No, no. They weren't married, but they came at the same time and then were married shortly after. They came in, I believe it was February 1868, first to Galesburg, and he found no work there, so he went to Moline and found work at John Deere and had $1.69 when he got to Moline. $1.69. $1.69, and they were married one month later. Did they know each other from Sweden? Yes. Well, they did. What was the reason they left? My father– my grandfather's father was a cripple, and they had six sons and a daughter. And of course, times were very hard. And he and a brother bought these dance tickets on a lottery in Denmark, and they won an amount that was sufficient, so he and his brother came to America, and the one settled in Galesburg and the other in Moline. But they worked and earned and brought over the other brothers. One died at sea, but– and the sister was the only one who remained in Sweden. She stayed there and– She stayed there and it's her descendants that I have visited. My one uncle– my father's uncle sent money so that she could be educated and she became a teacher. And then– So your grandparents, they was only by chance that they came here to– The United States? Yes. It was the winner. What kind of lottery was that? It was a dance lottery, is what they called it. In Copenhagen? Yes. So they went over there and– Of course, a little money went quite a long way in those days. Do you remember your grandparents from your father's– No, not my father's parents. They died when I was– one when I was a year old and one before I was a year older. So he got to work then for John Deere? Yes. And then he got enough money– he was very, very frugal and saved money, evidently. And of course, to buy a– he bought 149 and a half acres in 1874, October 1874, here. This very place? This very place, in Geneseo Township, the land that was in– well, part of it was in Geneseo. How did he happen to come out here? Because it's quite a distance though from Morin. That I don't know. You see, my father died when he was quite young. He wrote a history just before he died that– Your father? Uh-huh. In fact, it was the same year, and it was, you know, just a short one telling the essentials. And he– He didn't have too much down payment from you? No. No, he had a mortgage. And his brother, one brother, I think he was probably the younger brother in the family, lived here for a few years. And the first taxes on this farm were $18.74, and his brother paid them. But then evidently after– they moved here in 1880. My father was 12. And they were very, very poor. There were five– well, they had six children. One died of diphtheria in Moline. And they had to work, the older ones, when they came out. And I remember my father telling that they didn't have overshoes in the winter, so they would wrap sacks around their feet to protect them. So– but as it went on, he bought more land in Atkinson Township, and then he bought another 40 acres up here. So by the time he died, he had 305 acres in this farm. So he was able then to– because when he settled here on the farm, it was his only work then. He didn't work up here anymore? No, no, no. Was this an established farm already, with houses on it? It had a house. This part here was part of the house, and then the rest of it they– we had for a shop for a long time. Well, it's over 25 years ago since they tore that down and built a new one. But this is the original part of the house. And there was a barn on it when he came? No, they were all– let's see, 1880– they were– all the children were born in Moline. There were three girls and three boys, and as I said, one of them died of diphtheria. My father slept with him and never contacted it. So let's see. One of these things, the grona was a little bit more hardy to take the virus or germs. So there were six children living? Five. Five living there. When he moved out here. Six of them died, yeah. Your father was one of them growing up here, helping out? Yes, and then his older sister, and she liked to be out and help. She helped pick corn and was helped outside. There was another sister that helped more inside. And of course the youngest one was very young when he moved here. He was born– I think he was a year old, I believe. And they belonged to the First Lutheran Church? Yes, they joined First Lutheran. They were not able to– Get to church always. Get to church every Sunday. No, they weren't. Because it's quite a distance. It is. It's a horse and buggy. Yes, we had a shortcut road that we went through the fields, which took about a mile or so off of the road. We had that for quite a number of years. In fact, it was still a little bit of it there when they built this road here and I taught at our home school, which was two miles from here. And I drove that road for a time to get to school because it was a bridge they were working on. Over Green River? No, over a ditch, Blue Giant ditch. But they belonged to that First Lutheran then? Yes. And– He was a trustee, I believe it was eight years, I think. Oh, so he was active. And how about Grandma? Well she had asthma and she wasn't so well. They both died about– I think they were about 67, both of them when they died. She was in, of course, the ladies' organization. I don't know how often she got there, but as often as she could, I'm sure. Most of the ladies belonged to the– Yeah, they had a country, a town. So they met out in the townships then? They met out in the homes. And sometimes– This is cassette two, side two, continuation with Mrs. Ruth Bengtson in the Geneseo. My mother and father, not the first year they were married, but a year or two later moved on a farm of my grandfather, my mother's father, and rented that for a number of years. And he had– my father had what they called cholera morbis and was very ill. And my mother had to– after he got better and could work, he still was– he got to work as soon as he could while she had to harness the horses because he wasn't able to lift the harness up on a horse. So she could manage horses. So they didn't go in too often, though, to Geneseo to restores more than– Well, not more than necessary, and we sent for some things to Sears Roebuck, especially in the fall. A pail of herring and a box of crackers and a few things like that we sent. Did they come by rail then to Geneseo? Came by rail and came out by parcel post. Well, they brought out? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. The parcel post at that time, there was a horse and buggy, though. Yes. That's the first– Not after we moved here, I think, that they had– the mailman had a car. But I know over there they had a horse and buggy. And you have on the wall in your room in there an old bill of sale, auction sale. There was– In June– Selling our estate. Yes. There was a grandfather there. Yes. After he died, the farm was sold, and my mother's father helped my father buy the place. It was in June 1912. 1912. Mm-hmm. And you have a few gadgets on there. Yes. Some bells for the horse. Yes. And the old ironing board is the bill of sale that pays it on to. Yes. And you have a copper funnel. Yes, I think the copper funnel, I got it– I had a younger cousin who died suddenly, and he was the last of his family, and at the sale I bought a box of junk because there was a certain plate I wanted in it, and that copper funnel was in there. And this was a– he was a son of my father's youngest brother, and my grandfather, after his wife died, had lived with him. So there were a few things that I think probably were my grandfather's. I just happen to think maybe that funnel was one of them. And of course it was all green and that, but I polished it up and put it in brass. Yes. But it's an old one. It's an old one. And then you have the key to the house. Yes, an original key to the house, and a nail from the original part of the house. And then you have a very, very old corn husk, just used for one finger. Yes. I never seen anything like that before. No. And I did have a husking peg that my grandfather made, he was a blacksmith at John Deere. And so he made things like that after he came here. I don't know if we still have it or not, but we did have the vice that my grandfather had– He made it himself? Well, I don't know if he made it himself, but that he used a lot. So he was an old thrifty man until he was old. And my father learned to do a lot of things like shoe horses, and he could work with a forge too, and shoeing horses. So your father, he was growing up here then on the– On this farm. On this farm, yes. And he went to school then in– He went to school in a schoolhouse. It has been moved, made into a house over here, but they were, in the wintertime, there were 60 in that little schoolhouse. It was just a small one-room school, 60. In a one-room schoolhouse? Yes, and a lot of the older children couldn't go during the school year, so they just went during the winter. And so you can imagine what a time the teacher had with some of those big boys. I taught in that same school. Of course, I went to school there all eight years, and our older son went there through the third grade, and then they consolidated and went by bus into Geneseo. So there was one school in every township? More than one school in every township, because there was this school, and then there was a Pritchard school over there. They were both Geneseo and Bluff Road. There were three at least. Oh, well, that's just this side. There probably were about five schools in this township, at least. There were a lot more children. The farms were smaller, houses were closer together, families were larger, as a rule. Five, six kids maybe? Yes. Ours was a small one. It was just my brother and myself. So there you got your learning, and the teacher was able to keep order and respect? Yes. Of course, there weren't that many when I went to school. I think probably we were about, oh, 20 maybe when I started, and it kind of went down. There were five in my class when we graduated from eighth grade. And after that, it started going down. When I taught there the last year, I taught there was about 1936, and it was down to seven students. So you choose as your profession to be a teacher? Yes. So after this one-room schoolhouse, you went to a college then? No, I was planning to go to college, and after I had diphtheria. The last year I was in high school, and I got complications, and the doctor wouldn't let me go, so I studied at home and took teacher's examinations they had in those days, and passed those, and I taught in three different schools. I taught for ten years before I was married. You had also a one-room schoolhouse? Yes. So you have first-hand experience? Yes, I do. First one I taught at had a basement and a furnace in the basement, and it had the coal bins so you didn't have to carry coal. But my home school I taught next, I taught there for five years. It had no basement. It had a coal house, and you carried in your coal, you carried out your ashes. You were the janitor and everything. I started teaching at $85. I went up to $90, went down to $70 during the Depression, and got back. Then I moved to another school where they had a stoker, which was automatic and wonderful, and I had $85 there. And I asked them for a $250 raise, and they wouldn't give it to me. They could be the teacher for $85. So I quit, and we got married. But let me see, $85, it couldn't be a month. Yes. Well, you had a, that sounds pretty high though compared to others. Well, it bettered itself by 1937. Well, it was up $37. I thought it was in the twenties. No, no, I started in $29 to teach. You came into the right Depression. Uh-huh. Well, it was still a good price in $29. I got $85, and I went up to $90, and I had 92 years that I taught there. Then it started coming down. It's coming down. To $70. But I was lucky. I stayed at home and got my room and board. I worked in the summer for that. So you had a clear take-home pay then. Yes. So how did it work out now with one room in the schoolhouse? Did you have help of the other older students to teach? Well, some, not too much. But I did as much as I could. They didn't get as much attention probably as they deserved, but they seemed to get by and do well. Because nowadays the teachers are specialized. Yes. I mean, two grades and this is it. They don't know anything else. Oh, you have to teach them. But you had to do the whole spectrum. You had to do everything. Music, what music they got, and everything. We tried to make things interesting for them. I have a letter from a superintendent of schools that I treasure that an estate superintendent once had visited my school and said I was doing a good job. I'd get books from the library for them to read. Especially at this school, they had a very small one. At the last school I taught, they had a library beginning and had more equipment than what we had in the others. But you did the best you could with what you had. So when you received the kids, they already been to the first grades? No, I had all from first through eighth. So you had to, your first part was to teach them to read and write and arithmetic and the whole thing. And then continue all the way up. So you could really see the improvement in one child. Oh yes, yes. So what was the best way to go about it? You couldn't press on too hard or how did it? Well, you had a schedule and you probably had only 15 minutes for a class. But sometimes you spent more with the first grade trying to get them going and the others worked on their own. And they really did work on their own? Yes, they did. You went up to the higher grades now and took the attention to them and gave the attention to them. Did the first grade really? You listened in. They did? Yeah. They learned a lot I think from the others. And I don't know, we had an arithmetic game and all grades for what we call opening exercises. And it was for everybody. And you kind of keyed it to their level and then went on up. And they learned a lot from the older ones I think. And the older grades, they were not bored by hearing repetition from the older ones? No, they had to do their own studying and working and most, they learned to concentrate on what they were doing. I think they had to or they wouldn't have gotten what they did. But if they have like you said 60 kids in one school, they were not bored. Well, that was way back. That was way back. It's a tremendous number. Yeah, I don't know how much they learned. My father, he was a good, he could do arithmetic in his head. He was very good in math. He did go to what we called the GCI that we had here that was a Presbyterian school for a number of years. He went there during one winter at least. My mother graduated from the GCI and she was a teacher also. So they made, one thing about the country schools, it held the neighborhood together. You knew your neighbors. We had picnics and we had programs and the parents came too. And now you hardly see your next door neighbors and don't hardly know them. So you would say the PTA was better years back than it does today? Well, I'm out of it now you see, so I can't say. Yes, I would say so. You were closer too. And we had parties in the neighborhood too. If someone moved out, we had a party for them. If somebody had an anniversary, we had a party for them. In the home and you played games and you had a good time. Your mother, now she was a teacher, did she also quit teaching when she married? Yes. They didn't have married teachers, especially in her day I'm sure. Oh, they didn't have that? No. Did they use the rule or? Well, they just quit when they married. They had plenty to do at home in those days. It was like an unwritten law. Yeah. Oh. So you continued on then to teach for seven? Ten years. Ten years? Mm-hmm. But you had met Ernst Bengtsson? Yes. I met him several years. When he first came here almost, but he didn't come around. Like I say, he had another girlfriend for a time. Finally he decided to come. He had a. So he figured a teacher would be a good deal. I guess so. In hard times. Well, I wasn't teaching then. There was too many unmarried girls around here. So you married Ernst Bengtsson? Yes. You married in the First Lutheran Church? Yes. And you worked earlier in the Sunday school and. Not Sunday school. Not Sunday school, no. Young people. And church services mainly. So how far did he live away from your farm then or here? About two and a half miles. Two and a half miles. Mm-hmm. But you were continuing educating people around there for ten years? Yes. But then when you married, you quit the schooling. Yes. I quit before. Before you married? Because I didn't get a raise. I think it wasn't worth it. You were tired of it then. Yes. So did you move to this farm immediately then when you married? I lived here. You lived here? I've lived here since I was four years. Did you take over the farm then? Well the first year my husband worked as a hired man. For your mother? Yes. And then after that she took him into One Fourth Partnership. When we got the One Fourth paid off, then it went into One Half Partnership. And my husband and my mother got along very well on farming. So she was the business manager. Yes. She was very interested in farming. That was her life. She always worked hard, was up early mornings and baked pies and cooked and canned and all the things that went with life at that time. She was at the old-fashioned housekeeping. That's right. And she had a lot of men to feed too, I suppose. Yes, she did. She had always two hired men at least. And we were four in the family, of course. And then at times it was extra men for thrashing, tiling. Yes, we had thrashing dinners, of course, for the thrashing run. And they lasted for about two days? Oh, it usually lasted. It depended on how much rain you got, but I would say almost two weeks usually. And then we had a big thrashing picnic. I see. And the owners of the machine would get the ice cream and everybody else would bring all kinds of good food. I see. The owner of the thrashing machine? Yes. When they started, my father, there were three of them that owned it. My father and two other neighbors. And then after my father died, then one neighbor bought it out. I think he still has the machine unless he's sold it to some antique man. So that machine then covered how big of an area around here? Just the three partners? Oh no, about eight places probably. Eight places? Mm-hmm. Some smaller and some larger. And they started around? In August usually. Probably the first week or second week of August. It depended on the weather again. And then everything, the small grain was in? Shocks, yes. And bundles. Bundles, yeah. And hauled it together in? Yes, hauled them up and unloaded them in the machine. Before that, they had a steam engine that used to come, and then you had the crew to keep overnight and to feed breakfast. They stayed overnight? They stayed overnight. When they didn't get through in one day. You had to give them breakfast, dinner, and supper. And also at first they gave the whole crew dinner and supper. And finally it got done after they owned this one machine, they decided just to give the men dinners. So you were away at school then? Did your mother have any help? No, I was at home. The only time I went to – I went two summers to summer school. So I helped my mother, and then there were lots of – I had a lot of friends in the neighborhood, girls about my age that were teachers. And we'd go to each other's places and help serve the meals and get them – wash the dishes. But the threshing crew, they could be ten, twelve men or – No, oh, more than that. I think probably – because we'd have sometimes – You had to drive in? Two different tables. You went in after meet, be there at seven o'clock and be right home with the roasts, so you'd get it done in time when you had roast. You had to vary your meals. Sometimes we had chicken and then you had to clean them. My mother was up early in the morning. We had the pies baked by six o'clock. But for so many people, that was a tremendous crew to – Yeah, it was. It wasn't – To feed. They had to have plenty of food, too, because they ate well. We had – I used to go up to the neighbors up here, and she was from Sweden and one of the best cooks ever. They really had some real meals up there, and the men just ate. It seemed like – And it was like a competition, I understand, with the places. Oh, yeah. Yes, yes. Because if they got a bad treatment in one place, it was all over the – Yes. The coffee. You had to be sure you had good things and plenty of it. Always seconds ready. Yes. And then a lot of coffee, I suppose. Well, yes, I think so. I think we cooked quite a lot of coffee. Did they drink coffee with the dinner? Yes. They did. And not all of them. There were sometimes a few that – well, we didn't have, like, soft drinks then, and so they just drank water. Or sometimes, occasionally, somebody would want milk, but mostly coffee, I think. But it was hard to seat them in the kitchen, or – Oh, we had them in the – we had a dining room at one time. Our bedroom was the dining room, and we had a table that stretched out so you could seat twelve at one time. They washed outside, you put out a bench and wash basins and towels and plenty of water, and they washed outside in cold water before they came in. There was the pill with the dipper. Yeah. They didn't drink that, though. No. Because that usually was soft water. We had a cistern where they had soft water. So you had good water here on the farm? We can go to – A drill well? You can drill down twenty feet and get water. It's very close to the surface here in this area. For humans and the cattle? Yeah. You know, south of town they have to drill – well, not even south of town. The farm where we lived when I grew up, they had to drill quite deep before they got water. So when they had now the threshing crew in the morning for breakfast, would they serve coffee between the breakfast and the dinner? No. No? They were going – They had water boys, we called them. Some young boys that rode a horse and buggy around out in the field and had jugs of water so they got all the water they needed to drink. So there was a special crew of boys to take care of that? Yes. So, and the grain that was coming from the threshing machine, was that hauled away immediately or was it – No, they – we had stored that at home and some places you had to scoop it into a bin. That real hot summer that it was over a hundred degrees for so many days, sometimes it was a bit where they had to scoop oats or – into a bin. I don't know how they stood it. Here we had an elevator quite soon so they elevated it, which was a lot easier. In sacks then or bags? No, just loose and the elevator took it up into the bin. So and then it was sold for the best prices for – Yes, a lot of it was fed too. They used to mix it in the slop for hogs. They mixed oats in, they'd mix it a day ahead for the next day and it would soften it and so it would be swelled and the hogs did well on it. So most of the grain that was consumed on the premises? Well, yes, most of it. My father had hogs and he also had some cattle. And they sold some I suppose. I don't, you know, remember what proportion. I didn't pay enough attention I guess at that time. And the threshing crew from around here, they was the farmers and – That was the farmers. People. Right. Did you exchange workdays then? Yes, yes. In other words, you paid for it. My mother kept track of how much time they put in at each place and if they didn't work enough, why then maybe you had them help with something else some other time or in some way why you evened it out. Here they would chop wood and sometimes we'd have some men come and help when they sawed wood. We still have our old wood saw standing in the shed. And that way you'd get your help back or sometimes in making hay or something. They exchanged help. So there was one way to cut the cost of hiring outsiders then. Yes. And the time was when they hauled hogs into town and they just had these small wagons. And if you sold quite a few hogs, you'd have some of the neighbors come and they'd get up early in the morning and take the hogs into the stockyards. So when they bought the hogs now from the farmers, there was a buyer then from the – There was a stockyard near the railroad and they were shipped to Chicago. In Geneseo or Atkinson? Geneseo. Geneseo. And there was what they called a shipping association that the farmers got together and formed. And after they got that, the farmers would bring them there and the men would keep track of how many hogs you had and the weight and so on. Would they weigh them before they – Yes. So they knew how much, how many and how much you had. I don't know. They probably marked them too. I don't know. So they got to be marked because there were several train loads, I suppose. And when they sold cattle, they drove them into town on the roads. To Geneseo? To Geneseo. And they had to have quite a few people that would have to go watch the gates and the corners so they'd go the right way. And then they were – They started early in the morning to drive and get them in. And then they had the holding pens in the – Yes. So there was a lot of commotion then, I suppose. Yes, there was. A lot of hauling. Yes. Out in the fields. And your father, did he die when you were young or – Yeah, I was 24 when he died. Was it an accident or – No, he hadn't been too well and he had cancer and he was operated on a Sunday and died on a Monday. He got – the doctor said there must have been some leakage somewhere. He got peritonitis. So he died quite suddenly. So then your mother had to take – was she used to take care of things? Well, she had been very interested and knew what was going on and she did help some. My brother was handicapped somewhat so he, you know, couldn't manage things. And so she did the managing of it. There were certain things he did and he liked to do certain things and did them very well but he couldn't do everything. So she was familiar with things then. Yes. And it happened. And then more and more you and your husband took over the orchards and the old farm. And when did she die, your mother? She lived to be 89. She died in 19 – 31st of December, 1964. She was quite active until about, well, 80 then she started to fail. But she liked to work when she was sick so she couldn't get up sometimes. So it just was no good at all but if she could get up, at least wipe the dishes. It would be useful. Yes. She did it as long as she was able. So she lived with you then? She lived with me and with us and my brother also. After she died, he lived with us. He just died five years ago this summer. He lived with us. How about other Swedish people around here, your neighbors, were they of a Swedish background? Well, they were of a Swedish background and there used to be a little church about two miles straight west of here that was a mission, sort of a mission friends church. And they belonged to that. And when, well, I'll say two reasons. Most of them went into the Grace Church at that time because it was all English and ours still had some Swedish. That was one reason. And then I also heard that our pastors would not come out here and preach and that was another reason. So they all joined but they were all, at the time I grew up there were a lot of Swedish families and now there's, well, there's one up here of a Swedish background. Her father was born in Sweden but he died a number of years ago. But you know, they're all, well, there's one up here on the corner too also that's of Swedish descent. So some of them have moved off then or there was not too many? Well, they've died. They've died. So the acres you bought into this farm then, there were people that died then or? Not right away. Yes, that's right, he did die. But the brother had moved away before and it was a bachelor brother that owned the land that we bought first. And the other land we bought, the owner had been dead a number of years and the children owned it and sold it. So the young people now around here, they left for Moline or Rock Island? Well, not all of them. They're, well, this farm up on the corner and his sons live further west down where those.