 This is tape number three, page number one. We continue with an interview with Alfred Nyren, Portwing, Wisconsin. Tape number three, page one. Okay. Yeah, he... You went home to Sweden in 1957. That... Then when I came back, then... That's when I went to business, you know. See, when I got into Hollywood... I got Hollywood, he said, on my five fingers. He said, they have three interior decorators. Well, the interior designers, really. We are the decorators, not them. So... They came to me, I was eating lunch one day. And he said, well, we have fixed colors for the building now. There'll be seven colors for the whole building. Each ten apartments get the same color. If they like it or not. Well, somebody maybe don't like it, they probably want to change it a little bit. And you can always change it. And get permission from you to change it. So there'll be no problem at all. And... My partner... Got sick. Right before he got sick, he came to me and said, the interior decorators, you have all the actresses coming now. And we'll give you every one of them. They have a flat in the building here. Every one of them can have a flat. We had that many flats. So you'll be working for all the actresses. Well, they'll be nice, I said. Some are nice, some aren't, I said. But what's the difference? We get along with them just the same. I've worked for many actresses before, and they're very nice people, I think. What kind of people are they? The... The actresses, you know, the acting on the show. They were there, they wanted to make the show, you know. Oh, actresses! Actresses, yeah. You see, there was a name for somebody, right? A name on somebody, right? And I probably don't follow this so good. So if you stay, you get all the actresses. And you had to know, on your five fingers, he told me. Because they liked all the work I did. And that's the way we're going to do it, I said. All together, if I hire a man, he has to do like we do. He's nothing but the best. And, yeah. But I wish you could stay. Well, my father is getting sicker. I've noticed lately, he isn't as happy as he used to be. There's something wrong with him. His brother is a doctor. And he was acting every week, you know. And every month. To quit smoking. He smoked when he worked, you know. And that's a bad job. That's a bad thing to do. So he told him, you'll be sorry someday. He told his brother that you didn't do what I tell you. But you haven't done anything what I told you so far. You work against me. So he gave him hell that way. And, well, what am I going to do now? I told John. John was his name. And he said, I can't take it no more. I'm getting sicker every minute. And he went back to Chicago and he turned into cancer. He didn't live long. And that was a sad thing for me. Very sad. I worked and I found a doctor like that. Nothing. I could never find one. So you left California then? You left California then? Yeah, we left, yeah. Yeah. Mexico. We had a lot of big jobs in Chicago. We had a lot of big jobs in Chicago. We told them to wait. And they were willing to wait. They waited a whole year, two years. One waited two years. So that we'd be too busy to do the job. I liked you to make the job. Here is a question now, Alfred. You were an experienced painter from Sweden, you said, more or less. What techniques were they using in Sweden compared to the United States? Was it better done over here? The wrong-handle brushes, I didn't like that. The wrong-handle. You see that? Is that for Sweden? I started to paint so early that my fingers grew with the brush. See the round? The lucky brush. There's another one. And that's because of the round brush? Yes. It grows. You got a cold there? No, I didn't get a cold. It's tickling. Lift the ice from Superior. Oh, is ice on it, yes? Oh, yeah. So you're saying that the brushes in Sweden ruined your fingers? Yes. Oh, yeah, well, I didn't like them. They were wrong. Here they got them flat, you know. And that was better? I liked that better. Those wrong brushes, it's hard to handle. They were wrong in your hand. Well, of course, you get used to it. But it's an effort to get used to it. The Swedes were too slow to shoot me. They were too slow to shoot me. No. Why? I don't know. You mean you weren't very fast now? Well, that's the way they grew up. Everything got to go slow so you get a good job, you know. If you work fast, they figure maybe the job isn't so hard. And it has something to it. How were you able to keep the quality then if you worked fast? How were you able to keep the... Well, the quality is in what you put on. And how you put it on. You work fast to put on the same thing as you did slow. The thing you put on over here, was that better than what you put on in Sweden? Well, I guess they do. They import quite a bit of paint, I think. They do that. They have very big paint companies there. And the paint is very good. Now I don't know anything. I don't know the good paint anymore. That time I know everything about paint. I always used the very best. We painted a barn. You remember that barn that I asked? Falu Rödfärg? Yeah, and I told them we should do the back frame. I didn't know I was going to get the job when I said that. So I got it. You know what you should have done? You should have recommended Falu Rödfärg. Pardon? Falu Rödfärg. Oh, that's Swedish bread. No, not the bread. That's what they made in Falen. They had a copper mine, you know. And you get red paint from copper. Oh, you never used over here? Oh, yeah, they import some Swedish red. Oh, yeah. Is that good? Most of the barn paint, I guess, comes from there, I think. They had to import something from there. That's good. That's a lie. So, you don't have to be so particular with it. We used self-cleaning paint. I said, self-cleaning paint. And you put it on, and it dries, and you have the rain and wind blows off the dirt. So you always had the white barn. And he said that, too. That's amazing, he said, how nice and clean this place is. You can see it from miles away when you get close to my barn, my farm. Yeah, well, that's how we keep it. No matter how many coats you put on, it blows off the paint, and it rains off. It rain-hits it. So you have clean. And it don't ruin the painting or anything like that. So that's good for it. That's good for it. You have a clean heart. When you put on new paint, you put it on a clean wall. So you like the 4-inch brush, then, not the round type? You like the 4-inch brush rather than the round-type brush? You know, with the round handle. You don't like that? No, no, I like the flat. It's flat a little bit. This flat for one part, and then it's rounded off on the sides. How did the Union take the roller coming into the business? Well, it cost an awful lot on the stippling. Well, no painting like stippling anyway, I said. If you can roll it, so much better. It's easy. The stippling is hard work, I said. Did you like the roller? Well, I didn't like it, no, I didn't like it. I didn't care. I never did, oh, I did stippling an awful lot. Big ceilings. We worked at Stevens Hotel. And we had 200 painters there. 200 painters? 200 painters. And I had part-time, part job in that. We cut up and take 25 men each. And then we run them. And they get into different rooms. We get so many rooms assigned to us. And we do them. And everything turned out just fine. And it runs like, it runs just like. The crew you had now at the Stevens Hotel? The crew you had now running at Stevens Hotel? There were 200 workers and you had about 20 of them. Were there any Swedes among them? Among the... The painters? Oh, yeah, yes, oh, yeah. The Swedes, we said they are the best painters. But you said they were a little bit slow. At home, yeah. In Sweden, not here. Not here. They were faster here. No, no, yeah, you better, when you work for somebody, they get something done. You better. And that's the fun thing about the Swedes. They're well known for it, too. They adapt. No stalling, and no, and try to make everything legal. They learn fast to be in the speed. And they know the job, clean and fancy everything. Clean job. You know, when you paint against mahogany and stipple it, you got to be very careful. Because it always drops so small, just like dust coming from it when you stipple, from the paint. And that flies around and gets on the mahogany. And it shows when it gets on mahogany. So we had trouble. That's where we had trouble. Could you work well together with the Irish and the Germans and the Danish? Oh, yeah, sure, worked with them. We had to do it. There, I had all kinds. I was running jobs all the time, you know. I tell you one thing. I had, I had, every fall I went to Florida, I had a job waiting for me. Yeah, they had it all figured out. I take 15 painters. With you. Yeah, and I don't take them with me, but they had them. They hired that many. So each man gets 15. And then you run them. And this time, I, yeah, it all came from certain states. And you don't understand when you talk. No. So I said, I said, I called in all the 15. I said, now, well, now, we got to have a little talk here. I said, you know, we don't understand your talk. And you do it purposely. You can talk English if you want to. I said, but you refuse to. You're going to show us Southerners that they know something that we don't know. So if you, if you show that on your work, you're OK. If you can do it, you'll never stand in the other place. Then you're home. He didn't say yes or no on that either, but I made it. I said to him, well, now, he said, you understand me, do you? Yes. You know what I say all the time? You don't know me, you say, yes? OK. Then you be quiet and I'll talk. Now, you be quiet, because I don't know what you're talking about anyhow. So you be quiet. Oh, boy, everybody had a kick on. So it works beautifully. Those guys produce more than anybody. I was the highest in the shop. So you were pretty sharp then? To make money, yeah, for the company. Did you get extra bonus for that? No, no, no. They were nice, and you get a lot for you to come back. You know, you get a job in Florida, I mean, it's something unusual, you know. It isn't easy. Did you take your wife with you? Oh, yeah, she was there too. And when we painted Hollywood, they went to show every day, you know. You had to get queen of the day, remember that? Queen of the day. And I know that was the day for the other one. They took that in every day. They were busy every day, you know. We stopped. And there was only one block from one job. So they came out with us and get off where they was going to have one of the shows, you know. And they saw all kinds of actresses, people that they'd never seen before, actresses and all that. And people, all kind of actresses that we had known for years in the show. Did you join any other organizations now in Chicago? Like Vasa, Viking? I joined... Switchwood? No, I joined... Temperance? You didn't join any groups in Chicago? I can imagine that. Any groups, Swedish groups in Chicago? I joined Mason. Mason? Mason, yeah. I joined that in 1921. You didn't belong to any Swedish group? Yeah, I belonged to... This was the Swedish local I belonged to. What Swedish local? The Swedish local in Mason. In Mason? Mason, yeah. And the painters local now, there were no Swedish branch in that one? Oh, they were Swedish and they were Irish and they were everything. Mixed up in one heap. Did you all agree though with the different nationalities in this local? Well, I didn't have to agree with anyone. It was never brought up that you better be quiet when you talk about those things. You can get enemies. And I didn't want them. You learned pretty fast. You bet you. Yes, sir. No, sir. Keep it quiet. If you hate somebody, don't tell them that. Oh, no. And your friends, any place. I can go to anybody. Who was running the union, you think? Was the Irish running it? Well, the Irish... 184 was Irish. It was Irish? There was one... The whole thing was Irish. But there was a Swedish local in Chicago too. Why didn't you do that one? That's in Torstedalen town. Oh, yeah. Yeah, there was Swedes. A lot of people belonged to the Swedish local because they thought it was a nice thing. They loved Swedes, you know. They do the right thing and they live nice and clean, every one of them. They shine that way, the Swedes. Of course, some Norwegians don't like the Swedes, you know. I know that. And they try to get all kinds of things wrong with the Swedes because they are Swedes. And because the Swedes run the iron, the Norway. And Norway I'm talking about too. You know, that's... The Swedish government run the Irish, run the Norwegians. And that's why they are mad at the Swedes now. Because they told the Norwegians what to do. There was a Swedish army, protected Norway and all that. But they didn't think about that, that they had no protection. And the Navy, Norway didn't have anything like that. But they weren't thankful at all. The Swedes were running the Irish, the Norwegians. And that's pretty tough when they say that. When you try to do the best. Look at Swedes, what they did after the war. They built a hospital in every town. Because there were so many soldiers who came back wounded. I worked for the railroad. The time when the first contingent came back from the war. There was a whole boatload full. And the war came and told us, If you go to say hello to those fellas downtown when you come home, We pay you all day. You don't lose any money for going downtown. So we get paid for the whole day. What kind of insurance did you have now when you worked as a painter? Hospitalization. If you got sick for instance. Yeah, ARP. Who? We had ARP. ARP? ARP. No, but I mean years ago. That's Social Security. I know, but before the Social Security, in the 1920s. There was nothing then. We didn't get anything. Nothing at all? Nothing at all. When I got old enough, then they took it off. When I got old. And I never got nothing that way because it was taken off. You know, a lot of Swedes, they joined the Vasa Order and the Vikings and the Svittjod together. Oh yeah. You didn't care about that? I was a member of all of them I guess for one time. I remember that. They come to your house and say, Oh you got to join up, join up, join up. You didn't like that? I did, I did. It was the same thing. Why you go from one to another, it didn't make any difference. It was the same thing. So I said, well I'm not going to all of those places and pay money on it. Pay dues in too many places. And, oh it's alright. You know, you meet a lot of people that way. Good people, the Swedes too. So how did you meet Beda Östling here now from Luleå? Beda? How did you meet her? You didn't tell me that. Well I told you. Well but you didn't finish it off. We were on a dance. On a dance? Yeah. Temperance dance? No, a dance on the south side, close to the lake. There was a big dance. Swedish club? No, no Swedish. Where there was Swedish in there, there was a mixture. And there was Beda? There was a big dance hall and everybody went there, no matter who they were. And I met her, I told you I had a dance with another girl, but I didn't go to her. I went to the middle of the hall and I looked to the left and I saw Beda sitting between two girls. So I thought, well if I get a good looking girl, I'm going to find out who she is. And I asked her for a dance and she said yes, and we've been dancing ever since. So that's it. And we belonged to all kinds of dance clubs, folk dance. You belonged to that? Yeah, we took, we took, you know, we took, huh, now I forget what their name was. Crisis? Yeah, we took, we got, hmm. What did you dance then? Hambo? Chalis? I'm trying to think, from honor, and we took, I belonged to one club when I was 23, 24 years old. In Chicago? In Chicago. And we belonged to the Dollar For Buns, and we were working under that name, Dollar For Buns. The Dollar For Buns dance club was the best in Chicago, and I was the head of that, I was the leader of that. And we had, we got, I'm thinking about their name, you know, and we got an honor. They come and take your pictures, and then you get your honor. Huh. Hmm. What the heck is her name? Honor, and I got one in the Army, when I was in the Army. We were, we were taken out as bodyguards for the Kaiser company. We were bodyguards. And then we got prize for that. We didn't get any money or anything, you know, we just, on a piece of paper, we were the first. And now I can't think of the name of that. Your two boys now? No, one died. One died, one left. What is he doing? He died from high trouble. But Kenneth, he lives in Lake Geneva. He is the head of the biggest estate. He takes care of the biggest estate there, and that's a big one. That's one of the richest man that owns it. Did he also? He got a job that takes care of his place. Did he start out to be a painter too? No, no, he's a carpenter. Carpenter. I told him that's a good one because you can build your house, get your lot, and you can go into someone's land and ask them owner, put a lot on this house, and I build a house, and we can sell it, and you make a good price on your lot. And that's a good one. That's what he's been doing. And he agreed. He thought that was pretty good. And he's been doing that too. But now they picked him to be the head on that biggest estate. They own the short shore in Lake Geneva. You know what it is, the short shore. He owns the whole short shore, lake and all. And he really got it. We spent Christmas there last Christmas. We were there for two weeks. Why did you move up here to Port Wing? Vena had her brothers, they were fishermen. The only relation she had was up there at that time. Her brother and her brother and their children, they had five children, her brother. So we moved up here to be with them. And now they're dying out, you know. The old people are dying and their kids, they are somewhere else. You know how that goes. So now she had to go to Ontanagan to get any relation. Ontanagan? Ontanagan, that's in Michigan. Oh, I know where it is. You got the big lake there, you know. The big Lake Superior is right there. How about your sisters now? Did any of those come over here to the United States? No, no. One wanted it, but I told him, you're better off in Sweden. If you come over here, you got to learn the language, you got to learn the trade, you got to learn it. So I don't think, you'll be better off in Sweden. Why not? You could get a good job in Sweden too, if you know your language and if you're a little bit smart, you know. So if you look back now, Alfred, if you look back now, what you have done, do you think it was worth the trouble to learn a new language and get into a new... Oh, more than half. It's just the thing, you got the Hollywood for yourself. And everybody trying to get to Hollywood. If they get Hollywood, they're on top. So you were there? You've been to Hollywood? Yeah, sure. I got the job. I got all the access. So you've been on the top then? Huh? Yeah, I've been on the top. And if they're not living, I don't think they're in terror. So you had a pretty good life then? Oh yes, I had a nice life. I told Bela one time, if God wants me to, when I die, he can make another painter out of me. But you don't care too much about union meetings? To heck with the union as far as they're concerned, they don't do no good. No, no, no. They don't do anybody any good. That's for some Irishman to steal a little money. That's what it is. That's the whole thing. So it don't mean a thing, what they're good at. But it's good, the painters, they get a certain price. And you can't skin on that. That's one good thing. They all make a good living if they follow their suit. But you know, some of these Irish, they pay them half the scale. And he tells them, you be quiet now, you pay them full scale. And they give you a job all your life if you keep on doing that. And no good painters, they couldn't hold a job any other place. But to get to a job like that, they can hold it. And if you get half the scale, it's better than nothing. How was the depression for you? How much, what? The depression. How was the depression for you? Oh, the depression, yeah, that was good. Yeah, yeah, oh yeah. You go to work and work for 20 cents, you know. So the union scale didn't mean a thing? I got 20 cents an hour. Did you still pay the union dues? No, it wasn't paid. At first, you know, I was the head of a lumberjack club. We were told they want to cut down 40 acres of timber and stack it up in quarts. And so I said, and they put me in charge of it. But I said, why don't you put a lumberjack in charge? I don't know nothing about lumberjacking, I said. Oh yes, you do, he said. Sure, you're as good as anyone. So you're okay. So you have a job now. What was the depression like for you? The cassia tree. But it kept something away from home, you know. You had something to eat every minute. But there was tough times. Yeah, yeah. If you didn't do anything well, you had loaf, you had butter and bread. You could buy butter for about 12 cents a pound. And bread was 5 cents a loaf. Do you remember there were Swedish socialists in Chicago? Oh yeah, they were bad business. Bad business? Yeah, they were bad. Oh boy. Well, the anxious to dump some muck truck, remember? You see, the muck truck went on strike. Yes. And these guys, they were friendly with some part of us. Did they meet on Café Idrot? Café Idrot? Huh? Café Idrot, on Sheffield Avenue? Oh yes, sir. You were there? We lived right there. You did? King Place was next block. Which one? King Place. Oh, you lived there? Yeah. And King Place isn't there anymore. That's a Swedish hospital there. They built it. So they took up the whole block. And I like to see it. I had a building there, 92 flat, when I started going business. And I got there from a lady. She was Irish, and also was English. But she liked our work so bad that, you stay with us and you get all the work. And they said, I have, they can sign new leases twice a year. Or three times a year. But it was only one year before, one time. And you got clogged up with work that way. Everybody wanted to have it done, fast. But you couldn't handle all that work. So it was a good thing that they changed it that way. During the Depression, did you do any painting then, during the Depression? Did you paint anything? Oh yeah. We got in on the paint job then. Oh yeah, we got in on the paint job. That was really scary. And I was paid by the union scale too. Oh yeah. Oh yes, there was something done. And then we made a little more money. Oh, they look up there, oh, the union made it? Yes, oh boy, you get a lot of money then. So then the union came back again? During the Depression, the union was still. Oh yeah, oh sure. The union was just about done, their work. I know, but during the Depression, they didn't show up? Well, they tried to show their backs too, you know. They tried to show off that time too, but they didn't work so hard. So, most of the people, well, we don't make any money now, so why should we belong to the union? So they dropped out? Yeah, so they didn't pay the dues. And the union fell down like a pancake, you know. Tough times. Well, just because they worked against the rules, you know. The rules were you pay the dues, but they didn't. So they go out and start their own jobs. They couldn't refuse to do that, go out and get a job from somebody. They couldn't refuse that. And there was too much to do there, you know. So, the union lost out. They lost out that way. And then they got scared. They tried to change it somehow, but I don't remember how it was. That part I don't remember. You know, it's a long time ago. Did your local now, 184, the 184 local on the south side, you belong to that one all your life? 184? 184 on the south side? No, no, I changed to Lake Geneva on their own. I moved to Lake Geneva from there. And then wherever we went to work, we went to Florida. We took it out in Florida. We belonged to a club in Miami. And so we had to have union cards. And if you came from Chicago and had a Chicago license on, you couldn't work anyplace if you didn't take out union. In Florida, for instance? Yeah, in Florida. So, you had to do it. And then another thing, the state was after you too, if you didn't get a license on your car. Yes, but when you went to Florida to work, no. You had to take out the new union card. In Florida? Yeah. You took out the new card. You go to the local you want to belong to and they make a new card. Okay, but did you still have to pay for 184? No, no, I quit that. You quit it? When you joined something else, you quit the old union. You can't belong to two clubs. It cost enough to belong to one. And they had nothing to do with each other then? No, no. Nothing to do with each other. All locals took care of themselves? When I came back to Chicago, maybe I joined them again just to work in Chicago. And they took you in immediately? That's okay. When you came back to Chicago and showed your card to the 184 treasurer, did he look at your card from Florida if you had paid up there? Yeah, he recognized the card. Did you have paid up? Yeah, yeah, oh yeah. You paid one way or the other. You only had to pay in one place. You paid in one place and you're in. No union was the least of my worries. I didn't worry about that. A lot of the time I did against the union. I worked lots of Sundays. You're supposed to put in an application that you're going to work on Sunday. But we didn't. So, a lot of the time I got a job, I got to finish it. And I got to finish on Sunday. If you can't finish on the other day. You mean the union didn't want you to finish it on Sunday? You want to? The union didn't want you to work on Sunday? No, no, no. There was double pay. Three times double. Three times? Yeah. Did you get that? And if you work on Saturday, that's half time. Time and a half? Half. Did they pay you that? And if you work nights on Sunday, that's three dollars. Three or four dollars. On top of the regular pay? Yeah. You get three or four, I don't remember, three or four more than the regular wages that they got. That they got. Yeah. So, you had a long work day. You have had a long work day. Oh, yeah. You bet you have. How many years did you work now then? Forty-five years as a painter? Oh, gee, I was a painter when I started right away when I came to this country. Yeah, I've been a painter all my life. Well, often I could do something else. I bought some land up north in Fort Wayne, up here. I saw the Fort Wayne and I said, if I'm ever going to buy land, I'm going to buy it in Fort Wayne. And I did. I had a nice home here. And I sold it for a little or nothing. I couldn't get the money back on it. So, that was a mistake. That's one thing you can't do in a small town. You don't overpay anything. Don't make anything too fancy. You've got to have more money for it and that don't work in that town, you can tell. Like I paid $34,000, $35,000 for the house. I bought a new house and tore it apart, built a new garage, put on a new bedroom on it. The old bedroom was too small, so I had to make it twice as big. And I made a kitchen, $15,000 on the kitchen. It cost the kitchen, it cost $15,000. And I got $12,000 for the whole job. And that don't sound good, does it? No. That's almost like depression. That's, the depression was on, I guess, for a while. Did you own your own house in Chicago and Lake Geneva when you lived down there? Lake Geneva was my home. In Chicago, we tried to get, all the port wingers, they tried to get a place to build a home on. So they looked at all subdivisions all over the country. One day I went west on, you know, 45, Highway 45, you know what that is? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. And, uh... How, uh... Have you been interested in politics? Huh? Have you been interested in politics? Politics? Oh, politics? No, no, no, no. No interest? No, not Homburg. Homburg? Oh, yeah, politics. It depends on what kind of a politics, too. So I had to take back some of it. You know, you're a politician if you do something that other people haven't done. Then you're a politician. Isn't that right? Well, it could be. Yeah, I think so. So have you voted Republican or Democrat? Have you been a Republican or a Democrat? Republican, yeah. Republican? Yeah, no, when I was 95, the president sent me a birthday present. He did? Yeah, and wished me all the luck in the world. And now somebody stole it. Can you imagine that? We went away for Christmas and somebody got into a house and went through everything and stole my card from the president. Who, Reagan? Mrs. and president. Reagan. Isn't that something? I wouldn't sell it for a thousand bucks, I said. And someone stole it. What the heck is a man going to do with a stolen card? In that category, like being 95 years old. They know very well he's 95, they won't steal it. And his name is in the first place, I got my name on that card. So I don't know why they do it. I don't know why they do it. We went for Christmas, you know, away and that's when it happened. Somebody got in and got hold of the keys and got in there like that. So I'm going to find out now, one person left and says come home now and I'm going to find out who took it. It'll be a thousand dollars fine. I might as well give you a strong, a better. Then they get scared. And, well, it talks about for a social, you know, you get a card from the president and wish you a happy birthday. Well, everybody likes to have that. And you like it very highly, you know, think an awful lot of it, sure. That's what happened here. Somebody took it and now they're going to play big. I don't see they can show it to anybody, no, this is your name. Have you been back to Sweden since you came here? No, I haven't, but I figured I'm going back now. Do you think I can make it? No, I'm sure you can. I don't see, well, I'm going to see my eye doctor a week from now and see what he says. He thinks that spot, I got a spot traveling, he thinks that spot is going to go out. I see. And I'd like to know. It seems so that it's getting a little bit less right now already. So I hope, I hope so, that'll be terrible if I go blind, you know. And then you're going back to Norse in Dalarna? Yeah, yeah, I go to Dalarna, yeah, you bet, yeah. What happened to your other people? There were 14 boys and 14 girls from those. What? Well, we slept on the canvases, you know, the whole thing. We slept under the canvases and on the floor. I know. We slept under them, it was warm there. But what happened, you came to Chicago, what happened with the rest of them? Well, some had friends, some had friends, carpenters, friends, they had a painter's friend, and they helped them in so they got a job. Have you met any of them since then? No, they're gone forever. You've never seen them again? No, they're gone. You see, that's a long time ago, and they were old people then, so they can't be living. It's funny how they drop off, you know, drop off, one after another, get old. So pretty soon, I don't know any of my working partners that I've been working with. I don't know any of them, not that I know. Maybe somewhere, if you advertise. Now, did you ever hear about one that they call Stokholm Svisse? Yeah. Stokholm Svisse? Yeah, I heard about him. Oh, you did, huh? Yes. Yeah, he was my partner. He was? See, we worked on a railroad during the First World War, and we got a job on it in the repair department to paint cars, and we painted dining rooms, dining cars, passenger cars, and everything. And I guess I was a little better painter than, so I must notice that. See, he said, President Roosevelt got his car here. That car was shot up in 1914 by guerrilla Mexican bandits. Oh, yeah, the first President Roosevelt. They shot up his car. Teddy Roosevelt. Yeah. The President, he was going to investigate Villa. His name was Villa. And the minute he got across the border, the machine guns opened up on the train. I got a frame that I took from the car, a frame on the paint car. I'll show you later on. You still have it? I took that because they would shot the pieces, so they had to fill new stuff all over. And they had a panzer inside so the bullet didn't go through. It didn't kill anybody. But it really raced up fast with the car. It was nothing but splinters, the whole thing. And I got the job. So, and it was going to be painted and stippled and all Mahogany trim, you know, and then stippled. Small, small pieces that would be painted in between. And they tried to keep this clean, but when you stippled it, it was almost impossible. So, we had an awful time, but we got it, we got it, we made it. We took our time. We were paid, we were paid the regular wages, you know. And nobody watched us, so we can do it at least. We didn't have to hurry or anything. All those jobs were extra. So, they charged extra from the government to fix up his car. So, you did pretty good then? Oh, yeah, I did pretty good. And I had that. And then I got the mail cars. Government, and all the government cars came to me. My section in the office. So, yeah.