 We are 30th of September, 1987. I'm sitting together with Mrs. Carl Falk, the latest Falk, in Omaha, Nebraska. And if I ask now the question, your parents, your father was born in Sweden. Yes. In Jönköping. Yes. Can you tell me a little bit about his background, what he told you? Yes. He was one of nine children, and his father was a shopkeeper, and as I remember, he said it was like a grocery store. And the grocery store was on the main street, and they lived above the store. And the quarters that they lived in got very crowded with nine children. So one child started immigrating to the United States, and then another daughter left, and he was about the third one that left at the age of 16 years old. Did he remark about the other people also left to the United States? There were lots of, at his age, 16 years old seemed to be the time, especially boys. Whether or not it was the service that they were having to go into, or the fact that there was poverty in the family, and they needed to try to find their own livelihood. So America was a well-known name then. Yes, yes. And he had very little money, of course, just enough to pay the passage on the ship, and of course he came steerage, like most of the immigrants did. And he did have a source when he got over to New York that got him in touch with John Johnson in Bradshaw, Nebraska. And John said that he would, he could come and stay with them and work on the farm. And he met him in New York? No, no, he did not. But he was able to... He knew about him in Sweden. He knew about him in Sweden, uh-huh. There was some sort of a old cousin relationship between the two families. And so then he came to Bradshaw, Nebraska and started working. And my mother's father had homesteaded the land across the road from John Johnson's, and my mother was 16 years old at the time, and the two of them would see each other, and they would talk Swedish and reminisce about their families. So do you think John Johnson paid for the ticket for your father then? Possibly so. I never heard. So there was a deal he was going to work on his farm? He was going to work on his farm, uh-huh. But he was not used to farm life in Sweden? No, no, he was used to... But he was not afraid to... No, no, not at all. And of course, in those days, farming was a hardship, very hard. They had to control, they had to do the roads, and they had to cut the trees, and they had to farm the, or till the ground, and they didn't have the equipment, and it was a hard life. Did he tell anything about the traveling over from Sweden, the journey? Oh yes, he said it was very laborious. It was hot, and of course, steerage was not very comfortable, and going through Ellis Island was a very frightening situation. But he, then he told about coming into New York after he had gotten off of Ellis Island, and the first thing that he saw was a man on the street selling apples. He didn't know they were apples. Or he, selling tomatoes. He thought they were apples. And that was his first experience with an apple. He thought he was buying an apple and he was buying a tomato. So, and of course, the language was so difficult. He had, knew no English. But he said that he managed to get on the train and got to Bradshaw, Nebraska, and that was his life. So he was the only one leaving then for Bradshaw? He was the only one, no, he was the only one that left for Bradshaw. The other daughter, or his sister, Helga and Hulda, they had some relative that lived in Chicago. So they came from Inchiping to Chicago, and then the one sister, Hulda, stayed in Chicago, and the other sister, Helga, came to Omaha. Do you know if he had some stories told about Ellis Island before he came there, that he was a little bit scared of it, or was this the first impact on him? This was the first impact on him. I think the stories came from the people that were in storage. They'd all been told stories about Ellis Island and whether or not they would pass and whether or not they'd have to go back. And my father said there were so many that had to go back because they were ill, they had lung trouble or something like that. But my father was healthy and he passed. Do you remember if he mentioned that he had to show some money there to go through? No. Fifteen, twenty-five dollars or something? No, I imagine he did have some money though, because he had to get on the train. But he never mentioned that? He never mentioned that. If I recall, when he was telling about coming over, he had the equivalent of around fifty dollars when he left Yenchaping to make it here to the United States. He never mentioned the name of the ship? Was it an English vessel? No, no, no, he never mentioned that. And then he came in and said it was hot? It was hot. And of course they were in steerage and he said it was, people were fainting and they couldn't get, and they were seasick and they were having quite a struggle of bearing the trip. It was a very hard trip. And babies crying and this sort of thing. He did bring his own trunk that he had made from Yenchaping and I have it. And it's a... He had made it himself? He had made it himself. What did he bring now? Was he told to bring something special? No, no, he brought... not that I know of. There was, the trunk is in good shape and it was a matter of clothing, I suppose. I really don't know. He brought nothing at all. When my aunt Helga, the older sister, went back to Sweden, she brought a lot of things back from the old home in Yenchaping to divide among the ones that came to the United States. And we have those things. They were like the old mementos then? Yes, well like the brass coffee service, or copper I guess it was, copper coffee service. So he never saw his parents again then? No, no. He never went back? Never went back. He always was saying he was going to save enough money to go back to see his parents, but he never had that opportunity. He was, it was a struggle. After they were married he had a job and he came to South Omaha. He worked as a bookkeeper and in the city of South Omaha and they had a little house. And each year he'd say, well, I'd like to go back and see my mother and father. We always got pictures. The mother would always send a picture of the father and of her. And we also got pictures on our birthday, not of the grandparents, but of the King of Sweden. The postcard would always be the King of Sweden. So did he correspond quite often? Oh yes, he corresponded. And during the war years he would send coffee. Was this during the First World War then? First World War. He would send coffee. Oh, you remember that? Oh yes, I do. He would send, that was very important because they had no coffee. They were making coffee out of grain and so my father would always send coffee. But before we go into that time now when he was in Omaha, he stayed with John Johnson on his farm there for how long? Until they were married in, it would be like about seven years. Oh, seven years? He stayed on the farm. So he was a good worker then? Yes he was. And I think he paid off his debt to Johnny Johnson. It was probably the ticket then? Yes, I'm sure it was. When I think of that, you ask where he got the money. But he had to work to pay off his ticket. He was young now, so there was no problem for him to pick up the English, but was he able to pick up English out there in Nebraska, in Bradshaw? There were so many Swedes though. They were all Swedes, of course. How did he, like his girlfriend, or it was going to be his wife, did she speak? She spoke English and Swedish. She was born... Pardon? What was her name? I think you ought to know. Well, he knows that. Her brother's name. Yes, he knows that, honey. It was... She was born, or your mother, out in Bradshaw? In Bradshaw, yes. She was born in a Swedish home? In a Swedish home, and they spoke Swedish all the time. Well, most of the time, but she spoke English too. My father did go to York College, and I think there is where he learned, during those years, that he was able to get some education. So he got time off then from the farm? Time off from the farm, where he could go into, they'd go into York, and he would learn bookkeeping and the English language. And then when he came to Omaha, after they were married, he spoke Swedish to a certain degree, and we were sorry that he didn't insist on speaking Swedish so we could learn the language. All the prayers were done in Swedish, and I was confirmed in a Swedish church, and I learned the catechism in Swedish. So I had some understanding, and I could read it, but I couldn't speak it. So it was never used in the home to all of them? No. Your parents spoke English then? That's right. I see. So there was an idea of his own then to go to this York College? York College, uh-huh. Now, whether or not it was a correspondence school, or what, he was able to get information or do something with it from Bradshaw, because Bradshaw and York, what is the distance of what, about ten miles? But that's where he learned the English language, and I think about that time, they were speaking a good amount of English maybe on the farms. So did he join the Lutheran Church out there, the Augustana? Yes, in Bradshaw. In Bradshaw. Almost immediately when he came? Uh-huh, uh-huh. And John Johnson was probably a member there too? Yes, uh-huh. And also your mother? My mother and my grandparents, the Munce-Petersons. They were my grandparents. So they helped you get them to church meetings? Mm-hmm. And, yeah, he was confirmed then, so he didn't have to do any, did he go to any, in the summer they had what they called Swedish school? Yes, yes. Do you remember later, or talked about that? No, not my father, but I went to a Swedish school in Omaha, you know, in south Omaha, south Omaha. You belonged to the Salem Church then? It was the little one that was on 22nd and H. I think it was the Salem Church, 22nd and H. Yeah, that's, I believe it was. Down in that area. So he stayed on the farmland for seven years? Mm-hmm. And they didn't get married out there during that time? No, they were married in Omaha. In Omaha, so they were, know each other, and then they decided to move to Omaha. To Omaha, mm-hmm. What was that, who made the decision, do you think, your mother, or? I have no idea, I have no idea. They were a handsome couple. My father lost his hair, and when he was married he didn't have hair on his head, but he was a handsome man, and. What happened then, did he get some? I don't know, I don't know, I don't know what happened. John Johnson, he didn't have any children of his own, or did he? That I don't know. He was not offered to take over the farm, I mean, if they. No, no, no. So there was no, farming life was not for him then? No. He was running away into more. To something more profitable. So they moved in the 19. 19, it would be about, they were married in 1903, so they probably moved into South Omaha 1902, because when they came to South Omaha, then they were married in 1903, so it must have been within that year they were married. Do you know if he was homesick during the time, the first? Oh, I'm sure he was. Did he complain about the heat, for instance, in Nebraska on the plains there? No, no. There must have been a tremendous difference though between unishipping and. Well that's true, that's true. No, he never talked about that at all. Did he do any traveling outside, go to other Swedish communities like Frunk and Holdrich and Extell? No, they went to York and that was it. That was the extent of the traveling? That was the extent of the traveling, because it was horse and buggy then. If you want to take the train though, how did he do that to Omaha, for instance? Well that was easy. The train left from York and I'm sure they took the train to Omaha. They went through York, so that was easy. That was easy. When they moved out to Omaha, did they have any friends here to come to, any relation? Yes, the sister was already here, Helga. His sister? His sister was already here and she had married, and so there was that connection. And then there was a cousin, Eric Lindquist, that had come over and he had no place to live, and so when my father and mother were married, he came to live with them. So there were two people from Vientiaping and my mother, of course, she was from York, or Bradshaw, Nebraska. So they had, and they made friends, lots of friends. So they made it easy for them to be accommodated here in Omaha. Your mother's parents, now they came from Skoda, you said, the Malmo area? Yes, around that area. That was Nels Peterson. They came around from Skoda. And they were also farming then in Bradshaw? Yes, he homesteaded that land. And did they stay on then, your grandparents? Yes. So they had, my mother had two brothers, and the one brother, well, both the brothers farmed this homesteaded land, and it's still in the family. So they had no idea of moving to Omaha? No, no. It's still good land, and it's not irrigated, I don't believe. But it's still good land, producing land. So then they joined the church here in South Omaha? They joined the church in South Omaha, and then they joined Coosa Memorial Lutheran Church on 26th and Farnam. That was after they were married. Somebody took them to this church, and it was quite a trip to go from South Omaha to 26th and Farnam. It was by streetcar. And I can remember as a little girl, about seven, eight, nine years old, we'd always go to prayer service on Wednesday night. We'd go to church service. We'd go to Sunday school. We'd go to church service. We would come back for the evening service, and we went by streetcar. Was this where you should? No, no. It was, what was Coosa Memorial? I think there were more German than... But you didn't learn any English there, though? No, no, no. It was that little church that I took my confirmation, or catechism. Lutheran Church of America is what it was a part of. But we've gone to that church for all these years. So they had some friends there then? Yes. That they joined there. So you were confirmed, and you didn't have any Swedish? No. So the Swedish came out of the existence more or less then? Really how I'd love. I'd like to go back to school and learn the Swedish language. We did send a daughter to the University of Stockholm, and she had a year there, and she loved being there and learning a little bit about the Swedish language. But of course, and then we have, we had another granddaughter that took a course, and of course our Carolyn Falk, Bob's oldest daughter, went to Gustavus Adolphus, and she took four years of Swedish. In St. Peter? Yes, in St. Peter. So you still keep up the traditions? So we still keep up the traditions. So how do they... Your father, he got into the... some kind of office work then? Yes, he was a bookkeeper for the city of South Omaha. And he would come home, and he would, they never had desks that they could sit down. They'd have to stand up and do their bookkeeping. A high desk. Well, they didn't have a stool like they could... They had a stool, but most of the time they stood up. The desk was very high. There was nothing to lean back in? Nothing to lean back. And he would come home and be, he'd be so tired. And he said, well, he was going to try to do something else. So he, his oldest daughter, his oldest sister, excuse me, was married to Fritz Sandwall. And the two men, Fritz Sandwall and my father, decided to go into the jewelry business in Omaha, Nebraska. And they were in the jewelry business for quite a few years. And after that, he went into politics, and he became a clerk in the courthouse in Omaha, Nebraska. He had to run for the office? No, no, he would campaign for the man that would get the office, and then this man would hire him as a, well, I suppose it was a bookkeeper, wouldn't you say? Something like that. So what kind of affiliation did he get then, Republican or Democrat? Oh, he was a Republican. So this is heavily Republican area. So he was active for many years then? Very active for years. He campaigned, and he was, he loved what he was doing. And he never made very much money, but he always had enough money to do what he wanted to do. He bought farms. When he first came to Omaha, somebody told him about a farm, and he went out, and he wasn't able to get to the farm, but he bought the farm sight unseen. Was it far from Omaha? It was out in western Nebraska. Oh, western Nebraska? Western Nebraska. Sibley? Sibley, yes. It was a wheat area. And that made him money, but he thought, well, this is going to be easy. So somebody came along and offered him another farm, so he mortgaged the first farm to pay for the second farm, and he tried to pay that off, and then he would buy the third farm. And finally, he couldn't take care of it. The Depression came, and he could not take care of all three farms, so he had to finally mortgage his house that he lived in, that we lived in, and he lost the two of the farms. So it was a struggle all of his life. It was a struggle. But like I say, he lived comfortably, and there was never ever a desperate need that he was not going to make it except one time when he really did lose most everything. And he pulled himself up and got himself a job, and he was able to survive that. So it didn't affect him then that he lost the farms? No, no, I'm sure he worried about it. No, but he never showed it. He never showed it. We never, I never was able to go to college because there was never enough money. He was able to get us through high school, and it was, but we were, we always had three meals a day, and we lived a good life. And you also, you had a brother. I had a brother. He was three years older than myself, and when he was 16 years old, he left, and he went to Des Moines, Iowa, because he didn't see any future in Omaha. It's strange, isn't it, how history repeats itself? He had the Viking blood. He had the Viking blood, and he went to Des Moines, Iowa, and worked for Fairbanks Morris Scale Company. Did he go to college? No. He finished high school then? He finished high school. We both finished. He did, because he played on the Drake University basketball team. Oh, well, possibly he went one semester. I don't remember that. Or in Des Moines, he went to Drake. University, yeah. It must have been night school or something. So he stayed then in Des Moines? He stayed in Des Moines, and then he came back to Omaha, didn't he? Yeah. How many long time did he stay in Omaha? He stayed in Iowa for about, they were married in Iowa, oh, for maybe 15 years. Then he came back to Omaha and started selling life insurance, and he made a very nice living doing that. So he was not interested in farming either? No, no, no. He got some other farm. He got some other farm, too. Because he started to work then before the Depression, of course, so he was already a... Yes, he had an income with Fairbanks Spars. So those farms now in western Nebraska, they was in a hard, depressed area, of course, the dust bowl and everything. This was around Sydney, this particular farm, and interesting enough, he was able to hold on to it, and he had a nice income if the wheat was not hailed out or... He had the tenant farmers then? He had tenant farmers. Were they Swedes or were they... I don't think so. No, I'm sure they weren't. But at the time, the first oil drilling company came into Nebraska, and they started drilling on the farm that was bordering my father's farm, and they discovered oil. Well, my father was so thrilled because now they were going to find oil on his farm. And over a period of years, there's been quite a few companies that have leased the land or they oiled land, but they never found oil on my father's side. It was very close within a perimeter of maybe, oh, maybe 100 feet that they found. And my father thought, they're taking all the oil from my land, they're getting the oil on the other man's land. We still have the oil rights, but we did sell the farm. Oh, I see. So they never... that petered out? That petered out. Well, it was a fault, you see, right there. But that was the only thing that my father ever got excited about, that finally he was going to reach his pot of gold. Did he visit the farm store later on? No, no. He visited several times with my brother. They went out, but not very often. It was too far away. Too far away. So he retired and from the political work here in Omaha, how long did he work then? He worked until he was about 70 years old. And then, of course, it was a time when we got Social Security. And he lived in his house until he became senile. And then we put him in the Emanuel home for the aged. And he lived there until he was 92 years old. Oh, I see. And your mother, she died... She died when she was 40. Oh, I see. What happened? What is the kind of... Well, this is interesting. She lived on this farm and her mother had passed away when she was 12 years old. And so she was the only female on the farm and my uncles would say she would have to haul the water from the well into the house. And they said it was a tender age and she did something to her heart. And she died of what they call leakage of the heart, which would be an artery, you see, was not pumping enough blood into her heart. She died very young. You were 42 then? Yes, 40, 40. And I was 12 years old when she died. And her mother died when she was 12 years old. Then you had to take over the family. So then, of course, we were all worried that maybe that might be inherited. And for years, my father would see that I would go to the doctor regularly to see if anything was wrong with my heart. But there was nothing ever wrong. You didn't have to haul any water. No, I didn't have to haul any water. I've lived a wonderful life. So your mother, now, did she tell you some of her experience? I mean, it must be hard work, but there was, they was asked of the young kids to take over when they were 10, 11, I suppose. Yes, it was a natural thing, natural thing. And she did the cooking. And when you stop and think of a 12-year-old girl, very fragile, she was tall and thin. And it was, they had, the other farmers around in the area would come and help with the thrashing crews. There was 215 people, I assume. Oh, yes. Oh, of course. And the women would come and help my mother prepare for those affairs. But she was a wonderful cook, just a wonderful cook. So she had to learn early. She had to learn early. And how many children were they now in the... In her family. Younger than her? Two brothers, but they were both older. Oh, I see. And she didn't have to do any milking, the men did, I suppose. No, she never did anything like that. She did the hauling of the water, and of course... Why didn't the boys do that? I don't know. Of course, they were out in the field, you see. They were out in the field. There was no one there to do it. No one there to do it. So she did it. And corn cobs were heating the stove. Oh, yes, yes. Those were wonderful times. My mother, when she was... before she passed away, was not able to take care of me. So they would send me out to Bracho, Nebraska for the summertime. And I experienced that, too. And I'd always help. Those were wonderful years when you think of the family gatherings and the people. We'd go to church and the family gatherings. Of course, there was never anything like Christmas times together. But in the summertime, it was picnics, and it was the association and the love that was there between the families. They all pulled together. Did they have a store out there in Bracho? It was like a little village or just farms around? There were a few stores. They would let me... they would hitch up a horse to a little cart, and I would drive the horse into town to pick up the mail. I remember that. And there were a few stores. There was a post office in Bracho? There was a post office, and there were a few stores. And how about... did they have a car on the farm? Eventually, there was a car. My uncle... The interview continues next side. And one day, he was approached to buy a raffle ticket, and it was to benefit the church. And he bought this raffle ticket, and he won the car. It was a Buick touring car, and that is the first car that I ever rode in. So he struck gold. He struck gold. He struck gold. It must have been a tremendous good feeling. Yes, yes, it was. This farm that my mother's parents homesteaded was divided... it was divided in the middle by a railroad track. And the two boys, my uncles, farmed this land, and always they knew the time the train was coming, and they would be very careful crossing the road. And this went on for years and years and years, and the two brothers died, and then the farm was handed down to my nephew, who was Frank's son. His name was Edmund. And strangely enough, with all the modern equipment they had, he always would cross this railroad track to take care of the other section of the farm. And this one day he was crossing, and the tractor was... he was riding the tractor, never heard the train, and he was killed. So he was so used to the crossing, I suppose. He was used to the crossing, and he just didn't pay any attention to it. But for years and years and years, these men crossed that railroad track, and nothing ever happened. And now the farm is being taken care of by his wife. So it's still in the family. So you remember good times then, because you were so young, so you didn't need to do any chores. Oh yes, oh yes. No, I never did need chores, no. When I married Carl, it was hard times. We were married in the Depression years, and we had hard times. If you compare the city with Bradshaw, they always had food out there. They always had food, lots of food, because they raised it. But shortage of money. Pardon? Shortage of money. Shortage of money, yes. So but in the city there could be a shortage of both food and money. That's true, that's true. It was harder during the Depression right here in Omaha, I suppose. That's true. My mother made all the clothes. She did the washing and ironing, and the washing machine was the kind that was not electric. You had to stand there and use your hand. When they moved in and out of Omaha, it was all by scrubbing board. That's right, that's right. For how many years, do you think? Well until I was about 12 years old, did they get this tub that had a handle on it, and she went like this, back and forth. And there was no running water in the house. There was no basement. There was a coal stove that was nickel-plated that was in the dining room. And I remember my father would always warm the silverware on the stove in the morning so we'd have warm, something warm in our hands. He'd warm my underwear on the stove so it'd be warm. We slept upstairs, and every night he'd bring us a glass of water. In the morning it'd be frozen. And it was, it was rugged. So there was almost a uniform coal, or you slept in a room with no heat in it? No heat, no heat. There was no uniform heat. There was no basement. The only heat that we had was the kitchen coal stove that my mother cooked on, and also the base burner, which was... You had a second floor, or you slept on it? We had a second floor. There was no openings so the heat could go up? No. The pipe didn't go up? Oh no, no, no. But you got used to that? We got used to that, sure. But it was the mornings, I suppose. The mornings, it was so cold. Did you have bed warmers? Yes, we had bed warmers. I see, but they are pretty cold, too. That was cold, that was cold. No breakfast in bed? Oh no, no coffee in the morning. But most, all the houses and all the households had the same thing. That's true. There was no discussion about it was bad. No, that's true. And we had a, my father raised chickens on the back lot, the back of the lot, and we had a garden that kept us supplied with vegetables. We had a few, we had a cherry tree and a couple of apple trees, and we lived, we were able to survive that way. So when you were old enough not to help out, you helped your mother, of course. Yes. And you were taught how to bake and the cookies and bread and everything. How about Christmas? Christmas was wonderful. And we've tried to carry down the tradition all the years from, it would be the family, my father's two sisters, we'd alternate. One would have Thanksgiving and one would have Christmas and one would have New Year's. And it seemed like we would have Christmas. And our house was very small. We had a parlor and we had a sitting room and then we had a small dining room and the kitchen downstairs. And the Christmas tree would always be brought in Christmas Eve through the window. Santa Claus would bring it. Well, not before. Not before, no. The Christmas tree would be brought in. And of course, they'd have candles on the Christmas tree. Live candles. Live candles, lighted candles. I mean, the wax candles. And after we had a bountiful dinner of the lutefisk and the chutbula and the herring and all, we would join hands and dance around the Christmas tree and sing, Newly, Youly Yen. And we've carried that on all down through the years. Did Santa Claus come on that evening, too? We never saw Santa Claus, but Santa Claus came, yes, and put the packages underneath the tree. After we had danced around the Christmas tree, then we opened the presents. You had no stocking on the fireplace? Oh, yes. We had the stocking on the base burner. And that was in the morning you got something in there? In the stocking, yes. The tradition was... Yes, carried on, carried on. So who dressed the Christmas tree? Your mother or... I imagine she did. We never saw what was on... We did prepare for the Christmas tree by stringing popcorn and cranberries. And outside of that and the candles, that was it. There was no apples or any fruit? No, not that I can remember. What kind of Christmas tree was it, was it a short needle or the long fur needle? It was a short needle. Short needle. Uh-huh, short needle. Do you remember if the top was... Had something on it, yes, a star. You don't remember that the cut was cut sometime or broken or anything to get room for the... No, I don't think it was ever that big. It was a smaller tree. It was a smaller tree. We could dance around it. I mean, it was as tall as I was, or as tall as you. I can remember, though, there was always a bucket of water by the tree in case the tree would catch on fire. And I'm sure the tree was fresh because I can't ever remember that it ever caught on fire, but it smelled so good, so piney. So your father, he bought that at the store then? At the store or at the market, uh-huh, and brought it in. And it was always pulled through the window. It was never brought through the door. It was always brought through... Through the window. Through the window. It would always come through the window. And we would always... The children would be out in the kitchen, and we'd wait for Santa Claus, and we'd have to listen. And, of course, my father had sleigh bells, and he would more or less ring the sleigh bells and Santa Claus was coming, and we got so excited, you know. And all during the years, we carried that on in our family. Santa Claus would come to our front door, and my husband would be Santa Claus, and he'd have sleigh bells, and he'd stand at the door, and, has Carolyn been a good girl this year? And go down the list, and then he'd say, now has Gladys been a good girl? And we'd all laugh, and it was so much fun. Bob carries on this tradition, and our Susie in Wichita, Kansas, this is the youngest daughter that went to the University of Stockholm, she still carries it on. And now we spend Christmas out in California, and the children, some of the children come, and we don't have the space for them to dance around the Christmas tree, but we do sing the song. But you don't have a real Christmas tree now? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. We have a real Christmas tree. Do you remember the foot, the stand for the Christmas tree, was that your father made that one? Yeah, two slats of wood. To get lucky, and cross. Yes. And it was used year after year, then? Oh, yes. How long was it up, the Christmas tree? About ten days, until the needles started dripping, or coming off, but it was about ten days. Was it lit more than once, the candles? I don't remember, I don't remember. I'm sure it was, because when we took the candles off, there was no towel left, so it would have to be lit more than once, wouldn't it? So you had that tree in a cold room, then? In a cold room, yes. So they could stand there quite a bit, with a good smell. Oh, yes. Still in it. Out in Bradshaw, was there the same kind of routine for Christmas there, too, then? I was never there for Christmas. Never there for Christmas. And they never came to Omaha. At Christmas time, we had just the relatives that were in Omaha. So it was too far, then, they thought? Too far for them to come. And then there was the other side of the family, like my uncles had married into the Sandahl family, and they would have Christmas. The Sandahls were from York, Nebraska, and they would have their Christmases. No, they never came. They would come to visit in the summertime, on the train. And I can remember my grandfather from Bradshaw, and I was not more than maybe, oh, eight, nine years old. He was still alive, and he would come once a year, and it was in the summertime. He would come on the train, and he would bring me a sack of candy, and the sack was striped, all different stripes. And my mother said it was ten cents worth of candy, not five cents worth of candy, ten cents, full sack of all kinds of candy. So I would look forward to my grandfather coming with this sack, this colorful sack of candy. And he was a wonderful grandfather. I never knew a grandmother. It was just this Nels Peterson, my grandfather. Like I say, my grandmother died when my mother was twelve. And he lived on the farm that he'd homesteaded, but they had built him a little house in the back of the house where the son was living. And the summers that I would go out there, I would go into his little house, and he would read me stories out of Swedish books, and how I loved that. You understood what he said then? I understood what he said, but like I say, I never was able to speak it fluently. I think you have to learn that when you're a small child. Did he prefer to speak Swedish than your grandfather? Oh yes, he preferred to speak Swedish. He understood English, but he preferred to speak Swedish. My father said about the Swedish language, he said it was hard to read the letters that his mother wrote, and his sisters that were still over in Sweden, because the language changed. Now, did it really change? No, in the twenties it did. It changed. And I know Susie said that... But not that much, though. So he complained about it. It was hard to... It was hard to understand the phrasing or something about... And Susie said that this was true, and they explained it to her when she went to the university there in Stockholm, that it was... would it be providences, or that it would be changed? I mean, the pronunciation or the... Yeah, the spelling was a bit more common. The spelling, yes. They had different phrases. It was grammatical then. So he was not used to it gradually. It came too fast for him. Yes, yes. It was hard for him to read the letters. And they didn't write letters too often, though, maybe two or three times a year, or what do you think? Just about that. He was very good. He had a beautiful penmanship, and he would write to his mother, of course. He loved his mother, and he would talk about her. I could remember pictures that she would send, and it's so typical. I think they were old when they were 50 years old. They looked old. She parted her hair in the middle and pulled it down this way. And she was a large woman, heavy set. I never saw her with glasses on, but she lived to be well in her 90s. So she got old, and it was very seldom they smiled. That's right. That's right. And I think this is typical of the Sweden that we saw. People on the, especially in Stockholm, they were friendly, but they didn't smile. And we often wondered, don't they have something to smile about? So they looked a little bit subdued. Yes, yes. So the first time you visited Sweden, then, when was the whole, there was a... This was about five years ago. Five years ago. So you saw your father's home, perhaps, in Jönköping, or... Yes, we did. And interesting enough, I have a few pictures I'll show you. We were able to locate the street, and of course, I'm sure that the building had been changed, the roofline had been changed. But here it was, right on the corner, exactly the way my father had described it to me, and it was a carpet shop. And I went in, and this owner of this shop could speak English very well, and I told her who I was, and I would love to see the upstairs of that store, and told her this is where my father was born, and he had his childhood, and could I have the privilege of going upstairs? We took our youngest daughter, the one that had been to school over there, and her husband along with us, and she and I went upstairs, and it was, the tears came to my eyes. It was such a... You could see where nine children lived. It was very small, and they had one bedroom and a little room off the kitchen that I imagine they slept. I have no idea how they slept, but in this one big room, there was this porcelain fire. It was like a fireplace. It was that what you call it? And then in the kitchen was this magnificent coal stove, and it was all in porcelain. And my daughter Susie said, Mother, buy it. I want to take it home. But of course she wouldn't sell it. But that brought back, I could almost see my father in this upstairs, and how they lived. You visualize what it was like, and this lady was so nice to us. She said she understood, and she let me take all kinds of pictures, and she said she didn't recall that it had ever been a grocery store. But of course she had not... Too far back. Too far back. Did you meet any of your relational... Yes. I met my first cousin. His name was Seth Svarendal, and he was captain of this cargo ship. And he was... He lived in Stockholm in an apartment house, and we went up to visit him, and he had pictures of my aunt, his mother. But like I say, he had become the new Swede. And he didn't seem to want to go back to his childhood. He wanted to live right now. He wanted to tell us all about what was happening in this modern day. He never... And his mother, he said, never seemed to want to go back to Jönköping. Which was strange. So he didn't care about Jönköping. He didn't care about it. No, no. Did he know anything about your father coming here when he was 16? No. No? He had no attention to what happened. No. He remembered my father sending money for Christmas to his sister, Elvira. But outside of that, he had no memories at all of Jönköping. So he wanted to sweep down the... No. It's strange, isn't it? Yeah. So he didn't visit too often then? No. No. Your father, was he living when you made this trip to Sweden? No. He was already dead then? No, he was dead. He died about 19 years ago. And on your mother's side, now, she came from Skåne. Did you go down there to find any... No. No. There was no way to find anything? No way. No way at all. I think Bob will probably try to trace that down. He has a little bit of history in this. So on both sides of your parents now, they were Stansh Republicans, as they call it. How did they get the idea, you think, like your father, he was 16 when he came? I think it's possible... Who introduced him to the political life? Don't you think it's the family you're born into, if your grandfather was believed in being conservative and I can't ever remember what anyone even talked about being anything but a Republican. And of course, he was born in a family that you owned your own property and you worked hard and the government didn't do anything for you, you did, you paid your taxes and you then passed on that belief to your children. I can't ever remember that there was ever anyone in the family that was a Democrat. Did they say anything about the Democrats? Why... Oh yes, they were spenders. They were spenders. And the Democrats, of course, would get in power and they would take your money and spend it and give it to somebody else and the Republicans never did that. They believed that you had to be independent, that you'd made your own money, that you didn't take money from the government. They didn't mention anything about who were the Democrats, like the Irish, Catholics? Yes, of course. Of course, of course. Well my father would say, you were either born into a Republican family just like you were born into a Protestant family. You're Protestant because your father and mother were Protestant and you're Republican because your father and mother were Protestant, or Republican. And of course, this is true, the Irish were always Democrats and the Bostonians were always Democrats, everybody back east was a Democrat. We have gone through a lot of politics in our family. My father was very interested in the... he was in the Treasurer's Department at the county and... Douglas County. And he would work so hard for the Republican Party to get in power because he believed in them. Did they have some criticism though against their own party sometimes to straighten it out or something? Oh, I'm sure they did. I'm sure they did. Like during the Depression, I mean, they were in a hard time. Oh yes. What did he say about Roosevelt for instance? Well, he gave everything away. He said Roosevelt, he had that... and of course, my father would say this, and I remember this, that he would say, if they had given Hoover one more year, he was beginning to straighten out this Depression. He was working so hard to get the country back on its feet. And then of course he was defeated and Roosevelt came in. And then Roosevelt of course started doing all this for the underprivileged and people that didn't have money. And it took hold. But of course that is when our debt started accumulating. And you go back to history and politics and in Roosevelt's time, that was the beginning and the debt has increased to the degree it is today. But my father always said it was not Hoover's fault, it was Roosevelt's fault because he spent the money. Somebody had to pay for it. It did help the poor people that did not have jobs. He provided jobs and he did this, but he was spending your money and my money in doing it. How about your grandfather? Did he... was he still living then during the Depression? No. No. No. No. Because the farmers, they were probably helped by Roosevelt. Oh yes. The corn crop and everything and they could borrow money. Yes, but you see that, if you have followed the farmer all these years, has it helped them any? Really, when you stop and think it. They have subsidized and they've given them crops that they didn't, I mean land that they never had to seed. It's never really helped them, I don't think. And the Republicans now, don't they have, they seem to have socialistic ideas too though with the... Oh yes, sure....27 billion dollars. Yes, yes. And then... They don't plant anything. They don't plant anything. So you see it's kind of a circle, isn't it? Yeah, it goes around. Uh-huh, it goes around. And your grandpa now, he belonged to a co-op out there. He must have. Yeah. And... Did they have co-ops in those years? Oh yes, they had. Did they? It's very interesting though how Republicans can have a co-op because that's directly socialistic ideas. Sure it is, sure it is. And that seems to work fine. And of course Sweden is socialistic. Yes. Very much so. So that's hard to say who is right and who is wrong. Yes, well that's true. But you don't remember any Swedes coming in and discussing politics with your dad in your home? No. You don't remember any Swedish Democrats? No, no. No. They are extinct in this area. I think so, I think so. It was always people that thought the same way we did. And there was never any discussion on the other side at all. So that's the later generation that came in with the Democratic foothold in Nebraska. That's right. It was very heavily Republican. Have you been interested in politics over the years? Oh yes, yes. Very much so. My husband's partner decided to run for Congressman from this district. And we were involved in his campaign for many, many years. And after about four sessions that he had in Congress, he was defeated by a Democrat of course. And then we got out of politics. We are now involved, we're very much involved in politics now. We have a granddaughter that is, well she's worked for KR and she was a graduate of Dartmouth last year. And she decided she wanted to get in the political system and she has worked for George Bush in his office. And she's now thinking of going and becoming interested in his campaign. What was her name? Her name was Suzy Olson. Oh, this is your daughter? This is our daughter's daughter. And then we do, we're now of the age and the prosperity that we give generously to the people that we believe in. So she is working full time then? Not quite full time yet. But she is going to be, she was in charge of George Bush's visit here just recently. So she is stationed here in Nebraska? Well she's here now. She is waiting for the call to come in to George Bush's campaign or whoever comes in now. DuPont is going to maybe run and if she does she'd like to go work for him. So she's had quite a few offers in getting in. She's one of these gals that knows how to get money out of anyone. She came into Kaye Zorr's campaign within a week's time. She had $100,000 just like that. But she'd gone over the list and found out who were the heavy contributors and was able to pitch her thoughts and she came in. And she is that way. She's very energetic and she's very knowledgeable of course. So she's in her 20s or 30s? She's about 22 years old. So she is a go-getter from the beginning? Yes she is. So her father is just Swedish back then also? Yes but I have no idea how far back they go. His name is Albert Peter Olsen II and he's an ear, nose and throat man here in town. He's a doctor. They have never ever spoken Swedish. They kind of lost that background. It's too far removed. It's too far removed. And maybe the grandparents didn't stay with them. That's right. Do you think that makes a difference if you go back with your grandparents? Oh I think it does. They had their roots over in Sweden. That's true. That's true. I was fascinated when we decided we were going to go to Sweden. I was fascinated with the country. Of course it was very socialistic and we had our own guide that took us through and she was telling us a little bit about Sweden and the problems of course and the health problems for instance and how her mother was going to have to wait so many months before she could have an operation and how you could only...