 active. We never were. But your daughter is the? Well, my daughter is state senator. And her name is? Carol McBride-Pirsch, P-I-R-S-C-H. So they're fathers. And he gave them the name of Liebeck, L-E-B-E-C-K. Liebeck? Because the address back there was Södra Land, and back, you know, is the river, a small stream in Swedish, a little stream. So he gave them the name of Liebeck. So the four brothers always went by that name. Here we have 13th of October, 1987. And I'm sitting here with Mrs. Henry McBride in Omaha, Nebraska. And she was born 1904, 13th of April, in Sioux City, Iowa. So your parents now, Anton Liebeck and Susanna Amanda Andersson, they both came from Sweden? Correct. Do you know actually? I don't know which year they came. They came as younger people. They weren't married. Did they know each other in Sweden? No, no. They met in Sioux City. My mother's father, or my mother's mother died, and her father remarried. And I think that was one of the reasons why she came to Sioux City. But we also, I already had an Uncle Frank in Sioux City. Frank Anderson? Yes. So she went to stay with them until she learned the language a little better. And then, of course, she worked out. And so she learned the language. We never spoke Swedish at home. Never? No. Well, of course, when gatherings and things like that with my cousins. But otherwise, you see, I was the third child, so they never spoke it at home. And I learned my Swedish through the Covenant Church. We had Swedish, our Sunday school was in Swedish. We read the Bible in Swedish. And I was confirmed in Swedish. And then the First World War came along, and they said it was illegal and unpatriotic to know another language. So that stopped all that. So you remember that? Oh, absolutely. I was confirmed in Swedish. That's how I learned my Swedish. And I can converse in Swedish all right and write letters. I do. And it's bundled now to about three people that I write to in Sweden. Is it our second cousins? Yes. So, and then your father, he came from Värmland. Yes. And what place was it you said? Södralin. Södralin. That was the name of the farm? Yes. Platsen som han kom ifrån i Värmland. Yes. And the house is still there. And my great-grandfather's house is still there on top of the hill. Södralin is halfway up the big hill. And Sturegård is on the top of the hill. So you have visited the place of your father's birthplace, and it's still there. So he came then to Sue City direct from Sweden. Yes. And any relation he came to? Not that I ever heard. No, I suppose, of course, I think Uncle Charlie was already here. And then I don't know, I think Uncle Axel came after Dad. These two brothers are him. So there were the four brothers. But my father had, of course, the family, and Uncle Charlie had a big family. And Louise is still living in Sue City. And then I have a cousin, George, living out of state. So did they become farmers then around Sue City? Uncle Charlie was a farmer, and he did some other things. But Dad was a carpenter. He built houses. I mean, he built them from the ground up. And he lived in Sue City? Yes. He enjoyed building houses. I guess that's why I had this gen to build this house. And they all had the name Liebeck in this country. There were Andersons in Sweden, but then they took the name Anderson. And I mean Liebeck. Yes. So they were married then in the early 1900s, your parents, or maybe even before 1900? Well, yes. My brother is eight years older than I, so they were, you know, it would be at least nine years before that. So they came here in the early 1890s then? Yes, I think so. Did they join the Covenant Church immediately? Well, my father wasn't really a member, but my mother was a very active member of Covenant Church. And I appreciate the training that I received in character training from that church, because it was a good Bible church. So you went to Sunday school there? Oh, I went to Sunday school, and if I didn't go to Sunday school, I had to read a chapter in the Bible. At home? Yes. So were they religious, your parents, your mother? My mother was very religious, and my father, I don't know, for some reason or other, you know how sometimes men, they didn't go, but he was. They all belonged to the church, and all your brothers and your two brothers? Well, they were all confirmed in the Covenant Church in Susse. And you were born at home then, midwife? Yes. You didn't, you're not in a hospital? No. All the children born in the... But, no, Harry was born in the hospital, and mother just had a terrific time, I guess, when he was born. And Mildred, my sister, was born in the hospital, but Lilla Corrie, as they always called her, attended mother when I was born. So she was a midwife then? Yes. Was she a Swedish lady? Yes. So that was her duty, to deliver the Swedish babies around there? Well, she was known for, you know, for being a good midwife. For anybody, in other words? Oh, yes. She didn't have to be Swedish then? No, no, no. Was she also trained so she could give some help for some sicknesses? I really don't see, by the time I was old enough to know about it or anything, why... She was gone then? No, I just heard about Lilla Corrie. Oh, there was a Lilla Corrie, no? Well, I suppose, a Carrie, or, you know. But I remember when they talked about Lilla Corrie, and I just knew that she was the one who had been with mother. So she was an important person? Yep. She came then for a couple of days and stayed with the new mother, I suppose? I suppose. I don't know just how they handled all those things. They were not strength enough to be on their own. So, the time when you were born, then, your father had built a house then already? Oh, yes. He built lots of houses. And we lived in a lot of houses. And they're still standing today. And those in Sioux City, they've been kept up till you wouldn't know they were old houses, except maybe the design a little. So they were well sturdy built. Oh, yes. And I think, looking back, you see, you have more understanding of your parents when you get older, because I just accepted everything. I was an immigrant child, so what? It was never any problem to me. Because, well, there were probably six or eight other in the grade school along with me that were. Swedes? Swedes. Do you remember being teased of others? No, never. No? The only thing I remember was that I was a Swede and I was supposed to get good grades. I don't think I would have gotten as good. I'm actually not very happy. I mean, I'm, you know. But I know I had that feeling. I had to get good grades because I was a Swede. It was expected of me. They wanted to be proud of you. I guess so. Did your mother tell you that or your father? I know. But I never, you see, a lot of these things I never realized until maybe 20 years ago. You know how recollection, you think about things. And afterwards I laughed to myself when I thought, that's really the way I felt. I had to get good grades because I was a Swede and it was expected of me. And Swedes were well respected in all the social activities I had. If you're a Swede, you know, you're okay. And you didn't have any problems in school, then? No, never. Went through all the grades? Had wonderful teachers. And how about homework? Did your mother help you with the homework? Or your older sisters and brothers? I don't think I ever had too much trouble, you see. If I applied myself, I got it all right. Anyway, I had good teachers, I guess. Were they of Swedish background, the teachers? You remember that? No, I don't think any of them were. Were they Americans? Uh-huh. You didn't have any problems when you started school knowing only Swedish and no English? Well, I knew English, you see. That's the only English I, English was the only thing spoken in my home. So your parents knew Swedish then? Uh-huh. It's only from my Swedish, from the church that I learned Swedish, and I must be glad I did. Do you remember if your parents mentioned to you that you should be learning Swedish in school or anything like that? They didn't say anything? Well, Mother, one summer she was going to teach us Swedish. I think that was, well, anyway, one summer. And we were going to speak nothing but Swedish at home that summer. And we were ornery kids, and so we'd answer her in English. And so she'd answer us in English, and she got exasperated and gave it up. You were too much for her. Well, you know, we were ornery kids. Yeah. It's hard to learn to teach. We didn't go along, well, you know, we couldn't just as well have gone along. It had been a good experience, but. It didn't work out that way. Well, I remember that we'd answer her in English, and she tried to talk Swedish to us all the time. But then, you see, when we answered in English, she involuntarily spoke English back to us, and then she'd be exasperated. And that went on for about a couple of weeks, and then she decided, I think. You don't remember if you went to summer school to learn Swedish? I did go one year to summer school. In the covering church? Yes. And there was pastors or students from Chicago then, Norfolk College? No, they, I don't recall who taught us. I suppose it was the minister. I went every Saturday from fall, beginning of fall, to Obstundelsedag. You see, I remember the Swedish word for that, because they don't talk much about it in the church I go to now. And we had to go every Saturday, and then we had Swedish history and the Swedish catechism. So I remember all that in Swedish. And the whole class had to learn Swedish then? Well, we all did, because our Sunday school, everything, up until the First World War, everything was Swedish. And our minister wanted to continue sermons in Swedish, because the people would have liked to have heard their sermon in Swedish. But the government wouldn't allow it. They were stopped? Absolutely. They took French out of school, and they took German out of school. There was no discussion about it, do you remember? They all went along with it, because it was the law then? Oh, it was absolutely the law. Absolutely. So there was no catechism? Well, it went on in English after that. See, my sister can't talk Swedish. She's ten years younger than I, the one that's still living. And she doesn't know Swedish at all, because she was never exposed to it. How big of a confirmation class was it? How many students were you? Oh, I'd say about fifteen. Boys and girls together? Oh, yes. And it was very, we had a very fine minister, Reverend Gabbert, and he was just a very fine minister. Was he born in Sweden, do you think? I think so. He was a cultured person, you know. But before they stopped the sermons being preached in Swedish, he had to preach two sermons then, one Swedish and one English? No, no. It was all Swedish before? It was all Swedish. We had nothing but Swedish until the government stopped, and he was going to go ahead, and the government would have just done things if he hadn't quit. Because the Swedish congregation, and I took notes that last year before I was confirmed, we had to take notes on the sermon in Swedish and turn in our notes every Saturday. So we really had to listen. So you had to be there every Sunday then? Yes, and we had to listen. What happened if you couldn't attend one day? Oh, well, they, you know, we had to go excuse. But you see, we just went to church unless we couldn't. Oh, there was respect for the gospel and the preacher at that time? Oh, yes, absolutely. That has changed now over the years? I don't think there was anybody in my grade school that didn't go to Sunday school. It might be Methodist or Baptist or most any other thing, even one Unitarian friend of mine. But you see, everybody went to Sunday school, and I think it made such a difference in the kind of kids that were raised at that time. Because when I, when we visit now with the people my age, we can remember how things were then and how the things are that go on now. That if kids were really raised in Sunday school where the Bible was preached and taught, you know, they wouldn't be like they are. And also in the grade school, I mean in high school, did you have to read the religious classes there also? No, no, no. There was no religion in the school? No religion in school. So there was the place, was the church then? Only the church. Only the place. Uh-huh. And after, did you go through high school? Oh, yes. Did you continue after that? I had one year at Morningside College. Where is that located? In Sioux City. Sioux City. And then I have gone, oh, I probably have the equivalent of at least another year or two at Omaha University. Because I took French and I took Economics and I took, oh, I've forgotten. And I took Spanish. So I can read Spanish and I can read French. I can't talk. But I can read Spanish and I can read French. So what was the intention? Were you going to continue studying to be a teacher? No, just, my husband was, we were just interested in languages. We belonged to a Spanish club. So did my husband. And, well, I had a very, I guess a very bright husband too anyway. I don't know where he learned his Spanish. But we went to the Spanish club and the leaders were excellent. He was the teacher of Spanish at Omaha U. And everything was conducted in Spanish. We had a nice dinner and we enjoyed the people and everything was in Spanish. And he'd bring in people from South America. He was great for cooperation between South America and the United States. And so it was just very interesting meetings that we enjoyed. And then we did, they had evening classes. And I guess that's where we took Spanish. They must have been pretty good. And we took German classes, but the teacher for that wasn't any good. And he didn't show up and everything. But my husband had German in school. So he was interested in the German language. So when you lived in Sioux City and you went to the Morningside. I went, had one year at Morningside. So how about the rest of your sisters and brothers? Did they also attended the Morningside? No, neither of my brother or my sister attended college. Did they go through high school? Yes. And my sister Marion became a nurse. So she got her training here in Omaha. At the Manual? At the University Hospital. The University Hospital. And so she, I think she had to have two years of college to get her degree there. But then she served in the Second World War in New Guinea. She went overseas to the Pacific. Did she continue that with the nursing when she came back? Oh yes. And then she became a school nurse. And she continued in the Army as a reserve officer. So she retired as a major in the Army. So your parents then, you said they moved many times because he built new houses. It meant that you always lived in a new modern house then. That's right. And he was better and better for every time he had new ideas. Oh yes. Dad built nice houses. Do you remember the first house you lived in when you were old enough to be able to turn on, open up cabinets and stuff like that? How did they look then at that time? The only thing I remember, the house is still there up on 27th. And the only thing I remember, my two aunts, my mother's sister-in-laws, and my folks, and another member of the family on Malta's side, the four houses were together and they used to get together, I think, for coffee. And the thing I can remember is that I got out of bed. My mother thought I was napping, see, and she went over for coffee. And I got out of bed and was running across the lawn, and I know my mother was so, you know, I mean so, well, concerned, you might say, you know, that I had. They had a cup of coffee there and you ran up to them. Well, I know that they would, you know, they would get it. And that's why I have so many nice memories of going to my aunt's for coffee, Colossus, with my mother. Did they live close to each other? For a short period of time, they all four lived up there on 27th. And then we moved, hmm, maybe after that we moved to the farm for two years. And then we came back and lived on 17th. And then we lived at 1, 2, 3, 4 Mulberry, and that house is still standing and looks just as nice as it ever did. I would love to go in, and someday I'm going to have nerve enough to go in, maybe. But my sister lived near. See, whenever I went to my sister, I used to pass these houses. And then also we built one, well, anyway, there's three or four that I recall. So do you remember now how they looked like, houses in the kitchen, for instance? Did you have a wood stove or coal stove? No, we never had. The house on 17th had gas lights. You had to light the mantle, and then after that it would light. But after that, they were all electric. And we had gas stoves. And an icebox. You had an iceman coming in with big blocks. No, I don't think my mother got... When she did finally get one, it was an electric one. But that didn't come until much later. She managed. And no washing machine at that time? Well, not early. No, not early. It would be the washboard. The washboard. So you remember that? I think I did that. That was your job. No, I mean after I was first married. Oh, I see. I think I worked on the board to start with. And then I had some kind of a whirljig thing that would rinse them and everything. No, I remember washing on the washboard and putting them through the wringer. So your mother did it for many years? Yes. That was the way to do it? Uh-huh. She washed them once a week or once every other week? I suppose she washed every week. She heated the water on the stove? Oh, boilers. And I think I was convinced that I had to boil things. When my children came, I think Mother McBride thought the diapers ought to be boiled. So I know I had the little burner downstairs, gas burner, and I had a boiler and I still got it. And I boiled those clothes. Everything that was white had to be boiled. Uh-huh. They don't do this, eh? No. They take shortcuts. Oh, all you do is put the stuff in, turn a few knobs, and wait until it gets done. Even the cold water would be all right. Sure. In fact, they say that's better now, you know. Oh. Yeah. You've come a long way. Oh, sure change. There's been a lot of changes. See, my father had a brush car. That's the first car I remember. Brush? Uh-huh. I never heard of that before. No, not very many people have. It was one of, you know, at that period of time, there were so many cars manufactured, and only a few came through, you see. But I know we had a brush. And Mother bought dust coats for us because it was so dusty on the roads. I see. And there was no, what do you call, enclosure or anything? Well, when it started to rain, you had to put up the curtains. You got all the curtains out, and you fastened all the little knob things all around so they'd fasten to stay together. When it was dry in the summer, it was dusty. Very. Very dusty. Just dirt roads. Oh. There was no paved roads up there then when you were growing up? No. How about Sioux City, now, did they have this wooden sidewalks? They probably had. I can't recall. I can't recall wooden sidewalks, but you see, I didn't. We had cement sidewalks on 17th, and that was when I was about 10. We had cement sidewalks there. You were talking about Mother going to Café Carlos. Did she have coffee every morning, or did she just? No. When my mother used to go, we used to go visiting. They came to our house, of course. And then she went over there. And for some reason, I don't know what happened to my sister. She was 4 years older, I guess, but it was a privilege because I have so many nice memories of going with my mother to visit my aunt. And my one Aunt Annie, she always made a white cake that was just superb. And my Aunt Athena, she always made a chocolate cake. But my Aunt Emma, we might get almost any kind of a cake. You know, I never knew. And I also had a cousin that my mother used to go to the four places where we used to visit quite a lot. Did you go in the morning or in the afternoon? Oh, no, afternoon. Afternoon, after all the work was done then. Yeah, well, it was afternoon coloss. Well, I guess you wouldn't call it a coloss, but it was a coffee. It was afternoon coffee anyway. You didn't drink coffee at that time. Oh, I sure did. You did. They started right away when they were starting. I grew up on coffee and... You had cream in it? Yeah, cream and sugar. And then after we got to having these sweet desserts when we'd go out, I mean as a teenager, you know, we went out and we used to get these evaporate ice cream things. And it seemed to me that that's when I went to black coffee. Oh, I see. You needed extra... Well, I don't know. For some reason or other, black coffee seemed to go better with those rich desserts, those banana splits and all those. And we used to try out a new name every time, you know. They had these ice cream parlors where... When you were a teenager? Yeah, and earlier. When you had dates then in high school then? Well, I... well, anyway, that's part of my... that I remember my activities. What happened when you started to date boys in high school? Well... If your mother had a talk with you then, you had to keep to the Swedish ones or...? No, no, no. No? No. There was not any question about that? No, no. Because the Swedes were always afraid they were coming home with a Catholic? Yeah. A girl or a boy? Well, I knew... Catholics in those days were very domineering. And I suppose with my church history and everything, and I knew about the war that established Protestantism, and so I don't suppose I would have gone with a Catholic on my own. I don't think... I think I was so annoyed, not by persons, but by what I read and so forth about, you know, if you married a Catholic, you had to be Catholic, the children had to be raised Catholic, and they dominated. And they have... I don't know, they don't do that so much anymore, I think. I don't know. But up until 25, 30 years ago, they still thought they could take over and take over the family if there was one member who was Catholic. So there was the philosophy of the... Yes. I was very anti-Catholic, and I suppose even today I am anti-Catholic to the church, you know, because I think... I don't believe anything they... I think all the things that they have added during the years are not true in the first place, and I resent their trying to take over everything. So you were well-educated in religion, about other religions also then? Yes. Yes. Do you have any of your classmates that married non-Catholics and non-Lutherans? None of my friends, no. They all married... Well, they married... Well, no. Most of them did not marry Swedes. The others. So there were a minority of the Swedes up there, and boys... Well, I don't know. I just didn't... I didn't seem to know very many Swedish boys. Because you got to know your schoolmates then, more or less. Yes. What kind of parties did you have after school, for instance, did you come together and... when you chummed around? You didn't go to dances and things like that because you were in a Catholic church? No. No. There was not... looked upon as... No. It was movies and Orpheum. Well, you could go to the movies. Well, I tell you, we had to talk about that. But I said that if you went to a good movie, what was the difference between going to a good movie or reading a good book? You know, it's a good story. And my mother wasn't... I tell you, I think I'm... She never did say, well, I'm your mother, you got to mind me. She always said, det skulle vara ordentligt. And sometimes it was a small thing, det skulle vara ordentligt. And if it was serious, det skulle vara ordentligt. The interview continues next site. Next site. And... I do. You know, and it's only been maybe in the last 20 years that I've begun to recollect and realize my childhood. And I'm glad I had an ordinary kind of home, you know. I didn't think... you know. And everybody in my... but I think I always thought that everybody that I knew just had ordinary kinds of homes, you know. Parents were good to you. Well, you went to other friends' homes now. Were their parents different than your parents? Did you, when you were growing up, thought your parents were very strict to you? No, because she always... it was det skulle vara ordentligt. And you know... And you know what that meant. Yeah, and it was something you couldn't argue with. But all my friends were the same. I mean, two of my very best friends, they were Swedish. And one of my friends was a Unitarian. And once we talked about the differences in religion, because of course Unitarians, you know, are not Christian. And... but she... Levon was such a very... and her mother and my mother, we lived on the same street on 17th. And my mother and her mother were very... were very good friends. So they had coffee together sometimes, too? Yeah. Well, we had... she would invite... I... lunch. Like, I'd go with Levon home from school and then we'd have lunch together or something like that. But they were both busy, so they, you know... But your mother and this friend of yours, they never discussed religion or... No, no, no. No, mother never would... mother never would discuss religion, no. They respected each other? No, they just... they just were good neighbors. So what happened to her now, your friend then, Unitarian? Was she married? Well, she... Did she go to church after that, or...? Well, she... she died shortly after she was married. They... she had... from an operation. So... She had no children then? No. And she married rather young. But... just out of high school. And... yeah, it was... It was unusual that the young people married at a young age years ago. Well, I don't know. How old were you when you married? Twenty-two. Twenty-two. But did they marry at eighteen, sometime, seventeen, eighteen? Well, I think so, maybe. I... You see a lot of those things. I didn't question. They just... part of the background. But it was not too prevalent, and in other words, they talked about it, or...? No. I... I don't think it ever... When you found somebody you wanted to marry, you got married, that's all. So, after school, now then, what kind of work... Did you stay at home then, or did you...? No, no. I... I worked for a... Well, I... I... When I was going to high school, I worked for Davidson's, and... selling. And then I worked for a laundry as a bookkeeper. And then I was a... office... office girl, essentially. I mean, for the Hoover Company. The vacuum cleaner...? Uh-huh. He was the manager for the district, and so I kept track of parts, and I wrote the letters, and I was in the office all the time to handle whatever came along, and things like that. He was a very fine man. And you continued with that until you married him? Yeah. How did you meet your husband, Lyle Irwin McBride? It was love at first sight. It was? Uh-huh. You know, my kids, my whole family, you know, of course, this is just one of the things. But we were both out on a trip to the Black Hills, and... Alone? Alone, you know. I was with two other girls. We were out, and we were having a vacation out there, you know. And my husband was with his folks and another family. And it's the truth that we just happened to look in each other's eyes. He just got out of his car, and I just got out of my car. And you had never seen him before? No. And then, of course, I mean, you know, really love at first sight. But I asked Mel anyway. Of course, he looked us up on the trail, and we talked. And he made a point of looking us up, of course. And we talked, and this is what you did that, you know, that was kind of a natural part. And we were all vacationing. And then I had a date with him in Deadwood. He knew that there were going to be, you know, special activities in Deadwood. And so he said, were we going to be there? And I, of course, we were planning. And so I had a date with him in Deadwood. Was he alone coming up there, or was he with friends? He was with his folks. Oh, I see. Yeah. And so we had that date. And then we started writing, and then he started coming up, and then we got married. What did your mother say then? Did you tell your mother that you had a date out in South Dakota? I never said a word, but these two talkative friends of mine, of course, they knew what had gone on. They didn't have any dates out there? No. They probably fell left alone out in the wilderness in Deadwood then. And, you know, we just danced. He never shared dances with anybody. It was just the two of us danced together all that evening. Well, you were supposed to dance, though. You belonged to the Covenant Church. Well, you see, by that time, things had changed quite a lot. They had? Oh, yeah. You changed the rules a little bit, too, I suppose. Well, I think that they had to along with times. Were you able to dance then, or did he teach you? No, no, no. I don't know how come I never. Well, dancing was something you did, I guess. So I did. What kind of a dance was it out there? Oh, that's just regular. There were all kinds of dances. There were waltzes and foxtrot and just the old-fashioned dances, you know. And you can follow a lead on most any of those. Was Lawrence Welk, he played out there? Lawrence Welk? Well, maybe so, but this was... He was more up in North Dakota. But Deadwood, well, Deadwood always had, one day a year, they had this special celebration thing. Did you go by car out there? Yeah. You and your two girlfriends? Yeah. I was the principal driver. You had your own car? We went in Esther's car, Esther Montgomery's car, but I had driven ever since anybody let me under the wheel. And I had my own car. After I started working, I had to have my own car to get to work. So I was, you know, I had no compunction. What kind of a car did you have then? Oh, I had a Ford. A Ford? Oh, sure. Model T Ford. So you learned early then? Oh, yes. I... How to drive? Oh, yes. And a driver's license was not necessary then? No, no, no. Just a car? And I drove quite a lot because we had friends in Orange City and all around, and so we'd drive up to... friends that I had in Sioux City whose homes were out, you know, and so we'd go out for weekends or something like that. So you took this trip with your two friends then out to South Dakota. You were on your own then. You didn't... Oh, yes, just the three of us. You didn't live with your parents at the time? Oh, yes. I always... You didn't? You never think... You know, you always lived with your parents until you got married. What year was it that you went out there? Do you remember? Yep, it was 26. 26? I got married in 27. You were 22 then? Yeah. Yeah, but your parents, now, when you told them you were taking the car out to South Dakota... Oh, well, there was no... Yeah, but there were bad roads and you can get flat tires and how could you get the upper deck fixed? I'd already been driving all around Sioux City, so Ireton and... But this was out in Haldo, out to Deadwood, South Dakota. Well, you know, it was a trip. Everything went fine. Well, yeah, it was going to be a trip. It was probably my first real vacation. So you went by Mitchell and Pierre and... Oh, yeah. We drove out there. We had no... Went through the bad lands and... But it wasn't a risk, you know, for three girls at that time? No. You see, you never worried about anything. I walked three miles, I think, to Junior High and back and you never worried about it. I came home from work late and had to walk a couple blocks from... But you never worried about things like that. You were, you know, you would naturally be careful or something, but you never... You could go anywhere and you never worried about it. So how did you... Where did you spend the nights then? In the hotels? Hotel, sure. And then you... We had all our reservations and we had... It was a lovely trip. We really had a lovely time. Did the young people take trips like this? Were you a little bit more fortunate than others? You had a good job and the other two also employment. Well, I don't know. I just accepted everything as perfectly normal. And it was easy to... It was no problem. I decided... We just... The three of us decided we'd like to go. I think Esther was one who thought about it first. And she said, let's plan to go. And they knew that Mabel, one of the girls, couldn't drive at all. So she, of course, did want another driver. But I'd been driving so much and everything that driving wasn't a problem to me. And I drove in the mountains, you know, because I wasn't afraid. I'd just drive anywhere. So after you found this blind date and it was easy driving the rest of the way? Well, that had nothing to do with it. But it's just... You know, the family... It is a family kind of something or another because that's exactly the way it was. We just... We talked to each other after, like on the trail. And we made the date for Deadwood. And everybody... I remember the neighbor was quite concerned, you know. And the first time Lyle came up... But then anybody that met him, he was such a wonderful person. That's his picture over there. And you just met him the first time and you knew he was a wonderful person. There was never any concern at all after they met him. But the mother usually sees a little bit different, though. No. They all... But she approved of him, you mean? Oh, absolutely, absolutely. He was an exceptional person. And he came from Blair then with his parents? Yes. And did he work? Yes. He was older than I. So he had been an electrical engineer for the power company. He worked for the power company, I think, five years when we were married. Oh, I see. So he was already established. So he had a good job. And he was living in Omaha at the time, of course, but his folks still lived in Blair. So you remember them when he came up to Sioux City the first time? Very much, because the first time he came up, they put cleansing powder or something on the grapefruit. I don't think he got it, but somebody else did. The hotel where he stayed. And so, I mean, that was one of the things. They actually made a mistake. He got sick then? I suppose they tationed it or something right quick. But anyway, that was one of the family joke things. And so from then on, of course, he always had breakfast at my house. So when he came the first time, did he propose to you then? Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. No? No, he was very— It was a slow progress. Well, he— It was a considered decision, I'm sure. Because he wouldn't— It wasn't one of these— Fly by night. No, no, it would be a considered decision. That would be a very major decision, and it would be a considered decision. So he came many times then up to Sioux City? Oh, yeah, sure. Did you go down to Omaha? Yep, I came down to Chiron Ball. That was my first date with him in Omaha. How long after you met? That fall. Oh, that's fun. Oh, I tell you— Well, not—Omaha wasn't so different from Sioux City at that time. Omaha has grown a lot, and Sioux City kind of stayed still. So there was not too much difference? I didn't feel—when I moved to Omaha, I didn't feel like I was moving to a much bigger city of any kind. I see, so you felt at home then almost. Oh, yeah. Well, I never had any problem adjusting, because, of course, we just always had such a lovely time. So when you went to Omaha on offer a date, did you stay with his parents then? No. He arranged for a room in that same—he had just a room. And so we—well, when we came down to Chiron Ball, Esther and Mabel, my two friends, came too, so then we had a hotel room. We came down. But then whenever I just came down, because we started thinking about building a house, you see, and so whenever I came down, I stayed with this same family. I had another room in the same place. And then, of course, I did spend weekends with his family too, Thanksgiving. Was he the only son? Yes. Only son. So then they looked you over, and were you— Oh, yes. Were you a little bit nervous then, or, I suppose, to meet— Well, I didn't even know it. —being lost the first time? No, I—when I came down that Thanksgiving, I met his grandmother, and she was like—you see, she was the Arnold that goes way back to Rhode Island. I mean, she was English stock and she was in bed because she was confined to bed about the last year of her life. But she was a very marvelous person, and I treasure the visit that I had with her. I'm so glad I had that visit with her because she died before we were married. She died about two months before we were married. What did she say then about the— She called me his wife or something, you know. When she talked to me, it was just all settled that I was going to be his wife anyway, so she was a marvelous person. So she could tell you about her— No. —her—not much. No, no. You see, it's—like I never asked my mother about things. We just accepted it. And then when her children, when Grandma McBride and Elsie wanted to question her and ask her in her later years, she said, why didn't you ask me earlier? Because she was, you know, unfeeling good. And that's just the way it is. We forget—you see, I think my daughter knows more about my mother's coming over here than I do because she asked her. So she was interested in— Yes, my daughter Nancy. That's the one that's a politician? No, no. She lives in New Jersey. Oh, I see. So then you decided to be engaged and marry? Yeah, we got engaged pretty soon, and of course then we— That's all? Oh, yeah. And then we started planning. And he, being an engineer, he made the plans and wrote out all the contract and everything for building the house. And we had a very lovely house on 45th and Hickory. And there was not the question of whether you were going to live in Sioux City or anywhere. You were just going to move to Omaha? Oh, he was an engineer. He had his job with Omaha Public Power. Well, it was Nebraska Power Company at that time. So what kind of religious background did he come from? Methodist. Oh, Methodist. And he was a devout Christian. I mean, he was a real Christian. And who married you now? I was the—we were the first couple married in the New Covenant Church in Sioux City. I see. So you married up there? Oh, yes. And he consented that he didn't have any— Oh, well, sure. You were the one? We never had any problems. But we were both Christian, and you know, you don't worry about them things. So you had a wedding up in Sioux City? Yeah, and we joined the Methodist Church because it was within a couple blocks of us where we lived. Here in Omaha? Yeah. And how many came from Omaha then for the wedding of his in-laws? I mean, his side. Well, everybody. Well, I guess all the close relatives—all the close relatives came. You had a big wedding? Oh, yeah. In the church? Sure. Oh, bridesmaids and— Oh, yeah. Everything was there? Oh, yeah. I've got pictures in the paper, and I got all that. But you see, that's what I have to do this winter, is go through all the memorabilia and get all this stuff organized. I never threw anything away, but I got so much stuff, I don't know where anything is. So, and after the wedding, you took off for— We had a honeymoon. We had a honeymoon in Rocky Mountain National Park. So you went west again? Well, of course, we liked the outdoors, and we liked that sort of thing. So you drove with the car then? Yeah. We drove down and—well, we went to Omaha, right, that night of the wedding. And then the next morning we started off, and we had our honeymoon out in Rocky Mountain. We had a reservation, and, you know, and we went out hiking. It was in June, you see, so we went out hiking every day. We had a map of trails out there, so every morning we took off and went on another trail. So you were both interested in the— Oh, we've always had the same interests. He's very musical, and I enjoy music, and he was a great photographer. He took that picture over there, and that's on one of my other trips. He was fine. He was a great photographer. He was an excellent pianist, very accomplished pianist. And he could do anything. He could do anything in wood, and it would come out nice. He had the first radio in Blair, and he always kept our radio up, and he could fix the television, and he could fix the car, and he could do anything. So the grand piano, that's from— Yes, that was his. Do you also play on it? I play. So you are— I had piano lessons. In the same city? Yes. My mother was very musical. I learned things about my mother and father so much later that I'm going to, you know, think— but it's just amazing. You just accept, and you live from day to day, and so that's it. You don't think about things. But my mother used to play a little squeeze box, music box, and my father used to play the violin. He'd given it up by the time I came along, so I didn't know it. But I didn't learn that until the funeral when my cousin was buried, and then Louise and the close ones of us got together afterwards, you know, and we just talked. And I think she knew more about my family and background through— you see, I was named for her mother in the first place. Her mother's name was Hillefry. And so Louise, we just don't get together like we should, but I'd love to talk some more with her. So you never had a chance to live with your grandparents, though, neither one? Never, never knew them. Only aunts? They lived over in Sweden, you see, and I— But you had the aunts and the uncles? Yeah. So you were close with them then? Oh, yes. But they didn't say anything about your parents, I suppose? We never talked like that. We never talked. You know how when you're visiting and so forth, but you don't talk about old things or anything like that. And my cousins, and of course, I had three or four, maybe five or six first cousins come direct from Sweden. But all I remember is we had a good time. You know, of course, I was younger, too. Did people take a honeymoon when they were married years ago? Oh, yeah, I think so. How long were you away then? A couple of weeks? Two weeks. Two weeks. And he came back to his job. Yeah. And— Well, of course, you see, he was an electrical engineer, and he had a good job, and the Depression didn't bother us, you see, because if you had a job in the Depression, he had to take one day off. I mean, he lost one day's pay every week. But prices, everything was so cheap that we could live better then, and we went to Chicago World's Fair three times. When I was 33? Yeah. Oh, I see. Because he could accumulate the days, and having a regular salary, we weren't hurt by the Depression. Did you quit working then? Oh, yeah. Most of the people did at that time, and the wives stayed home. Well, yeah. And raised the children. Yes. It was important, I think, for a mother to be with her children. So—and he had a house built, you said, or did he buy one? No, no. He had a house built. He planned the whole thing. Planned the whole thing. He just spent hours and hours making out the plans and writing it up because he wrote out every detail. Were you able to put in your thoughts on the whole thing? Yes, he always wanted me to. And, of course, he came up to Sioux City most of the time, at least every other week, I think. And so we, you know— You planned the house before you were married? Well, he did the planning, really, because, see, I didn't have too much idea about anything. So he had some inducement every week, and it come up, you know, there's another room added to it. Well, no, he planned the thing, and I think the only thing I said, let's have a fireplace. We had one. Yeah, a fireplace was the only thing I thought of. How about the bathroom at that time in the house you were living in Sioux City? Your house that you built in Omaha was much more modern. Well, no, everything was modern. You have a bathtub or a shower? Oh, from the time from 17th. The house, when we moved, that was when I was about 8 or 10. In Sioux City? In Sioux City. Dad rebuilt the bathroom. He made a modern bathroom at that time. A bathtub? Oh, sure. Oh, yes, I can't remember the time. With cold and hot water? Oh, sure. Yeah, Dad, I know— It was really though, if you were only 10 years old and he had that. Well, we always had modern stuff. I can't remember. Well, we always had the bathtub and the laboratory and the toilet. You never had the old house up in the Sioux City? No, no. No chicken coop in the back? No, no, we never had anything. Do you remember any families that had that? Huh? Do you remember any families? No, nobody on that street. There was a city street and you couldn't have any of that kind of stuff. No, there wasn't—there was a big barn, but no, probably at some time there had been horses. But never—we never had horses. So Sioux City, now, there was a hustling and bustling town in those days. Yes, it was. And there was slaughterhouses there and petting horses. Oh, yes. And a lot of commotion going on. Well, it was a thriving city. Do you remember the Swedish council in the Sioux City, Swan? I can remember the name. But you don't remember being in contact with them? No, no. Like your parents, no, they didn't belong to anything else than the Covenant Church. They didn't belong to any Vasa group or— No. There wasn't a motel house up there, though. Well, we didn't know anything about it. No, not at that time. We just lived in—well, friends and church, I think, probably was most of the activity. And then whatever came along, you know, I mean— There was no Swedish organization, as you know of. No, no, we never belonged to any— They used to have the Swedish dances once a year out there at Riverside. And then when that Darn Moor came along, you see, that closed everything. They cut it off, too? Everything was—you know, you weren't supposed to have any interest in any other culture. I guess—I can just remember as a child, you know, that— But that—see, I was only 14 and—10—well, I was about 10 or 12 when I was confirmed, and that was the time it happened. So when you came to Omaha, you didn't feel anything about this? And there was no good to be Swedish or anything like that? No. You didn't hear anything about it? No, no, no. We had—Lyle already had this—we had all these people, but most of my friends at that time were power company people. So they were not any Swedish exactly, and you came in? We never—never entered into it. And the church you belonged to, that was not the Swedish one? No, no. It was just a little neighbor one. It was just a very small neighbor church, and just a group of nice people, but it was such a small little church that we developed quite a personal interest almost. You know, a small church, you get closer together and so forth. So how was it now for you then, being of Swedish background, coming into an English-American setting? You had no problems, no adjust? They knew I had a Swedish background, I guess, but mostly they kidded me about being from Iowa. Oh, I see. The Swedish being Swedish didn't matter, but they did give me a little kidding about Iowa or something, but not really. None of those things mattered at all. I was Lyle's wife, and so everybody in the power company accepted me as Lyle's wife, and of course all through the years we've been friends. And one of them still that I go to see over at Skyline was one of the first people I met as a power company wife. And he had a good job there, you said? Oh, yes. He was an electrical engineer. Working there so the Depression didn't affect your family at all then? No. You see, in those days, if you had money, if you had a job, you were okay because your money went so much farther. But if you didn't have a job, you were absolutely out. They had to have W-A because if you didn't have a job, there was no way you could get money. Did you notice that in your neighborhood, for instance, where you lived? Well, you see, we lived in a nice neighborhood where everybody had jobs. No, the Depression really didn't make too much of an impression on me, but I know that my husband, you know, everybody gave up one day's work. That way the power company didn't have to discharge anybody. He didn't have to work that day though? No. He stayed home then? Yeah, he had that day off and then we could accumulate them. He didn't have to take it every week. He could work all the week through and then when he decided he wanted a week's vacation, we'd gather up the days and go. That's how come we could go to Chicago World's Fair. Three times? Three times, and that was a night. Chicago World's Fair was an outstanding thing.