 I was a city surveyor. And I was in the city for six years, I think it was, seven years, then I became city engineer. And I was city engineer for six years. We have 30th of June, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Bernard Harvey, born 14th of January, 1892, in Rockford, Illinois. And it was 30th of June, 1987. So your father-in-law, Frank E. Harvey, he was from Smallham. That was my father. That was your father? Yeah. Where did he get this name Harvey? Did he take it when he came to this country, or? Well, he had a brother that was here first, that went up to Alaska and seeking gold up there. And then he told my brother, my father, to come down to the United States. And then he changed his name because he said the name I had before, they could never remember me. So I shortened it and called it Harvey. What was it before? Was it? Hawkinson. Hawkinson? Yeah. So he had been up in the gold fields then? My uncle had. Your uncle, yeah. So did he come back with gold? He came back with gold in Chicago, called my father to come to Chicago to see him. My father went there. When he got there, they told him he hadn't been in this hotel room for a couple days. They couldn't find him. He probably had some gold with him and someone wanted it and took it away from him. So he disappeared? What? He disappeared. He never showed up again? Never showed up. What was his name? I don't remember what his name was. Who was it, Dad? It was your father's brother. My father's brother, yeah. I have a family tree here, but I... There's no name on there. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. He was an older brother then. He was a couple of years older than my father. Your father though? What year did he come over here? My father-in-law? Your father? My father? What year did he come over? She can give it to you. What year was it my Dad came over? Well, he came over here alone, then, from Sweden? My father? Yeah, he came alone, he didn't have any... No, no. He came alone? Yeah, yeah. And then he met your wife, I mean your mother, here in Rockford. In Rockford. And she also came over alone, or... Yeah, she came alone with her father and her mother. Oh, I see, the whole family came there. The whole family came here. But my grandfather came first. And then my mother and grandma came. So you remember your grandparents then on your mother's side? Oh, yes, yes, yes. They did what you were... As my mother's father. Yes. Yeah. So you had to talk Swedish then all the time when you were a little... Oh, yeah, sure. I went to a Swedish school to learn Swedish so I could read and write. I still can read and write Swedish. Oh, that's pretty good. Yeah. So what church did they join then, the First Lutheran or...? No, Zion Lutheran Church. Zion Lutheran. Yeah. So you were in Sunday school there and confirmed and... Yeah, I was baptized there in March 1892 in Zion Lutheran Church. Been a member ever since. So you went through the Swedish confirmation class then? Oh, yes, yes. All in Swedish? Yeah. Oh. Yeah. And then you went to school here? Yeah. Grade school and high school? No, I went to grade school because when I was 18 years old, my father died. And my grandmother and grandpa were still living. The year after that, I was 19 years old, my mother died, so I was an orphan. And I had a sister two years older than me and a brother seven years younger and a grandpa and grandma. They were my responsibility. Those years we didn't throw it onto the government, say, the government has to support them. That was up to me to see that they were taken care of. I took care of them and my grandparents until they passed away. But when I was 19 years old, I started taking college courses by correspondence. And I had finished two courses in engineering. And I would work in the daytime and study further all night. I finally got so that I was nothing but skin and bones. What kind of work were you having then? I started to work with surveyors. So then I started to study surveying and engineering. And then I took reinforced concrete designing. And then after I left the city, I opened up my own engineering company and done a lot of work for towns around Rockford. And in towns, I laid out most of the east side of Rockford. Rolling Green, Amvets, you know where that is over here? I laid that out. And property north of Harrison Avenue and east of, west of Elp, I laid all that out. I was a busy young man. But you were able then to keep going and also take care of your grandparents? Oh, yes. You stayed with them then? Yes, I slept upstairs in the room with them. But your grandpa, he wasn't working at the time. He was retired. No, he's retired. Your father, now when he died, what kind of work was he doing? In the furniture factories or...? My father-in-law? No, your father, Dan. My father? He was a carpenter for a long while. And then he fell. He fell on the second story in the building and fell down, way down to the basement. He almost got killed. I didn't expect him to live. But he pulled through. He wasn't in good health the rest of the time. So then he started working in the furniture factory where he didn't have to move around. And he stayed with them until he got sick. He couldn't work anymore. So you were 18 then when he passed away? Yes. I had a brother and a sister and a grandma to take care of. A young boy, 19 years old. They don't do that today, you know. So when talking to your grandparents, did you have to use Swedish all the time? Oh, sure. I always talked Swedish to them. But you were able to pull through and get yourself a job and education? Yes. It was hard work. It was hard work. Work all day, study all night. A lot of nights it would be 3 o'clock in the morning before I got through. Then I'd go to bed and I'd have to be at work at 8 o'clock the next morning. You passed the test to be certified as a professional engineer. In what year? When were you certified as a professional engineer? You can look at that. He's a lifelong member. The sign is out over my desk. 1926 I became... 1926. 1926 he passed the test to become certified as a professional civil engineer. This correspondence school, was it out of Chicago? Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania. Did you have to go there to take some tests? No, no. Correspondence. Back and forth. Was it hard to do that? Well, it was work. You had to sit down and... Step by step? Step by step. And if there was anything you didn't understand, you'd have to... When you sat in the next report, you'd write a note and tell them you want more information on this, more information on that, and they would give it to you. How long did it take for them to answer you back? You sent it one week and... I would say within 10 days I got the... You got the reply? Oh yes. Yeah. Yeah. But I'd have to send my test in every so often. I forget how often it was. I'd have to send my test in, and they would check them over and report back how I come out on them. And you didn't have any trouble to pass the test in 1926? No. No. I never had any trouble. Where did you take that test? In Chicago? No. No. Well, could you do that over... I think I got through the mail. I see. Yeah. So, then during the... I was a licensed soldier also. There was something separate. That was separate. I had that first. And then when... Well, when I was working for the city in 1917, the war broke out, you know. And I was one of the first men in Rockford that knew that Camp Grant was going to be built in Rockford because the chief engineer from Washington came down, and I sat in on the conversations in there. And they were on the road surveyed from Rockford to Camp Grant. So that was my job to lay that out to Camp Grant. So you came right into that then? Yeah, right then. Were you drafted then? Then I stayed with the city until the government finally said, well, now you'll have to join the service. So then I went down. Then I went down to Camp Grant, and I served in Camp Grant with the engineers in Camp Grant in World War I. Then in World War II, I got a notice from the draft board to report to service. Before I—I had some papers filled out. Before I went into Chicago or wrote any more to Chicago, I went down to Camp Grant because I had contact down there. And the post engineer said, give me all your papers. I want you to come and work for me down here. So then I stayed in Camp Grant and got to be assistant post engineer for Camp Grant. I stayed there for four and a half years. So that was a big job then, too. Yeah, yeah. I had charge of all the equipment down in the building. We revamped the commissions, the interior of the buildings, the heating system, all the equipment in there. It was my responsibility. Were you there when they had the Spanish flu, influenza epidemic? Yeah, I had it down there. You had it also? Yeah, yeah. So you were quarantined then in the camp? Yeah, yeah, yeah. But you— Yeah, I had the flu. And there were a lot of people that died? That died. There were a lot of people that died like flies. So there was a bad epidemic? Yeah, yeah. And you had to pull through? Yeah, yeah. And we went out afterwards. You had to have a gauze over your face, you know. And in Rockford at that time, there were a lot of Swedes. Yeah. And some of them refused to draft. Do you remember that? Do what? They refused to be drafted. Oh, yeah. A lot of them did. Some hot-headed Swedes. So they sent some of them away, I guess, someplace. To Bridewell. I don't know where they sent them. Chicago. And what year did you meet Herman Hallström? After he was elected mayor. It was 1921? Yeah, and he came into the office. And he wanted to talk to me. You had never met him? I had never met him before. I never met him. I didn't vote for him. But you know who he was, though, or? Oh, I know who he was because it's advertising in the papers. He come in, he wanted to know if I wanted to take the job as city engineer. I told him I didn't know whether I would or not. I came home and talked it over with my wife. And she said, well, it's up to you. If you think you'd like to take that job responsibility, I'll do it. It's up to you. So then a few weeks afterwards I called him up and told him, I'll be your city engineer. So you came from Camp Grant and to the city hall almost? Well, I was in the city hall before Camp Grant. Before that, I see. I went to city hall in 1916. Oh. So he had heard about you then. Yeah. Previously. Yeah. He had been on the socialist ticket. Yeah. What did people say then at that time? Or how did he get elected, I mean, to be honest? I don't know. I don't know. It was a big surprise. No one expected him to get elected. Who did he run against? Huh? Who did he run against? Do you remember? Bennett? No, he ran against... No. Oscar Ogrim was one. Yeah. Do you remember him? I remember him, yes. He lost against Bennett. Yeah, yeah. See, I started to work for the city when Bennett was mayor. He was English. Huh? He was English, or British. Yeah, yeah. Well, it isn't that important. I just wondered if it was the Swedes that... No, no, no, no. Oh. Well, I suppose the Swedish people put him in. There was no... He was the first Swede to be elected there, the mayor. How was the government at that time? Was it rockford starting to modernize itself when Halston came in, or... Yeah, after he'd been there about a year, then he commenced to see the problems we had in there. What was the major problem then? The major problem, one of the major problems was the sewage, all the sewage was going into the Rock River. All of it, yeah. There was sewer going into creeks, and the only time that sewer would move was when they had a rainstorm, and there'd be terrible odors. The first thing I did when I was an engineer, I said, I'm going to start a sanitary district so we can take the sewage out of the river. And I did, and I worked at it, and I made it. My field crew, the small field crew I had, they worked almost night and day. The men would be out of the field all day long and come in after supper and work till 10, 11 o'clock at night to get the drawings out. So that was actually your idea then, rather than Halstrom's? Huh? Was that your idea, rather than Halstrom's, to get the sewer system arranged to... Oh, that was mine. That was mine. You presented it to the mayor? Yeah, I presented that to the mayor. And I done all the engineering work on it. What did people say about it? Because there's always an uproar when you want to start. Well, no, everybody seemed to be for it. Because I wrote articles and explained, said there's about 9 million gallons of sewer going into the river, and the dam down there held it back, and the sewage would stay there until it got digested, then it would flow up and go over. So the river became, year after year, became a bigger and bigger sewer pot. Yeah, a place for septic material. So how did you go about, now? I mean, there was a tremendous operation. Well, I know it was a big operation. How could you present a budget, for instance? Well, the first thing you had to do is to find out about where will the city grow? How big will it be? Where will the biggest population be? So I got all the information I could together, and I'd work night after night after night, lay it out, you know, plot it out. And I had a map I made, and I don't know what become of it. It's around here somewhere, I think, where I figured out how big Rockford's going to be first. That was the main thing. And you had to plan it. 25 years? You had to plan it for 50 years. 50 years. For 50 years. There's no use building something in there for less than 50 years, it's as big as that. So I worked everything back to the 50-year period. And then I laid out the ground, the boundary line that it would be. And the first place that we went outside the boundary was the St. Anthony Hospital. They were building a new hospital over here, and they had to get sewage in there. So I started to work that out with the sanitary district and the hospitals in there. But that was after then. Yeah, that was after I had created. I created the plan, went through the courthouse, September 1927. There was Hallstrom's third time in office then? He was in office. No, he was in office the second term when it went through. I see. Yeah. And we had a health officer. There was also a health officer in the Army during the war, and I got him to work with me on the idea of telling the people the importance of getting rid of the sewage. Did you visit some other American cities to see how they laid it out, or how did you learn about the newest of the day, so to speak? A lot of that came naturally to me. Just things that come to my mind. I could see things that you couldn't see, but I could see them. No one else could see it, but I could see it. Were you able to present it, or to Hallstrom, for instance? Then I had to present it to the court. I had to take it before the court. And the day that it was confirmed in court, we were in the court about 15 minutes and it was approved. And the county judge afterwards came up and said, Well, this is a very important day in this community. You have done something now that is going to mean a lot to this city. It was in the Winnebago Court? In the Winnebago County Court, yes. How about the West Side? There were not too many Swedes living there. Were they appreciative of what you were doing? Oh, sure. It affected them, too, because... There was no opposition? The people's sewage from their place, they were going into creeks and finally getting into the river and polluting the river. So, as a whole, the people seemed to be... I had no objections. How was Hallstrom to work for now? You said you didn't vote for him, and he was a socialist now. Sometimes he was awful hard to work for. He was? You'd say things you wanted to do and he'd be against you. And you said, No, it won't happen. You can't do it that way. A lot of times I would do it anyway, and it would be successful. So finally he got where he didn't interfere too much with me. Was he in favor of the sanitary district being formed, or did he think it was too expensive? I don't know whether it was or not. I think he realized what it was, because it was very important to the city of Rockford. Today we know it's important, because now they have boat races and diving and everything else. If they had all that sewage in it, they couldn't do it today. So the projected time of 50 years, did it keep their promise? In other words, in the future it was all right? Your system lasted for 50 years then? In other words, you had to project yourself for 50 years ahead? I had to project the district for 50 years. Did it work? Then after it was confirmed in court, then I couldn't be engineer for the new district and engineer for the city. Why? Because you can't hold two public offices. So Pierce Green Hanson then came in and took a hall where I left it. For a while I worked for them a lot and laid out some districts and put the sanitary sewers in for them. But tell him, you planned for 50 years ahead. And then 50 years after that went into effect, he was still working in his own business. He was still working. And laid out Clock Tower. Clock Tower, you know where that is? And he then put the sewer from Clock Tower to where he had laid it out. The city went almost out to Clock Tower. He'd been right on the nose. So it was a good project then. Yeah. Well, it started out with the hospital was the first one to get into our district. Because the place, as I said, 50 years from now, this should be the end of the sewer district. About five or six years before that it was the end. At that particular point. I see. Then the hospital wanted to get in, so I worked with the sanitary district. Got their survey to be approved and come into the district. And then when the owner of the land down there where the Clock Tower is, he called me up and he wanted me to come down and look over some land for him, and I did. And then he told me what he wanted to do. And I told him, yeah, you can, but I said I'll have to give it a little more study because you've got a problem. Your sewage problem is the main thing. Water, you could put a well in any place and get water. But you can't put sewage every place. Now, if we can get this territory into the sanitary district now, we can lift the sewer from down here up here, and it will flow from gravity down over here into our present system. So I worked all that out, laid the plan out, and the people I was an engineer for, they did the work. I worked it out and they did their work and completed it. And at that time there was no buildings around there. The only thing they had was that little place on the south side of the highway where they prepare a—what do they call this place where they keep—Betty? What? That place on the south side of State Street west of the highway, that Black Hawk trailer camp, isn't it? Oh, yeah, there is a trailer court just west of the clock. And they had a problem, too, on sewage there. And that's where they called me in, and I laid that out for them, designed a lift for them. So you worked there for six years under Hallstrom? Yeah, yeah. So how many streets were you able then to— because you had to dig up the whole town and you took it in sections. We, well— New sidewalks and what— You see, the actual laying of the pipes didn't start until after I left the city. I see. It took them many years to— Yeah, because— To planning. What? It took them many years to plan it. Yeah, it took those years to plan it, yeah. And then after it passed the court, I couldn't do any more with it. I couldn't pay it off to a job. So they was done doing the— Well, then the judge appointed five men as commissioners of the sanitary district. And they asked me who I thought could take a hold of it now. And so I told them. So they got Pierce Green Hanson to start laying out the pipelines. So they was— And then I started to do work for Pierce Green Hanson. And I did other stuff for them. So they was doing the depression when most of the work was done? Or the late 20s? It was— No. When the work started, we had to go just getting over the war expenses. Oh, the first war, you mean? Yeah, World War I expenses. You see, the war ended in 1918. So it was in the middle of 1920s when it started, actually. Yeah. And then you got new sidewalks. There were no sidewalks before that. Oh, yeah. They'd laid sidewalks all over the city. Yeah, but before the sewer work was started, though, there was no sidewalks in Rockford. Before the sewer work started, there was no sidewalks. You see, they had—a lot of sewers were laid long years ago. Restored sewers? When I started work for the city, the city engineer they had then would make a drawing and say, Here, we're going to put a sewer out here. Now, whether that sewer was big enough to take care of that district or not, there was no way to take it because they had no figures on them. Site 2, continuation with Mr. Harvey. Rockford, Illinois. Site 2. And, well, you had some critical points there on the Chelsea, down at the Rockford Plaza. Yeah. The big cesspool, I've seen pictures of it. I've been on the water for a long time. Well, that's— It was almost like a lake in the 1930s. Yeah, well, a lot of places all over the city did that because there was no drainage in there. There was no drainage. So, that was another thing that had to be considered. Stormwater. You can't put stormwater in a sanitary sewer. So, you've got to plan so that someday you can get a storm sewer system that will take care of all the stormwater. That will go back into the river. Stormwater would go into the river. Did you design the drainage water to the canals that goes down there on Charles Street and— Where is it now? Oh, that was on the east side. No, on the south side. Kent Street? Yes. And also, that Wesley Boiler Water, whatever it is, it's a big one. Kent Creek? There's the one, yeah. Kent Creek. Kent Creek? Did you design that one, too, then? What was that? Kent Creek. Kent Creek? Yes. Well, we didn't have to design any sewers at that time. No? I had to figure out for the future. We had sewers in there. We had stormwater sewers going into sanitary sewers. Every time we had a big storm in there, the houses would get flooded. So wherever possible, we started to lay out storm sewers away from the sanitary district and separate them. And that's why I made all these drawings in there. Was it easy to work now in a city like Rockford to get rid of the water, or was it a lot of problems you had to go uphill in some sections of the city? Well, there's problems. We had to lift the sanitary sewers. The stormwater, you could always find it. Stormwater always had to drain somewhere as it goes in there. But then you'd have to figure out the areas in there. If this land in here is going to be all residents, so many houses in there for every acre, one, two houses for every acre, you'd have less water to take care of. If it's a bigger density of houses, more sidewalks, driveways and garages in there, more water will have to be taken care of. So I had to work all that out. I got all my records home here of all that stuff. All kinds of problems. Yeah. They could come. And then I laid out, then I figured out, all right, if, for instance here, here's an area that we've got to take care of now. We find out the boundaries of it. We get levels. We get the slope of the land. So then we know how fast the water will flow down this grade and how much will flow across this grade and get all that put together in there to one place where they will meet. And from there it will have to go into the river. Well, all that had to be figured out. And the most important thing was the rainfall. What's the rainfall record here? Well, I couldn't get very much information. So I wrote to the government and got copies of their different cities of about the storms they had, how long the storm lasted. And the time from began to end, how much water was falling in that area. And then I made charts of that, profiles. You took an average then? Yeah, yeah. Did it work out all right then? I never had any trouble in any of my work. Wherever I laid any out in there, to my knowledge, there was never any difficulty. How about the areas down at Spring Brook and Spring Creek? There's a lot of beautiful homes now, but 50 years ago, did they anticipate the people to plan to live there? And they got this and up and down there? Well, the creek, there's a big creek that goes down through there and there. And the city now is trying to clean that out now. Because people live next to a creek, they let weeds grow there and little trees and shrubbery grow there and block the area. Finally it gets dammed up and then if you live over here, you get dammed up. You get full of water. The fellow down here doesn't get any because the water just seeps over here. So they're opening up their channels now, open channels. It's not even the storm sewers, it's just open channels. We used to call them creeks. So there was a lot of problems then for Mr. Holstrom when he was a mayor. Oh, yeah. How about, there's another thing he started, the Jefferson Street Bridge. That was one of the problems he had. It was standing idle for a whole year. What was the reason for that? Politics. Was it public opposition? No, it was just a few people that lived around there that didn't like the bridge to go overhead in there. Well, there's the reason. Yeah, and by the time we got the thing built up to the east bank of the river, I was out of office and a new bunch came in. And they said, oh, we're going to change that. That isn't right. We can't do that. We can't go overhead like this. So they stopped the bridge right there? Oh, yeah, stopped the bridge there and it stood that way for about a year. But the plans were already made. And there was a landing... Have I got a little picture of it around here? I'm surprised they didn't call it Hallstrom Bridge. Huh? I'm surprised they didn't name it Hallstrom Bridge. Well, it's called the Peachtree Bridge. Isn't it called the Jefferson Street Bridge? It was called the Peachtree Bridge. Why did they change it? Huh? Why did they change it to Jefferson? I don't know why. It started out to be called the Peachtree Bridge, and it wound up as the Jefferson Street Bridge. Was that paid by the city of Rockford or by the state? By the city. By the city? Yeah. After I left, the ones that followed me, after they extended the thing out to where it was supposed to extend out, they had a little trouble in there. They called in an engineer to check it over. He checked the bridge over and he said, you've got to tear the bridge out altogether. The only thing that you can use is the footings and the piers coming off of the footings. You have to tear it all down. There was an article in the paper about that. I've got it down in the basement down there somewhere. He was at one meeting in there, a Kiwanis meeting I think it was, and someone asked him about the bridge. He said, I can't understand. He said, that bridge is still standing up. That was a couple of years after it was built. Now it's been in there since 1927. So they stopped the construction in 1929 or 1930? No, they stopped the construction when I went out in 1927. In 1927? Yeah. And then it was standing idle for a year? It was standing idle for a year. Then they decided they would make some changes, but still go up to the Peachtree. I think they built part of that, and then they had to tear all that out again and rebuild it. Why? I don't know. There was some problems with the... Yeah. As I remember it, they built it up there and then they tore it down. Was that the way you had designed it though? No, no. No, they changed it. They changed it. But then the city never took care of the bridge afterwards, you know. They put a lot of salt on the street. The salt would lay in puddles along the gutter, and it started to eat up the concrete. And finally they had to put a new deck on. And when they put the new deck on, the Rockford Blacktop didn't work. So they put all their heavy equipment on that bridge. And they said, nothing wrong with this bridge in here. It doesn't even shake when we put all this equipment on it. It's still standing there now, and it'll stand there for quite a few years more. That's a landmark. Because when I became city engineer, I wanted to know why things happened. What caused it? So I kept records. And then we bought a great machine so we could make samples of concrete and break them for tensile and up compressive strength in there. And everything that we did in there, we made silvers of it, or slabs of it, and tested them to make sure that we got good, strong concrete. The year after I became city engineer, they must have sold to somebody who bought that nice equipment we had. Because they said, never use it, never have a chance. And they don't know how strong the concrete is that they're putting in now. They bite the pig in his egg. Yeah, yeah. Hallstrom, now, he was a bricklayer by trade, which we'll start with. He was also an architectural engineer, or whatever else. Was there any truth in that? No, no. No? No. He was no architectural engineer. He was a mason. Then he was a businessman? Yeah, yeah. And he had a full-time job, though, as mayor? Yeah. He was sitting there every day? He was in there every day. But they got very little pay for it, though. And he never was used to any big pay anyway, because these masons in there, in rainy weather, they couldn't work. Off the job, this was a safe job. But was he able to cope with the opposition, for instance? I mean, the Swedes he could probably handle, but how about the Italians and the Irish and the Lithuanians and the Poles? Did they like Hallstrom? I don't know. I never had any trouble with any other nationalities. I didn't care whether it was Swedes or Italians or Germans or what they were. As long as they would do what was right, it was all right with me. How about the city government now? How many were Swedes working together? You were the first Swedish? Sitting there. And then Hallstrom, he was the mayor. And then you had aldermen, I suppose, from the east side. Oh, yeah, yeah, the Swede hall. But how about the west side? They were represented by Italians and Irish? By Italians, mostly. How did they get along with the Swedes now? Italians and English. And English. Irish. How did they get along with the Swedes in the city council work? Well, years ago they did. There used to be street fights between the Swedes. Do you remember those fights? Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Where I lived, there was a fellow that would be in the fights all the time. And they'd bring him home and they were all beat up, batted up, blacked out. Cuts on his face and cuts on his body. Oh, yeah, they had fights. One weekend the Swedes would say, we're going over to the west side and fight the Irish. A couple of weeks afterwards the Irish would say, we're going over and fight the Swedes. So they'd have their fights. But that finally dwindled away. Now the Italians are marrying into the Swedes, if you like. And then they disappeared, the differences. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But before it was not easy to... But before, if you were a Swede and an Irishman, an Alderman and an Irish Alderman never liked to work with you. They didn't want to do that. They didn't want to do that. They didn't like someone else to do it, see. But I got along pretty good. I never had any trouble with any of the Aldermen. One Alderman used to give me a little trouble, but he finally saw that he was wrong and I was right, so we got to be friends. So you had to go out there in every community, every street, every corner of the city. Oh, yeah. So you were out there in the battle line, though, I mean, when people come up and ask you, do you really have to go over my lawn and dig it up here and so on? Oh, yes, yes. You had to face the opposition. I'd have to go out there and settle some arguments with them, you know. Tell them who I thought was wrong and how they could fix it. So it was not easy then to be... Yeah. But it's different today. Yeah, now it's mostly Irish and Italian in the city government. Yeah, yeah. The Swedes seem to have withdrawn. They've gone out. They're out. But the second and third generation, though, aren't they interested in serving on the city council, Aldermen and so forth, or the Swedes? Well, I think they've got, I could say, a couple of Swedes, fellas on there, and Aldermen. There's a few Gustafsons and Johnsons, I think. I think there's about three of them out of the council that are Swedes. But they get along pretty good. Now they've got colored people and there's Aldermen, too, you know. On the southwest side, yeah. So... And Blum, how was he as a mayor? The druggist. He was also a socialist. Yeah, yeah. Well, I don't know. He didn't have... He didn't have any force in him at all. He was, like we used to say, like an old lady. Oh, I see. He wouldn't get into a fight or anything like that, you know. He wouldn't want to argue with anybody or try to... No. How did he get in, though, in politics? He was at Aldermen for quite a few years, you know. I see. And finally he forgot to be mayor. So he beat Hallstrom in the last year he was running? Yeah, yeah. Somebody told me that he was very particular about the tools. He went on to count all the shovels and all the wheelbarrows. Well, he probably would do that. I don't know. I don't know. They don't do that today. One of my books isn't up here now, Betty. You see, when I first became civilian here, the streets were in terrible shape. Potholes all over. So then I... We had... I used to do hauling from the... health department. The health department took care of the garbage. And finally that was abandoned, and they had some trucks. So I said, give me the trucks. I can use them. So I got three trucks from the health department. And two of the trucks, I rigged them up for patrol work for the streets. And I had my crew of men. They had sand with them. They had gravel with them. They had tar with them. And cattle, where they could keep the tar hot. And everything was right there. And they used the tools to work with to cut the square holes out like this, you know. And dig out the loose stuff and then fill it in and then pack it down. And put the tar on top of it. We went to patrol for each side of the river. And their job was to go out and patrol all the streets. Day in and day out, they would go out. They'd say, well, today we're going to go out Prospect Street and fix the streets. Tomorrow we'll be around this street. And that we used to... I had two sweepers. One sweeper for the west side and one sweeper for the east side. And I laid out a program for them. So we swept the streets at least once. Every street was swept at least once every other week. The very longest time. So the streets were paved then? Paved, yeah. How about the sidewalks? Well, the sidewalks would be put in cement. But that was up to the property owners. Oh, I see. The city didn't do that? No, no. Well, it was each property owner's responsibility. The owner's responsibility. So it can't be that Hallstrom put the sidewalks in Rockford. It's not true then? No, no. Because it was the property owners'... All over the place? Well, not all over, no. Like you said... Only like on 7th Street and there. The store owners were responsible for the sidewalks? The store owners were responsible. But on the business district, I think the city paid part of it. I see. Because it's a business property, see. But we never had any complaints on sidewalks. No, they said that the sidewalks were good in Rockford. Yeah. Quite early. But the main thing, we were building a lot of concrete streets. And to be sure we were getting good concrete mixture. We had these tests. I had an inspector at the gravel pit that checked out the testing. And saw that that testing material goes in the trucks. And it's all to the job. Were you responsible for getting this testing material? The testing machines bought? Yeah, the testing at the plant. Were you responsible for that? Yeah. And then it was disbanded? Yeah. After you left, it disappeared? It disappeared. Why did they do that? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. So they wanted to protect the... Jobber? Well, I was there... The years I was there, we had a lot of honest men working for us. And they would give us a day's work. They wouldn't be loafing at all. When they went out to work, they worked. And I kept records of what they did. So if a report would come in that the sweepers only swept so many streets, I'd call the operator. And before he went to work the next morning, I'd be down at 7 o'clock, I'd be down at the yard. And I'd say, hey, how come you didn't sweep this street? Well, he said, the broom broke down. We had to put new cores in there. All right, that's an hour's work that you lost. So we could account for everything in there. But I had records of where we slept, how much dirt we picked up, the number of miles of streets we cleaned. And we cleaned the business district every night, flushed it every night, the business district. But we could do a lot of that then because we weren't influenced by any union or anything. We were free to act. And if we made a mistake, we had to say, it's our mistake, not yours. So there was a responsibility that was mutual then with the management. Oh, yeah. I always had a good crew. It didn't make a difference whether they were Germans or Irish or Swede or what. It didn't make any difference to me. As long as they produced and gave us a good day's work, then I was happy. How did it work out with Hallström and Blum? They were socialists. They were for the unions. Well, they got to be. I never wanted to be in politics. That's why I didn't want to take the job in the first place. Because engineering should not be in politics at all. Because what's right is right, what's wrong is wrong. So there was no way to bicker with you politically then? No, no, no. If you say that this is the way it should be, as far as your experience and study of it, this is the way to do it, I'll do it. If it doesn't work out, don't blame anybody but yourself. But now nobody wants to assume responsibility. They want to pass the buck to somebody else. Now they have consultants. Yeah. Did you have any consultants, for instance, when you were in the department? No, no, no. I was the head of the department. And you took the blame? And I had men that worked with me, that worked in the field all day long and come in. And I say, now after supper I want you to come down and work three hours for me. All right, we'll be down. We'll be down tonight. And we'll have the drafting tables all lit up until 11, 12 o'clock some nights, working on plans and plans. And the fellows didn't get any extra money for that. There was no overtime? No, no, there was no overtime. They didn't get it because their heart and soul was in the job. And that's the way it should be. So you were experiencing a lot of growth in Rockford, in other words, during the 1920s and the 1930s. Oh, yeah. And then you had the Depression in the 1930s. What happened then? Was there a setback for the city? A lot of people unemployed? Factories shut down? Furniture factories going out of business? What we would do in the spring of the year a lot of times, to begin with, before we had the sweepers and stuff. Nobody's talking about the Depression, Dad, in the 30s. In the 1930s when Rockford was hard hit by the Depression, what happened to the city government? I don't know what happened to the city government because I was out of it. Yeah, but you just know from reading the papers. I started my own engineering company in 1927. And you stayed here in Rockford? I stayed in Rockford. You took on private... I took on private, yeah. I laid out the water system for Duran. I laid out the water system for a town south of us. And I done a lot of work in Sycamore. Sanitary work, storm sewer work, paving work. Were they able to complete those jobs during the Depression? Huh? Were they able to complete those jobs? No, in the Depression everything closed up. What happened to your industry? Well, I suppose it happened to everybody like it happened to me. I had a lot of money invested in labor and help. We made surveys, we made plats, profiles. The Depression came on and everything stopped. I couldn't get any money. I couldn't get any money because I didn't complete the work. And there's no way to complete the work in there. So it was dog eat dog for a long while. How did you survive then during that time? Thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two? Well, I always picked up a little surveying to do and stuff like that. So that... Well, you had a wife that... We didn't spend any money. She kept everything. My mother was very frugal. She sewed all our clothes. And yet we all went to college. My friends say, You couldn't have gone through the Depression, they say. And I said, Yes. All three of you? All three of us went to college. And they said, How could your parents send you to college? Well, Bernard went to college. Bernard went to college later though. Yeah, but we all three went to college when it was time to go. Yeah, but then he went in the Army. Then he was in the Army for three and a half years. Then he came back and went back and finished up down there. Of course, then the government paid for his tuition down there. So he graduated as a mechanical engineer. And he was a mechanical engineer for air research for 30 years. Then he retired. So you then went to Rockford College or...? University of Illinois. University of Illinois. High school first, then here in Rockford. My sister went to Augustana College. We grew up in the Depression. I remember.