 We have the 6th of August 1987. I'm sitting together with Mrs. Mamie Limburg, Lapeer, Michigan, and she was born 1916, 5th of February, in White Pine, Michigan. Your parents, Mrs. Limburg, they were of a Finnish background. Finnish, yes. They came from... Well, mother came from northern Finland, from Kittilä. Father, he came from a different... Well, Oulu, Lani... They're going to be on that. That'll be all right. And so they came to Upper Michigan in the early 1900s? Let me see now, I think 1908 mother came to Hancock, Michigan. Hancock. Were they married then, when they came? No, no. They got married maybe three years after. The whole family, they were born and raised in Upper Michigan? And you were born in White Pine? White Pine, Michigan. That's a mining town. And then you... So he was a miner then? Well, he worked in the mines, and then they moved on a farm. Off to Ontanagan? Ontanagan, Michigan. So there was a little farm there. You were raised on a farm? Raised on a farm. Very nice. River circled around the... Farm was up on a hill, and river circled around, and was three miles along the river to Lake Superior. Real nice. Nice spot. And it's still there, and my brother, oldest brother lives there and keeps the place up very nice. So there you went to school, and... Uh-huh. We went to a country school that had eight grades in one room. And we walked a mile and a half, one way. Every day. How about the wintertime? It was blowing cold air. It was. Superior years cold. Yeah. Very cold, but I don't know, somehow or other we survived. And you didn't have these snowmobiles like they had today? No. Everything was walking. It was walking. You never went by horse to any place? Oh, yes. Downtown, Dad used to. To Ontanagan? To Ontanagan, six miles. Oh, you were that far from Ontanagan? Oh, yes. Or in the country. That was a cold ride too, though, in the wintertime, wasn't it? Of course, they bundled up and... Bundled up, yeah. And you never thought about being out of town? No, no, no, no. Oh. And then you went to church. You were confirmed at the... Yeah, Lutheran church. Lutheran church. In Ontanagan? In Ontanagan. How did you get in there for confirmation classes and so on? Did you have to use a bike in the summer then? No, like, well, confirmation was maybe seven days or a week. And so many children went, so they took turns taking, you know, every family, you know, one day, whoever went. Oh, it was seven days straight in a week? Mm-hmm. Oh. So you didn't go all summer then? Oh, no, no, no. No, that's the way they had... That's the way we were confirmed in them days, you know. Oh, I suppose the distance and the... Yeah, they had to kind of put it... Concentrate it. Yeah, in one, yeah. Mm-hmm. And then when you got old enough, you were 17? Oh, 17, when I was old enough. My oldest sister was in Detroit, and she had her apartment, you know, so the next one left home. In 1992? Yes. So you went on to... Mm-hmm. Looked for work for the big city. Right in Detroit? Right in Detroit, you know. Not in the heart of the city, but close by. Yes, and she had already arranged a job for you then? Oh, no. Put an ad in the paper and... Was it easy to get a job? Them days, all the girls did housework, them days, in big homes, you know. And you had your room and board, which was nice. Of course, wages were not very good, but... When you took a job like that, did you ask how much pay there was, or did you just take the job and whatever? Well, more or less, that was their standard, you know. Housework was like a standard. Worked $15 a week? Not even that. Well, this was during the Depression, you mean? That was... This was during the Depression, which meant a lot if you got your room and board. It was not easy to save up then? Pardon? It was not easy to save them money. To save, you mean? Yes, yes. Oh, I did. In them days, if you put a dollar in the bank, that was... That was something, you know. And during that time, then, you went to dances and... Oh, dances. The Danish Hall? Danish Hall, and... Well, it was nothing to go dancing three nights a week, you know. Oh, you were free in the evenings, then, so you could... Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And there you met Charles Lindbergh. I met Charlie at Greystone Ballroom. That was one of the nicest ballrooms in Detroit at the time. That's where I met Charlie. He had been in Detroit then about eight years, seven, eight years? Oh, yes, he had been there for a while. He came in 1925, you thought? Yes. And he had immigrated together with his parents from Sweden? I don't know who came first, but I think the father came first, and got a job and worked, and then... And the two boys that you saw in that picture on the top, Hilding and Helgi. Hilding and Helgi. They came, you know, first, and then the mother and the other boys came later. And they came to Port Arthur? Port Arthur, Canada. And they settled there? But then three of them went to the United States, over Detroit? Detroit, Hilding, Folke, and Charlie. And they had no trouble getting over the border, I mean, the visa? Not that I know of, no. So you started to date, or he started to date you, rather? I knew Charlie a long time before we got married. You did? Yes. There was no rush? Huh? There was no rush? No, and then it was really something when he brought me out here, and of course it was so different, they had tents and, you know... He brought you out here to Lapeer? Well, he took me here to show what the place looks like, you know. And in them days, you know, they weren't buildings like they had here now, you know. People, a lot of times, lived in tents, and it was a lot of fun. But they were all Swedes? Well, more... yes, more or less. Cher could write a book about this place, but he had some good times here. But I always wondered, at that time, going to the 30s, didn't it seem far away to go so far north from Detroit? Well, it seemed like an all-day trip, you know. But you didn't mind because you were young and... Oh, yes....taking each other out and everything, in two days. Oh, my God. And you didn't even know that distance. No. I don't even remember that it seemed so long, long distance. I don't know. It's far away, though, if you think about it. To Detroit from... from Detroit here. Yeah, in those days. In those... yes. And you didn't have such good cars them days, either, you know. But you didn't mind the bumps and... And did you go back then, the same day? Oh, sure. A lot of times, yes. I mean, Fokke and Esther were married before we were, you know. And they're the ones that had the... had a tent, you know, and they lived in there, you know. Sometimes we... Oh, so they were... you were introduced to each other earlier. Yeah. See, I knew Esther from... from up north, you know. Oh, she is also up north. Oh, she is also of Finnish background. That's right. Esther and I are from Upper Peninsula, yes. So two brothers dated two Finnish girls. Finnish girls, yeah. A lot of the Swedes, you know, dated Finnish girls. And so they were married... Before, yeah, long before... before Charlie and... So she let you know then that they were all right. Well, it's really something, you know. When I danced with him and got to talking, you know, and... You know how you... I guess I mentioned where I was from and they said, well, my brother is married to a girl from Upper Peninsula. And I asked, what's her name? And they said, oh, my gosh, you know, I know Esther. It so happened that I... I happened to know her. Oh, I see. So she came from the same area. Well, about 35 miles from where... where I came from. But that was a coincidence, you know, sometimes you meet strangers and I just felt, oh, my goodness, I know your brother's wife, you know. So that was... that was a coincidence. So you went up here very often then to... to this area then? Oh, to you mean the Savasa Country Club? Oh, yes. Every weekend? Well, they had doings here, you know. They had... they had doings almost every Saturday night at the pavilion. Years ago. So they had dances here in the summer? Yes. And in the wintertime in the Danish Hall and... Yes. Somewhere else. You know where the Danish Hall is? I don't know if it's there anymore. But you've heard about the Danish Hall? I've heard about it, yes. Oh. I heard about it. Oh, my goodness. That was a... that was a spot. So every... all the Scandinavians... Like the Danish people, was there... was a big group of Danish people in Detroit? A lot of Danish? I'm quite sure that there are... there are a lot of... Because they could afford to have... Because they have their own Danish club now, you know. Yeah. But the Swedes... well, they also had organizations, but... You didn't belong to any of those, like Vågstan? I belonged to the Fram Lodge. Fram Lodge? Fram Lodge, yes. There was when you... 267. I... I joined it after Charlie... Charlie passed away. He... he... he belonged to it... oh, a long time. But after he... he passed on, I... I joined, you know. Mm-hmm. So what kind of work was he doing then, when you came here? You mean Charlie? Yes. He were... he... he worked at... here on forging machine company. He worked there for 34 years. So then you married and... what did you marry? The Swedish church? No. No? We eloped. You eloped? You took the honey, weren't you? Yeah. Did you go up north, you mean, to... Did you go up to Upper Peninsula? Yeah, we were... we went to... Port Arthur, Canada, and... meet the Round Circle, Antanangan, and... So what did your parents say, now, when you brought home a Swede? Oh, they liked Charlie. Oh, Charlie, oh... Oh, my whole family thought he was the greatest person. Charlie was a great person. So he was very... He just loved to go up north, because he said it reminded him of his childhood days in Sweden. It is beautiful up there, on the rivers and... It just... it's God's country. So he felt at home there? Yes, very much. That's... that's where he always wanted to go, and he loved to go fishing. And my two brothers, you know, they were great fishermen, and... He just loved it. On Superior? Lake Superior. They'd go trolling, I mean... They'd take the day and go and get lake trout. So how about your brother, Ilona, or your sister, Ilona, here? Did you live close together in Detroit? Not too far. Not too far from Folke and Esther. They have a son and a daughter. They're both married, and have families. So did they go with you when you married Charlotte? Charlie? No. So you went to Canada then? We got married in Bowling Green, Ohio. Bowling Green, Ohio. Bowling Green, Ohio. Oh, well. Well, it worked out. Then when... huh? It worked out anyway. Yeah. You married them in the 40s? In the 40s? Uh, 1951. Oh, 51? Oh, I see. So... You were engaged, so to speak, or had a long dating period from 1930s to... We had to know one another, you know. Charlie was full of life, you know. He's... oh my goodness, he was... There was never a dull moment in our place, you know. He was just full of... everybody would tell you that Charlie was a great person. So you worked at your job then, and he worked at his, and then you met. But then in 1951... 1951 is when we got married. You got married. Yeah. You bought a house then, or you rented a place? Yeah, we lived in an apartment for six years, and then we bought a... we had our home. And then when you moved up here, then... Well, we moved here in 1977. We moved here in February, and the same year in November, November 8th, Charlie passed away. And here's where we decided to live, you know. The same year we moved here. So he never got to live up here, then? And he was the president for 18 years of this club? But we used to come here weekends, you know. Every week then, almost? Yeah, weekends, yeah. Why didn't you decide to go up earlier to live here, or... Well... He couldn't because he was still working then. Yeah, he was still working. But no, he wasn't... he wasn't working. He retired when he was 19... I mean, 65. See, he was... see, he was 75 when he passed away. Passed away, yeah. Mm-hmm. So he built this also? No, his... Hilding, his brother. His brother. And then, of course, Hilding passed away, then we took it over. We had a couple of lofts here first, over there by Arnie Larkin Club. Over there by Arnie Larkin, this place. But we have... we have done... did a lot to this place before we moved, you know. It wasn't like this. In fact, since he's passed on, I had that addition put on that dining room there. You have electric heat and... I have electric heat and then I have space heater. In the wintertime, I couldn't be without that. That's... that's nice heat, even heat. You get faster heat than with that one. I have two kind heating here, so it's nice and warm. If one feels hot, the one takes it. Yeah, mm-hmm. When I... if it gets real cold, you know, these... these come on. So your sister-in-law and her husband, they moved up earlier, though. Here, you mean? Yes. Did they move up earlier? Yes, uh-huh. Because her husband, let me see, he was 65 when he had a heart attack and passed away. So your husband, he got a heart attack too, or what happened? Oh, no, no. He had Parkinson's. He had Parkinson's? He wasn't bedridden or anything. No, no. You know what Parkinson's is? That you tremble a little bit? So... but he was interested in this country club. Oh, this was his life. He really worked hard for this club. Charlie... He was improving every year to get people in there. Yeah. Was there a big interest? There was no problem selling the lots for this country club. There was always interest in the parties coming up here and look at it. Of course, one has to be Swedish, you know. I wouldn't be here if I had Charlie, you know. Oh, just one or the family? One. See, that's the reason I'm Finnish and I'm here, but it was... Charlie was Swedish. But Finnish people have a beautiful club too, you know, in Farmington. In Detroit. In Detroit. Oh, they have a really nice place there. In fact, I'm a lifetime member of that place too. Oh, I see. Is there something similar to this one then, or...? Well, yes, but they really have a nice... very nice place. Of course, they have more doings and they rent it out to a lot of weddings and different things, you know, because it's big enough. Well, there's like a commercial doing that, in other words, they... It's a Finnish club, but it isn't only the Finns that can join. There's other nationalities too. I think they have at least 3,000 members. Oh, I see. It's about 20 years old. It's all... it's really nice. And they have permanent houses too, on the ground? Oh, no, no. It's just a club. It's just a clubhouse. Yeah. So it's not like an... Oh, no, no. No, no. No, it's not like this. When were you here the first time? Last year. Oh, don't you think this is nice here? Yes. I was here in the wintertime, but that was last February, a year ago. Well, then Pete Dankerson's wife, you met her. Yes, she was still living here. Oh, she was full of life too. And you used to have your stop by and... How about your family now? You said you have seven of your sisters and brothers are still intact living now? Oh, yes. All in, I would say, good health. Did they also... one, the older sister went down here before you to Detroit? First, yeah. And did she stay here and marry them? Oh, yes. They stayed down here? And, yes. How about the rest of them? Oh, well, then Elma, she came and she met her husband here too, and they lived in Detroit area. And my sister Lydia, she got married up north and she lived up north for a while, but then she moved to Detroit and she lived in Detroit too. She lives in Sandusky, Michigan now. I don't know whether you know Sandusky. I know Sandusky, Ohio. Outside of Port... Oh, no, it isn't. Ohio, that's not the one. No, it's... you know where Port Huron is? Yes. Well, it's in that palm area. So now when your husband died, you didn't refuse to live here alone, though? I mean, you lived here all these years. No, it was my home, you know. We brought all our furniture, what we had in Detroit, and you know, that means a lot. You still got your... that you live with... even furniture mean a lot, and pictures meant a lot. So you stayed on. I stayed on. I have taken a few trips, like I've been to Hawaii. I went with the Finnish Center group. There were about 165 of us. We had chartered plane, and I've been to the Caribbean cruise trip. And my sister Lala and I, one of the Charlie's nephews lives in British Columbia, so we took a trip to British Columbia one year, so I've traveled a little, and my next big step would be to go to Sweden and Finland. You haven't been to Sweden? No. And your husband, he never... He never went back, but Hilding went back twice, and Helgi. They went back. Did they talk often about Sweden, they left the brothers? Oh, sure. Your husband made a comment about the Altonauri, it looks like. Yes, I remember he had a friend whose name was Alfred Carlson, and talked about some cabin or something they had over there on some... like an island, you know, where they used to go, and I don't know, he talked... oh, he talked a lot about Sweden. And they had a favorite uncle that, during the summer when school was out, and he was on a farm, that they'd go over there and help him, you know. I don't know, he talked... I don't know how it is. So they were a little bit homesick for the nature sometimes. Oh, sure. I don't know, if I... we sat here and says, well, let's go up north, and he'd be ready just like that. He just loved it up north. Yeah, he used to tell me, he says, when he's up north, he feels like his childhood days in Sweden. So he didn't care to go back to Port Arthur, though, and Canada? No. Well, it was more or less, you know, there was more work. What kind of work were they doing, the remaining brothers in Canada? Well, in Fort Francis, Canada, his brother Seegert had a clothing store, a real nice clothing store. And his parents, did they work in the... Well, I imagine, you know, years ago, they probably worked in the woods, you know, logging or... there was a paper mill in Port Arthur. Seegert is this one here that had the clothing store in Fort Francis. And Helgi and Tore were in Port Arthur, and they worked in that pulp mill or paper mill in Port Arthur. Did the parents come down there to visit you at any time, his parents? I didn't. I never met Mrs. Seegert. The mother. The mother, you know. In fact, she passed away when I met Charlie, just a few months, you know. And Charlie went to Port Arthur and was supposed to bring her back, you know. But she got pneumonia and she passed away. That was in 1938. But I met Charlie's dad in Port Arthur. I met him. Did they still talk Swedish at the time? Did you understand any Swedish, by the way? Foxy make car bicycle. Charlie could understand Finnish. He could. Oh, sure. I wouldn't dare say anything in Finnish that I did or something, because they know what I'd say. How did he learn that? I don't know. Well, I imagine because when... in Port Arthur, when they were there, so many Finns, you know, and... but he understood Finnish real good. And he could say it, talk Finnish a little bit. But I think Swedish is hard to... I don't know. Is it hard to learn, you think, Swedish? I think so. I don't know. It seems to me like it would be. Maybe if I go to school or something and you know that, you know. Are you taping this? How about the customs now? Are the Swedes different than the Finns? Of food, for instance? Do you eat herring and lute fish? Very much the same. Very much the same. So you had no culture shock then when you married him? No, no, no. Pickled herring and lute fish and this here, Karlsilt. And my husband was a good chef. He was a good cook. Oh, so he prepared... He prepared... and that spout herring, you know, that... that... lox. Oh, yes. See, he told me, you know, after all, there were six boys in the family. He says he was the one that was in the kitchen with his mother all the time. So it's no problem. So he had to learn that. He had to learn to cook. And I don't think it hurts for any man to cook. Probably good. Huh? It is. I remember dad, you know, I don't know he was lost when mother went away because he never, never, never cooked, you know. But I think he was a good cook. He never cooked, you know. But I think it's good because when I worked too, you know, Charlie, his job, he's at the house at six in the morning and he'd get home at 2.30, like banker's hours. And he'd do the shopping and when I came home, supper was ready. All I'd have to do is wash my hands, sit down and eat. Why should I stay home then? Why did you wait so long until 1951 to marry him? Huh? I mean, you tested him for one year, two years, three years, ten years. I, as I told you that he was. No, they can't even boil water. And they married the next day. I think he taught me how to cook. And when he took sick, he thought I was better cook than he was. I don't know. But he was, he was a good cook. The depression, how did it affect you and him? Was he without a job during the depression? I imagine he, well, that was, depression was before I met him, see. Really. So you met him after. Yeah. But I remember, as I say, I was doing housework, not making $6.50 a week. $6.50 a week. But I am a woman born. But $6.50 would be considered now how much money? But there was more than you made when you were home. There was more than you made when you were home, of course. When you were home in Alton, you didn't make $6.50 a week. No, no, no. But I mean, I mean, like, when you think about it, $6.50 now would be worth a lot of money. Yes. That's how many years, that's, um. Well, it was 35, 36. Yeah, in that year. When you started working. But how was the depression home on your farm? Well, we always had, we always had enough to eat. We had chickens, the eggs, and we got the beef, cattle, and fish. And they were hunting too? Wood fishing and hunting. My mother used to can everything. She'd can meat, she'd can carrots and vegetables. Our basement was always jars, jars, jars of everything. Berries, us kids used to go in the woods and pick raspberries, and my God, it was nothing for her to put up a couple hundred quarts or something. I mean, people had enough to eat on a farm. It seemed to me that they didn't, they didn't really, really witness how it was really a depression because you always have plenty to eat. We didn't have the things that children get nowadays, you know. Maybe we had one pair of skis and we took turns and slay. They couldn't buy a slay for each one of us, you know. But we used to have to learn to share things. And that's what's bad nowadays, is that parents give their children too much. They don't appreciate nothing. We'd go in the, we'd go, you know, in the potato field, and you know how those potato bugs, you know, you'd have to whip them up and then you put them in a pail and with straw and burn them up. Maybe we would get a nickel for a few rows or something, you know, spending money from there. So you had the potato bug up there on the... They used to years ago. I remember those, you know. But the only way to... To shake them up. But now they spray them and everything. But we used to have to shake them in a pail and go and shake them. And then they'd have a big thing and they put dry straw in there and then they'd burn those. But it was a good insecticide. It was clean. There was no poison on the ground or anything. Well, that's it. See, everything now, you don't know what you're... I sometimes think about these different things that maybe that's causing cancer. You never know what you're eating, you know. All this poison and... Too much chemicals. And they even say when spraying lawns, you know, and even when you've got wells and things, that could seep into your wells. You know, all that. You've got to consider all those things. It's poison, poison to your system. And it takes too long time to figure it out and then it's too late. Yeah, it's too late. Something that's doing it and I don't know... I don't know why they can't find out what's causing it. They really don't know, do they? So it's a different kind of living. It is. But with 650 a week now, you didn't complain? No, it was a big deal to go to the bank and open up a... This is site two, continuation with Maymue Limburg, Lapeer, Michigan. Site two. So your childhood days were kind of pleasant then, you? My dad and mother, they liked for us to bring our friends home and always have young people, you know, and we had a lot of laughter in our place. And my dad was Sunday mornings, we had long ways to go to church, but he was, he could, he'd read from the... Sunday morning was a Saturday. He'd read from the Bible and he was one of the, he was a good, how would you say, like in church, somebody that starts the singing and singing. A leader of the... Leader, yeah. He was a very good singer and us kids used to have to sit around and it was, it was like a church service at my home. So the whole family was on Sunday morning? Sundays. And he read then all the Bible? All of the Bible, us and us kids. So it was, it was actually almost like you would be in church. Did he use the Finnish language then? Yeah. The Finnish? I see. So you were brought up in Finnish language then, and you didn't have any problems when you came to school, the eight room, or eight class, one room schoolhouse? That's all I had and I've done, I think I've done pretty good in my lifetime. All education I've had is eight grades. And even at Hudson's, I was a supervisor over a department for seven years and there were college graduates and stuff. I haven't done too bad, you know. I feel that I, I haven't missed the education, really. So you just, how did you get a job though? Did you have a, when I was, you didn't have a degree to show when you came into the department store. What did you tell them? I told them, I said, I told them what I've had. They hired me and they, I was, I was in selling first, you know. And they just, they knew, they knew that they just, I said, you can do it, you know. So I, I, it seems to me that education hasn't interfered in my life as far as, as far as... How, as long as you were in your home then, the Finnish language was used... All the time. Extensively. But then mother, I was surprised how mother learned English when I was a kid. And she could even read the paper English, you know. She did? Mm-hmm. Mother did. Your father, did he knew more English than your mother? Well, my dad could get along with, you know, in town, you know, with the business people and stuff. He, he got along fine. But I don't remember dad reading, but mother, mother could read the paper. I know she did. Mm-hmm. When he was reading out of the Bible, did you have to take turns, then, your kids around the table? To read your part too, or... No, he just... He read then. He read and... And you were singing. And he was so special on Sunday. I miss that when I even came to Detroit. Dad never smoked. Oh, he did chew tobacco, but Sunday he always smoked a cigar. And that smell of cigar to me seemed, seemed like it, it was Sunday. Isn't that something? It was special. He always smoked a cigar on Sunday. But never, never during the week. That's Sunday. And I, it was, when I first came to Detroit, I really, I miss that smell of cigar. Did you start to smoke later in life? I have never smoked. Never smoked. How about your brothers now? Did they take after your dad, the smoking? I don't remember my brother smoking. I, there's nobody in our family that's, I think one of the sisters smoked at one time, but, or two of them, but Charlie never smoked. He never smoked? No. Or Paul, he never smoked. No. Charlie never smoked. Did they take a drink occasionally? Oh, sure. A sweet. You should ask me that. Well, I like an honest opinion. So this was not the temperance place then? Huh? This was not the temperance retreat then? I should say no. Oh, my goodness. I wish that you could be here sometimes for our doings. Have you ever been here to our doings? No. Closing out party. Oh, it's so nice. You know, that's when everything falls up and, you know, people that been stay. Really nice. And Edward Erikson drives around his car then. No, no, no. Oh, no, no. They give him a ticket for sure. Oh, no. I thought they made him the sheriff for one day. Oh, no. You got to give the guy a break. It means well, I guess, to Eddie. Eddie had a nice wife, Violet, yeah. Violet was real nice. She died of cancer. She was of Irish background, wasn't she? I think so. She was from Chicago. Violet was very nice. No, Eddie does well. He cooks for himself. So he seems to be one of the men that he survives all the women around here. He beats you up. You're afraid of him. 50 years or no, he must still be walking around there, keeping track of people. Oh, God, that struck me funny. Oh. So you could take a drink then up here. It was not against the law. There's nothing in the bylaws then, nor drinking. Gee, I don't think this place would have anybody living here. You see wild animals running around. No, but this is not the rule over all the suites. And all the suites you have met, they always take the drink. Oh, I would say that, but I mean, gee, you gotta have your medicine. You think it's good? Yeah. Oh, no, they don't indulge that. They're just sociable, you know. Maybe that's why they die so young, though. I mean, if they drink a little bit less. The ladies, no, they don't drink as much as the men, though. Well, 75 isn't young, do you think? Who? If you die 75. No, no, well, this is a good age, but I mean. I'm quite sure Eddie takes a beer now and then. So it doesn't hurt. 86 or 87. Running on 90 for this one. It's probably good for you. They had crayfish parties up here, too? Crayfish? No. How about seastroming? Oh, don't talk about seastroming. You can't be in Norland with no seastroming. I think the one time somebody brought some from Sweden and they had to go in the garage and open that can. Sitting there eating and with a clothespin on your nose. So they brought it up here? How do they allow you to bring it over here? Well, you have to ask your. If they take it away from you, I mean, the customs, all you have to do is open the can and they'll run. Did you like it? No. But your husband and. Well, sure, Hilding and all that. That was great. They were brought up on. Oh, but that's worse than Limburger cheese. Oh, my God. They put the best stamp on sweets. Oh, but I remember, I remember, I don't know who brought it over and. Oh, you can open it up in the house. It could be a divorce. Somebody didn't flush the toilet. They tried everything. Oh, God. Well, anyway, now that's. Do they have any other questions? Oh, God. Well, anyway, now that's. Do they, do you like it? Yeah, I can eat it, but in our part of the country, that doesn't appeal too much to us. No. But Norrlanding, they always like that. I think they like that more than Lütfisk. I don't, I don't really care for Lütfisk, but once a year is all right. If you've got nice, a nice, rich sauce to put over it. And what we had was boiled potatoes and, but that was a must. Christmas Eve, we had Lütfisk. But it's hard to find and it's so darn expensive. That's right. Oh, you're like eating gold. I think it was eight dollars a pound or something. Everybody must be eating Lütfisk. Everybody must be eating it, as it is in demand. Yeah, what I really liked was that test, that slaw salmon that Charlie used to eat, with lots of fillets like that, and he'd turn him over and slice it up that on hardtack. That's good. Oh, so hardtack is also a good treat for the fin, though. Yeah, I brought some from up north, that round package, and that's, that's the blue, the blue cover on it, it says wasa. That's the best. You don't have a bakery up north, up in Penoso, that bakes thin crisp bread? Uh, I don't think so. I don't think so. I don't think so. You have that in Rockford, here? No, no, that is all imported. Oh, is it? Nobody bakes it here. Oh. No, that's all imported. They used to have it on a, on a rod like that and put them all in there. Oh, you had it in your home? No, Charlie used to tell me that they had it. Oh, yes, yes. In Sweden. But you didn't have it up in your home? No. No, no, no. I think he had a picture he showed me one time, how they used to dry them. Well, they lasted long, you could hang them up there and they would dry, you know, from the heat from the, from the stove. So there was a lot of similarities then, you, you married. In other words, with the food, there was no difference. No, no, no. You liked some food? Everything, everything. Oh, sure. Swedish meatballs and. And a little echo. Lingonberries. Lingonberries. Are they hard to get? Are they hard to get? I think they're kind of hard to get here now, hey? Yes, I believe it is. Yeah, it's a different, they put too much dark sugar in it, you know. Yes, it's so sweet. Yeah. Too much, it's cheaper than the lingonberries. Oh, I'd rather, I'd rather than have cranberries. Yes, yeah, because then you can get them fresh and. Right. I get the cooked, fresh cranberries, like for the holidays, cooking myself, you know. That's, that's good. So you got to go see Carl Johns or he wasn't here, hey? No. Doris, you're going to. So you had, what do they discuss now in the meetings, like your husband, he was the president for 18 years. Was it easy to be a president of all sweets or was there any difference? He, he liked, Charlie was fair, you know, and he, he don't, he wasn't that hot headed that he'd blow up, you know, he was, he, you know, I think that they just. Because I, there must have been different opinions when people move in, they like have things like this way and this way. Oh yeah, but when they at the meeting, that's what it is for that. Yeah, air it out. Air it out, you know. Was there hot? Well, sometimes, you know, sometimes it kind of drags, you know, they can't get it. Well, then they can come back next day. So anyway, but more or less the meetings, they kind of, you know. They have meetings every, every month? Well, the board of directors. Yeah, every month. Every month. And then the yearly meeting is usually in the first part of June here, or the club. Oh, the yearly. For all the members. Then they vote for the president and the vice president and, you know, members vote. So do you have members living in Detroit now that's coming up to have a meetings? Oh yeah, all the members don't live out here. No, they have their homes, you know, like Carl and Mary Bengtson, Pete's son has in Livonia, his home and he's got his, you know, place here and, and like we used to too, you know, we had our home and we just come weekends here, you know. But evidently then when they retire, you know, more or less. Then they move up here. Yeah, like Carl Anderson here building that nice new building there in the corner. Of course, he's still a young man, you know, he probably has six years or so to go. And then, well, I'm quite sure eventually they'll move here. Otherwise they wouldn't build a nice place like that. How about the children? Are they coming back and taking over the parents' home then? Because you can't sell it to anybody else than the... No, more or less. Yes, I'm quite sure that that's the way it... I know there's a man and a wife, Oster's. Harry Oster, they both died and I understand the son is going to take over the membership. And Esbeth Dela, you know, across the way, her daughter took over hers. But she remarried, Ruth remarried and they hardly ever come, but Ruth has a daughter that takes care of the place. She comes here every weekend. In fact, she'll be out here tomorrow. So they keep an eye on it and follow up the traditions. Yeah. Yeah, well, keep it... She's about 26, I think, and she cuts the lawn and she's working, but she takes care of it. And you don't have any wild parties like they had in the 30s? Huh? There were no such wild parties as in the 30s. Well, I don't know where they were. There was another thing I was going to ask you about, the bachelor club. Uh-huh. What kind of group was that? Were they always secluded out there? No, that was a good group. It was... But no married men could walk on there? No, it had to be bachelors. Charlie never belonged to the bachelor club, but you could go there. They used to have some parties there, but they were all this Karl Lundquist. Of course, he went back to Sweden and I guess he's passed on now. He was one of the bachelors and there was Ernie Grandel. He lives in California. Of course, he married. And Oscar Ostholm, he went to California and he married over there, met a lady. But they were, first, when you know, they were a good group. And they had their own little clubhouse? Huh? They had their own little clubhouse? Yeah, it was a bachelor club. But it's gone now, it's already... All of them, one of the members, there's club members now bought it. Oh, I see. So the house is still there? Oh yes, it's down the hill over there. Oh yes, uh-huh. Haskell, Lyle Haskell bought that place. But years ago it was called a bachelor club. That was kind of cute, bachelor club. Boy, the Swedes wait quite late to get married, you know that? Most of them. They have to wait. Well, it seems to be that sometimes they have to wait. I don't know, they don't have to wait, but it seems to me that more or less they're... Are they afraid to get married or what? Well, maybe the depression time was hard to get married in those... It's a commitment, you know, like... You know, like the 30s, I think they held off on their marriage because rough times. Rough times, yeah. I mean, to be too... But even now, both man and wife has to work, really, if you want something, you know. There's very few couples that both of the man and the wife don't have both work. Especially... This place now was 360 acres when they bought it. And there was a farmer, Bron, that sold it to the Swedes. Uh-huh. Why didn't somebody come around here to settle down as a farmer? Because you rent out most of the land to a farmer now. You rent out some of the land to a farmer. Well, my brother-in-law farmed here. He was a dairy farmer here for eight years. He was? Your brother-in-law? My brother-in-law's sister were on this farm for eight years. Uh-huh, so they were... They had cattle and they sold the milk and... Oh, I see. And, of course, the fields were all kept up, you know. And he rented the land then from the... From the club. From the club. Was that during the 40s or... No, that's... That was in the 60s, I think. And what happened after that? Well, when they left, they went to Sandusky. He bought out another farm over there. Oh, I see. But no Swedes have been... Yeah, there was Strand. He was a Swede. He was... He lived on the farm there and farmed there, too, you know. They had one son. And then there was somebody else after Strand. I don't know what his name was. But the farmhouse looks nice now. They've painted it and it looks real nice. They had 360, did you say? How many acres? Yeah, somebody mentioned 360 acres. Yeah, I'm quite sure there's that much, yeah. There's a lot of people in Lopere. This place has been here over 60 years. A lot of people don't even know about this place. They're probably afraid of the sign, though, that says no trespassing. Yeah, but it's good in a way, you know, that it's private. It's a good thing. Yeah, it's a good thing. So they just figure... What do they think it is, then, if they hear about a bunch of Swedes living here? Well, it's a private country club, you know, a Swedish club. Maybe they think it's a nudist camp. I think they do have some around here. I'm quite sure they do. I was going to show you a pic. Maybe I shouldn't even show it to you, that I got through the mail. It looks just like the Vasa Country Club. Right, that came through the mail. Finland Society. No, that's the Finland Society. Yeah. They sent a photographer in here. That's not you sitting there, though. Imagine sending something like that nude through the mail. You being of Finnish descent now, why haven't you introduced the sauna? Over here, you mean? Yeah. Gee, I don't have sauna. Never thought of that. No, I don't know if anybody has a sauna here. He might have a sauna over there, that white house there, with the pillars, you know, he's fixing. He's Finnish and she's Swedish. He might have a sauna in that place. But they've never been discussed over here. Not really, not really. Because you've got the wood and everything, and you heat it up, and you have the lake to jump into. Yes, yes. But it's never been discussed. Uh-uh, nobody has never mentioned about a sauna. Was it common to have a sauna up in the Upper Peninsula? Oh, yes, because they didn't have... You had a community sauna, though. Or you had it on the farm? Oh, we had a separate little outcab and sauna on the... On the farm? On the farm. Oh, sure. Did most of the Finnish people have that? Everybody had a sauna. That was... They didn't have bathrooms like, you know, tubs and things, you know. They had a lavatory and stuff, but they didn't... That's how you took your baths. Well, it's better than the bathtub. That's right. You had the birch whips, too, to... Oh, yes. They were always brought in fresh for a Saturday night bath, you know. And then sometimes people, you'd invite neighbors to come over and have a sauna, and then they'd have coffee after, like a little celebration. It was on Saturday, then? More or less Saturday. Well, they would heat it during the week, too, if the men worked in the fields, you know. But it seems like Saturday night was a special night for sauna. And my mother used to have her washing machine and do her laundry in the sauna, because they had like a dressing room, and then they had a wood stove, you know, one of those old-fashioned wood stoves that she heated the water, you know. Because everything, all the clothes used to be boiled in that copper boiler, you know, years ago. They don't do that anymore. No. She made all these rag rugs, you know. My mother was a great weaver. You know, on the looms. Mm-hmm. Yeah, she... our floors were all covered with rugs. You wonder how they get time to do all this. Oh, she... With eight kids. Oh, she... her hands were always going. We never... she knitted all our, you know, mitts and chooks and scarves and... And I remember her knitting in lamplight, you know. We didn't have electricity. I remember when no electricity, and... machine was that, a little machine, you know. Thing was always going. Ha! Did you learn to do this also, to weave and knit? I do an awful lot of handwork. All these pictures are that I've done. All these... then, there. And I... I do all kinds of work like this. Oh, I see. So your hands have been busy, too. Yeah. And I make... I make dolls. Oh, I see. You dress them up. I make them. You make them from scratch? I make them from scratch. I see. What do you do with those? They're just like little babies. Yeah. What do you do with them? Well, I make them for friends. You give them... Ha! Cute. Hobbies. To keep busy. Yeah, if you don't have any hobbies or... or... I see you still living. You got that. The more busier you are, and your mind working, days go, and you're happy. But see, you gotta have a hobby. Yeah. I see. You gotta have a hobby. Yeah. And you're happy, but see, you gotta... you gotta have hobbies. But you had in your own mind when your husband, Charlie, passed away, you know, I suppose you got a lot of recommendations and suggestions what to do and so on. No, no, I... But you had your own plan to... Oh, yes....to cope with. I... I was glad that I... that I had a car and I drove. My car is my best friend. If I... if I wanna go someplace, I... I go in the car and I... I go. I can go to La Peer and spend four or five hours and... and... and spend my day, you know. And I... I know just about all the salespeople and... and... and people in town, you know, and... I can... I... I don't... I don't... I don't see how people get lonesome. I don't. But you... Just in your frame of mind, you know, that you're... you gotta... you gotta think young. Keep up with the times. Well, you are still young, though. Huh? You are still young, though. I should have given you the year I was born. Well, the main thing you have the health and... Huh? The main thing you have the health... Yeah, I come from a healthy... I come from a healthy family. My mother was 86 when she passed away, but dad was 72, but he got that miner's... Lung? Lung, you know, what they get from working in the mines. He never received a pension after his work days were ended. Oh. It was all his life and... But my oldest brother, he never married. He's 70... he's 72. Oh my gosh, you should see the hair. Oh my gosh, you should see the... he does... he makes these wood splitters, you know, that split the wood, you know, and he has a lot of... a lot of wood and a lot of... that's what he... he keeps everybody in town in Akhnaghan in wood for the winter, you know, they come and pick it up and he has all this business. Besides, he... he repairs things, you know, for everybody. He... he's a mechanic and he's a... He's just busy all the time and he... you saw that picture how nice he keeps the place, lounge and everything. Just keeps it up nice and which makes us feel good that the home place is kept up, you know. So you go back to location to visit? Oh yes, oh every summer I have gone. Every summer. In fact, my sister Katherine and her son and the two children were up there last week. Oh, he gets a lot of company in the summer, you know. We're a big family. I think there's about 50 of us when we get together. So you are very close then, you come together? We're close-knit family, very close. Yeah. A lot of... yeah.