 October 7, 1987, together with Erik Åkerlund, he was born on June 20, 1984 in Ransjö, Hälsingland, Sweden. Ransjö, R-A-N-J-O-U, Ransjö. And you came to America in 1913? Yes. So your father was working with Per Åkerlund? Yes, he was a young man from Norskogsvist, a young man from a sewing factory. I see. Yes. And how many children were there in the family? Ten. Ten children? How many boys? Six. Six boys and four girls? Yes. Yes. And were you one of the younger or the older? I was born in 1913, but I have a sister older than me. And she is still alive? She is still alive, yes. In Sweden, what is her name? Marta Persson. Marta Persson. Does she live in Ransjö or? No, she lives in Bollnäs. In Bollnäs. Yes. So when you grew up, you went to school, did you also start working at the sewing factory? Huh? Did you also start working at the sewing factory when you grew up? No, I worked for my uncle on the farm there. I see. Yes. He lived all the way there? Yes. Yes, just over from there. Was that your uncle? Yes. Yes. Was that after you were confirmed? Yes, I moved in before I was confirmed. I see. Yes. I usually have two girls, but I had a girl who would help me to clean the yard and stuff. And you were with her as a boy? Yes. And you had to do all kinds of things to help her? Oh yes, yes. Out in the woods maybe? Driving home, yes. I drove home with her. I saw her there. How old were you then? 12, 13 years old? I was 14 when I moved there. I was there for five years. I see. And that's when you started? Yes. And your uncle helped you? Oh yes, he did. Did you learn how to milk? Yes. Didn't you? But I did it when I was in America. But in Sweden you didn't do it? No, not at the time. It was the pigs who did it? My uncle was a farmer here. He was a farmer here. And that's your uncle? Yes, he was my father's sister. And he was married to your uncle. How long did your uncle stay in Oslo? I think it was in September that I went to Skottbruff to work at the sugar factory. The sugar factory? In Sweden? Yes, in Skottbruff. But how long did you stay in Sweden? I went there in 1913. So long? Yes. So you went to read to the priests when you were at your uncle's? Yes. But you had a lot of fun with the pigs and danced in the evening? Yes. There were a lot of people in Helsingland. Yes, there were. It didn't help. So you learned to dance after you had... I wasn't very good at dancing. I came over here in......1943 or 1943. So what made you emigrate? Who told you to go to America? Well......I was in a place where the government was going to go into the army. Oh, I see. And that was the first world war that started? Yes, right after that. So you wrote to the king? But......here in 1918, I was left in the army here. So I was a camp dog there. But at that time I was on the road there. And I had trouble here. I didn't see how anything was left of me here. What was that for? Did you get hurt? I had a whooping cough when I was......three, four years old and it pulled the eye sideways. Did you see that? Of course, if it had been locked, no, it would have straightened up. I was going to an adventure booth. Oh, for good, I talked to an OMA specialist and he said that......as long as you see good reason here, you won't bother with that. But if something happens inside here, you won't touch a thing. But they're getting better now, better than they used to be. I can say, yeah, they're getting better now. So when I was in the camp dog there......the......after I got out of the camp, they found a concealed battalion there. And I was walking on the road, they said, promise to go back on the road, or they would give me......they'd shot me. Did you tell them that you couldn't see on the island? No, they couldn't find that out themselves. They thought I was putting on something, they tried......servile ways there, you know. But then when the......Kaise Willem found out I was an army, he surrendered, you know. So I quit fighting then. You scared them, huh? You with the bad left eye. So when you were a young boy and you coughed so much, then there was cheek whoosh that you had? Yeah. So the eye went crooked? Yeah. So you had a bad......bother with whooping cough? Yeah. But if you go back now......you......did you have money then so you could buy your ticket in Sweden? No, no one could send me ticket. From where? From Nebraska? Yeah, from Nebraska. You did? Yeah. So what happened then? Did you make a little trunk for yourself to pack down the things you needed, or... What did you bring now, with you? Oh, just... One suitcase and one little handbag I didn't bring to Nebraska, no. No? Yeah, just... What did your parents say now? Papa and Mama? Well, they... The oldest son, wasn't they? They know that......they thought they had better chance to make a living here and everything, so... And I've been pretty good at sending them on home to Sweden, yeah, yeah. They are... They told you to come back after a few years, so did you tell them to go... I went home and visited one time, yeah. Oh, you did. So... How did you leave now? You took the train to......Gothenburg? Yeah. And then... Do you remember the boat you went on from Gothenburg to... Hull, England. Hull. And then I took the train to Liverpool. And then I took the boat to Liverpool. I went to Boston, Massachusetts, to land there, you know. Do you remember the name of the boat? Mmm... Uh... It was a Franconia. I couldn't... I wouldn't be talking about that now, no. Franconia. I think we landed in Boston... May the 18th, if I'm not mistaken, 1913, yeah. In the fall? No, May the 13th. Oh, May the 13th. Yep. So that was your first trip outside your home? Yeah. How did you feel then when you come on the boat there? You... Oh... And Sweden... Uh... Was in the horizon. When we left Gothenburg, yeah, it was so nice, you know, dancing up on the deck, we had a good time. And next morning, when I got up, it was me and two girls, we stopped for breakfast, because I was sick. Oh boy, boy, you ought to see the mess on them. Them days, you don't have no private room, there were men putting their arms around the boat, and they'd shake the boat, you know, and they'd just get the troll up, and it wasn't all for nothing. But I was looking as hard as I could get. So you didn't get seasick? No, I lived... Seasick, throw up, throw up, but the wind was so bad, so they chased us down, so we couldn't be up on the deck there. So they'd take up all them... put the cans over them... what do you call them? Holes, you know, where they keep the water, and they'd put water over the deck there, so it was awful, yeah. It was bad, but you were not sick, though? No. You were able to eat every meal? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So when you came to England, then you came on a train? So they trained them from Hull to Liverpool. How long did it take? Yeah, it took very long. Three hours? Three hours, I remember, I think. But we came into Liverpool in... Did you have anybody with you from... No, no, no. You were a stranger? Yeah, I was a stranger. I couldn't get on a boat there, so they had to take me. But there were more Swedes on it, though? Oh, yeah, yeah. A lot of immigrants? Yeah, there was a lot of... Then there was a whole bunch of them, and there was two, three of them been over here before, and they... I don't know what it was. They stuck together pretty good, I remember. One of the girls went to... Fredrik, I was here. Fredrik? Yeah. They were on the same boat? Yeah, yeah. Have you had contact with her after that, or... I think we... I heard from her a couple of times, and I started moving around there, and I just... I just sort of said, I don't know what happened to her. So, then you came to Liverpool. Was it... There's a big town? Yeah, yeah. A lot of commotion there? I just... If you were to run, looking and seeing, they had some raincoats. And I didn't have any raincoats. I think I had an old overcoat with me, but... You could put a good raincoat for three dollars and a half there. Oh. I recall that, you know. How much money did you have with you now? Well, I had a little spending money, and they spoke to me, $25, and it was anything, you know. They spoke to... showed them that it was $25, and a ticket to the destination there. But you got that money back, though. You only showed it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I just showed it, you know, that it wouldn't be too trouble for the country. I just took care of it. Who told you to bring $25 to show? Did they tell you that in Gothenburg? Yeah, they told me that when I... Oh, yes, that was in... In the day when I got the ticket and made the arrangement for the boat I was going on that time, you know. Uh-huh. So the ticket was specified there, but they specified where they are to leave it, you know. And your destination in Nebraska, where was that? Lousville. Lousville. Where is that? But... 2,000 miles south of Omaha there. There it is. You got a big cement plant down there. Oh. Oh, a big cement plant. They used to have cement down there. Oh. So when you arrived in Boston, though, you had to go through the custom. There was no problem? No, there was no problem, no. Did they look at your eye? No, no. They didn't? We supposed to be examined in Sweden before we left there. Yeah. And we got the tank to... Vexen is a small... Vexen is a small... Yeah, for the shoulder, yeah. So that was all done? Yep. So you passed through the custom and on the train then to Chicago? Yeah, on the New York Central. How were you able not to order food on the train when you got hungry? Well... I don't know. You cannot... We always had somebody... We know where the folk is talking to. They help you? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh. But you didn't know any English? No. Oh. I remember here... Here... We took the train or... Chicago, I see. I don't know, about noon or something. I forgot. And they stopped in Gatesboro, Illinois. They had the restaurant so you could see in the deep of day, you know. But when you was going to... There was some kind of pie or something. But they look out and the train... They don't know what to get the train that was looking down there. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. You had your experiences. So when you came in then to Omaha, did your uncle meet you then here or what happened? Well... It was a long trip, though. It was the hardest. It took you three days from Boston? See, that was on Saturday night. Saturday night to come to Omaha here. And after we left, really go, I went to sleep on the train. It was late in the evening, you know. And I didn't know for sure if we'd get off in Omaha. I thought I had to get off in Omaha. No, Luther was supposed to be in Omaha there. I guess I went to sleep and... I had my four o'clock in the morning. The conductor woke me up with a hundred-seven ticket. And it was a fair mountain in Boston here. But, oh... 60 miles west of Lincoln there. So he stopped the train and he helped me pay the suitcase and make the way for there. And it was a happy day. And night, up there in the deep, it was open all night. So I showed it up there, my ticket there, and he pointed out on the card there I had to get a train to Earsop in the morning. And that was on Sunday, see. So then I come into Lincoln, and I had to change train there and take another train for Ashton, Nebraska. And I had to change train from Trudulsk to Dunflund on Sunday. So I had to stay over in Ashton there Saturday night. So you couldn't talk to anybody? No, but... I had to go up to Ashton, I see some... Dunefall is there, and... I guess I went up to talk to him. And I said, look, it was sweet. It was so good, and the bridge came there, and the bridge over Patshugge. And... And they took me down to the little hotel I was staying at, and they paid me about a dinner, and I was there for nightfall or something. So I had a course of mutt, two of them here in the morning, and they laid round. They booked it now, but it was too far away. It was a room there at the hotel, and it was all for nightfall. So they helped you? Yeah, yeah. Oh, you had been on the road then for how many days in Boston? Four days? Five days maybe? Oh no, we left Boston on... Friday evening, I guess. Coming to... Coming to Chicago on... I don't know. I stayed there for a long time, I guess, the first four years, and we took the train there. And then you took another six hours from Chicago to Omaha? Yeah, yeah. But then I got home, and I stayed in the train, went to dinner, and I went to sleep, and I couldn't look around. They never took me off this. It was a good thing you woke up? Yeah. So I got an extra ride there, but just because... And you didn't understand what he said? No, he... He shook his head there, and then I know he pulled the cord on the train, and the staffers were just cleaving the depot at Fairmont there. And he was... He and my wife, we had to carry the suitcase and make in the depot there. So he was kind of nice about it anyhow. But they should have taken me off in Omaha by right, I guess. And I had to wait in Omaha for the train to Luton, you know. So how did you get in contact now with your uncle and aunt there? Were they worrying about you, what happened to you? Oh, the... The fella, he was the tech, he was the swede there in Luton, and he had some kind of a business there, so... And he... The steamer company, Nudels was him, when I was coming. Oh, I see. Yeah. So my uncle and his wife and my cousin, they were standing there meeting me when I came in that night, and I saw them in the morning. Had you seen them before? Well, yeah. They were 18 years old when they left, and they left in 1901, you know. It was... 1901? Yeah. So I was 7 years old then, you know. So I remember, yeah. Yeah, yeah. 1901. So your uncle here now, he was also a Swede? Oh, yeah, yeah. Had he done his military service in Sweden, where he left? Yeah, yeah. He did? Yeah, yeah. In 1901? Before that? Yeah, he was 13 years old when he came over here. Oh, that old? Yeah. He did on a farm there, and then he moved up to... Auckland, in Bershka, was on a farm there. Was he married to your aunt in Sweden? Yeah. Oh, yes. So they had children, and they lived on this farm? Yeah. And then the... The darling, she was... She was 40 years older than me, and then Margaret had a son, and they was 11 years younger than his sister, was 11 years between them. And then my auntie died in 1916. And then he left to move away from Lusitania and move up to Auckland, in Bershka, lived on a farm there. And then he left the farm there in 1923, because they had a son. He went to the University in Lincoln, and... He... Oh, what do you call it? He was... He makes signs of his own business in Chicago for years and years. Sign business? Yeah. Oh, I told you, he... It was in the Geographical Magazine, and they had maps there, and they changed the maps all the time, and he... He made new maps all the time for them, and... And he had his name on them. B.A. Benson. Ben Albert Benson, yeah. And he retired from Chicago here, and... I can't say it, it must be... Is he still living? He's still living. He's got a half-sister there. Listen, Lincoln, I talked to her once or twice, so I think he's living. So he is... He was born in 1901, so he is... He is six years old now. So when you came out to your uncle here on your end, you've been on the farm in Sweden. How different was it not to be a farmhand here in Nebraska? Oh, it was quite a bit different to have... What did you have to do now when you started? You started right away to work for your uncle then? Oh, yes. And you lived with him? Yeah. Just the first summer there. And just... Then after the... Sugar factory closed down there, but... Well, it must have been a little after Christmas or something, I forgot. But I went back to see my uncle there for a couple of weeks, and I went to the farm there. And then, just close by there, there's a fellow fielder, a fielder, two, three, he had a fielder there, a fielder, and he was in the bunch of hoes. And he... He needed somebody there, but I forgot the man who was working for him. What happened to him? But then I went to work for him there, and I worked there for... Autumn, long there. So you had a team of horses then, and drove up with all the corn and feed and everything? Oh, yeah. Four horses. I planted corn there and everything, and had four horses, and it was kind of different from Sweden, all right. How was it in the wintertime, though, compared to Sweden, where you came from? You had the woods, you know, protect you from the blowing and the wind, and it was windy and cold, and it was kind of misery down there. There was nothing there, feeding the cattle. Well, there wasn't a lot of wind in the spring, and yeah, when it was raining, and mud there. Of course, we had a row of boats on, but I got a bend up, half of the anchor there, and I had a boat on, you know, and you might notice the mud there. So mud was worse than winter? Oh, yes. Yeah, in the spring, yeah. It was a good year, you know. And... So how long did you work then on the farm? I worked for... I worked in the second year, I worked for a Swedish pilot, Suresh Kulak, sort of over there in Sweden, so I worked there. But then a fall came, I went up to Scottsdorf again, and I worked for a sugar factory, that was in 1915. Where was that located? Scottsdorf, in the Basque Country. Oh, Scottsdorf, all the way west? Yeah, about 400 miles from here. Yeah, as close to Wyoming? Yeah. Yeah, it was just... only about 30, 35 miles from Wyoming. Why did you move out there? Did you have some friend of yours? Well, no, it was... So I followed some old guys, then up to the fall, you know. In Sweden? Yeah, oh yeah, yeah. So did you join any church here when you were in Suresh, going down there? No, but the... they had a Swedish-looking church out the country there. I forget from New Orleans, and... and let's see, there was a Swede there, and his wife was dead, but he had a daughter there, about 18 years old. And she... they had a car, and they picked me up and sent me on... if I wanted to go to church, I took the church, and a lot of times they sent me in, there was often those people. Was there a church in Suresh? Yeah, out in the country. Valparaiso? Oh, let's see, yeah, but what's the name of it? It was just about... It was a country church? Yeah, but three, four miles out of Suresh, you could never ask for the... Did the pastor preach in Swedish? At that time? Part of time, yeah. Part of time? Mm-hmm. And Suresh, the... the father's name was Ernst Svansen. He started a big story, had all kinds of functions, and he... well, he died, but his son's around now, and he got an awful big story about where the people come from all over New York. You mean down in Suresh? Yeah. And there was a Swede, Svansen? Yeah. What kind of story is that? Oh, furniture. Oh, furniture? All the radio and everything like that, you know. Yeah, they had a hundred... they had a big... built a big story about the country, and it seemed like the business... had good business, too. So how was the time in the work out in Skotsblad? How long did you stay there? Well, last time I stayed there till... was he... I worked on the... uh... in the winter on that work, and I worked on a beet dump. They dumped the farms hard. Dumped this for whole teams, you know. So there was a big race... Yeah, yeah....in the growing fields out there. Yeah, there were sugar beets. And me and another guy, we had to dump them baggage, you know. They had a chain horse that pulled them up, and they were on a handle, so you dumped them in a pit. And that was your job? Yeah. And I remember... on the day they were sown, the beets were bad, so... I was a bit sore up for work there, and... and the monk around there, he didn't tell us anything, but down in the clock, the foreman, he said that... you'd better go home, because I don't think you... be the harming into the... And just as we... me and my partner were going, through the tanker shop, we had a... we had a bunch of coals, you know, a tanker. And the superintendent there, a German fellow by the name of August Heldt, he was the boss for all the outside work. And they had a big farm there, of course, by there, too, you know. And he said, very sweet, where are you going? So Mr. Stoltz and his homies had run from... I said, wait a minute, so I said, I think I'll just go and get a little lube here. So we took a job at the warehouse. And it was steam heating, so it was hot, but I mean it was full of night there. And they gave me, wrote down... file numbers on the paper there. They had all kinds of boxes of sugar beet seeds, you know, stiff with cane, you know. And he told me to see if we can find a box for him. So I wrote all afternoon, and looked and looked and looked, and looked, and couldn't find them the next morning. And still snowing, the farms couldn't hold the beets in, so I went back in there about nine, ten o'clock. That... The chief of the town, the chief of the town, came in and said, sweet, have you found a box for me? No, I'm sorry, I can't find them. I don't know how to enter in there. I know they're well in there, but you can look for them, he said. Oh, look at how nice, they could pay me, you know. It was the nicest thing I think I've ever done, at that time, you know. You can look for them, so I got paid a hundred half, you know, if we only... Continues on the next slide. Next slide. Site two, continuation with Erik Åkerlund, Oman, Nebraska, site two. So this guy, the foreman, what kind of nationality was he? Was he a Swede? No, no, no, I don't know. Were you the only Swede out there? No, there was some farmers there, but most of the farmers was... I don't know what they call them, Russian Germans, I think it was German people living in Russia, and they came over here. And there was quite a few Japanese and quite a few Mexicans working in the beech fields that day, you know. Were they able to raise beeches in the dry climate? Irrigation. Irrigation? Oh, yes, yes. At that time? Yeah. Was there pipes that laid out in the ground, and were they overhead in the spring? Yeah, they had... They had a canal up on the high ground, and they had a buffer north of the valley there, and then they rolled down to ditches on the farm, and the farmers could work in the wrong water there. So they came out in every furrow then? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you had to work quite a bit. But I never done any of that, except in the farm here in the winter, you know. You were never on the farm? I mean on the ranches there. You were only in the factory? Yeah. So after that job there, you went to Omaha again? Yeah, we came into Omaha in... 1st of March in 1916 there, and the ship... then he wanted to come back here. He got that. He said he was going to put it to work right away then. But then the bunker on here, and... I stayed on railroad. And you rented a room then, or did you go to... We had... Buck's Coffee, the head of the bunker, had beds in there. The railroad supply was there? Yeah, the ferries were there. So we had to move around, you know. Were you what you call a rallare, a gandit dancer, or what? Yeah, I was in the British military department. We maintained all the buildings in the British, yeah. There was a whole war going on in those days. And in those days, they said kind of war, but they had machines, and you were on the rift, and in those days, they would do it themselves. How did you eat then? In restaurants, or had you... For a while, they ate in restaurants, but then we moved on to the... Got a raid around... They got a dining hall, and they found a raid around the dining hall. So you had a right on the premises then? Yeah, yeah. So we moved on here from Pacific Junction to Lincoln, and then we went up on the east side to Sioux City, and from Sioux City to Omaha, there was all territory. And the railroad at that time, there was a busy commodity. Oh, yeah. It's the only way you could travel in those days. A lot of people were flushing through Omaha at that time. Yeah, them base... The Omaha stockyards, they had the biggest business of any stockyard in the country, because them base, all the cattle and hogs came in by raid, you know. How did it look down there at the stockyards? There must have been a tremendous noise and... Well, yeah, it was, yeah. And commotion. But no, the... The farmers, the ranchers, they came in with the cattle. Yeah, in... Yeah, along with... September, October... The bulk of all the... They had a whole train, 50, 60, 70 cars were just north of Cale, coming from Wyoming and Montana up there, coming to Omaha here. And the ranchers, they came with them then? I had some guy on in the cavalry there, yeah. Yeah, to weigh them in and get paid for it. Yeah. And how... Were you down there at the stockyards at any time, so you saw the commotion and... Well, some, not too much, not too much, no. But we had to maintain our stockyards up in the little town there, no. Oh. Over the town at the stockyards, no. Yeah, but we had to maintain... The department had to maintain the stockyards. Who took care of the switches and rails down at the stockyards? You had to do that, too? Oh, yeah. To maintain it? Yeah, the... The... The common, the common and Saxon man. Mm-hm, they took care of that. Yeah, yeah, I was in there, what do you call it? The B&B department, Bridges and Buildings. Oh. So... Were there many Swedes working at, in your department? At the time, there... The first... Folk now worked for... He was a Swede. He'd come from Sweden. And... And you would see now, there was... I worked at Bridges and Buildings. And there was three... Four fathers who were in the Swedes there then. Mm-hm. So when you came here to Omaha, did you... You had to join the Union then? I joined the Union in 19... I'd seen now... Thirty... Oh, in 1920 or something like that. Oh. Yeah. So, and they took only Union men. Nobody else could work. Huh? There was only Union men working then as railroad workers. Well, no, the... First Union had started in 1918. And we couldn't get... Fifty-three percent of the fathers started after Union, so we couldn't ever get an agreement. But that's when we settled with the... They put a hundred percent on that one, then started to get some agreements, you know, yeah. Was there a good Union? They paid you... Where are they? Benefits? Yeah. Yeah. Pension too? No, it's... At that time, there was a company... I think it was a company pensioners' union, it was for, I don't think it was over fifty dollars, that they worked there for... for over fifty years. Fifty dollars a month? Yeah. You still receive pension? No, yeah, I get... The same as social security, but they call it railroad retirement. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So how much paid were you per hour then? Forty cents an hour? When I first started, twenty-five cents. When they quit down there in 1923, I think, I lost it. A little over two dollars for a half a... No, you got more than... Eight more dollars than we did for ten dollars at the start. And that was because of the union? Yeah. We had over a hundred cents in, oh yeah. Yeah, there. The rest of it, I know I'll get to... I think I'm probably get... Eight, nine dollars, I don't know. Oh, I know. Yeah, there. How many years did you work then for the Union Pacific? Burlington. Burlington? Burlington. I worked for... I think it was in 1923 or 1923, I was in charge of... In Albany? Yeah, I was in charge of the steel factory at the time. And I had to help them to keep... Help them. See, there was two bottles of tonneau and you can, you know... Were you laid off in the wintertime? No, no. You worked all year long? Yeah. And she... Talked me to notice, said, You come and help me here, I'll give you half a profit. At the boarding house? Yeah. We used to... The company had... We don't have a lot of... Steel parts, it was a different building, This was just a building for the Christians, We didn't have any room there, you know. And... There was a man there in March 1919, And his head height was... 50, 60 men sometimes. And you could see it was so cold. And you became a partner then? Yeah. He said, I'll give you half of it for a week. Was she a Swedish lady? No. She was a Pennsylvania Dutch. Was she the one that was going to be your wife? No, no, no. No, you were not related on that basis, no? Yeah. So you started in there? Yeah, we were there. And how did you get on? I was there for about 13 months, And I saved $2,800, And I sent $200 over and home to Sweden. I see. I had to count the contenders for $200, There was a limit to send money to Sweden for some reason or other. So you sent home then to mother? Yeah, my dad there, yeah. And she had young brothers and sisters there, So I sent them home there, yeah. Did you write often to Sweden? Yeah, I had to tell them there, yeah. You did? Every month, every month, yeah. So this lady now, your companion, She was pretty good then? Yeah. And then in the summer of 1910, She decided she'd been working hard for several years, So she decided to quit, so I did quit so late. I was there, we had to tell them all to stuff their hands in, And take in what they could, And the new people took over, they had to pay us for it. But it was a hard work, but it was a good month, Long days on you. Did you put the money in the bank then? Yeah. And did you join any organizations there in Omaha at that time? Vasa or Viking? I don't know, I only worked in 1929. Vasa? Vasa in 1943. A fellow named Svon Lawson, He was elected Grand Chief here in 1929. And he was the instigator to start the Viking Ferry in Omaha, Back in 1905. So Omaha had the first Viking large west of Mississippi River. Before Iowa and Minnesota had them. So did you become an officer in the Viking then? I was chief in 1946 there, yeah. 1946? Yeah. And how many members did you have then? There was quite a few then at that time. Well... 125? No, it wasn't 100, no it was 60-70, but then it was 90%. All Sweden? It was all country Sweden. All of Sweden? And they came to meet me all the time, but now we have, We joined together with the Registrar's there in Omaha, and it's over 200 members, But you look at it, you get 35-40 people to meet in there. Chances are, yeah. I don't know. So did you join the church? No. You didn't do that? No. So when did you meet your first wife now, Phyllis Thomas, what was her name? I met her in Omaha. She was not Swedish? No. How did you meet her? Oh, I don't remember. Yeah, it was two or something like that, I made a friend of her. What year did you marry her, was it during the Depression or before? Well, it was in 1937. Oh, after the Depression? Yeah. And during the Depression, what did you work then? I worked on the railroad. On the railroad? Yeah. You were never laid off? No, no, no. I was laid off for just a couple weeks or something, I don't know. That's all? I could... So that was a good job then? Yeah, I was classified as a carpenter, you know. And when I was laid off, I could bump several guys to call and help, because it was getting a little less money, but they were all married and had a family, and I didn't have no family, I wasn't married then, so... I was on offer for a couple of weeks and they called me back there again, so I was no longer, you know. Only time I was laid off, you know. So there were a lot of people without work though? Oh yeah. It was a bad time? Yeah. And did you have any money in the bank now, when the war was over? Oh, yes, yes. Did you lose any? No, but when they closed the bank in 19... what was it, 23 wasn't it? Yeah, 23. I had $800 on a cheque in the bank down here at Preston, Nebraska. We worked from Preston all that day. Done this and we chopped there, and we had to maintain the buildings there and so on. And after a month or so, they opened up again. And you only got 15%? Back. Back, yeah. And this fella, Heather Bank there, he owned a lot of land and stuff on there and everything. And I don't know why he got in trouble like that, but anyhow. 15%? That was pretty much. Yeah, but anyhow. You see, after I got married last time, 19... I got married in 1942, and then in 1944, I think it was, or 1946, he paid us in full, of his own money. All? Yes, it was all for nice. I didn't do anything to get it all back, but now I understand what they got it all back to. That was kind of unusual, yeah. Did you own a house at that time in the Depression? No, no. You had rented? First house I bought there when I got married in 1942 was a house there in 1947, Devon. Was this the Swedish neighborhood where you live now, at that time? No, it was a cottage house, a cottage house. I bought this place in 1961. So this Emanuel Hospital was not too far from here? No, it was on 34th Street. On 34th Street? Yeah. So I got him here now. And married it? Yeah. But it was there in 1972. So there's nothing there anymore than on the Swedish... I think they all searched in the nurses' home. Still there? But the nurses lived there. I think the priestess was the main hospital down here. So your first wife now, Fee Thomas, did she die? Yeah. She died? Yeah. And you had no children with her? No. And then you married Anna Tunkrist in 1943? 42. And she was from Östergötland? Östergötland, yeah. She came over here in 1921? Yep. You had any children? No. Too late to start a family when you're 50 years old. Why should you do it? Not too old for you, though. Well, I don't know about that. She was too old? Well, it didn't happen to have any, you know. So then you bought your first house then when you married the second time? Yeah. I bought it up on... Do you remember the road from there? Yes. Do you? Yes. There where you bought the house? Red Western, yeah. And then... He wanted to expand, he wanted more pocket space. And I bought a house in Red West. West side of the border, and he needed some more pocket space. You sold it? Yeah. And I bought a car and a lot of... on a taxi, I paid a lot of money, and I got to the farm and I sold it. So you made a pretty good deal then? And I paid... 4,400 for the house or something, and it added a lot. And I got over 9,000 for 10,000 or whatever it was, yeah. So there was a better deal than the boarding house you were a companion with? Well, it took 19 years to make it. And then you bought this one here on... Yeah. And then this one, then a couple of people, all the local people here. The next neighbor, he's white, and then the whole next door white people there. And, yeah, both of them had places right there. But that was the next door here, all colored people. So when you bought this house there in 1961, there was no colored people in this area? No, no, no. They happened after then? Yeah. And now there's only three houses there with white people in. But how do you... You still live here, though? I mean, you had no problems with them, or... No, they didn't bother me, no. How much did you pay for this house in 1961? I paid 16,000, I think it was. How much can you get for it today? Well, if I would fix it up, I don't know. If it was a different neighbor, I'd get a good price for it, other than the colored people there. Yeah, but don't you think that you have to pay two to get in there, or, I mean... Oh, yeah. I think you paid. Did you get the money back, though? The neighbors here, when they moved in here, I see, I see, yeah, he... I thought that he worked for Evans London, his wife worked for him, and they were white people, you know, very, very... How much did they pay them for it? 35? I've forgotten, I just saw it there. And I think he got... He got probably over 20,000 dollars there, and sold it to black people. But you are 94 now, or 93. I don't feel this. You had no trouble to live, you take care of yourself? Well, so far. If my legs are a bit better, I'd be all right, otherwise I feel pretty good, but I can't run very fast. So the area is safe for you, though? You can walk out there any time you want? I don't go out in the street, no. You don't? No. Do you still drive the car? No. I drove the car here for, let's see, ten years. And I got a burglar alarm, you see that light there? Yes. So, when I turn at night, you know, if somebody break in, break a window or something, they set off an alarm here. And if I don't rush up here, call up the office down there, the police come up there. And the same thing, if you make some mistake and open up the door before you change the... You hear a noise? Yeah, the... Does they go into the police department? No. Well, they go to the office. Oh, I see you have a connection. Central office. If you don't call them, or they call you, they call the police. So, when you look back then, when you came here in 1913, and over the years, was it safer years ago to live in Omaha? It was quite a bit different from now, yeah. It was different? Yeah, oh yeah. People didn't bother anybody, you could walk any time of day? Yeah. But now it has changed? Now it has changed, yeah. I don't know how they got... When I got to the service, I'm thinking about it even, but I've got some friends here, you know, following in the name of Carl Lambert, who was walking in a water boat. And he's from Sweden too, you know. What was his name, Carl? Carl Lambert. Lambert, yeah. And he lives close to here? He lives up on the highway there, on the 16th, and what do you call it, the regional highway there. Oh, the regional highway, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, but you still have some of your old friends. You belong to Vasa, and you belong to the Vikings? Yeah. But you don't belong to church? No, we used to go to church in Auckland. Oh, she came from Auckland? She used to live in Auckland for years, you know. Oh, she came then from Sweden. And when did you go back to Sweden, now? 1923. 1923. I was there ten years. So what did you say to them when you came back? Did they want you to stay in Sweden, or...? No, and they didn't always come home and sneak up on them. You did? Yeah. Why? Because I didn't want to surprise them. You didn't write beforehand? No, no, no, no. So what did they say then, your mother and father? Well... Did that do you any good? Well, they didn't want me to stay. And there were about five of us in the same tent. So they weren't home? Well, my brothers and younger sister were in the tent and my older sister was home, and they were all hiding in the cellar. So that was a surprise? It sure was. So how long did you stay home then? I... Three months? Well, I stayed home for four months. June, July, August, December, yeah. And I took a train up to the city of Bord, out of Montreal, Canada. I went to Grand Tent on the river, and I took the train up to the river, and I tripped on there. And when the boat came up the river, he got stuck in ice. So, the... I was too late for a whole week there. Otherwise, I would have been home for Sweden for midsummer, but only because the dog ran off the boat. I didn't make it home for midsummer. So you're all friends now, that you have home. What kind of work did they have? Was it easy to get a job in Sweden in 1923? Did they complain about the hard times? Well, it wasn't bad. You know, there were a lot of young people who left Sweden in 1923. Yeah. It wasn't bad. The Soviet was going? Yeah. And Vasilis Pallas had a big office there. He made trash machines and everything, and had a big shop there. Yeah. And my brother-in-law, he worked there. And my brother-in-law's brother, his name was Anders Persson, and he took the first part in 90 kilometers there for 14 times out of 15 years. Oh, you mean skiing? Skiing? Yeah. What was his name? Anders Persson. Anders Persson. Yeah, he was in the news, you know. Yeah, was he one of your friends? He was the brother of my older sister's husband. Oh, I see. Yeah. Did you do any skiing when you were home? Oh, yes, yes, yes. Huh? Yeah. You were pretty good at it, huh? Well, we saw skiing, you know. You know how to do it? Oh, yeah, yes. Didn't you, when you came over here, though, you could not ski or anything, I mean, in Nebraska? I have. Didn't you long back then to Sweden and the woods and the snow? Well, not too bad, though, no. I never was so sick to bed, no. But you never belonged to any athletic club over here? No. No running or soccer or... you didn't play soccer in Sweden? No. No, only skiing? Yeah. So Anders Persson, he was pretty good? Yeah, he took the first place for the... I think it was... yeah, it was the whole... The Swedish championship? Well, I think it was for the whole Europe, I guess. And he won the Vasaloppet, too? Anders Persson. Did he go to the Vasaloppet, too? Huh? The Vasaloppet? No, no. He was on there, but there was no race or anything, no. So, politically, have you been a Democrat or a Republican? Huh? Have you been a Democrat or a Republican? I was a registered Democrat, but I don't pay attention to that. I vote for, I think, who's the best candidate. But I'm a registered Democrat, yeah. But there are a lot of Republicans here among the Swedes. Well, I don't know half and half there, we got a Republican governor now, a lady. Mrs. Orr? Yeah. Sean Ron Newsome. And the Democrat candidate was a lady, too, so I think it's about the same as the history of the United States, about candidates versus ladies. Mrs. Orr got the next, you know. I don't know. She has a Swedish background, you know.