 This is cassette three, side one, continuation with Evelyn Chell, rocker and wife. Cassette three, side one. You mentioned before, Emma, that Theodore's wife was Emma. Emma Hawkinson. And she traveled along. Did the women folk, did they have nothing to say at that time, you think, or could they say anything? I wondered about that. But you know, when you're young, you have adventure, you don't look at all the difficulties that you might meet up with. You just go. They had confidence in their husbands then to bring them to the... And I don't think, I don't think that the families, Emma's family never went farther than to Norseland. They just stayed there. I knew her two, whose sisters knew well, when I was six years old, they were two old maids. One had been a teacher and one had gone to Omaha for training. But you know, oh, Emma just had a big family, that was it, you know. And they, these old maids, they kind of hated, hated a lot of children and all this business. I don't know what it all was. But they had a brother and he lived near St. Peter also, Gibbon, Minnesota. Well, as a child, it was always something wonderful about Alabama, that was all. So you heard a lot of stories about it, and they would talk about it when they met? They'd talk about it, yes. Most vivid is that Aunt Anna dies down there in 1904. My folks had just been married then, and she left this family of, I count them over and over again, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven children, freed off that you maybe met in Minneapolis. Yes. I think he was born 1900. 1900, he was four years old. He was four years old. He barely remembers. Yes, but he stayed with my father and mother then that year before Uncle Hedward got married again. And Joseph, who became an attorney in Des Moines, Iowa, was six years old, so he would have remembered more. But Grandpa was deaf, and they freed off this, you know. He was an old man that can't hear. You just don't communicate very much about that. That's all I know, is what freed off said. Did you get to talk to freed off? Yes, I did. Wonderful man. Yes, yes. I was up in Minneapolis, but I didn't even call him. I tried one day, but I couldn't. So how did they cope now with the people living down there? What kind of people did they come into? Were they? The natives. The natives. What kind of people were they? They were not really good farmers or anything like that? No. What they did was buy land. It was cheap land. That was the one thing. And they began to plant fruit trees, peach orchards. Who told them to do that? Well, I suppose maybe that was a thing to do down there. Peaches and grapes. I remember seeing pictures of grapes. They tried different things to see how it would work out. Now, there is a lady here. I looked up her name. Mrs. Julius Alstrand. We can call her, and you could maybe go over to her, and she lived there. So she would know more than I know. All I know is these letters that came from Uncle Feder once a year or so at Christmas time. And the fact that Aunt Anna died and her body was brought up to Scandinavie Grove and buried there. And the boys, Uncle Hedward took those two little boys along out to his in-laws, grandpa and grandma. So his family, they left all of them? They all left. Then within the next year, they had left for Minnesota. And they had to travel by train. Those were long. Did they sell? Like Pastor Hedward, he didn't have any farm though. No, he had the congregation. He had the congregation. And he also took care of the railroad depot. He was paid extra for taking care of the telegraph. And they were the Fred remembers. Yes. Well, I know very little about it because he... But you made a visit down there in 1963. Yes. Then we visited Naomi. And one of Naomi's sisters was going to be buried the next day or something. So I met her sister. The turnquist, I had met Naomi's father. He came up to visit the St. Peter. And there were six girls, the turnquist girls. Well, Naomi said when her mother died, she didn't want... They were not to wear black, but they wore white dresses, these six girls. White dresses? Yes. Why? That I don't know. Maybe it was a custom down there. I don't know. To the Chinese, white is a color of sorrow. I found out the other day, James had been to a Chinese wedding and the girl, the bride did wear a white dress for the wedding, but then she had red for the reception. She had changed dresses four times. And who told Anna Turnquist's mother she died? Yes. Who told the girls not to wear white? That they should wear white? Yes. Who told them that? Well, I don't know if their mother had told them that or what. Because they were completely against Swedish customs? Well, everybody wore black for everything, confirmation and everything, way up till 1900. And weddings too? Yes, weddings too. Oh, yes. But they actually had white dresses on? Yes. That's one thing I remember. And she's buried down there in... Aunt Anna is buried in Wasika, Minnesota. But they brought her back too? Well, when she died, when Uncle Sam died, he moved north. My Uncle Sam and Aunt Anna moved north to Wasika, St. Peter and Wasika. So they're both buried there. I see. Yeah. So Mrs. Turnquist now, she's married on there now to a Turnquist? Naomi. I don't think she ever was married. So there was her maiden name then? Yes. Turnquist. Uh-huh. There was a Mrs.... one was Charlotte. I think we were at Charlotte's funeral service on our way to Florida because our son Theodore was interning at St. Petersburg that winter. That's why we went. 1963? Yes, and I wanted to see Dorothy that I'd heard about all my days. So what was your impression when you came down there to talk? Well, it was a nice little town, and I was just thrilled to see that this is where some of our relatives had lived. And we went over to Decatur to look up Uncle Theodore's grave and Aunt Anna's, and Emma's grave at Decatur. Uncle Theodore had a little coffee shop in Decatur, and some remembered him there, and they could smell his—he would grind his own coffee, you know, or roast his own coffee and sold teas. That's what he did toward the end of his life. But his boys were farmers, I think. Roy ran about a thousand acres or something. I don't know. There, Decatur? At—at Thorsby. At Thorsby? Yeah. We looked up my cousin Roy at Thorsby, but I'm sure Roy must have died by now because he had— It was like his father then. He was a speculator and buying land and— Yes. Well, he maybe took over his father's land for all I know. And he has some interesting children. There's one, Mary Emma, who lives in Madison, Alabama, and she's very much interested in the story of the family. I have heard said, but I've never met her. I've been gone out of there for over 50 years, so I don't get to get in on some of these people that come back to St. Peter to look up relatives and old places. So you have no context then with the later generation of Thorson, going to Alabama? Well— Nobody that keeps in touch with them? Not there, but I have cousins, Uncle Sam's children live in Chicago, and I have—I have lost track of them now since I got out here. Since my husband didn't drive more, I haven't—but we were to weddings of a couple of them. And there is a Florence that was born in—at Thorsby, but she, of course, is over—much over 80, and I heard she was losing her whereabouts, so I didn't—I haven't kept up with her. I did write Christmas greetings, never gotten answers, so I've just lost track of— and the brother, Sidney, her brother, Sidney, I saw more of him in Chicago, and his wife lives in Waseca. Sidney died. Uncle Sam's two children became Catholic, and that was much to our sorrow at that time, and now I was happy to see that Sidney was in church and entering into the prayers of the service at the wedding of his son when we lived there in the 60s. Yeah. Well, with the Hedberg family, they have all gone except Fredoff. That's the last one. When you visited Thorsby in 1963, did you see any of the old homesteads or buildings and houses? I saw—yeah, I saw the houses that Uncle Hedberg had built and Uncle Sam. What did they look like? Were they like the Minnesota buildings? Oh, they were just elegant, big homes with a lot of—well, you see the 1890 architecture, you know, there were steeples and— How could they afford it, though, I mean, being pioneers? They must have done well, however they did it, I don't know. So they looked kind of Southern then? Oh, they were big houses like you would see one over on the corner in East State. They had turrets built up and big porches and—yeah. Oh, I see. This Mrs. Ostrand, she can tell you—I'll have to call her up and see if you can—she can tell you— She's not related to you at all? No, she's not related at all, just a friend of the—of Naomi and some of the others there. I haven't seen her for—oh, it was when my husband could drive that we were over at their home. See, my husband came down with Alzheimer's, so he was out of it for about, you know, five, seven years. So we couldn't do much then. He lost his ability to think or speak much. But he was home here until he died one night. He died in his sleep one night. The church, was this still standing, the Concordia Lutheran Church, the Swedish one down there in Norse Bay? I don't know how long, but I suppose they had moved out. You see, all they had— They moved out, but do you remember if the church was still standing? The church was still standing there, but I think the Lodge or something had taken it over, or a Methodist or somebody. Somebody had—so the church was still there when we were there. It was a nice little church. How they ever got lumber together to build a church, you just wonder. How about the native Alabamians now? Did they attend their church, or was it only a strict Swedish? Oh, I'm sure it was only white people at that time. They maybe had Negroes working on their farms. To grub the land and— And they had little houses out on the farms. That's how that Roy showed us, where there'd be a little house, like a little log house or something, where there were people who were working. She is mentioning here, Opal Hedberg, that when one family moved on, I think it was Joseph. He remembered talking about it was like a little Negro boy coming to the house every night, and then he left in the morning, and he slept in his little nest in the room, and he didn't want to leave. Oh. Because they took over another house. Well, you know, there was a strong feeling. They were very much looked down upon in those days, and they still are. I taught in a black school in Chicago, and we came there for six years. And when my Minnesota relatives heard it, they thought it was terrible to think that I would have anything to do with black people. My brother said, oh, they should send them all back to Africa. So there's different regions, then, where it's conceived. And it's strange to come up to Minneapolis and see how few black-skinned people there are. There's not too many. No. Do they feel they are not themselves? Do you think they are not welcome, or do they sense that? I mean, because— The black people? Yeah. Well, all I can say is when I worked in the worst part of the ghetto in Chicago, and Cabrini Green, if you've ever heard of that— Yes, I've heard about that one. They were very friendly. I worked with retarded children, and I had interviews with the parents, you know. They were very friendly and kind. There was one teacher at the school where I taught. There were 2,200 children, and there were over 80 teachers. One-third were Jewish, one-third ordinary white, and the other third black. I got to know black teachers who had come from the South, from Kentucky and Mississippi, from the Christian schools, from the Christian schools, very fine men and women. I had lunch with one lady just about every day there for one year, and I invited her to come out. We went out to a parish near Chicago after Dad had turned 65. I said to Hallie Mills—she was a Methodist pastor's daughter from Atlanta— I said, Hallie, maybe you'll come home with me some weekend. She says, I wouldn't dare. I'd have to sleep with a gun on each side of me. So you could go just so far with them. You couldn't befriend them for anything in the world. And I thought I was doing her a nice gesture. No. And it was just the same with the Jews. Jewish girls, wonderful people, but there's that little wall between you, you know, that you can't escape. It's still there, present. Yeah. Generation after generation. Yeah. It's just—the night Martin Luther King died, that was a difficult time. I came to school the next morning, and the lady, a black lady across the hall, she says, you know, the blacks have been up all night arming themselves for the uprising today. And the schools were closed at 1 o'clock. First we had to get the children home. We had to get them together and then make sure we had a ride to wherever we were going out of there because there was shooting over in the next block. It was just an awful, horrible uprising. And I was commuting on the train at the time, came down to Union Station, and it was just jammed with people. Businesses and everybody closed, and they were to go home. And there were mostly white people in that Union Station that day. It was—the suburbs had to leave. So that's a strange thing in our country. It is hard to— Hard to understand. Understand, yeah. Yeah. But the colored people down south at that time in the 1900s— All of them. The colored people were probably worth nothing, in other words. No, they wouldn't be. They were niggers. They were, you know— That's all it was. Yeah. Did they ever enter a white church, for instance, or— I never heard that they did. Well, the restrooms and all were marked black and white. That was one thing on the way down. They were still in 1963. In 63. They were marked white and colored. And there was one church that had a black cross on one side of the door and white on the other. Now that—how they could come in the same building, I don't know. Well, that was an experience all by itself in my life. But it was a wonderful experience. To have these little retarded children. Well, I wish I could tell you more about Alabama, but— Yes, but you have a little something to talk about, anyway. It isn't very much. Your parents, now, did they discuss Alabama at any time that they had— No, it was just when we'd get a letter from them, or maybe somebody was coming to visit, like Justin, Uncle Theodore's oldest son, would come with his children to visit us. There was the one, the little Crooks, Santa Cora. Yes. So I got to know Justin maybe better than any of the others. Dora had died in the meantime. Justin had a big family of, what, six or eight children. He had a farm out there, or was he— No, he had a little store. His wife—he came up to go to business school at Gustavus at St. Peter's. And there he met Hannah Anderson from Crooks, South Dakota. And so Hannah goes down to live there, and her children were born there, many of them. I don't know if that— And she was a Swedish Chevecho. Yes, from South Dakota, or from Crooks, South Dakota. And she said that when I—you know, it's hot down south. She said, and I saw that Justin was slowing up too much. I decided we'd have to move up north, which they did. They moved back to Crooks. And he had a store there for a long time. I visited their home when I was on a debate trip to Augustana College in Sioux Falls. And then I called up Justin. He came out, and I know there was this table full of children. It was quite a thing to visit his home, because it's just like a fantasy, you know, that you have relatives off someplace and you don't know them well. What kind of man was he? Was he different than the rest of the children? Well, he was a very sociable man, and he wrote letters, Christmas letters, to us all. I have a number of Justin's letters, if I run out of some. So he told about what he has been going through in the last year or so? Well, he always told about his family, where they were, what they're doing now, you know. And I think he was at St. Peter for a reunion the year that Jonathan graduated from college. And that would be 25 years ago, because we went back to his graduation. He was a very personable man, to run a business through the Depression and all and come out of it. I think somebody has written that, who's written that up. I don't know if I have a copy of it or not, but it's quite a story. What's the...? When Mrs. Hedberg dies, that's my grandmother's, let's see, fifth daughter to die. They've all died. Now, Anna is the third Anna, and Elna and Christine were students at Gustavus and came home at Christmas to Syria. That same month, five of her brother's children, the Perthorsons' children, died of dysphoria. They're buried up in Scanning Grove, five graves all in a row. So there were many hardships for those people. So my grandmother suffered a lot of sorrow in that her daughters, all but my mother, died before she did. They had to go through a lot of suffering and questioning. And loneliness, because these girls have grown up. Anna was 25 when she died of TB. So it must have been... I wish I could now sit down and talk to her and see how she weathered all this. But in this one book, there is a story of her obituary. And it says something about her faith. From the many trials that she lived through, the Lord had been her help and comfort. She trusted in the Lord. Therefore, we have the hope. Also, she listened and read God's word willingly and often. And she is mourned by it, it says. And they had a tale about her funeral. And one place it tells about her favorite hymn from the... I don't know the hymn, but I can't get my eyes... Yeah, Psalm, in the Swedish Psalm book, Psalm 92. And this funeral notice now was written in English, the first part, and then they... No, it's all in Swedish. It's just translated. She died of pneumonia in January 1910. This diphtheria, what happened really when they extracted that one? Well, they just got to terrible... Like a cold and fever and... And chills. And they really choked to death from phlegm. At the Benson home where the five died, the boy, Henry, who became the attorney, he was saved by a Norwegian lady up the road, Mrs. Mira. She dipped her fingers in kerosene and stuck down his throat, so he got rid of some of the phlegm and he survived. My mother was four years old when this happened. And so that she shouldn't get it, and the boys were sent over to the neighbors. And mother tells about... Oh, they had a lady, the lady they stayed with there, the next house, baked a special food, it was a dog clunk, for her birthday, and gave her a little set of dishes. And she's only four years old when this happened. And she said there was a mysterious rap at the door, and pretty soon there's another rap at the door, and word comes that one of the girls has died. Mother tells that about the death of her, I don't know, either Elna or Christine. There were 15 and 17, these girls that died of dystheria. Practically every household had someone that died because they couldn't, they didn't know how, I suppose, for one thing, how to keep from spreading it, to know how to handle it. I suppose when one died, they had a funeral in that home, they never took the body away from the home. I suppose, how they ever got caskets together, I don't know, because they had to drive to St. Peter's. There was no doctor that came out? No, not then, I never heard that there was. So there was only the strongest... This is in the 80s, in the early 80s. That was a big thing that happened in those days. I think now they have vaccination for dystheria. But there was... Well, there are many things I should tell you. I should tell about my grandfather on my father's side. Anderson. Anderson. Lots of Andrews in the family. I have one grandson, Andrew, Mark Andrew, up in Winnipeg. You see, they wrote letters back to Sweden that this is a good country, they should come, you know. Good idea. Because there's a lot of poverty and trouble over there. Here is a letter. Now, you must have an Aurelius book. Yeah, I got that one, yes. Well, on page 740 is a letter by my grandfather from St. Peter and Turkle's Lake, the 19th of June, 1858. Now, they had been there three years then. They came in 55. And his first name, no Anderson's. No, that's Torson. I'm sure it's grandpa. It is Torson, I see. But I'm coming to this, that I suppose my grandfather thought that... You said three, so I two. He came from Hrby, Sweden. And there were... They went... First, they came to St. Peter's. They got work for a little while with Andrew Nelson, grandmother's brother. And then they moved on out west of St. Peter to Winthrop area, and then on out to Buffalo Lake and Hector. So I have... All those relatives are in that area. A few left. They have a family reunion every year in Minneapolis, but I don't always get to it. And they have died now. Most all the uncles and aunts are all gone. How about the young ones? Are they following up on those traditions of meeting, reunions every year? Yes, they're coming. There are 50, 60 people at a reunion every summer, but there are so many that live in Minneapolis now, Minneapolis area. So they go to Glencoe, Minnesota for the reunion. And they get together. Is there any special dish or food that has been continuing on over the years since the beginning? They've been carrying on something especially designed by the Thorstein family or others? Well, my mother made mussler, or sandbuckles, sir. You know, you make them in little tins. Yes. That was one thing. And they call, the Sconeans call them tummakager. Tummakager. And that's been handed down? Yes. So your daughter can make them then too? I think so. I think she has some tins. I think my daughter-in-law, the one that James' wife does. How about spettekaka? You heard about that? Yes. I never saw one. They never call them in Minnesota? Oh, my mother's mother made spettekaka for the weddings. In Minnesota? In Minnesota. She made for the Hedberg wedding and for her two nieces, Mrs. Hulcrems and Mrs. Colberg. And that was done outdoors, the fire outdoors. And the spit was, I think they used wood, I don't know if they had a wood spit or what. So she knew how to? She made them. She made them. And I was eager to, when we came to Skona, there was a little bakery near Trenna and Fairleaf there, a little country bakery. And so I asked the baker, oh yes, he's still making them. He had a big rig to do it with now. But I wanted to have one for our daughter's wedding. And I'd heard that there was someone that, there was no one in Minneapolis, the egg equists or the big Swedish baker up there. But they did make with rings. But the real spettekaka is done with sort of a sponge batter and poured on bit by bit. But the ring thing, that's Norwegian and also Danish. And you can see that in bakeries now. I've seen them in Minneapolis. We had one with the rings for Faith's wedding. We had a man, a baker in Minneapolis make it. How about other dishes now, like fries, korv? Korv. The sausage. Do you remember making the ort on the farm? Well, you know, when they butchered the ort, they had to take care of the meat in every which way. And they did not have potato sausage. No potato sausage? Not in Scandinavie Grove. I never tasted there. But when I came out to western Minnesota, there were later arrivals from Sweden who made potato sausage. And in Spring Garden. And uskaka, they made that out in Densen and in Cannon Falls. But not in Scandinavie Grove? No. It could have been that maybe it was a small land's vet. Yes, it's typical. I was going to make one last Friday. I got so hungry for uskaka. But I haven't come to it. I've got the milk and the rennet and all. I have a mock uskaka that I can make. There were wild plums. So Grandma was known for her good plum sauce. That was one thing. And my father's parents lived in Winslip. And this is horse and buggy days, and we didn't go there more than once a year or so. And that was a long ways off, even 20 miles. It was quite a ways. So you didn't go to St. Peter too often? No, once a year, twice a year. How about Minneapolis? No. I was 14 years old and I had a ride on the train to go with one of Mother's cousins and Mrs. Forrest, Edna Benson Forrest. We went to the state fair. That was 1914. I think that was my first train ride. No, not the first one. We went to Vista to visit Reverend Hedberg. It was 1910 when my sister had died. Mother and I took a little trip to Vista from St. Peter to Waseca. So now you have Scandinavian roads and with reunions. How often do you have the reunions? Is it the Thorson family or the Anderson family? Well, the Anderson family is every year at Glencoe, Minnesota. The Thorson family, we aren't that organized. I think we had one two years ago. There is a cousin's daughter, maybe the Hedbergs told you about her. Her name is Natalie Casey. She's a little person. She's about so high. She married a little man. Natalie lives in St. Paul. She's very much interested in family history. She grew up in Kosoda, that's near St. Peter. This is Uncle Nathaniel's granddaughter. She has a daughter, Susan, who is also a little person, who has been studying in Wales, England this year. And looks up Larry Thorson in London. So the family gets... Gets together as well, too. Gets gathered, yeah. I have lost track of Uncle Cedar's children now, after Justin died. I called out to Crooks to the funeral home for the burial. So I talked to one or two of the boys, I think. Maybe it was Roger. I'm not so sure. He was 94 when he died? At least 95. My sister in Minneapolis had been out there for his 95th birthday. Uncle Cedar's youngest son, Milton, turned out to be such a wealthy man. In Evansville, Indiana. He married a wealthy widow. And his in-laws were in the paint business. And I have not seen Milton since he was eight years old. He has a home in Florida, and I don't know. My sister met him. But he maybe doesn't need or bother with the family history too much. That's what I gather. I don't know. You see, the Justin Thorson family is so big now, and so scattered. That's the way it is with all of us. We're so scattered. Like my children are so scattered. My grandchildren don't even get to know the people of St. Peter, my brothers. When they lived in Edmonton area, it was too far to come down many times. And your children, you have... Four children. Four children, and they all went through college. All finished at Gustavus. How were you able not to send them through college? Oh, they worked their way. They worked their way. And we helped some, but we never had that kind of salaries to really... And two of them became pastors. Two became pastors. And one organist. And Jonathan got his Master of Music in Dallas, Texas. And Faith was a teacher, and is still doing some... She's teaching music at home. She's giving piano lessons. Jonathan is... His wife remarried. He was divorced some years ago. And his wife is remarried to an atheist, if you can believe it. They have two lovely girls. Sarah is going to go to Champaign now for her junior year at university. She just finished Rock Valley here. And Andrea is a senior at Auburn High School. They live with their mother, but they are here. So they live in Rockville? Yes. But the girls are here... Well, they're here several times a week. Now in the summertime, they have little jobs, so they're working. So they're very close to those two. I've seen more of them. James has five boys. He's the oldest one. He's been in Alberta until two years ago, when the church headquarters moved to Winnipeg. When all the churches of Canada, of the old LCA churches, joined with the EALC, and they had their own church organization. They're independent from the United States now. And his boy, the oldest one, has just finished a course in telecommunications, Joel. And Peter is a machinist and wants to go back to the university. And he did go back, and he wants to... I don't know what he's going to do. Peter... Joel is married, but Peter... I don't know what he's going to do. Paul is a graduate of the University of Alberta, and is to be married this summer. So I hope to go to his wedding. And Edward is in Germany right now for some study and work. And Michael had a year after he finished high school with the Cominovic. It's a program for youth to go travel all through Canada and spend time in different parts of the country and learn the ways of people and find out what they want to do when they're through. So they have the blood from the grandfather to be travelers and explorers. Michael started out in Vancouver and he ended up in Nova Scotia. And then he came home at Christmas. No, he came home a year ago, last June. And Michael is majoring... They have the accent all their own up there. Psychology, he says. And then they have a sister. After five boys, they get a girl, Anna Marie. And she says she's going to be a dentist. I don't know. I'll go with Anna. Ted has three boys, and David is a graduate of Gustavus at St. Peter. And he is a writer. He does writing, advertising for magazines up in Winnipeg, and does a lot of traveling. Andy couldn't take college. Andy is married now, and he's making almost as much as his father, just filling up, oh, vending machines and doing good business. He's going to stay with the company and work himself up. And Luther, Ted's third boy, just finished in North Dakota University at Grand Forks, and he's going to be in recreation. Ted's boys are such, they're so interested in sports. James' boys were more on the mechanical side of things, I guess, of life, I don't know. And our daughter has two. Lisa just finished high school, and Stevie says he's going to be a musician. I don't know. It turns out that he plays the trumpet and takes lessons with the trumpet. Sarah will go into some kind of something in the medical world, I think. She's very good with physics and so on, and biology. I don't know. And Andrea, who is 17, we call her our songbird. I don't know what's going to come of her. I wish she'd slip by so you could meet her. So you have a big family to keep track of. Yes. Birthdays and weddings. Yeah, can't do much about it. I sit down here in Rockford. And you are the one that knows the history from the beginning. Well, it's quite a story. I realize that more and more. To get all these things together, you know, it's all here. It can get scattered just overnight. I saw how it went when my husband didn't wake up one morning. He was gone. And that was the end of it. Yeah, and I have all his books and all now.