 Yeah, I'm sitting together with Bertil and Evelyn Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. And we have 27th of October, 1986. You were born 11th of April, 1920 in Rockford. Right. Can you tell me a little bit about your parents? Now, Ernst and Signe Carlson came from Sweden. They came separately. Yes, my father came over first and he came from Tiddeholm. And he was 16 years old when he left Tiddeholm. And I remember him telling me that he worked in the Tänstikkefabrik. Of course, he was young then working there. And as a smith, I guess, he made tools. And the day that he left for America, he climbed up in the smokestack of Tiddeholm. He had never been any place before, so he climbed up to take a good look at Tiddeholm and all the country from there. So he climbed all the way up to the top of the smokestack and looked at as much of Sweden as he could. And then he got on the boat and came over here. And he had his 17th birthday on the boat. So he was 17 years old when he came over here. But he was very mechanically inclined, so he had good jobs. The whole time he was over here, he ended up as a superintendent of Sunstrands machine tool. And started out with just actually he worked with the president of Sunstrands in another company before they formed Sunstrands. So he was a superintendent. So he came in 1907? 1907, right. What was the reason he left? Was there other brothers and sisters there? No. That's right. My wife had to coach me. He was going to become an apprentice seaman with his uncle. Who was the captain of a ship that plied between Sweden and Germany. So he was going to be an apprentice seaman there. But then his uncle died, so he didn't know what to do. So he came to this country. So he didn't see any future in the tennis league? I guess not. He had heard about America and he was so interested. He always wondered and heard so much about the Indians and all that. I guess he was a little bit adventuresome. He was a good athlete too. All around, what do you say? Sportsman? Yeah, sports. He played all the sports and just into everything like that. His father, did he also work at the tennis factory? No. I don't know too much about his father. He had immigrated to America. His mother immigrated? Yeah, well, if you want to say that. My grandfather then immigrated to America, but I don't know anything about him. He left his home, yes. My grandmother didn't want to leave, so she stayed. So I don't know anything about my grandfather. Did your grandfather come back then? No, I never heard any more about him. How many children were in your father's family? Well, then there was another, a daughter, two, by... Just a sister? A sister, he has a sister, yes, that's all. And she's still living in Tidaholm. In Sweden? Yeah. So what did he say now about the opportunities in Sweden? He didn't say too much about them because he had this outlook for the United States of America. He never discussed it too much. I guess he had just heard so much about America and he was curious about it and thought that this would be the place to come to. I suppose there wasn't... How did he pay for his ticket? Did he have enough money to say it? I guess he did have. He did work... He worked for two or three years. He started, I think, when he was 13 years old in Tänkstekka Fabrik. So he had money saved up and decided to come to America. What did he say about the journey over? I don't remember. I don't remember too much about what my father said about coming over. I really can't recall anything. How did he come to Hanoi and Rockford? Didn't have any friends or anything, just came to Rockford. Of course, in those days, there were many people coming over to Rockford from Sweden. So he got acquainted with what they call Tida Hallmutter. He found friends that... There was a big group here then. Yeah, I guess so, but I don't know if he knew of any others here. But he did. But basically, I guess, you know, the Tida Hallmutter were stuck together and more or less... Well, they... They had a club here. Did he belong to them? Tida Hallmutter's group? I don't know if it was a club as such, but they did always... Had picnics. Had picnics, yes, and all that. Do you remember that? I don't remember. I remember that all of his friends, Tida Hallmutter, yeah. But his best friend was an Ölanding, John Anderson. Oh, yeah. Ölanding, too. He met one in Rockford, yes. He met an Ölanding in Rockford, who was his best friend. John Nelson. But that was not... John Anderson, yes. So when he came here, then, he boarded with someone or lived in a private home? Oh, that's right. He did have a... Didn't he have a cousin or uncle here? His uncle... Did his uncle come later? I don't remember, but there was an uncle here, which I don't know anything... He was your uncle, yeah. Yeah, and I don't know too much about him. I don't think they lived together. No. He lived up on 7th Street, I guess. He lived up on 7th Street. Snooze Gotha. Snooze Gotha. He lived in the theater. Oh, that's right. Yeah, he lived with his friends. I guess he... I don't know how he ever got acquainted with the Svensons, but... He probably put a sign in the window. Yeah, he roomed with some people who became friends of ours, too, Svensons. And I think she was sconing, I know that. So you could detect a dialogue. Oh, yes. Herman and Beata. And there was no problem for him to find a job then, 1907? No, he was a very skilled... I guess it just came natural to him, mechanical... He had a high mechanical aptitude. So he looked for that job immediately. Yeah. But there were a lot of furniture factories there. He didn't get into the furniture because, I guess, he'd been working with metal over there. So he got into, I guess, what Sunstrand... Originally, I think he worked at National Lock, but then he got into Rockford Milling. It was just a small company, and they eventually formed Sunstrand Machine Tool. And then he got into that. Did they buy it, then, Sunstrands? Yes, I think it was Hugo Olsen, I think. It was Oscar and Adolph Sunstrand. It was Oscar and Adolph Sunstrand, yes. I should be telling you this because she remembers all these things better. You mentioned Olsen. He was a companion with Sunstrand. He became the president. He was the president. The president. Yes. But there was just a small nucleus of men. They were all Swedes, then. Oh, yes, they were all Swedes, yes. Oscar and David Sunstrand, I don't remember. They immigrated. I don't think they immigrated. I think they were born here. How did they start out, now, the Sunstrands? They came with very little schooling, only… They had mechanical ability. Mechanical ability. They started on a small scale, then, to… Right. Were they looking for something that was easy to sell, or were they just… I think they went to a milling machine company. Oh, they… They started with a milling machine company. Yes, they started with milling machines. And then one of them invented the editing. You want the mic? No, I was just… Cups. I guess he… Well, he actually was one of the organizers of what they call the Swedish Gym Club here in Rockford. Jorda. Yes. I'm not a charity member. Yes, and he has cups that he has won in triathlons and pole vaulting and track and… He was all around them. Yes, and boxing and just a little of everything. In 1910, I think he won the decathlon. Yes, decathlon, right. In 1910, three years after he came here. Oh, I see. And they were competing with Chicago? Yes, in different groups. In the local area, I suppose. Against Swedes only or against Italians, Irish or… I don't know that much. Probably just the Swedes. I don't know. I think so. I think just Swedes. I don't think there was that much interaction between them. When you were born in 1920, do you remember being three, four years old that your dad was active, playing soccer or… No. What I remember then is that he was very involved in his work and it seemed that he was very conscientious about his work. And so he seemed to put in a lot of overtime, worked all the time at the shop. So that's about all I remember about him. There were younger people then taking over the soccer… Yes, he had gotten out of the gymnastics then into working for a living, I guess. When he came over, I think a lot of the young Swedes, he had a boat, like a little motor launch, and they lived up the river in Loves Park, which is not Loves Park, it was just more or less of a wilderness then. But a lot of the Swedes just camped out there in tents all summer long. And when he came to work, he would just get in his motor launch and come down the river. He called it Najad. That wasn't the name of his uncle's ship, it was Najad. He was supposed to apprentice on it, so he called this little thing Najad. So they came down the river to, I suppose, down around State Street someplace and docked there and went to work. So he came in style then? Oh yeah. But all these Swedes, we have a lot of photographs, pictures of them at this so-called camp, you know, with their tents. And they played tennis and croquet and did boxing and competed in track and all of those things. Did he ever go to the Swedish-American Gym Club? Did he? I mean, that park where they… No, it was just a bunch of Swedes that seemed to gather there. You better say men. Men, yeah. All the men, yeah. This is when he first got over here. But I suppose they all just gathered. They weren't married? No. They were single then? Single men, yes. So if we start now with your mother, then, the single Cardell. She came from Jyrby, Östergötland. Yeah. 1910. 1910. And how did she… I forget how old was my mother when she came. 16. She was 16 when she left. In fact… She came along? No. Her uncle, she was one of 14 children. And she was one of, I guess, about the oldest girl, I believe. And her uncle was coming to America. And he had been asking her if she'd like to go along. And she wasn't sure if she'd like to go or not. So the day that my uncle, her uncle, was leaving for America, he came over to my mother's home there and said, ìWell, are you going to go with? I'm leaving today.î And so she just made up her mind just like that. Well, okay, she decided she would come. Just not going to Chicago? Yeah. She didn't know anything about it until she left that day. She was in bed when he came over. Yeah, she was laying in bed. And he got her out of bed and said, ìYou want to go with me now?î And she was leaving and thenÖ Well, how about tickets and visa and papers from the pastor? And how did they arrange? They must have been able to do it. I don't know how they did it, butÖ She went on his ticket and probably wouldÖ She was 16. I don't know. And her uncle's name wasÖ Axel Johnson. Axel Johnson, also from Muleby. Yeah. Did they live in Muleby or outside? No, they lived in a little farm outside of Muleby. Syria? What the heck wasÖ Yeah, well, it wasÖ It was on a farm? It was on a farm, yes. Not too far. She went to Muleby, Syrica, though. Yeah, she was confirmed in Muleby, Syrica. Yeah, that was her second, yeah. ButÖ So, there was fast action. Yeah. Yeah, there was, yeah. I can't get enough of that. And this Axel Johnson, he came then to Rockford. He hadÖ Yes, he was in theÖ He got into the furniture business. So, he was a cabinet maker all of his life. And your mother, did she stay with someone then or take a job in the household? Yes, she workedÖ Well, first of all, I have to tell you a funny thing. When they gotÖ They all seemed to get off to Liverpool. All the Swedes had screamed and they come to Liverpool. And so, she got to Liverpool. I guess they got off the boat there and they fed her breakfast and they gave her a shredded wheat biscuit. And she had never seen anything like this and she couldn't figure out what in the world it was. She didn't know what to do with it. She didn't know what to do with it, so she opened up her purse and put it in her purse until she found out what it was. So, it wasÖ An experience. Yeah. Yeah, when sheÖ She, like most of the young Swedish girls that came over here, they all worked as domestics, cooks and maids for a lot of the prominent families in Rockford. And so, she did work forÖ She worked at Rockford College, too. Yeah, she worked at Rockford College. So, she came into American families then immediately. Yes. So, she learned English very fast then. Yes. So, compared to your dad now, he was working with Swedes all the time. That's right. He worked with Swedes, but then he did become involved inÖ I guess he did work atÖ Merlin. Merlin, well, that was later, but he worked atÖ I thought he said he worked atÖ Yeah. Another company first, but he didÖ He always had supervisory jobs, so he did learn the English language, and then he becameÖ Before heÖ He was a road man. He went out and traveled around the country repairing machines and taking care of things like that, soÖ So, he had toÖ Yeah, yeah, he got around toÖ Among people. Mm-hmm. So, and thenÖ In fact, when heÖ Okay, I was going to say, back in 1954, I believe it was, he went to Sweden then to supervise the building of a Sunstrand plant in Sweden. What year was that? 1954. 1954. Yeah. In Hödinge. So, he went over there and supervised the whole construction of the plant and bought all the machinery for it and hired all the men for it and trained all the men. So, in fact, he was out, I think we had books he had gotten with Sunstrandís Bernadotte. Which one is it? Carl Juhans. Carl Juhans was connected with Sunstrand, one of the partners there. So, my father was one of his good friends then. We had books that Carl Juhans has autographed for him and given him, so he wasÖ What kind of line were they going to produce over in Sweden then? That was fuel pumps, oil burner pumps. Was that more or less on the lower side of Swedish industry then? Or why did they go over there? They didnít have anything in production like that in Sweden? I guess not. Fuel pumps forÖ Oil burners. Oil burners. Oil burners, yes. We did a lot of oil burner manufacturing here, one of the biggest oil burner pump suppliers in the country. So, we just expanded and went over there and built a plant becauseÖ Was it cheaper then to produce over there than toÖ It was just for Swedish use, it was not forÖ It was just for the European market over there. But you would think it would be more profit to ship them over and produce them in one plant here? Unless there areÖ I suppose there are tariffs and everything you have to consider. Yes, I donít know what the reasoning was behind it. So, is this still going? No, I think theyÖ They sold it to England. All of the rights went to something in England. So, in 1954 they started to construct the first factory. Yes. In fact, I donít know if I should get into that about Gunnar Wormwerk. Thatís his story. So, he supervised the erection of the manufacturing plant? Yes, and he hiredÖ And he stayed behind untilÖ No, he was there for about nine months. And he hadÖ By that time he had bought all of the machinery and hired all of the people and trained them on each machine. And supervisedÖ SupervisedÖ Supervised the personnel? Yes, the whole thing. So, he got the whole plant organized and going in full swing, then he left. And it was run by Swedes then after he left? Oh, yes. So, how big was that? Well, it was run by Swedes, but at the time there were a lot of displaced persons over there that he hired. He hired a lot of Czechoslovakians and Poles and people like that. I guess Sweden had been strictly Swedish for so long, and this was just the beginning of the displaced persons coming over to Sweden. So, he hired a lot of them too and trained. So, was this his first time then after he came to this country? That was his first time back to Sweden. So, he went to Tidaholm? Oh, yes. He went to Tidaholm. What did he say then about the reaction he got fromÖ Tänstekafabriken wasnít there anymore? Oh, yes. There was Tänstekafabriken and they had added on several more plants. Yeah, Tvåan and Trejan were there too. Still making, producing matches? Oh, sure. Yes, still today. Thatís a bigÖ At Tidaholm, that area is stillÖ Your ancestors worked there? Yes. My fatherís brother-in-law still worked there in Tidaholm in the Tänstekafabriken. He was an accountant. He was an accountant. And his sister was still living in Tidaholm? Yes, sheís still there. In fact, we still correspond with her. Got a letter from her last week, I believe. So, he saw the difference then between 1907 and 1950. Yeah. What did he remark about? Was it the most outstanding, if you can see, that ever happened? He said everything was so small. Yeah, well, thatís one thing. Of course, all his memories were from his childhood. And when he got back there, everything was big and now he couldnít get over everything was so small. He thought the river that he used to swim in was so big when he was over there. And he couldnít get over how small it was when he got back. And the chimney was so short. Yeah, the chimney he thought was so big. So, he didnít take any aerial view of it in 1954? No. And he came back then to work for Sundstrans until retirement? Right. So, he actually worked for Sundstrans all his life? Well, not all of his life, but most of it. He started with Sundstrans actually from Sundstrans inception, from the time Sundstrans was formed. He was part of Sundstrans and he worked there until he retired, I think at age, what was he? Sixty-nine. Sixty-nine years old when he retired. So, he married your mother in what year? 1915, I believe it was, wasnít it, Ed? Is she doing it? Donít you know anything? 1915, yeah. And he became a citizen soon after he came here? Yes. What happened during the First World War? Was he drafted then? No. He had deferment then from theÖ I guess he must have had deferment because he was in the machine tool industry. So, during the First World War, they were changing over them to war industry orÖ? What happened then with Sundstrans, for instance? I donít remember. I donít recall what it was in the First World War, no. I donít think we were into things that sophisticated in 19Ö you know, 1918. I donítÖ I donít think thatÖ There was no government order then for the defense or anything. It isnít like it is now. No. Like the Second World War wasÖ Second World War, we were all in defense then, yes. Thatís when we got into the aircraft. So, you were born actually in a pretty good time then, in the Roaring Twenties, as they call it. Yeah. So, they was going full blast then at Sundstrans. They were expanding every year. Yes. And a lot of workers came from Sweden every week. Oh, yes. In fact, when I started there, I started working at Sundstrans in 1938, and even then there was a lot of Swedish spoken up there. You know, it was almost all Swedes. Then, I think, after World War II is when things changed all over. You know, the SwedesÖ people came up from other areas down south. A lot of people came up, and so it no longer was only Swedish up until then. What made people come up from the south? Well, it wasÖ Was it because they had moved around a bit more? Before the war. Before the war. No, they came up during the war for work, yeah, because we needed a lot of workers, a lot of help. We needed workers. So, thatís when all of theÖ Sundstrans had large ads in the newspapers down south. Yes, we didnít have enough help here then, so theyÖ And then they settled for good up here. Yeah. So, prior to that, when you walked on 7th Street, you never heard anything except Swedish spoken. If you wanted to get a job clerking in a store, you had to knowÖ be able to speak Swedish. But, of course, now you can walk on 7th Street and you donít hear any Swedish. You hear the language of the hills. Yeah, and then some. How about in the 20s now, 1915 when they married, and they rented an apartment at first. They didnít buy a house right away? No, they rented. Downtown then, or close? Fulton Avenue. Thatís where I was born, which is now called Broadway. That was the Swedish cluster around there, wasnít it? Sure. And the factories were right beside it. Yeah, they were out a little further south from there. Then, I think in 1921, my father bought a house on 9th Avenue. I was just a little over one year old then. They lived there until he died. Was it close to the factories? Well, no. My father always had automobiles too. The times when he was home, all I can remember is him under the car or working on his car. He was a great mechanic, so he was always working on his cars. I think when I was two years old, heÖ I donít know how he got this. It was about an early 1911 or 1908 Buick touring car. He decided to go up to visit some friends up in Siren, Wisconsin. I donít remember anything of this, but I know I was along with it because we have pictures. He drove all the way up to northern Wisconsin at the time when there were no roads up there, just trails through the woods, more or less. Of course, when he got up there, he spent all of his time working on the car to get it ready to come back down again. But he was not afraid to take off then because he had his toolbox with him. Oh, sure. He was always working on automobiles. So that was before AAA was in full swing. How about you now? Did you take after his aptitude for fixing cars and transmissions and motors? Well, I began inÖ It wasnít one of my hobbies, working on automobiles, but I started working at Sun Strands and started out in the assembly department. I graduated from high school in 1938, and at that time, not too many people were going to college. The young people were going to college at that time. You tried to get a job because it was right after the Depression. So I finally got a job at Sun Strands too and started out in the assembly department and got into testing. We finally got into what we call aviation then, working on defense products for the aircraft industry. So then I went in the Army, and for over two years I went overseas and came back, and went back to Sun Strands again and got to be foreman of the test lab. And I eventually got up in engineering as an engineering technician, and eventually got as an engineer. So I worked my way up into engineering. Did you take evening courses then at the college, or how did youÖ? I took some correspondence courses, yes. SoÖ You took classes. Yeah, I took some classes. And your dad, he was a superintendent at that time, orÖ? He was in another division then. I was in the aviation division. So the aviation division, they started right before the Second World War. Yes, right during the Second World War we started out buildingÖ Actually, I should tie the Gunnar Wormark in on this. A young, also a young Swede that my father befriended, he came over from Ö and only had a, what you call it, grade school education, I guess. But at the time he was just living out by the river with his uncle. He worked on one of the riverboats, the paddle wheelers that go up and down Rock River. And he lived on the river trapping and so forth. And my father got him into the machine tool business, into Sunstrands. And he was a natural, he was a genius in fact. He was the one that started out inventing things. He invented the fuel pump. Thatís how Sunstrands got into the hydraulic business. And then during the war he invented a little, what we could call a hydraulic drive for a tail gun on a B-25 bombers. So that he could operate the tail gun remotely, so the tail gunner could sit behind armor plating. And we built thousands of these for all the B-25s. Thatís how we got into the aviation. And of course when I, just before I went into the Army, we were building, starting out on the constant speed drives. If youíve heard of constant speed drives, I wonít go into it. Thereís a constant speed drive on every jet aircraft I think almost in the world right now. All commercial airliners and all of our military have Sunstrand drives on them. And of course from there we expanded into much more aircraft business. So we got into the aircraft business due to actually Gunner Wallmark who isÖ Side two, continuation with Bert Kallsen, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So this Gunner Wallmark then, he opened up a complete new line then. Yeah. What did happen though? I mean here comes a guy withoutÖ He justÖ Öany kind of engineeringÖ Öhad an ability for this. A needle in a haystack. Yeah. What year was that? Oh, actually we, he got into I guess the hydraulic business 19, around 1930, 31, somewhere around there. Was that the beginning of the hydraulicÖ Hydraulics in Sunstrands, yes. My father had at the time, they had wanted him to go to work at another machine tool company here, Barnes. So he went over and worked for WF and John Barnes for a couple of years. But then Gunner Wallmark wanted my father to come back and to more or less supervise everything for the hydraulic, the oil burner pumps. So my father left Barnes and came back into Sunstrands again and stayed with Sunstrands until he retired. And so Gunner started out on the oil burner pumps and got into many other hydraulic pumps, hydraulic motors, transmissions for the machine tool industry and eventually into the aircraft industry forÖ I can say that he started out with the little half horsepower units for the tail gun on the B-25 and we built units for turrets on bigger bombers. So all those, youíre talking about constant dry now, they were DC motors then? Prior to this, there was no alternating current on the aircraft. This saved a lot of weight. Instead of that, they had to have their own either direct current or generators on the aircraft. So by converting the variable speed from an aircraft engine into a constant speed, you could drive a generator, which was a constant speed. You had to have a constant speed for reordinating current. So thatís how we got into it and started out on aÖ our first application was on a B-36. And from there it just grew into every aircraft that we build in this country and most aircraft in Europe, I guess, has Sunstrand constant speed drives on them. How did the Sunstrikers get into it? Were they the engineers? Iím not sure. How did the airline industry at that time, how did theyÖ Let me see. I was trying to think. The Army, the Air Force at the time, there was a great need for this, for alternating current. And one of the, I guess at the time, Gunner was going over, he was also working on a cabin supercharger, so he was working out at Wright Field with one of the Air Force personnel out at Wright Field. And so they talked him into, well, Gunner was a natural for this because he was working on more or less the same principle, hydraulic pump and motor, which delivered constant speeds. So Gunner started working on it and I think there was a competition between several big firms in the United States at the time. Chrysler was one of them and I guess General Electric. But anyway, they liked GunnerísÖ Gunner justÖ everybody else went out and made big presentations and Gunner just came to Wright Field with some sketches in his back pocket and took them out and showed them this is what he was going to do and they liked his approach better than anybody elseís. So they told him to go back and start working on it. So thatís when they started the model shop or the experimental department at Sunstrands to build the first alternator drive. And I was working on that just before I went into the service. And when I came back out of the service, we were just going into production on them then. So it wasÖ So how did he develop one of those now? Did he build his own prototype first orÖ? Well, we built Sunstrands, yes. It wasÖ I mean Wal-Mart, Gunner Wal-Mart. How did heÖ He just had the idea in his head, thatís all. Was he able to draw on sketches? Oh, sure. He drew everything out, detailed sketches from his head, you know, just sat down, drew out all the details. And thatís how Gunner is to this day. Heís still working on things this way. And then the toolmaker took over and the pattern maker. Well, yes, pattern maker. My father was in charge of it then. So we had about a dozen people working in this, what we called the experimental department, and did the actual machining and fabrication and assembly and test all in this department. And we did get into production, like I say, about 1940Ö well, 1946, I believe. We were building the drives then. Yes, we were in production in ë46 and ë47. So how long time did it take now from inception, so to speak, toÖ? Well, this was in 1940, I suppose 1942 or ë43, I guess, ë42 maybe, when we first started working on it. And by 1946, when I got out of the service, we were in production. 1948. Okay, that wasÖ sheís got a picture. You have the history. And this is yourÖ This is just a photograph we took up there, justÖ I guess we built our first production drive in 1948. We were building a lot of drives for the aircraft prior to that, but we got our actually first production in 1948. And this thing now goes into aÖ what is it used for then? Oh, that is the constant speed drive. Constant speed drive. Yes, alternator drive. It drives a generator. It takes variable speed from an aircraft engine and converts it. Variable speed goes into the input of the drive and comes out constant speed. You can go like from idle to full throttle, and youíll always maintain 400 cycles per second, plus or minus maybe one cycle per second, which is very close control of speed. So it always maintains a constant speed for you. Of course, now itís very important today because of all your electrical equipment on the aircraft, radar and everything on the plane is electric controlled. Of course, now we have gotten intoÖ The constant speed drive is more or less taking a back seat because weíre into so much otherÖ We do the entertainment systems on the aircraft now and black boxes, which the recorders, you know, that they have on the aircraft. Weíre into almost everything at Sunstrands. I shouldnít say ìweî anymore. Iím retired. I suppose you have an eye on them anyway. Yeah. So they really took hold then. Yeah. If it werenít for Gunnar Wallmark, I would say there probably wouldnít be a Sunstrand today. So it was really complicated, as we call it in Swedish, manik, to make them. Yeah. It was really complicated to figure out. What happened now with the Chrysler and Wrights and the rest of them? Well, they just gave up. So they had a patent on them immediately and also foreign patents, I suppose. Well, at the time, I donít think if Gunnar had a patent on it, he just gave it to Sunstrands, I believe. He was interested more inÖ This was his hobby and hisÖ He was more interested in having fun and doing things like this than he was in money at the time. He justÖ This was his life. He lived up at Sunstrands. He never went home. He just stayed up there andÖ He thought everybody should too. Yeah. He was a dedicated worker. Oh, yeah. He loved it. This was his life. Did he belong to the union? No. No? No. Heís a little bit eccentric. So what happened when your dad came over? There was no unions or anything like that in Rockford at that time when he started to work at the scale. No. It was just a small shop and everybody had ten, fifty workers. Yeah. In fact, when I started working at Sunstrands in 1938, it was only probablyÖ He hadnít started a union. No, there was no union. I was going to say there were probably a little over a hundred employees, around a hundred. And everybody knew you. The president came around, Hugo Olsen, came around almost every day to your bench and talked to you and asked how things were going. And, of course, today you go up there and you donít know whoís sitting next to you working anymore because thereís so many people working there. Itís completely changed. And the union came in about 19Ö I think 41. No. No, no. The union didnít come in until after I got out of the service. 1948, I believe, or 48 or 49, the unionÖ It was U-A-A-W. Yes. There was no other small union before that? No. There was no other union. But they had the problems in 1938 when you started to work not at Sunstrands but at other factories. What kind of unions were they then? Was there furniture orÖ? No, because they were all dead at the time. Yeah. I know there was a lot ofÖ Wasnít there plumbers? Wasnít there a problem with plumbers? I donít knowÖ There was a trade in theÖ Trade unions, yes. I think there wasÖ Yeah. No, we didnít have any unions. I donít think we required them. At Sunstrands they always treated you pretty well, but the unions came in. And then they stayed in. Yeah. They were still there. Did you have to join them later on or did you belong to the engineeringÖ? When they first cameÖ When the union first came in, I did have to belong, but then I becameÖ But it was a deployment. It was just about two years. I was in there for a year or two, yes, and then I became supervisor, so then I didnít belong to the union after that. But they got pretty strong though afterÖ Yeah. Ö10, 15 years. Unfortunately, there are so many radicals in the unions that just try to make itÖ They try to make a name for themselves and their biggest goal is to get the company down on their knees, it seems, and the average working person is not that interested in it and theyÖ Itís just a very few of the radicals that seem to run the unions and control the people. There are very little and a small representation in the union meetings as well. There are just a few that runÖ Yeah. And, of course, you donít dare toÖ Most of the people there donít dare toÖ Whatever the radicals say is what theyíre going to do, thatís what they do. Nobody dares to say anything against it. They believe 100% what they are told. Yeah. They donít fear retribution. Yeah. Why did the management go along with them later on in the 70s and early 80s to give them such tremendous benefits of hospitalization and vacation andÖ Well, this was not so much, I donít thinkÖ Sunstrand has always been very generous anyway and they would have done it probably on their own. In fact, I think we had more benefits prior to the union coming in than after the union came in. But, of course, thatís progress, you know. They want toÖ The benefits are different. Yeah. There are different benefits now, butÖ But a lot more vacation. More time off. Well, this is true all over, all of industry. Sunstrand is probablyÖ Now we have five weeks vacation, paid vacation, and your hospitalization, medical benefitsÖ Main holidays. Oh, gosh. But you have to work certain years, though, before you get five weeks. Well, yeah. Two or three years. Yeah. Itís quite a bit different now than it was back a few years. They keep lowering it all of the time. I forget now what it is. Maybe after ten years or fifteen years you get five weeks. You had to be twenty years before you got four years, wasnít it? Yeah. Itís changes, butÖ Why is it that your dad, now he worked from 1907 and up to his retirement age of 69, he went to work at the Gunnar Vormark, he went to work also and more or less lived there, you said. Did your father take his job with him back to his home, or do you remember he didnít have a workshop? No, he didnít. HeÖ Well, see, my father was more or less had a differentÖ Attitude. Capacity up there. Gunnar wasnít married. Gunnar wasnít married, so this was his life, see, and my father, of course, had a family, but he did put in an awful lot of overtime. But, see, my father was in a supervisory capacity, training and supervising, and at that time he figured costs of everything and did a lot of the work which now is relegated to probably dozens of other people. He did all of this by himself at the time when it was a smallÖ He did the payroll, didnít he? Yeah, he did the payroll. He did everything, yes, back in those days. But then he had three kids and a wife and a house, and Gunnar lived with his mother and father in their home, soÖ So his parents were here then, the Walmarts? Gunnars, yes. Gunnars? Yes, uh-huh. I see. So he really was married to his job. Yeah. So, but now people seem to be more suspicious of the management, like they were years ago. In other words, years ago they did the good honest dayís work, they said, and were happy with what they were paid by the management. But today they always seem to have the suspicion that theyíre not paid enough. Well, I worked at SunstrandÖ Why is the attitude different? Is the work harder today? No, the work is not hard. In fact, in fact, I shouldnít even be saying this for publication, but I worked as an engineer up there at the time, and when Sunstrandís, when they would go out on strike, they would, the supervisory personnel and engineers would go down and do the work of theÖ Oh, they were doing the work of the engineers? Yeah, the people that were on strike. And the work that I did, I could take one job replacing one person, and I could do a weekís work of theirs in a day and look around for something to do. They did not work that hard. I meanÖ Did the piece work with High Septon orÖ? Oh, well, this, Iím talking about, this is in one little department only. Iím not talking about everything but the rest of the shop. But I know the assembly and inspection that I took over, I could do the same amount of work in one day that it would take that person to do in probably over a week. And I could do it much better because I knew more about what to do. And so theyíre not overworked, believe me. No, but why didnít the management put the cross over the bargaining table to the worker? I mean, youíre not watching your butt off. You canít, the management canítÖ You canít do that. No, no, management has nothing to say about it. I mean, the union, they say, they go out on strike if youÖ In fact, they only go by seniority. A person can go up there and if heís got seniority, he could be one of the dumbest people up there and screwing up on a job all the time, but you canít touch him. See, the management cannot lay a finger on him or theyíll go out on strike. Who may do is lost. I mean, this seems to be quite out of step. Well, I know itís out of step, butÖ Itís the reality. Itís hard to sell products andÖ Well, thatís why Sunstrands locked them out here last summer becauseÖ well, actually, they locked them out because thereís always these radicals, just a few. Maybe 99 percent of the people up there are good, hard-working people, but theyíre the ones that are not radically involved with the union. Itís those few radicals that will do the sabotage and do all they can against the company. And so this is what happened. There was some sabotage going on up there. You know, theyíre going to get even with Sunstrands, so they did a few things like that and Sunstrands just locked the doors and said, ìOkay, thatís it.î And then they operated with office personnel and engineers. They still are there to do that. I mean, you would think that would be someÖ Well, thatísÖ thatísÖ thatís a way of life withÖ With factories. With unions and factories. Unfortunately thatís the way it is. Do you think it was a better atmosphere on the work floor years ago then than itísÖ Oh, definitely, yes. Prior toÖ Can you talk more to yourÖ Oh, sure. Next working buddy, for instanceÖ If a man didnít work, he was out of there. Yeah, well, then you were more or less judged by what you could do and how well you worked rather than how long you had been there. But if it was a guy, you know, a hard-working guy like Gunnar Wallmark, was he paid well enough then for his duties? Oh, sure. He gotÖ He got royalties on his products. Of course, he was an exception. He was the inventor and he got royalties off ofÖ He was in a special class. Yeah. He wasnít an employee. No. WellÖ He was more like a freelance. He was an engineer at the time. At that time, Gunnar was the engineer at Sunstrand. There were no other really engineers up there. Of course, now there are more engineers than there are people on the shop, you know. The white colourís off. Yeah. Itís changed. So, 1938 when you started there, the adding machine division then was already transferred to Bridsboro. Yeah, theyÖ What was the reason for that? Did they need money to sell off that division or why did they leave Rockford? I never could say. That was 19Ö When was that? They movedÖ 1927 or so, I think that they movedÖ Or 27. I think it was 27. I donít know whatÖ They sold their one out then to an American outfit orÖ Yeah. Was it an American or Sunstrandís name out there too? Burroughs. Burroughs. I donít know too much about that. Did Burroughs make the Sunstrand adding machine? Did he invented that machine or Sunstrand? No. No. Sunstrand did, yes. The adding machine? Sunstrand, Oscar Sunstrand, I believe it was, inventedÖ OscarÖ Oscar Adolfer, one of those Sunstrand brothers. Were they still living when you started work? Yes, they were still living. They were gone. But they were not as active then? No, they were notÖ I donít know. My father was very much involved with them at the time, when he was working up there, but they werenít involved with Sunstrands anymore when I started. It was thenÖ Well, at the time when I started, it had justÖ it had only been machine tool up until 1932 or so, or 1930 when they started the hydraulic, the oil burner pumps, and from there on it became a separate division. It was Sunstrand machine tool and Sunstrand pump division then, and from there it went into Sunstrand hydraulics, Sunstrand aviation, and theyíve gotten into a little bit of everything. So this oil burner pump division, they made the stoker obsolete in the house, feeding the coal and the furnace with the coalÖ Right, it was all oil burners at that time. Was it during the war they changed it, or was it before the war? Oh, it was in the early 30s, I think. Early 30s? Yeah, 30s when they started that. But the whole 20s was fired by coal then? Yeah. Most of the houses? Yeah, I believe so. There was no oil burners at that time. You had the truck coming down there with the coal. Right. The truck before that was the horse and the wagon, yeah. So were they using stokers then at the time, or were they feeding the big lump? Some people had stokers, Iíd say. Most people just shoveled in. Oh, by hand? By hand, yeah. We never had stokers, I donít believe, until we wentÖ I lived at home with my parents. We changed over from hand, you know, just shoveling the coal into the furnace until we got an oil burner. And there was no gas then at that time? No. Of course now gas has taken over, so thereÖ Because of the price, soÖ Yeah, right. So now thereís veryÖ thatís why the oil burner business has gone down, and itís now gas is the most popular way of heating. But there was a new thing then with the oil burner coming intoÖ Yeah. Öon the market. Did your dad comment at any time that it was easier to work here than home in Sweden, for instance? The field was more open for him to expand his vision of what he knew about machinery and inventing stuff. Opportunity in Tivoli. Yeah. I guess thatís true. He didnít talk about that much, but after all, he was just a young kid when he left there. He didnít have much experience then from theÖ No, and I suppose if he would have stayed over there, he probably would have just stayed at the Tenstikafabrik. But of course here he did work his way up toÖ as a superintendent at Sunstrands. And so the opportunities were much greater here. Did he long back to Sweden at that time, in homesickness, or he was too young? He was too busy, I think. Too busy. Yeah. He didnít really ever have any great desire to go back. And then, of course, he did go back in 1954 for Sunstrands, and he enjoyed it. In ë63 he went back again, yes. That was his last time over there. So how aboutÖ Did he join the church when he came here at first, or did he wait until he got married? Well, I donít know if they really were members. I know they were married and associated with the Zion Lutheran Church, which is the church that I was baptized in, and went to Sunday school, and confirmed, and married. One thing left to do, I guess. And you still attended. Yes. They were not as devout churchgoers as my wifeís family was. My wifeís mother. Yeah, her mother was more of a churchgoer. No, we went to Ö I can remember when I was a child, we just went to church on Yuletid. We always went to all the Yuletids, you know, and Easter maybe, but didnít attend church that much. But your kids did. I did, yes. From the time I wasÖ Your brothers did. My parents didnít, but I guess from the time they saw to it that we went to Sunday school, I guess from the time I was five or six years old until today. We still belong to Zion. Was there anything in particular about you learning Swedish in the church there, or listening to the sermon in Swedish? No, although I know they wanted us to continue to learn Swedish at home, my parents did. Did they talk Swedish at home? Yes, they talked Swedish. My brother was four years older than I, and he did not know a word of English until he started school. So he learned his English after he started school. Now I learn Swedish too, untilÖ I first learned how to speak probably until my brother started school. Then I picked up English from him, but I stillÖ Hearing Swedish all the time at homeÖ Swedish has always stuck with me. Tell me about your kids, Paul. Oh yeah, I know my mother would send me to the store for little things. In those days, there was a corner grocery store. I used to get so mad at the clerks because they could neverÖ I thought it was cute because I only spoke Swedish at the time. I always asked them in Swedish, told them in Swedish what I wanted, and they kept asking me over and over again because they wanted to hear me say it again. I remember I would get pretty furbundant at them because they never knew. Well, they just wanted to hear me repeat it. Your other one is Weinstein. Oh, that was many years later. In those days, when I was, I guess, a teenager, I was embarrassed about speaking Swedish. This was back in the 30s. My mother was going to bake something, and she wanted to have Weinstein for something. I don't know, Weinstein is something they use for baking. I went to the drugstore and told them I wanted Weinstone. I tried to translate it literally, and he never heard of it. I finally told him what it was in Swedish, and I think he finally figured out what I wanted. What was it in English then? Do you know what Weinstein is there? Is it tartaric acid? Is that what it is? Tartaric acid, I believe it is. They use it in cookies. There was a store very close by where you lived then. Oh, sure. Every 10, 15 blocks maybe there was a store. I think about every two blocks. Mostly were run by Swedes. Oh, yeah. In fact, my wife can tell you more about that. I think we went to more shopping sprees. One thing we miss is there used to be a fish store up on 7th Street, which is only a block up from her home where she lived. You could always go up there and buy fresh fish. This is one of the things that we miss today. There are no good fish stores. I don't know where they got their fresh fish from. Did they use more fish in the diet years ago than they do today? Sure, they were accustomed to it. Now everything is frozen fish, although I guess it's not that bad. They got there from Chicago then? Yes. They came in a horse with a train. You don't remember the teacher told you about anything, not speaking Swedish at home or anything like that, because you had no trouble with English when you started school? When I started school I could speak English. You had no trouble? No. I started when I was four years old in kindergarten. Everybody in my neighborhood, all the boys were older than I, so when they went to school I was all alone, so I wanted to go to school. I started out when I was four years old, so I went to kindergarten for a whole year. But prior to my brother starting school, I spoke only Swedish. Of course, I was only two or three years old then, so I did start in Swedish and gradually learned English. But Swedish always stuck with me, so that now I can... We've been over to Sweden four or five times, and I correspond in Swedish with my aunts and uncles. I just picked it up reading Swedish magazines that my aunt would send over to my father, like Året Runt and all these magazines. I finally learned. So you were able to write it also then? Yeah. Swedish is a very easy language to read and write once you understand all of the E-O-Y-A-U, you know, all of that. Everything is more or less spelled the way it's pronounced, whereas in English it's not that way. Oh, my goodness. So you had no problem then to retain the Swedish? Well, it's not easy for me to write in Swedish, but I can. I can get by. But you can read it though when your aunt is writing? Yes. There are a few of the words that I can't, because after all, I learned Swedish when I was so young that there are many words that I never heard.