 10 days, 11 August 1987, and I'm sitting here with Helen Millic Olsson, who was born in Gary, Indiana, on July 17, 1912, and her parents were of Austrian background. Helen married Carl Alvar Olsson in 1936, who was born in Köpenholm, Sweden, on February 14, 1906. Helen will tell us about the Olsson brothers, who came to Detroit. That came from Sweden. And all five of them had their own shops. Do I talk in here? The five Olsson brothers came here from Sweden, and all five of them had their own shops. John Olsson and Sigurd Olsson owned the Superior Piston Ring Company, and Carl Olsson and Valdemar Olsson owned the Olsson Tool and Die Company, and Albert Olsson owned two tool and die shops. All of them were very successful in their field. And John Olsson married Sigurd, who was born and raised in Sweden. Albert Olsson married Svea, who also was born and raised in Sweden, and Valdemar married Mimmi, who also was born in Sweden. Carl and Sigurd married girls who were born in the United States. There are the children. John Olsson had one daughter whose name was Rody, and Rody is a nurse and has her own medical clinic in Ludington, Michigan. Rody married Dr. Engstrom, who also is of Swedish descent. They both graduated from the University of Michigan. Albert Olsson's son, Albert Jr., is an executive at the Chrysler Corporation. He is now fifty-two years old. John Olsson, the son of Carl and Helen Olsson, is a contractor and has his own company called the John M. Olsson Company, and he is situated in the Detroit area. All of the children were healthy, and they all graduated from colleges and universities, and they have children and are doing fine. We get together, we try to get together and have a reunion. The last reunion was held about a year ago. The family is now quite scattered. Mimi Olsson, Waldemar's wife, is living in Seattle, Washington. There are many Swedes who migrated to Seattle. We take a trip to Sweden. We try to take a trip to Sweden every other year. Helen Olsson learned to speak Swedish and was raised among the Swedish immigrants who settled in Detroit. She is chairman of the Fram Chapter of the Vasa Order of America. All of the Olsson's are quite active in the Swedish lodges that we still have active in the Michigan area. You mentioned Helen Olsson, that's the one speaking. Oh, I should say that. So was John or Carl Olsson one of the older children? He was one of the youngest. John Olsson was the oldest. He came first then? He came first, right. Did he send back money or tickets to the rest of the world? Well, he was influential in having the brothers come. When the brothers were aware of the fact that their oldest brother John was doing very well in America, they all wanted to come to America. But one good thing, they all went back and visited the family quite often. All of them? Yes, they all went back and visited the family. But unfortunately, the last Olsson brother was Carl Olsson and he died last year in 1986 while vacationing in Florida. So he was the last of the Olsson brothers? He was the last of the Olsson brothers, right. So how did you meet now, Carl Olsson? We have the Swedish, the older Swedish immigrants bought 350 acres of property in Lapeer, Michigan, about 75 miles north of Detroit. They wanted to have a community of Swedes and there is a lake situated on it and it's one of the cleanest lakes in the state of Michigan. It's called the Vasa Country Club. One of the members has to be Swedish in order to buy property and build a cottage or a home. There are several at the Vasa Country Club who live there permanently. We also have several very financially successful people and I believe you met one of them, Harold Bradenburg? Yes. And he has a permanent home there. And then there, did you meet the Books? Yes. Well, they also have a very nice home there. Is one of the requisites also to be a member of the Vasa Order? Not necessarily, but I would say that the majority of the Swedish immigrants all belonged to the Vasa Order of America and their children also joined and were active. And we do have a Swedish club in Farmington, Michigan. Were you there? No. Did you see it? And it's in a very beautiful part of Michigan. Farmington is considered one of the most beautiful suburbs in the United States and we're having a little hard time collecting enough money to add on to the building, but we do have a club. Is that a separate organization? It has nothing to do with Vasa or anybody? No, but I would say that the majority of members all belong to Vasa. I think basically they all belong to Vasa. But it must be an expensive land site, too. How are you able to keep up? Oh, it is expensive. Well, we have a number of people who work. We put on plays and we have concerts and we have dinners and we have card parties and that way we make enough money to pay our expenses. So the Swedish club, they own this building then? Yes, they own the building in Farmington, Michigan. Is it in Hoover County? Farmington Hills. Well, it originally was a beautiful ranch house and the people sold it to the Swedish club for $150,000. And then the Swedish club bought more land surrounding it. And as I say, it is considered one of the most beautiful suburbs in the United States. It's actually called Farmington Hills. It is beautiful. So with all the activities and donations, now for example, about a year ago we donated $1,500. From the Vasa Lodge? No, we donated it to the Swedish club. Members did that? A lot of the members did that. Well, they donated some of them. Now Harold Bradenburg again, he donated I think around $25,000. But Carl and I donated $1,500. And they have very active people who are working hard to keep it going. And they rent this place out to other organizations? Well, only to Swedish or Scandinavian. And we are very close to the Finnish Center, and they have a nice building also in Farmington. And we also have Finnish people who are members of Vasa Lodge and also of the Swedish Lodge. So we're trying to keep it going. How did you meet Norbert Karl? Did you go up and settle up here then? Well, years ago there was a Swedish family, and they had a store in Detroit on Gratiot Avenue, and attached to the store was a hall. And they used to have dances on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. And the young people all went there dancing. And then, oh, shall I say about 65 or 70 years ago, a group of Swedish people started to search for a place where they could go to in the summertime. So that is when they bought the farm property that is now the present Vasa Country Club in Lapeer. They bought this 350 acres that has a beautiful lake, and they started building the cottages and so on, and that's how that was formed. So I met Karl at a picnic out at the Vasa Lake. Yeah, but how come in our time you went to a Swedish club? Well, in our neighborhood they were practically all Swedish people from Sweden, or they were Danish or Norwegian. What section of Detroit was that? That was on the east side of Detroit, but there were many, like I say, many, many Swedes there, and very nice and clean people. I went to school with many Swedes. Well, one of them was Ina Stone, and her father was one of the founders. And by any chance did you get to talk to June Jones? I met her briefly, yes. Well, her father was Nelson, and he was one of the founders. And also another very influential Swedish organization was the Swedish Church, and it was Lutheran. Emanuel. Emanuel. And it was Lutheran, and we also belonged to that. So there were many people who weren't Swedish that joined the Swedish. Did you mean your parents belonged to it? And well, they went to it, and then I went to it. Then when I met Carl out at the lake at the Vasa Country Club. Were you confirmed in the Lutheran Church? Yes, I was, I was, and my son was, John Olsen, John Olsen, Jr. He was confirmed in the Swedish Lutheran Church. And well, as I say, we were very active. So you were growing up then with the Swedes? Oh, yeah, I grew up with the Swedes. Yes, I definitely did. Did you learn to speak Swedish, too? I could understand it. Oh, I took lessons. And now I don't know whether you had a chance to interview this lady who also has worked hard to maintain the Swedish tradition. And her name was Signy, I think her name now is Signy Landstrom. Did you get a chance to meet her? No, Anna Landstrom. No, that was Anna Landstrom, but there was another one by the name of Signy. No, not related. No, I didn't meet Signy. No, wait a minute. Now what is her name now? I think her name now is Signy, I think it's Signy Carlson. But she gave Swedish lessons in her home, and I took them from her. And she has been very active in the Swedish community. So well, there are quite a few. So when you met Carlton. I met him, yes. We called it the farm. We always used to call it, yeah, the Swedish farm. We always called it. Did you go up often there until up here? Oh, yes, every week, every week. I went with the Stone family and another family, the Olsen family, and oh, there was a large group of Swedish people. You were dancing also then? Oh, yeah. It was wonderful, really. Well, we used to have steak roasts. In fact, we slept in the farmhouse, and most of the young people slept in the barn in the hay. We loved that. It was fun. So, and then gradually it was built up. So then you dated and got married? That's right. What year were you married? Let me see. Let's see. 1936. 1936. So you went to school here, to high school? Oh, yes. Did you continue on to college? Yes, I did. I went to the, well, it's now called Wayne University. I went there. And then I worked for General Motors for 12 years. I had a very good secretarial job. And one of the prominent Swedes that I worked with was Oskar Lundin. Who did it? Tresher? Yeah. And Oskar Lundin's family also lived on the east side of Detroit, and they also belonged to Emanuel Lutheran Church, and were very, very active. So there were quite a few, most of the Swedish businessmen that were well known were in the tool and die business. And the American government, did you know that the American government asked Sweden many years ago to send tool and die makers to Detroit to get the factory started? Was there Roosevelt in that? It was Roosevelt, yes. Yes, he did. Was it during the Depression or before? I think that was during the Depression. But Sweden was noted for being the only country that had a large percentage of tool and die makers and engineers. So Roosevelt requested, I forget how many hundreds that he requested to come here. And now you could probably go to the library and find that out. I don't know how many came to Detroit, but quite a few came to Detroit. Do you remember them when they came? No, I really don't. Were they educated from Sweden? Yes. Oh, yes. They were, oh yes, they learned their trade in Sweden. But like the Olsen brothers, were they educated in the tool making business? Yes, in Sweden, yes. In Sweden, yes, definitely. And well, now another prominent Olsen was Ozzie Olsen. And his father bought some very valuable property on the Detroit River. And that was at the foot of Nine Mile Road. He bought many acres on the river. And he was called Ozzie. And well, it was Ozzie's father, rather. And so when the father died, he left most of it to his son, Ozzie. But he had a daughter, Blanche. But unfortunately, he left very, very little to Blanche. So Ozzie Olsen became a millionaire when he sold the property. He sold the property, and they made, they have what they call, well, part of it is called the Olsen Beach or the Jefferson Beach. And it's at the foot of Nine Mile and the lake. And it is beautiful. Well then they opened up a shop. They had a big shop. And Blanche married a man by the name of Hopkins. But she wasn't a millionaire like her brother, Ozzie. And Ozzie always had, was the winner of many boat races. They had boat races. And he'd always have a big boat in the races. And he won many races. Now he lives in Grosse Pointe. And he belongs to the Grosse Pointe Yacht Club there. He has a boat there. How old is he then? Oh, Ozzie, he must be, well, I'd say he's probably around 75 thereabouts. But there is no relation to you? No, no relation whatsoever. Carl Law, in 1936 when you married, what kind of work did he have then? He came out of the Depression. Well, he was working for his brother at the Superior Piston Ring Company. And then he left there and got a job at a place called Motor Products. And then he stayed there for many years. And then he opened up his own shop. So he hired some people? Oh, yes. He did. He did. So that. But he was also very interested in sports. Oh, he was an excellent sportsman. So when you met him, was he a soccer player then? Oh, yes. In fact, Carl had the first professional soccer team in the city of Detroit. What year was that? Oh, heavens, how many years ago was that? I would say that, let's see, that's been at least 30 years ago he had that. And unfortunately, it didn't go over. So we lost money in that. So he actually invested money in it? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Ball players? Oh, yeah. We lost about, well, we lost at least $10,000 in it. Yes. Oh, yes. And very active. Why did it turn over? Well, it was too early. And now you see it's popular. It was too early. It started too early. But no, he hired people from New York and Chicago and what have you. But we could never get enough spectators to come to it. We had it down where they have the ballpark, down at Briggs Stadium. But we could never sell enough tickets to make a go of it. People weren't that interested. But now they learn to play soccer in the schools. In those days, they didn't. Everything was baseball and football in this country. It was baseball and football. But now soccer is popular, is quite popular. Oh, but when he was playing soccer, did they have a league here then? Oh, yes. They had a league. And the league was all different nationalities. There was the Italians and the Belgians and the Germans and the Polish. Oh, yes. And the Swedes also had one? Oh, yes. Yes, they had a very fine team. He was in the Swedish team. And they'd go to Chicago and play, and they'd go to Milwaukee, Wisconsin and play. But like I say, it never got to be popular until maybe about ten years ago. Then they started playing it in the schools here. So now it is quite popular. How about the Swedes now, the other immigrants? Were they interested to come to the matches to watch it? Not too many, no. The old timers, yes. But not the younger generation. The one that was born here? They were not interested? No, they weren't interested in it. Not too many. Were they more interested in the baseball? Right. In baseball and football. And football. And football, yeah. Those two things they were more interested in. So then for many years, down in Detroit, right along the river, downtown, we had ethnic festivals. And then we had representatives from all nationalities, and they would put up booths from Friday, Saturday and Sunday for three days. And we had that every year for about fifteen years downtown. But then it got so that the people got tired of coming and didn't want to go downtown. And so they cut it out. But occasionally they have—now so far this year, I believe that the Germans had one festival down there. And I think the Polish did. But they no longer have all of the nationalities down there. It got to be too expensive for one thing. And another, people didn't want to go downtown due to the crime, you see. That was another thing that— Who was sponsoring the Swedish exhibits then? Vasa? Well, Vasa helped. And no, we'd—the Swedish businessmen would donate. Karl's brothers would donate. And who was in charge of it? Who was running it? Well, we had—now I was secretary in that. And we had some of the—mostly the people from the Swedish Lodge and also people—see, we actually had two Swedish clubs. We had—now there was a Vasa club and then there was a Swedish club. And the Swedish club, we used to have a little hall on 7 Mile Road. And then it got too dangerous, too bad, and they sold it. And that's when they bought the property out in Farmington Hills. Well, this is the same one that was on 7. That's right. 7 Mile. So you actually have—you see, you not only have the Vasa members, you have the Vasa Lodge, but you also have the Swedish club in Farmington. And now they have—have you been out there? No, but I know where it is. Yeah, it's very, very nice. And it's a small hall, but it's nice. It's in a beautiful location, very nice location. How about other organizations like Jenny Lynn Club? Yes, but you see, they're— Well, they're not too big. Now I go to some of their doings, but I do not belong. But they aren't very active, let's put it that way. They're not too active. They might have maybe about two doings a year. Very nice doings, I must say that, and there's nice—very nice ladies that belong to it. And—but not strong enough, you know, to really attract hundreds of people. So they don't reach out for membership? No, no. It's more like an exclusive club? Well, yes, it's considered an exclusive club, and there's very nice ladies that belong to it, but there again, they're looking for new members too. Now I never joined it. I had a chance to join it, but I was always active with Vasa Club, and we had a very, very nice club called Dunard, and that was active. Now Dunard had a bowling league. We had a bowling league for many, many years, the Dunard Bowling League. Well then we had to—it got so that the members dropped out, so we had to—the Dunard Lodge, we just—the members, we dropped it, and most of the members then joined Vasa, those that didn't belong to it. And this Dunard now, it belonged to the Scandinavian Brotherhood? Yeah, that was primarily Swedish. It was Swedish. Yes, but I mean, nationally you belong to this Scandinavian Brotherhood. Oh yes, yeah, that's right. With offices in Akron, Ohio. Yeah, right. And then the singers, RP Singers? Yes, they were very well known and very popular, but there again, see now what is happening, they're not getting enough men. So now what we have done in the last two years, we get the ladies' chorus and the men's chorus together, and they sound very good, and that has worked out nicely. We've done that, and it's been very, very nice. You know, right around Christmas time, and maybe about twice a year we get together with both the— So they have performances then for different doings? Yeah, yeah, maybe about twice, twice a year we have it. But the big thing, of course, is the Vasa Country Club. That is the big thing. I mean, you've got the land there, and then the next big thing is the Swedish Club in Farmington. You've got a beautiful section of land there, and a nice—it's a nice clubhouse. It's not bad. So you and your husband, you bought a plot up there or a lot? Where? Oh yeah, yeah. We have three, they call them memberships. We have three of them, yeah. And like I say, there's quite a few that live there, you know, all year round. So it's very, very nice. Yeah, I like it. But how about the next generation of your son, John Olsen Sr., or Jr.? Is he interested in— He is, he does go, but he does not take an active interest. Now he has his own business, and he works long, long hours. He's in the building business. But like at Christmas time, and when we have something special, why, then he comes. But of course, he does come out to the lake, you know, we have that. Now I wanted to sell two of the memberships, because we have three. And now our cottage is on one, and then we have the two lots back of us. Well, he doesn't want to sell that, so we're not going to sell it. So we're going to keep that going. So you can build another two houses then? Well now they changed it. We can only build one on two lots. But that I'd say is one of the nicest examples of Swedish immigrants, of any I think, in the country. Now I know there are a lot of others, you know, in Minneapolis, but I think that is a beautiful representation of Swedish immigrants. And that's the Vasa Country Club. That will stand a long time. Most of the people that belong to the Swedish club also belong to Vasa, you know. And like we do, I'd say 99% of them belong to both of them. They're trying to keep them going. But this Vasa Country Club, was that, it has nothing to do with Ram Larsson in any way? I mean, there's no dues paid? No, no, no. It's completely private? Completely, yeah. The interview continues next night. Side 2, continuation with Helen Olson, Detroit, Michigan. Side 2. So they participate in both organizations? Yes. And from Larsson, what do they meet nowadays, at the church? Well we meet at various places, but I would say the majority of our meetings are held at Emanuel Lutheran Church. And we have them during the day on Sunday. And now we also have had Christmas parties at the Ghost Point Yacht Club, which is considered the most, it's considered the most beautiful yacht club in the United States, the Ghost Point Yacht Club is. We've had dinners there, and then also at the Detroit Golf Club. And we, the membership are very active, and very cooperative. And now we are going to meet this coming Wednesday at Georgian Inn, the officers are, and then we are going to plan our activities for the coming year. We always do that. And then we present it to the Lodge at the next meeting. And that, well as I say, we have nice Christmas parties. Oh, you were able to get into this Pentecostal Ghost Point. Do you have some members there? Yes, my son is a member, and that's how we were able to have it there. And then my husband had a membership in all the big clubs because he had his own business. And one of the nicest clubs is the Detroit Golf Club, which is on the west side. But most of our members are on the east side, so that's the reason we had all of our big doings at the Ghost Point Yacht Club. Yes. But, well, we play bingo, and we have sing-alongs, and then occasionally we'll put on a little show of some kind. And we always have some form of entertainment along with a good lunch or a meal. Whenever we have a meal, a dinner, we always have very good attendance. We found that out. So we try to have as many dinners, you know, as we possibly can. And the members are very cooperative. So you are the chairman now. I am the chairman. Have you been officer before? No. No, no. I believe that I'm the first lady to be the chairman of TROM. But we have some exceptionally smart officers, and the top one, and I would say she is one of the most efficient in the country. And I've heard other people say this. And that is June Jones. She's her monthly invitations are masterpieces. She uses very attractive stationery, and the invitations are very friendly and humorous. And she is a very brilliant secretary. She also had a very good position with the city of Detroit as secretary and had the reputation for being extremely efficient. She's still working with the city of? No, she retired. But all her life, she has been very active in the Swedish church. And we have several people, Lillian McIntyre and another one. And then we have Naomi Anderson. And well, there are a number of people who are the old, we call them the old timers, that are still trying to keep the Swedish culture active and alive. But we have to offer something that will be attractive to the general public. Well, we do find, for example, at bingo games, they do like that. Or if we have a special program, a special musical program, and also dinners. And we always have a good turnout if we serve dinner. They are open for non-members too, then? Oh, yes, we're open for members. Bingo too? Open for what? For the public? For non-members? Oh, yes. You mean our meetings? Mm-hmm. Oh, yes. The only meetings that are not open to the public are the officers' meetings, where we take care of all the business. Oh, yes, we generally do invite the public, yes. So we're still going, then? Oh, yes. We're still going. How far does it get to the young people, though? That's what we talk about continually. And it's pretty difficult to get them interested. And there are festivals now, like Lucia, for instance, you have there in the Lodge. Yeah, we have that, the Lucia. You mean that Christmas time? Yes, yes. Yes, then we get a good turnout. Whenever we offer something that is different, like a Lucia festival, or a nice dinner, or a play, we always get a pretty good turnout. But I must say, along with many, many other ethnic lodges, that it is difficult to get the young people interested. So they are struggling, too, the Italians and the British? Yes, oh, yes, definitely, definitely. Yes, they are. It is a common trend, then? It's a common trend. It definitely is. Because I go to some of the other meetings, too, because I was secretary for many, many years for the ethnic festival for all of the entire group. And so I would have to go to all of the nationality meetings, and they are having the same problem. Now the Finnish people have been very cooperative, and they have a very nice hall in Farmington. And we have rented that hall many times. And we have a number of Finnish people who have joined our lodge. Now, as I say, they are very cooperative. But like the Norwegians, there are very, very few. And how about your own? Now the Danish. They have a group? They're not active at all, no. They have a very, very, they go in with the Germans? No, they go in with the Yugoslavia, which was a country that they took part of Austria after the First World War and made Yugoslavia out of it. No, I understand that most of the other ethnic groups, too, are having the same problems. Except, well, you take the Germans and the Polish. They have a bigger group of people because they had a much larger number of immigrants who came to this country than Sweden did. And so consequently, they, well, they have maybe two or three halls that they can have doing that. But they are having the same difficulty as we because I, once a year, I go to a general meeting of all ethnic groups. And they all state that they're having difficulty getting the younger generation to take an active interest in their particular ethnic group and to try to keep the ethnic heritage active and alive. And it is difficult to do. And they also had to make the transition of going from downtown area to all of them. Oh, yes, we had to. And I would say, see, 20 years ago, we had a riot here. 1967. 1967, yeah. And that started people moving out of the city. And that's what has happened. So I don't know, just, but like I say, now the Germans, they had a very, very nice hall in Detroit, and right next to them, the Polish had a very nice hall. Well, during the daytime, the German club is open for lunch. But it's difficult to get any of them to go there nights. So therefore, some of them have built halls out of the city. And I don't, but there again, well, you don't have the immigration either, you know, from those countries that we had. Yeah, right. But talking about immigration, when did you make your first visit to Sweden with your husband? Oh, let me see. Was that 19, I would say, I think it was 1938. To me? I think it was, yeah, that I made my first visit to Sweden. So you met his parents then? Yes, I met his parents and all of his people. And I was so interested in Sweden that I wanted to go back there. And my mother got so sick and tired of hearing me how wonderful Sweden was, she says, for heaven's sake, she said, why don't you go back there and live? I was very, very much impressed with Sweden. Number one, I was impressed with its cleanliness. I was impressed with its safety. I was very impressed over the fact that the policemen didn't have guns. And the cleanliness was clean. And also, I liked the beauty of the country. I really did. And the people were wonderful. And well, I still like Sweden. I go quite often. Have you been back many times? Oh, yes, yes. I was there. I was there last year. And now I'm more or less planning on going. I might be going in the fall. If my other nephews don't come back here, then I'm going over there. Well, Ed Holm, he was one of my nephews. He was here. He was here for about five weeks. But he works for the world's largest paper company over there. Houston. Yeah. And they sent him here also on business. So he had about three weeks of business and then three weeks vacation. So that worked out very, very good. So and the, how about your son? Did he go with you? Oh, yes, yes. He's been there quite a few times. Yes, he has. And he liked it there too, very, very much. He's very proud that we have a Swedish heritage. And you've been able to learn to write and read Swedish. Oh, yes. I can write and read Swedish. Because you have a Swedish newspaper sent to you. Oh, yes, yes. And you get to hang it. Yes. And the Signe Karlström is the name of the lady. Yeah. And her husband taught me Swedish too. He was very, very nice. Now, there is a woman who has spent most of her life, she's the one that I'm trying to tell you, spent most of her life trying to keep the Swedish heritage alive. I like Signe. I think she's a hard worker and a very fine person. Her husband, though? He died. Yeah, what kind of business was he in? He was, well, he worked for my husband. He was a very fine person. It was her husband, it was her husband actually that gave Swedish lessons. And I was one of them. And then he lost his job. And they had it kind of tough during the Depression. And then he worked for my husband. He was a very, very fine person, very fine person. So he was a tool and die maker? No, I don't know whether he was a tool and die maker or if he was a draftsman. He could have been a draftsman, you know. And now that I don't know just what his job was. But we liked, my husband liked him very much. And they have two sons, and I think both of the sons now are lawyers, if I'm not mistaken. They're attorneys or whatever. And a very fine family. I liked her. So you liked Sweden then? Oh yes, I do. Were you able to convince your mother that you didn't ask her to go along? What did she say now when you came home with Karl? Oh, she liked Karl right away. My mother liked the Swedish people. Oh, she was happy and so was my father. You married a very fine person. And were you the only daughter in the family? Yeah. And I had three brothers. My one brother was a housing manager for the city of Detroit. He worked for the city all of his life and he retired. But no, I've always been with the Swedes all the time. My entire life I've been with them, you know. And I've always liked them and I've always had a good time, enjoyed myself. I like them very much. And that's the only place I care to visit really in Europe is Sweden. I like Sweden. I've been to every country in Europe, but I like Sweden the best. I really do. How about your relation in Austria? Do you have any connection with them? Not occasionally. Now there are two of them here. One of them is a professor, I understand, and the other one is a school teacher. And I haven't seen them in ten years. So we're not very active with each other. So you are close with your Swedish English? Oh yes, oh yes. Definitely, definitely. They are wonderful people. Swedes are wonderful people. You haven't learned to eat søstrammet yet? Oh, I love søstrammet. Everyone says, oh, you like søstrammet. I said, I love it. How can you eat it? No, I like søstrammet. I really do. I eat it. That was the end of our interview with Helen Olsen. Thank you foryour time.