 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with two rubrics, truck for Illinois, cassette two, side one. You know, at that time, there wasn't too much money floating around, and I didn't have much. I took some – I forgot what I took with me when we went out to Montana. It wasn't too much. But then I had $90, which was a lot of money at that time. I put it in a little can and put it in the basement, and I told my brother where it was. And I don't know why I told him, but anyway, when we came back from Montana, I went down there to get my money, and it was gone. And I says to my brother, I says, Hey, I says, what happened to my money? Oh, he says, Bert needed some money, he says, so I let him take it. That was a fellow that – a couple that lived upstairs to my folks. No, it was the family, him and his wife. And, of course, they were good for it. I knew that. But, I mean, here, that's all the money I had, and he goes and takes it, loans it out to somebody else. When I come back, sure. And, well, of course, I did get it back later on. But that was kind of ridiculous. HURST. So your wife's uncle, he was homesteading, wasn't he? VAILEY. Yes. HURST. And where in Montana? VAILEY. Oh, it's about six – HURST. What was the name of Montana? VAILEY. It's named Valberg. It's a little hinky-dink town, and it's about 60 miles from Miles City. And at that time, it was – actually, there was no road. You drove through fields to find places. We had to ask ranchers on the way how to get to different places. But it was no problem. We found the places. It was really wild out there at that – just at that time. I mean, it was – no roads at all in that particular area. HURST. And you had no difficulty with the car? VAILEY. No. No, I was lucky. HURST. How about flat tires? VAILEY. We got stuck, and I had to go and get a rancher to pull us out in a place. We come in on one place where it was kind of muddy. We drove in it, and the mud collected. They called it gumbo mud. It kept building up on your tires, so you had to scrape it off. And, well, we got through that with no problem. But it was really, really isolated areas out there. You'd see a little cabin here and there where people lived in. Of course, this is in 19 – well, right in the heart of the Depression, 1930. HURST. So how did he fare out there during the Depression? VAILEY. Well, he had chickens and turkeys and a cow, and he planted alfalfa for seed to sell, I guess. And he just made out, I guess, they ate. I mean, he'd plant a big garden, and his wife would can the stuff. So they had dug a – made a cellar where they kept all the stuff. And it wasn't easy, I guess, for him. HURST. He had a big family? VAILEY. No. He had an adopted boy, but they eventually came back to Rockford. But they stayed there for – he used to come once a year by Thanksgiving. He'd raise turkeys and bring a load of turkeys to Rockford. But he lives – oh, he's gone now, but, I mean, he came back to Rockford. His name was Arvid Gustafson. And – but he came back here and got a job and stayed here the rest of his life. But he went out there for his health originally. But it was really isolated. HURST. Was it good for his health? VAILEY. Yes. Yes. Evidently because he was fine when we got – we were out there and had agreed with him. And when he came back to Rockford, he was fine. That was my wife's mother's brother. But – HURST. So there was an isolated place? VAILEY. Oh. HURST. How about your – or her grandpa, what did he say about the place out there? VAILEY. Oh, he went out there – he had been out there before, once before, I guess. But, oh, yeah, after being out there for, I guess it was two days, he said, there's nothing to be out here for. He says, let's go home. I says, well, I says, we drove out here. I says, and we're going to stay a few days. He says, if you want to go home, I says, I'll take you to Miles City and you can take the train home, I told him. He never said a word after that. And – but he used to take – he was a pretty heavy guy. He had, like I say, he had a full beard and this derby. And he would get on his horse and ride over to a neighbor. He looked like General Grant sitting on a horse. But I guess after we'd been there for a while, because we stayed there for a couple of weeks. HURST. So he was irritated. It was nothing to do with him. VAILEY. Yeah, it was nothing to do, yeah. But he got so – he knew that I wouldn't go right away. HURST. And it took you probably four or five days to go out there? VAILEY. Let me see. No, it was 1,100 and something, about 1,150, 1,200 miles. I think we took about three days. But it's ridiculous. After we left Belfour, you heard of Belfour, South Dakota. And when we left there, we went into Montana, where it was just a fence there. We had to open up a gate and drive into this – we just followed a track. There was no regular road. We didn't – I mean, that's the way we were told to go. And, well, we finally got to where we were supposed to go. But it was just like the wilderness. No signs, no nothing. HURST. And quite a few hills out there, too. VAILEY. Oh, yeah. It was hilly. But to follow just the track. And then, of course, it got late at night there. And we were supposed to be there by then. And then we saw a light coming toward us. It was a car. And they stopped. And we asked them if they knew – it was the name of a ranch that was neighbors to the uncle. They had a huge ranch. They had many sections. You know, a section is a square mile. They had many sections of land that they owned. Simpson, yeah. We asked them if they knew where the Simpson Ranch was. And they did happen to know that, these people that came. So they directed us to come. And when we got there, it was about – we kept driving in in the dark, just following this track. It was ridiculous. And we got to my wife's uncle then about 1 o'clock in the morning. You know, man, you're finding a place in the sticks like that at 1 o'clock in the morning. But it worked out fine. So then you settled down in Rockford, anyway. You married in 1935. All right. Yeah. Did you rent an apartment at first or did you buy a house? This is the place we lived in the whole time. This house here? Yeah. Was this a new house then? No. No, it wasn't quite new. Did you buy this place then? My father-in-law helped us buy it. Anton Dorsen? Yeah. He helped us get it. And we've been here ever since. That's a long time. We bought a lot on Vale Avenue. It was going to build. And then we thought, ah, to heck with it. The kids grew up and this has been fine for us. So then I worked down here, too. I worked on the basement here. So it worked out fine. How about the politics now? Your dad, was he Republican or a Democrat? Oh, I don't think he was much of either one of them. I think he was more socialist, really. I think so. He didn't join up with the group here in Rockford? He didn't really belong to any – I don't think he really belonged to any particular party. There was a group, though, you know, that got into trouble in 1917 that were sent to – Oh, yeah. No. That's right. They didn't have trouble, I guess, then. No. But he had steady work all the time, so he didn't have trouble. He worked – he had steady work as long as there was work there. It's still in – it's a big foundry yet, but it's been – new people have had it for many years, whoever they are. But he used – when he wanted a raise on a job or more money, he would bypass everybody. All the foremen, the superintendent or whoever, he would go into the president of the company and ask for more money. Oh, yeah. Did he sympathize with the unions when they came in later on? Yeah. I think so. I think so. I don't know. Were you afraid to do that? Oh, no. I don't think so. Because when he worked – I mean, when they came in, I think he had been there for many, many years. There was only one other fellow that had been there just a few months longer than my dad. Henny Neckland, his name was. They were good buddies. And they both worked there about, say, 52 years or whatever it was. That's a long time and a place. That's a long time. Yeah. That's a long time. And the work he had, you know, it was not easy work. But he never complained about the war? Never. Never. He was – no, he was a strong man. Did he take off on vacation? Oh, yes. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Every year? Oh, yes. As far as I can remember. But they were not paid for that? At the latter years, I guess they were. Well, you were growing up there. Nobody had vacation at that time. Not really, no. There was some here and there. I don't think I ever – when I – I think the only paid vacation I ever got in the factory, I think, was at the pattern shop. I think I got some. You were not unionized, though, were you? Yeah. Oh, yes. Yeah. Oh, yeah. What union was that, the Carpenters? No, no. They had a pattern maker's union. Oh, yeah. They had – I don't know how it is now. I don't know. There used to be several pattern shops, but I don't think – So you were organized before the regular worker then, because that took a long time before they got to the whole area. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. They've been – the pattern makers, they've been in the union for many, many years. I don't know if I got – no, I don't know if I got a card. Were you still paid up when you were – No, not on my own. No. There was only one – No. I just – I don't know if I got any – no, my dad, he was never really active in any – So he was a friend of Herman Hallstrom then? Yeah. He was a Hallstrom man. But Hallstrom, he flip-flopped. Why did he do that? I don't know. He got – I think he got – the way I understood it, I think when he first ran, he got the most votes from the 6th and 8th Ward at that time. If they've changed the wards now, I don't remember. And he got the least from National Avenue, that ward. The last time he ran, he got the most votes from the National Avenue and the least votes from the 6th and 8th Ward, I guess it was. So 6th and 8th Ward were Swedes? Yes. All Swedes? Just about, yeah. That was the Swedish Ward, yeah. And what about the National Avenue and – That was the big shots. The big shots over there. Yeah. So he flip-flopped. Yeah, but the big shots, were they many enough to vote him in, though? The what? Were they many enough to vote him in? Well, I suppose the – Because he was in three times. Well, I suppose still people regardless, they knew – I mean, they knew the name, Holmstrom, and I suppose even though he had changed his politics, he – you know, they still voted for him, name recognition. You know, some people, they vote for – regardless, you know. They don't – like a lot of Swedes, they'll vote for a guy just because he's Swedish, you know. He can be the dumbest and the – and whatever, you know. But if he's a Swede, then they'll vote for him, some people will. It's the same with Italians. They might do the same thing. And that happens many times, too. So – In the first election, he got most of the votes from the 6th and the – I believe that's the way it was. I can't swear to it now. I think that's the way it was. So when did he flip-flop? Was it on the second election or the third, the last one? It must have been the last one. It must have been. I think that's the way it was. So quite a few Swedes pulled away them voting for him. Quite a few. I think so. I think so. Yeah. So – Was he a good mayor? Because you remember him. I don't know. I guess he was. I mean, how much can a mayor do anyway? I don't know. You know. Yeah, but you remember hearing him. Oh, yes. Oh, sure. Sure. I remember him. And – Was he liked by the people or – Oh, I think so. I think he was, at least the first – when he first ran anyway, I mean, by the Swedes, sure. But the voting went different, though, the last time he ran. But I guess as far as mayor, I guess he was a good mayor. I don't know. I think he had the bloom. Yeah, bloom. Yeah. Was he – some say that he was better than Holmstrom. He was more particular with – I think so. Counting the shovels on the garage every day. Yeah. I think so. Was that true? I don't know. I don't know. But I think he was better than Holmstrom. Was he a good mayor? I don't know. Was he a good mayor? I don't know. Was he a good mayor? I don't know. I don't know. But I think he was considered a good mayor. I don't remember. Mayors today, they don't count any shovels every day. I say they don't. The presidents either. So they had shenanigans. This Reagan, he sure is catching it now, isn't he? He's probably in trouble, no? Yeah. Yeah. But the politics at that time, were people really – You see, there used to be – like they used to have the socialist club. Yes. You know what I mean? Even the women had – the women had their own socialist club. And there was different politics then. Now it's Democrat and Republican. And actually, in many cases, it's not much difference, really. I mean, I think sometimes that there are certain things I think should be owned by the government. Myself, I think there are certain things should be. But I don't know. But the Swedes now that came over – you were born here. In other words, you had no problem with the language whatsoever. No. You were born into it. But the immigrants that came in the 1920s, do you think they were really into the politics that was going on because they couldn't understand the language? No, I don't think they were. They were handicapped. Yeah. Yeah. So they had to believe what the next guy – you understand a little bit more. That's right. If they had a good-talking Swede, I imagine he could influence them then. You believe them. Yeah. And then Austria was one like that. I think so. The young immigrants. I think so. I think so. Yeah. I think that's right. Yeah. They said that he fooled some of the ones in 1917, you know, not to register for a draft and so on because it was against them. And then he – Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. I don't know too much about all the backgrounds. I mean, because at that age, at that age, you didn't pay too much attention to it. I think about it later on. I mean, you know, I've heard things discussed and that's where I picked it up. And, you know, you're a certain age, you don't care for – you're not that interested. I mean, you're only interested in having a little fun, you know. You don't have any ideas of the future that much then at that time. Yeah. When you're a certain age, I think you're more concerned about having a good time. But it's strange though, the people in the early 30s when the Depression hit and the Socialist Club, do you think people were afraid of them because the management were on top of them all the time? They were branded, you know, as socialists. And I am sure they were not too welcome, you know, at the factory gate. Well, I think – They were scared and we – I think – No, stop. Yeah. I think many times just the name of certain things when you say that. And actually if they analyze it, what's so terrible about it? You know, I mean, they just got through newspaper writings and different things. I think that they got the wrong impression of the different things. But there's a lot of – Sweden now, that isn't so much socialism, is it now? Well, it's Social Democrats. Yeah. But here they probably associate them with – They killed the best man they had over there, didn't they? Yes. So they probably associate them with communists here, and that's why they – Yeah. Got a bad – Yeah. That's what I think they do. I think they've been kind of mixing them in with communism. So that's a – there's a red flag. Yeah. Yeah. Well, if you have nothing, who are you going to poll for, you know? That's right. So – and the management at that time were not too happy with the unions? No, no. Actually, I don't think the – well, even now, I mean, the unions are catching it, too. After all, people got to look out for themselves. I mean, they – well, it all depends upon, I guess, how the people – a lot of them actually grow – I mean, it's how they – their family and how they grow up, what they're going to be politically. Did your dad influence you in anything in the political thinking or – Well – Democratic ideas? I don't know. I guess so, to a degree. I think so. But as you get older – He must have read the newspapers, though, in a different way than he probably or – You mean the Swedish newspaper? No. No, the American newspaper, the Oxford papers. What do you mean? In other words, you were born here. You had an easier way to – Oh, oh, yeah. I see what you mean. Yeah. Right, right, right. They helped pretty much to the Swedish, too. Their parents – their mother and dad, they spoke Swedish. Oh, yeah. They spoke Swedish all the time. All the time. All the time. I don't think – my dad hardly ever talked English. My mother, she spoke good English, and my dad did – could, but he never, hardly ever – he always spoke Swedish to me. How about newspapers? They took – Did you read the English papers, I mean, the American newspapers? My dad? Yes. Oh, sure. Oh, yes. Oh, sure. Then he used to take Carrieren or some newspaper. Carrieren? Huh? It sounds like Carrieren. Yeah. Chicago. Is that Chicago? He used to take that and then I guess some other one, and then, of course, a regular Rockford paper, Rockford newspaper. And, no, he – no, he read the English and that, and – but, no, I'd talk English and he'd talk Swedish to me. Sometimes I'd say something in Swedish and, like my brother-in-law's father used to say, Det är roligt att leva för det är många som inte föda en. So it was easier for both your mother and father then even in later years to talk Swedish? Oh, yes. You felt more at home then? Oh, yes. They spoke Swedish at home to each other, yes. And then when they had visitors, they were also Swedish-speaking, I suppose. Yes. Unless it was, I mean, that they – if they had to speak English, they spoke English. Well, excuse me for running in again, but I always had the impression myself as a child, because I heard so much Swedish, that I wonder why they ever came over here. Because they had to go to the field club Swedish and everything with Swedish clubs and everything. They didn't, you know, try to learn English to most of them that I knew, you know, when I grew up. Yeah, a lot. They stuck to Swedish pretty much, you know, everything. Even by Christmas time, all the good food that they used to make, you sure miss that. But they didn't have you go to Swedish school though, to learn Swedish? I did. She did. You did. In summer school or? Yes, summer school. I didn't speak English when I started. Was it particularly for you to keep the Swedish? Oh, yeah. I mean, even though her mother was born here. She also spoke Swedish. Oh, she spoke excellent Swedish. Her mother didn't speak English. My mother's mother, the father. Oh, the grandpa. Your grandpa did. He spoke English. My grandma didn't. She didn't speak English at all. I don't understand it. Well, I suppose there was no TV, there was no radio. No, no, that's right. It was just conversation or newspaper or whatever. It was a long time before you could add some new words. That's right. It's much easier today for people to learn. But like you now, when you came home from school, you brought in a lot of new English words and sentences, I suppose, to them. Yeah, I suppose. So they were learning from you. I suppose. You spoke English to them most of the time. Yeah, I did speak English most of the time to them. You brought them along also. Yeah, they spoke Swedish to me. How about your other brother now and your sister? Did they continue with Swedish? They were born later. My sister was born before me. She was a woman. Yeah, yeah. No, she could speak excellent Swedish. She was the smart one. She spoke very much Swedish too. Who? Your brother. Oh, yeah, Gus, my brother, he passed away here, what is it, a year ago? And he spoke good Swedish. He worked with a lot of Swedish people. Yeah, yeah, he did. He belonged to Swedish lodges. Yeah, he belonged to SM&S, SM&S, that sounds like man's son-in-law, or son-in-law. Not quite that. Son-in-law. Your brother's father-in-law was also very Swedish, so it's a strong question. Oh, yeah, but he spoke good English. Oh, yeah, real good English. He was a painter, a contractor. When you were walking down on 7th Street, you had no trouble at all then to mingle with the people? Oh, no, I had no problem, no, no. I think I spoke better Swedish then than I do now. Minus... Well, you haven't used it, or something? No, and I get tangled up a little bit. But your wife's not going to school and everything? Yeah, she... Does she keep her Swedish as well as you do? Oh, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. You saw the different nationalities, the Italians and Irish. The Irish, now, they had one up on people that came from Sweden because they knew the English. Yeah. They were not handicapped. No. Was it easier for them to get a job compared to the Swedes? The Swedes that came over? Or were they hired because they were Swedes, you think? I don't think that... In Rockford here, I'm sure the Swedes had a... They had a good reputation as far as working, I mean, and being skilled craftsmen and that. So even if they didn't know the language... Oh, yeah. I don't think they had any problem. No. How about their businesses, not in the stores? Well, that too, because there were so many Swedes around there that they... 7th Street and Broadway, that was all Swedish. Even Broadway, I mean, it was not only 7th Street, but Broadway too was all Swedish. And any little... Then there used to be little neighborhood stores around, you know, the Southeast End and all over. They were usually Swedish. And they were able to talk Swedish? Oh, sure, sure. Like, I remember as a kid going with my mother to... On Broadway to Meat Market or that, the butchers, they talked Swedish. English, of course, too, but I mean, both English and Swedish. And on the West Side, there was a different group of English? Oh, yeah. That was different. The Irish, more or less, were settled over there. And in South Rockford, in that area, that was Italians. Now the Italians, I think, have moved out of there, and the blacks have moved in, more or less. In South Chicago? South Rockford, yeah. On this side of the river? No, on the other side of the river. The other side. So how did you notice you come into different neighborhoods? What did they differ now, the Italians and Irish from the Swedes? The housing, was it different? I think, right now, of course, I'm trying... At that time, when I was going to high school, I worked in a grocery store that was on 15th Avenue in Kishwaukee. You know where that is. And... You want a little more coffee? No, it's fine. It's fine. On 15th Avenue in Kishwaukee, there used to be a little... Before the big apartment there, there used to be a little frame building, a grocery store. I worked there. So I got to know practically all the Italians in that whole area. I worked there Saturdays and after school. And... Nice people, I mean, as far as I'm concerned. You had no trouble at all? No, no. Did they talk to Italians among themselves? Oh, sure they talked to Italians. They did? Oh, sure, sure. I think they stuck with that longer than the Swedes stuck with Swedish, I think. Were they new immigrants or were they born here? No, I think... There was, of course, younger kids like myself at the time. They were born here, but they were just like the Swedes. They settled there. I mean, they... I'm sure a lot of them couldn't talk English. And... But the Swedes were a little... They... I think the Swedes were more educated than the Italians at that time. I will say today, of any nationality, I think the Italians have shot up faster than any of the nationalities around. Really. You think so? I think they have. How can you see that? Well, just from the different ones that I know and families and different things. I mean, the Italians and even you read the papers about the different Italians and that. I mean, look at almost all your fine grocery stores in Rockford. Who runs them? The Italians run them. Used to be a lot of Swedes that had butcher shops and that around. They're mostly all Italians running them, the fine grocery stores. Were they suppressed then in the beginning, you think? Oh, I don't think so. No, I don't think so. Were they more aggressive? Not... I don't know. No, I don't think they were. I think the Swedes were more aggressive than they were at that time, at that time. But how did they get the money to get started? Of course, I'm sure some of them did during the Wu's time. But I think, too, that as time went by, I think they got a better education and everything that worked in their favor, too. And, well, you can see it. This is cassette two and that's side two. With two rubrics, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side two. So this seems to me that the Italians, they made a stride then to get a hold of business. In other words, to get the grocery stores and be doctors and lawyers. Oh, sure. They educated the young people. Oh, I think they've done a terrific job. I really do. I think they've come up, well, just like the Swedes. But the Italians have been more aggressive than probably the Swedes, you think? I don't know about that, but it seems to me in the latter years they have. It was hard for an Italian and an Irishman to be a foreman in one of the factories. Oh, I'm sure it was, yeah. Especially when the Swedes were running it. They were running it harder than the Italians. Yeah, I think so. But, no. But in later years, was this after the war that you think the Italians started to put themselves in the bootstraps? Oh, sure. You mean World War I? World War II. World War II, too, yeah. Yeah, since World War II, you're right. The 20s was probably the Swedes. Yeah, right. No, you're right. Yeah, that's right. And P.I. Peterson and so on. Yeah, right, right, right. They didn't let anybody else. No, no, that's true. That's true. Because they controlled quite a bit of the business, though, like P.I. Peterson, Hillman. Hoagland. And Hoagland, yeah, that's right, and the Sonstrands. Because they had ownership of the bank. That's right, that's right, yeah. What happened with the security bank, the Folidor? They said this Truman, Engstrom, and Gustafsson, they played horses on Arlington Racetrack. Was that true or not? I don't know. I don't know. They started to get better and tried to get it back. Yeah. But they banked Folidor. Oh, yes. I'm sure. Yeah, of course they did. And the people that have it now, I don't know. They've been open for several years now, haven't they? 80 years, yeah. Yeah, yeah. About the 30s. Yeah. We kind of saw it. Well, did you look at now, it used to be the Swedish Bank on 7th Street? Well, there's an Italian that's president of that bank now. There's an Italian? Yeah, and I know him well. He used to be vice president, I think he was president for a short time at Amrock, Darjean. In fact, when Darjean, when I used to go up to the engineering, he worked in engineering. I used to go up and I'd deal with him sometimes. And he just worked up in engineering. All of a sudden, he got a job. They pushed him into, he got to be head of engineering. And then he got into the office, vice president. That was after the old Aldine retired and the young Aldine took over the presidency. Then this Darjean, he got to be vice president. Then the young Aldine, he retired, and this Jardine got to be president of Amrock. He sure moved fast. And now he's president of the bank on 7th Street. And he's Italian. And so you would think that being the Swedish Bank on 7th Street, of course, I don't know who has most of the stock in that over there. I have no idea. But anyway, he's a heck of a nice guy. He must be pretty sharp, too. You married pretty good among the Swedes, then. Oh, yeah. How about the politics? In fact, I think he's married to, I almost think he's married to Halstrom's daughter. Oh, I see. I think, I'm not sure. Don't quote me on that because I think he is. You mean Herman Halstrom, didn't you? Yeah. I think this guy's married to his daughter, if I'm not mistaken. I'm not sure, but he's a real nice guy. So the Swedes have been helping the Italians, then? Behind the office. Yeah. Yeah, he sure got boosted over at Amrock. Real, he couldn't have been a nicer guy as far as I'm concerned. How about politics? The Swedes seem to be laying low now in later years. The other groups that come up, are they Irish and? Gosh, they have nothing, do they, in politics here in Rockford. They have a guy by the name of Hall, what is it, Hallquist or Hall, I don't know. It's some guy that's an alderman, I guess, that's a little active. But the mayor is Irish. Yeah, he's Irish, yeah. They are pushing harder to get a foothold in the politics than the Swedes. Oh, yeah, I don't think. I mean, like the Swedish sons and daughters now are. I don't think there's many Swedes in the politics around Rockford, is there? I don't know. I think you have a Democratic congresswoman. Martin? Joyce. Oh, Joyce. Oh, yeah, that's right, oh, yeah. Martin, she's the, is she what? I don't think she's a Swede. No, I don't think so, I don't think so. She's Republican. Why should there be a difference between Republican or Democrat? They're the person themselves. Well, there's like a Lutheran and a free English. Yeah, yeah, that's right, yeah. I mean, it's crazy, you know. Look at how they screwed up the Democrats. These are, what do they call them, these other that stepped in and. LaRouche. Yeah. You can see how people, smart people are. They don't vote for, they look at a name, you know. He looks like he's an English name, I'll vote for him. I mean, they don't know his politics at all. I bet you half the people that vote don't know what's going on in politics. Of course, I don't think any of us really do. I don't know. So, do you think it's easier for the Irish and the Italians? They are all Catholics, they're what they say. I suppose there are some outbreaks there too, but like the Swedes now. They have become everything. I mean, you have the Lutheran Salvation Army, Covenants, Baptists, Methodists, Free, Lutheran, Assembly of God, you know, the Lutherans. Yeah, yeah. They are also one in difference. That's right, yeah, that's true. They don't seem to be united. No, no, that's right, that's right. Where the others, they are united. Yeah, because they're religions. Yeah. They're united. That's right, that's right. They think the same way. I never thought of it that way, but that's right though. They have an advantage there, you know it. So, it's hard, you know, to unite the Swedes. Sure it is, sure. Because I'm sure that the Lutherans... I mean, the Democrats and Republicans, they're fighting each other, and you can throw them up in the air and they come down and do the same thing, I think. I don't know. So, your daddy was not too interested in the politics, I mean, the... Not like that. How about you now? Have you been running for any office? No, no, no. Supervisor of... No, nothing, no. I vote once in a while. No, I've been voting. Once in a while. Yeah. It all depends on what's running. Yeah. So, it's hard then to... In fact, come to think of it, I don't even remember our aldermen's name here in this ward. They changed our ward. We used to be 10th Ward. I guess we're 2nd Ward now. Can you talk to your aldermen and recommend certain things? Well, I had no reason to, as far as that goes. Yeah, do a good job then. As far as I know, I mean, they clean our streets and pick up our garbage, and what else can they do? I don't know. I don't know how much they can do anyway. How much can an alderman do? I don't know. Can I come again? He would work a little bit, then he would stand for another brother or sister, and then it went on that way. Yeah. We had a Gus Bloom. So, you had people living with you then very often? No, we didn't, but this is the older, the church folks maybe did. What? Somebody come from Sweden, you know. No, your family wasn't that big, but I'm thinking of a Gus Bloom family now. He came over, then he went and stood for his mother and his brother. The first one, the whole family was here, but one would each stand for the other. Now, I don't know if my dad did that or not. I think your dad did. Possibly did. Yeah, I think so. He helped your brothers come over. One goes first, and then the others, as they could afford it, would stand for, you know. So, I guess America was supposed to be so wonderful. Well, I suppose they looked forward to have some more friends in the nation coming over here and be in the same area. Well, true. They'd be strong enough. They were so young when they came over. My dad was how old, Terry? Fifteen. Fifteen, and I said to him once, didn't your mother feel terrible? Oh, sure, but they were lots of kids, and they felt it was an opportunity. When you think of it, he was fifteen. Look what he did. He got to be the general superintendent, vice president of Landstuhm Corporation, and he was interested in a lot of things. So he was good in English than your father? Yes. He couldn't spell. He didn't go to school then? No. Yeah, I know, but he couldn't spell. That didn't mean anything. He didn't go to school here. No, I don't think he did. He was fifteen when they came over. He was self-educated, and he had a lot of drive. I see. I mean, he really did. He could spell, but he still wrote. He still wrote. Beautiful handwriting. He just spelled wrong. That's all. Was it in English you mean? Yeah, yeah. How about the Swedish? Oh, of course. Oh, sure. Yeah. He was no dummy. He was a very sharp guy. He died of a heart attack at 61. Sixty-one. He died at work. I see. Was he in Jameson at the time? No, he was here. He was superintendent of Rockford Furniture at the time when he died. He had just got – my brother was a foreman there, and he just got through talking to my brother, and he walked down the steps, and when he got to the bottom of the steps, he died. And my brother – somebody hollered, and my brother went down there and tried to, you know, breathe into him, but it didn't work. The Rockford Furniture, they were – They were out by Fairgrounds Park. It's ripped down. It's where the blacks live in there. There was the Harry West. There was a guy that was called Harry West. Oh, Harry West. He used to live across the street. That's standard furniture. That's standard furniture. That's, you know, that's retail. They don't make furniture. They used to, you know, years ago, but he was smart enough, and he set up a – what he'd done, I don't know exactly, but he must have – if he bought the building or what, and he made it into a furniture store. It's a retail to sell. On 11th Street. On 11th Street there in Railroad Avenue. Sure. And he used to live right across the street here. Is he still alive? Harry West. I think he is, yeah. I'm pretty sure he is. He's no spring chicken right now. His wife died. I know she died. We were to the funeral when she died. She had – they lived here then, I guess it was. But he's quite a business. And – But like your father-in-law, no, Uncle Lawson, he apparently had a lot of business in his blood. Oh, yeah. He was able to run so many different things and diversify. He was a good organizer. I mean, get things done and get things going. And it just happened that the Depression came and knocked the stuffings out of it. He lost a lot of money. And he lost a good fortune, actually. He hadn't invested in anything like land or buildings or anything like that? He had, well, a bank stock, and he had – and a lot of money he had put into the furniture, Lansdome furniture, and other things that just went – just caved in. He lost it. He lost so much. So – I forgot how to finish my speech. I thought it must be a bad experience. But he – yeah, but he – Oh, I know. He didn't show it, though. He never showed it, but I'm sure it affected him. He borrowed a lot of money. I almost think that – He borrowed a lot of money out to personal people, and they didn't pay back. Oh, yeah. He had mortgages that he ripped up. That's what you're talking about. He did that on his good. Oh, you mean on houses that people had bought them? Sure. Friends that were there, Mr. Lansing could have borrowed some money from him. Oh, yeah. Some really good friends and stuff, you know. So they were helpful, and – Yeah. He helped a lot of people, and he never got any money back. So – Well, I suppose at that time, only a handshake would give you – Oh, yeah. He didn't – I don't think he even asked that, did I? Yeah. Oh, I know. Yeah? They were taught when we were little kids, when he said – I think it's true, especially the Swedish people, you paid cash. You didn't buy anything until you could pay for it. And what was it? Was that when he was going to go into medical practice? He said, try to get in the Swedish community because they pay their bills. There's been a trace – But now it's so different. Now it's everything is – They learn, too. Yeah. But now it's everything needs cards – I mean – Credit cards. Credit cards, see? But, well, we just were brought up, you don't buy anything until you could pay for it, and you wait until you could pay for it. And you have the money. Yeah. It's not kind of that's in our heads yet. Well, I suppose it is because – It is with me. I don't know if it's good or not nowadays. That's a fact. They say it was a bad economy to be like that. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And have you been working or not? The thing is now, we'd want to pay for a card, cash, sure. No, another thing is don't do that because if you can borrow money less than where you got it invested, it's better to – I mean, a loan at that, two something, well, they had two 9% there. That was just a common – You have one daughter and one son. Right. And they went through high school and college, right? Right. Both of them. Yep. And your son, he became a doctor. He's a doctor out in Colorado Springs. Medical doctor. He's a general practitioner, yeah, doctor. And your daughter? She went – after she got through high school, she went to Presbyterian St. Luke's Hospital and studied nursing. Well, first before that, yeah, she went to University of Iowa for two years. What she should have done, she should have continued there for her nursing, but she didn't. She came home. Then she went over to St. Luke's Presbyterian Hospital and took up nursing. So she went there three years for nursing. She got a good education in nursing. Well, then she practiced nursing for a few years, and then she decided she wanted to do something different. So she went out to San Diego, California – or Tucson first and worked in a hospital. Then she went over to San Diego, and she decided she wanted to take up acupuncture. So that's about three years ago. And she took up acupuncture and oriental medicine, and she should be through with that now, I would say, within a couple of months, I believe. She thought by Christmas that she'd be through. And what she's going to do with it, I don't know. I hope she can make a living off of it. She should be able to now with the acupuncture and being a nurse and then this oriental medicine. I don't know how that will come in, but how she's going to set up to make a living off that, I don't know. She told – we talked to her the other day, and she says that there's some doctor out there that's – a chiropractor doctor has offered to let her come in there and do her acupuncture and whatever. I hope it works out. One of the oldest medicinal treatments in the world, is that right? Yeah. Well, she said – she called us a couple of months ago. She had her first real patient in the hospital, and he had – all he had was a tennis elbow, whatever that is, I guess. Anyway, she stuck needles in him, and she cured him. So she was kind of tickled pink that it worked. Well, I hope it works out now. Are they married? My son is married. He has four – three boys and a girl, and my daughter is not married. And he's married to what kind of – He's married to a German – well, she's German descent girl, very nice gal, very fine gal. And they have the – he has a boy – he's been married twice. Now, this is his second marriage. His first marriage he had two boys. The one is 22, and the other one is 17, I guess. Yeah. And then he has a boy and a girl with his wife number two. And the boy is 15, I guess, and the girl is 10, I believe it is. So they're going to visit us now. They're coming Wednesday night. They're going to stay until Sunday. So kind of looking forward to it. You get a big family in the hospital. Yeah. Well, we – see, our house isn't that big, so we rented – we got the room over at Sweden House for the – my son and his wife for four nights. And then the kids will stay with us. So it's just a little ride back and forth, that's all. So that's going to work out fine. Because they've stayed here before, but then we got a cot and stuff, but it's – this is all we need anyway. Forget it. Yeah. Yeah.