 Sunstrand signed a contract with me in order to get me to work for him. I think this was in 1939. And I made a fuel injection pump. And Borg Warner got interested in that. So they paid me a fantastic salary of $500 a month. Which was an awful lot of money in those days. Because in most cases $125 an engineer got. This was an awfully high salary. And Hugo Olsson got a hold of this. See I had worked at Sunstrand before. And then I quit them. So that I could develop this fuel injector for cars. So I built this fuel injector and put it in the car and Borg Warner bought it. And then Hugo Olsson had heard about that I was working for Borg Warner. So Hugo came to me and asked me could I make him an oil burner pump. Yeah I said I'll make you an oil burner pump. But he said we can only pay you $300 a month. So what difference. Money has never made any difference to me because I only been broke once. I think I solved that problem pretty well. And after that money has never meant anything to me. But he offered you $300 and you already had $500. That was a tremendous step down. No I had both places. You could work both places? Why certainly. And they also had an office in Rockford, Borg Warner. They had a research center in Des Plaines. And Borg Warner, did they approve of that too? Did you have to ask them for permission? No. No? No. But you know when you're independent and you have certain patents. You were independent then? Oh yes. Already then. Oh yeah. I was independent. I see. So there was no discussion about the price a little bit with Hugo or anything. You took $300 then? Well I took $300 because Dave Sunstein wasn't dead at that time when I came back to him. And then, well, my dad and Hugo had been good friends. So why shouldn't I work? You had a little obligation to him as a good friend. Yeah. Why shouldn't I do it? So we got going on this oil burner pop and the oil burner pop turned out to be a pretty good item. Was this one of the first ever developed oil pump or was it just a… There were other oil burner pops but this was the first one that would go directly into the oil burner. And this pump had a cut off valve that would start the spray in the burner and also cut it off. And all that was built into this unit so it became an oil burner pump unit. And it was used for every household? Well, whenever they had an oil burner, yeah. So that was going pretty good. And what time now? Was that before the Second World War? That was back in 1933, 1934. I see. So most of the houses then, they were gas or coal furnished? Coal was most of them. But then it started in with oil, yeah. Because you could buy a gallon of oil in those days for six, ten cents. It was cleaner and more secure. And they got away from all these coal trucks. How long did it take now for you to develop this from scratch, so to speak, when he told you we need an oil pump? Well, that was easy. You see, I've been making pumps since I was 18 years old. You wouldn't tell him, though, that you had a monthly salary? No, with Sunsland, I had $300 a month. And on top of that, I had 3% of the selling price. So I got a commission there. So you figured out you were going to have some coming back to you after you developed it. Yeah. But you did that pretty fast. Oh, yeah. And you see, there were people at Sunsland, like Bert Carlson's father, that was a damn good factory manager. And him and I worked together. And we had worked together when I was 16 years old. I always had my friends. We always remained the best friends throughout the whole life. On top of that, I want to tell you that about a year ago, Ernie is now dead. But he has a sister that's living in Sweden. And she came over one day and visited us here. And we sat down on that platform. We got a bench down there. And she wanted to know everything about Ernie. And I could tell them everything about Ernie, because I had been with him since I was 16 years old. And he was my best of a friend. That's the same as Floyd. He became my best friend. And Floyd had a keen mind. He was a damn good mechanic. So he followed in his father's footsteps then to be a good mechanic. Oh, I'm sitting together with Gunnar Wallmark. And this is Grende de Tour. Is it Dixon or...? It is called Grende de Tour. We're outside Grende de Tour. The first address is Dixon. It's Dixon. He belonged to this county here. Grende de Tour. And he was born 1905, 17th of December in Rockford, Illinois. But your parents, they went back to Sweden after you were about a year old. And then in 1922, my brother and I came back to Rockford again. But how old were you when you left for Sweden the first time? Just about one year. One year. So you had all your schooling in Sweden then? In Mörlunda or Kristala? Oskarshamn. Right in the city? But you see, my mother, she lived in Oskarshamn. And I had a grandmother. And my, I guess it's the youngest sister of my mother. She took care of my grandmother. And those two ladies wanted to have something to do. So mother said, why don't you take care of Gunnar? So you stayed there? So I was about, right after we came back from the United States, I came to Mörlunda. And I stayed with my grandmother and my aunt. So there you stayed then. But what happened then when you became 16 and you got... Well, then you see, my grandmother, she had a son by name of Carl. Carl Burgendahl. And this Carl Burgendahl, he was the best mechanic in the world. So they were always talking about how wonderful Carl was. So I had to meet Carl. I see. And he lived in the States? Yeah, he lived in the States then. You only heard about him? You never saw him? I never saw him, no. So what did you decide to do then? Then I came back to Rockford. And that was in 1922. Alone? Huh? No, with my brother. With your brother? Yeah. And the first thing I did was to get a hold of Carl. And Carl and I became very good friends. And we grew up together, or I grew up together with him. And he taught me everything. And then he had a machine shop too, see? His own machine shop? His own machine shop. And I could do anything I wanted in that shop, see? So I became a machinist long before my pants were dry. I see. So he was your teacher then? He was my teacher in how to do things. And he talked in Swedish to you at that time then, because you didn't know? Well, sure. Because you had to learn. Yeah. But you learned English fast though. You see, Carl, he was working for Barbara Coleman in the research department there. So he was probably as far ahead as anybody could get in the mechanical way, you see? Was he called an engineer then? No, he was called a... Well, in this research department that Barbara Coleman had, he had to correct machines that didn't function right, see? So he was little of everything. He knew the basics for everything then? Yes. Had he done any inventions of any sort? No, he has never made any inventions. But he was one of those guys that if I asked him something, then I could get an answer for it. He explained it to you? Yeah. And I think it was maybe six months later, because he was always thinking things over very thoroughly. Oh, I see. Before he gave you the answer. Yeah. But he never forgot it? No, no, no. Well, you see, when I came back then and started on this oil burner pump, then Ernie Carlson and I, we worked together. And when a guy can work in a shop together with a guy that's in charge of manufacturing, you can always come across with two ideas. In other words, Ernie Carlson's ideas and my idea. So we built this thing up. So companionship is good then for the… Always, yeah. And we have workers there that still come down here and visit us. So once I have a friend… He stays a friend? Yeah. I don't want to… I never forget him. When you were in Sweden, you were 15, 16 when you left. Were there any cars on the road at that time that you were interested in? I mean, tinker with these cars? You mean the… In Sweden? No. You didn't come close to any cars? No, no. They only had one car in Oskarshamn. The red car. Was it the fire truck? No, it was a single one. But there weren't many cars. So you were not interested in specifically cars then when you came to this country? I mean, were you interested in tinkering around with motors in general? In general, yeah. You see, this Dave Sundstrand, he gave me a fantastic chance. How did you get in contact with Sundstrand? Was that Hugo Olsson? Yeah. You met him? Yeah, well, yeah. I was hired as a blueprint boy. And how did you meet him? Or how did he know of you? Well, that's through my dad, see? Through your dad? Yeah. So you went there and you were hired as a blueprint boy? Yeah. For two hours a month? Yeah. And it didn't take long before I was working for Dave Sundstrand. Because making drawings has always been my hobby. Oh, I see. So you learned it... You didn't go to school then in Rockford for an engineering school? No. I went one night. One time? Just to look at it? No, they were... There was nothing here in the school that I was interested in, see? Because all they had in school was verbs and... And there was no mechanical things you were interested in? No, that didn't exist. They didn't have that? No, that didn't exist in the schools then. They didn't learn you in school to be a mechanic. So this Dave Sundstrand now, was he as good a teacher as this Burgendorff doll? Let's put it this way. My uncle, he had prepared me so that I was... As far as anything physics, I think I could stand on my own. I see. I see. So when Dave gave me a job, I had already built a steam engine when I was 10 years old. In Sweden? Yeah. Oh, I see. Who gave you those ideas though? Did you think about it yourself? Yeah. So Dave, he could sit in my bedroom in Rockford, on my bed, and tell me what to draw because I had a drawing board at home and he thought that was too noisy at the factory in Rockford. So he came to your room then? Yeah. So there was the planning? Yeah. And he had all kinds of ideas. And he was that kind of a guy that all he wanted to do is to see if his idea could be worked out. And those ideas, were they with the time, not too far off? No. So he started on a hydraulic pump then. And he gave me his ideas and I drew it up and I found something in it that didn't function. And he would just tell me, well, you go ahead and finish it up, see? So he gave the whole job to me. So my first hydraulic pump, that came off the line in 19… well, let's say 20, 28, 27. Before the Depression? Yeah, yeah. And that pump was there for what kind of machinery? For hydraulic machinery. Is there one of the most efficient systems there are? There is, I mean the hydraulic. You mean… To be efficient? Well, it's the most accurate way. Well, you take this alternator drive. And you can control the rotation of a shaft within 15% of 6000 RPM, 15%, see? Which is pretty accurate, see? So it is easy to control things then with the… With hydraulics, yeah. You have to have the pumps, the motors, and all has to be efficient. And now, I started with this pump that Dave Sundstrand designed. And of course, I made thousands of mistakes. But I was on my own, so nobody could ever fire me. If I want to do something, I just went out in the shop and made it. So I built it myself, so I didn't have to ask anybody for whether somebody wanted to build it or not, see? So in other words, you had their endorsement to be on your own, they trusted you in every respective way. Yeah, and then as I became an independent, so I had a contract with the different manufacturers. During the Depression, did you stay with Sundstrand then, in the 30s? Yeah, you see, Depression… I left Sundstrand and then came back to him a couple of years later. So in 1930, I came back to Sundstrand again. Because then it was bad times all over. All over, yeah. So were you without a job then, during that time? I always had a job, see? No, you quit your job. Yeah, I quit my job. Because that was during the Depression. He quit his job because he wanted to work on this thing for a car. You see, I want to build… Let's put it this way. I'd been working on cars when I got back from Sweden. So cars was in your brain, and you were… Yeah, and I worked on carburetors. And with the carburetor, I started realizing that you couldn't get the right control. So you had to have an injection pump. So I built then this injector, injection pump, the injection system, and took it to BorgWarner. What year was that? That was in 1930. Did they come on the market, though? No, it never came on the market. Because in those days, they could buy a fuel pump and a carburetor for a dollar and a half. My injection system would cost about $25. So it was out of the sky. The only thing is that people started realizing that fuel injection was the only way to control a car. And what do they do now? They have to have fuel injection. You were 60 years ahead of your time. Did you have fuel injection in your car then? Sure. Well, you see, I had to sell it to BorgWarner. So I had it in the car and drove down to some place out there in the east. And this mechanic, this chief engineer, he thought the drawing looked fine, but will it work? Well, I said, I got one in my car out in the parking lot. If you want to come out, you can drive it. And they did? Yeah. What did they say then? Right off the bat, they... Did they buy it then from you? I got $500 a month. I see. But you sold the patent to them then? No. But they never put it in the cars? No. Isn't it strange? Do you think some part of the country would be able to buy it? I mean, I know it was tremendous. It was too early, see? It was too early. And things were so cheap in those days, you know. And people didn't have much money. To take an eight-cylinder car, you could buy for $800 in those days. So your carburetor was way out of line compared to the rest of the car? Yeah. It was efficient. Yeah, but nobody wanted to put $25 more. It was too much. Too much for the... So Boy Warner, they had to sell it then to either GM or Ford or Chrysler? You see, I got the hookup with Boy Warner, which meant that their laboratory was always open for me. So anytime I had something I wanted to test, I could always test it there, see? But they were awfully nice people. So you stayed with them then for a long time? Well, that was a year ago. I was out there and tested some stuff. So anytime I come in there, I'm welcome. But not most of the people. Gunnar was the first one that tested anything in this place. But not those people I retired. And Boy Warner has been cutting down quite a lot. They've had some problems with takeover. The management is not the same. So there was one thing that you never got credit for, and in other words, the public was not ready for it. No. You were way ahead. Yeah. And then you... That was in the 30s? 1930, yeah. 1930. That was during the worst depression. So what were you doing then? You were not working in the factory. You were working at home then, trying to... Yeah, I built everything at home. I had a little shop at home. In Rockford? Yeah. Did you employ anybody? No. You never thought of starting... So many like Swan Hillman, Eric Anderson, and Ernie Swanson, they started their own companies. You never thought of that? No. I was only interested in keeping myself busy. You didn't want to bother about books and bookkeeping and stuff? Oh, no. Manufacturing. No, no. You see, I was making more money than I needed anyhow. Because you could have manufactured this thing, but it would be unsellable then at that time. Well, then I would have to sell it, see? No. If Boy Warner can't sell it, I can't sell it. But then you see, Sunslam wanted the oil burner pump, and that came across. And it didn't take long before the war broke out. And on most of the airplanes, they wanted a power unit that could operate the machine gun. Oh, the tail gunner? The one... No, just... They could be... In those days, it started out with... They had a machine gun in back of each engine. So they were shooting through the propeller, and they needed a power unit to sight these things, see? So the Air Force came to Sunslam, and I built them a power unit. How did you test those things, though? In most cases, the Army tested it, the Air Force tested it. Were you with them then, so you could see? No. No? No. In most cases, you see, they gave me the specification, what it should do. And as long as it was up to the specification, they didn't need me. What kind of a driving force was behind it? Was it hydraulic or...? Yeah. I see. So there came about a very compact unit. It was only about this big. Very, very small. And the Air Force knew about this, of course. So when their B-6 airplane bomber came about, and they wanted to change over to a 400 cycle, then the Air Force knew that I was working at Sunslam. So they came to Sunslam, and we built them a test model. So that was your job all the way from the beginning? Yeah. All the way up? Yeah. And in a couple of months, we had a unit for them to test. So there, the first alternate drive came about. You were an important guy then. You were almost needed a secret service man. So did you stay at home too then during that time, or did you work at Sunslam then with this...? Back and forth. Back and forth. So you were still independent? Yeah, still independent. How did they come about to be independent? Did the Union come into the play there? No, no. They didn't have any Union in those days. No, it just that... Here's what I said, that this is what I like to have. And it cost a lot of money to file patents, so I wanted somebody to pay for that. So then you got to the company, yeah. But there must be a headache to have lawyers and patents rights and everything. Well, to me it hasn't been any problem. I have never had a lawsuit. You never worried about that? No, I never had a lawsuit. And I got about 80 patents. And still all those patents that I had, Sunslam had the right to them, see. But then American Motors came to me and wanted me to build them a car transmission. And Hugo Olsen said that they wouldn't let me work on that because they were afraid they were going to lose too much machine tool business. You know, Motors might be mad at them for giving American Motors. So I started to realize then that all the patents I had wasn't worth anything, see. In other words, they had to be made better. I always like to see something new coming up, see. And it was always when a guy like American Motors came about, then they gave me a chance to make a car transmission. So I was with them for five years. In Kenosha? Yeah, yeah. But you had to sign over all his patents to Sunslam, he loved. In order to get out of Sunslam and that contract I had with them, see. You had to sign over the whole thing? Yeah, I signed over and I was glad to... Well, it is decaffeinated, but... I was glad to do it, see, because I had other things in mind that was much better than what they had, see. You had the future ahead of you. Yeah. Yeah, but they must have felt pretty bad, I mean... No, not one bit. No, I was happy to do it, see. You like its freedom. Freedom, yeah. It was worth more than being under the... Well, I know what I had in mind. So you left Sunstrand then? Was it after the war? Yeah. After the war. But you still stayed in Rockford? Yeah, I was built... So in Kenosha I went once a week, see. I see. And American Motors now, they were the same as Nash? Yeah, Nash or... Yeah. And American Motors. What kind of transmission did they have then? What did they ask for? Well, an automatic transmission. Oh, that was their first automatic transmission? Yeah, they wanted an automatic transmission because I had built one at Sunstrand, so they had heard about it. And who also wouldn't sell it to them, see. It was politics again. So American Motors after that time only had stick shifters? Yeah. So how did you start out, did you go on by the old... Well, after five years I felt I wasn't able to make one quiet enough. See, they had to be dead quiet so they couldn't hear them running in the car. And then some other company had come up with one. Didn't they buy it from some other company? No, no, no. The whole thing died out, see. But you were working alone on this transmission? Yeah. But you see, I still hadn't accomplished what I was after, a quiet. And it's just about two years ago that BorgWarner tested a car transmission for me, which is dead quiet, see. Oh, you didn't give up then? You continued? Yeah, I continued, see. But I paid for it myself, see. So this in the making, they never come in the cars in the next ten years? Well, you never know. But you haven't sold that one to anybody then? No, Volvo's been interested in it, see. And this Gudmundsson? Gudmundsson. Yeah, Gudmundsson. Gudmundsson at Volvo. He knew about what I had done, see. So he wanted me to come to Sweden and work there, see. But that was in Trollhättan. That was Flygmotorn. Flygmotorn. That was in Trollhättan, see. And he was a peach of a guy. But then he retired. And then he died. And then new people came over. And these new people, they didn't allow me to work on any new stuff, see. They were afraid that I was going to take somebody's job. So they were… Do you think the union has anything to do with that? No, no, no. No, it was just an engineer that was so power crazy. Oh, I see. You know, I was with them for three years? Three, four years? Four years. He could ask me hydraulic questions, long ones, see. So then he would turn around and say… He had it all written down in books, see. So he would turn around and look it up in his book. And he said, yeah, three years. This is what you said three years. And that's what you said now, see. So he was testing me. And then when he saw he couldn't get any place with me there, see, he got the management to okay that I wasn't allowed to work on hydraulics any longer. So then we moved back. See we moved to Sweden once. Yes. Oh, you still go to Sweden though? Every year, yeah. Half a year or… A couple of months. A couple of months? Yeah. So you have a hostel in Oskarshamnstrakt? Yeah, it's behind this town. So and you are from Norway? Ja. So how does it work out not to work with the thinker in Sweden? I'm a turncoat. Maybe you are helping out and giving some assistance. No, not very much. Oh, she's my secretary. She's my secretary and I can't live without her. We've been married now for 27 years. I'm an old man, you know. I'm 81 years old. Well, you don't look old. You look like a 60 year old. Well, you're active, Janet. You're active. Well, my thoughts and I can live with people and well, as I say, there's new people now at Volvo, see? You're working with them, though. I mean, they should be interested in something. Yeah, they, well, you know, after I finished this transmission and tested it, that Borgwarner found was quiet, dead quiet. I got the best patents in the world on it, see? You have patents on that one? Ja, ja. Your own patents? Ja. I mean, you know, the people at Volvo has heard about this, see? So we're on talking terms because this guy that didn't want me to work on hydraulics. He's still reading his book. Ja, he's out. He's out now. Well, his aim was he wanted to be the first and the youngest. And he wanted to be the youngest one? And his aim was he wanted to be the first and the youngest, and he wanted to be the youngest professor and the first professor in hydraulic engineering. Oh, I see. So he's in Linköping now as a professor. No, no, you see, this, this, what I have now, it's my whole life's work. And when you get it down so that it functions, and the patent office realizes that you got something new. You have no trouble getting, getting it. But this, now with this new transmission, there must be a lot of questions, though, because there are so many transmissions floating around all over. How were you able to convince them? Well, I haven't tried selling them. They have to come to me. Whatever they want, but whether I don't need to sell it, see, I have finished my work because I got me a hydraulic transmission that is quiet, see. So you didn't give up then with Kenosha deal? Oh, no. You still? I still stuck to it, see. So I made more and more mistakes. Was it simple mistakes you made? You know that now? Yeah, sometime, of course, when it came out and it wasn't quiet, then you had to throw it out. But it was easy for me to throw it out because I was the boss, see. No, but that must be the hardest decision, though. You don't want to make a mistake. Oh, yeah. You're wrong. Oh, yes. He does. He has the patience. I don't know. So he tries again. If it had been me, I would have given up a long time ago. No, no. What were the simplest mistakes you made the first time for Kenosha? Well, it's a question of knowing how to do it, see. There's so many different... Yeah. There's different stages. See this pump? This pump has a... That came from Volvo. They're using this one, used to belong to Gunnar. They own it. Oh, what is that? Is that a... It's a piston. It's a piston. Yeah. And what did you do... He was 80 years old and one of the guys that had made this thing. Well, they want to come back with me. In other words, they realized that they made a big mistake when they let this guy... Ol. Ol Olson, yeah. You met one good Olson and one bad Olson. You see, I didn't give a damn what that guy was thinking. See, my Uncle Carl learned me all that stuff, see. That if you can't see what's wrong with you, then you can never correct yourself. And he was good. Yeah. Because whenever he had gone over in machinery, everybody wanted to work on that machine because they knew that machine is working. It was working. He was a hero. Yeah. How did he get along with the rest of the engineers now? There are so many book learners. Where? At Sundstrand, for instance. I haven't... You never worked with any? No, I don't have anything to do with them anymore. No, but when you were working there... No, no. But you see... You had your own department. Yeah. You hired... You mean when I was working at Sundstrand? Yeah, you know what I mean. Yeah. Well... How did you get along with him though? Because you know, like this Ol Olson now, I mean, he had one train of thought, you know, and you had another. Well, take... Take this Floyd Carlson. He was my assistant. He was the best guy that you could think of because he knew how to machine. He knew how to make a drawing. But he was a personal friend of yours also. Also, yeah. Tremendous respect for you. Oh, gosh. But what happened when someone from MIT out in Massachusetts came in there? Well, I don't give a damn what they say. See? That's the hell of it. No, but these Bernshaw guys, they worked together in that little department. They're great guys. They were just like a club. And if they needed the machinery, they just snuck out in the evening and stole it from some other department, you know, and hauled it in. They had a ball. When those guys, cronies, come together, you wouldn't believe half of it. No, I have never... It has never bothered me what people say about me, see? And if they want to find some mistakes in something, then they still aren't able to convince me. And if they can't convince me that I made a mistake, I just let them talk. As you say, when you have made as many mistakes as I have made, okay. Yes, the seniority, you know. On that one, too. But isn't it hard? I mean, you wake up in the morning here. You still have some new ideas to perfect things. You said that you don't want next best. You've got to have the very best. Yes. In anything there is. And here you are so far advanced now with this fuel injection. If you don't have it in the car today, I mean, you don't have a car. No. And you are so far ahead. Why does it take so many years, though, for the rest of... Well, you see, in this pump and transmission that I have, you needed a universal joint. So it took me probably almost a whole year to work out a joint for this pump. And you made it all yourself. Yes, so when I finally got something that was workable, the joint part, but that's only a tenth of what's required to make a transmission. So there's a whole series of mistakes that can come up. So when you think about it now in your shop here, you don't know how it's going to work out when you take it into Chicago for testing. Can you test it here, too? Yes, I can test a certain amount. But in most cases, there's some minor tests that you can do and satisfy yourself that you're all right. So when you tested this new transmission, you felt pretty good then? After you heard it running? Yes, when a Jew from Israel has been running here a lot for three years, he's been running back and forth because he found out from Borg Warner that I had the only quiet. And he had tried Sunstrand, he had tried all over the world, Germany, Volvo, yes. So you will have people lining up now, standing in line to get this one. This is going to be a tremendous selling point for any car owner, I mean manufacturer. That won't be this year. He has already his plans for this year working. Oh, I see. The most important to me is that I'm satisfied. So it seems like the hydraulic transmission is as good as I can make it. How long will it take now before it gets into big production? Will it take another eight, ten years? Or never. Before they get it in, set up machinery for it and building you? Well, General Motors came to me and they wanted a joint for their front wheel drive. And they had heard about this joint that I had, I don't know who, but it leaks out. So General Motors came and the joint that's in the Tornado is my joint. Oh, I see. So you made it for them then? Yeah. You almost stole it. Yeah. In most cases. As far as money is concerned. He is so absolutely the worst from things like this. So dare you come in then? No, no, I can't put my nose into that. I mean that's his problem. Well, you can read the letters and see what they want. Oh, yeah. He doesn't care. Like, like, yeah. He's a watermelon and his things. But you have to have legal help all the time so you can depend on it. Oh, yeah. This patent business must be a tremendous. Yeah. And in most cases, if you can get a lawyer that's willing to listen to you, see. So he sees your side and I got a damn good lawyer now. Well, you had tries everywhere. Huh? You had tries. Oh, gosh, yes. But this guy, this guy, he, yeah, he, he, he. I said, after this patent was allowed, I said to him, I want to thank you for doing such a good job. But all he came back with, I couldn't have done it without your help. Oh. So he is understandable then. Yeah. You are. Yeah. When, when, when, when they start realize, you see, there's a, there's an examiner in, in Washington that examines all the patents. And they came up with the questions, now how to get around what they are objecting to. And if, if this lawyer that I have realize, realizes that I got the answer for it, and then he writes it the way I want him to write it, and then the patent is allowed. But it takes time, though. Well, a couple of years, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So this unit will be a small condensed unit then, or? Oh, yes. I see. So there will be a revolutionary, brand new. Yeah. What do you think about the automotive business? Now GM is going down, they have trouble. Japanese are coming in, and Volvo is doing fine, of course, but it's very expensive, though. Mid-Rachsalb. Mid-Rachsalb. Mid-Rachsalb. It's a good car. So are you able then to, you know exactly how SAAB is working then? Well, there's a. Well, how do you get service for it? You can listen to it, you know exactly what's missing. Oh, oh, yeah. You can listen to it, but. I don't do it, I don't do anything to know. No, we have a good, there's a Dane up in Rockford. Oh, I see. But they, I'm a Dane good friend with a chief engineer, research engineer at SAAB. Yeah. And they gives me jobs to do, see. Oh, I see. So you think the SAAB is a better car or is it a better drive? Oh, yeah, it rides nicer and. Well, some like the mother and others like the daughter. Yeah. I wouldn't have a hydraulic transmission, see. And if I had to work so much to get the joint perfect, see, because there again it's got to carry a lot of capacity. So, if you can come up with something that's simple, see, well, it's got to be simple enough so I can make it. Is the material better today to work with? No, no, material is. No difference? No, no, material is. I use Teflon. Yeah. I use Teflon. Yeah. I don't think you can leave it out there. The whole thing is that my life has been with this development. And when you can work with people that can really help you in every respect, see. But like what you have developed now, I mean, you have to help yourself most of the time. Yeah, oh, yeah. It's your ideas. Yeah, but you have a shop in Rotherford that you somewhat agree. And you see here, if you think about this transmission, here you have General Motors. They have at least 5,000 engineers. Oh. And they can test day and night. Yeah, and they never get any place. Yeah, why is that? Well, it's probably that they're not allowed to work on what they want to work on, see. No, and then there are 10 guys sitting around the table having a conference, and everybody wants to come up with an idea and get it on the paper. And then the first idea probably is forgotten about. Yeah, and then they sit there, yeah. Well, we will talk more about it next week. What is he doing now? I mean, he has only Commedia One. You are also sitting in in the morning before he goes out there to his shop. Oh, no. What does he do then? Does he read anything or just sits there and thinks? What is he doing? How does he prepare himself? He sleeps good at night, and then he wakes up, and then something has been going on. So he goes in there and writes down something, goes back to bed, and then he gets up in the morning, and if he has something up in the shop, he goes out there. So he goes out and… We sit at the drawing board. There was one morning when I came out, and there were ice on that stone out there, see. And I fell and broke my hip, so I got an artificial hip there. So that's what's… It's those minor little things. But he healed up, though. I couldn't see anything while he was walking. No. No, but look, he works sometimes from 6 o'clock in the morning till 8, 9. Not as many hours, no, but… And these calls are year-round. So you had to stay with it until… Well, you know, in most cases, the ideas, they come to you almost automatically. And during the night, somebody tells you what to do the next… Yeah, but like I said before, GMs, engineers, they don't have a set on an American. No. They must do something else during the night. But look at the hours he puts in. He sleeps good when he sleeps. Yeah, but he puts in long hours. Well, I just want to tell you, I have crazy dreams. The craziest dreams that you could dream of. So one morning, I was telling Karen that, you know, what makes a Rolls Royce quiet? Why is it such a quiet car? They have a rug made out of nuts and bolts and pipes that are joined together that hangs underneath the… Yeah, underneath the… Chassis. Yeah, underneath the chassis there. And here I was working on this Rolls Royce, and I had to take these nuts and bolts rugs out. And my God, I couldn't understand how I was going to be able to screw that thing together again. And then the car would be noisy, see? No, but he lives, he dreams, everything is… You have interest in his life, you see? Yeah, so… No, but you know, that's the only thing that goes around in his head, is the shop there and whatever else he thinks about in the same… I got my Karen, though. Oh, she can relax. Well, that's good, you got to be two, you know, to get through the… No, and then he doesn't drive the car anymore. So I'm the chauffeur. Yeah, you're the chauffeur. So you spent some time in Sweden, and was there your intention to stay in Sweden? Yeah, we moved everything we had in Rockford over to Sweden. Oh, from Rockford? Yeah, from Rockford. The house was built back in 51. He was married to a Swedish girl. And the girl came over here, and then she wanted a home there. And this farmer, good friends of hers, had promised them when they got married that he'd give them a piece of property. So he built that house for her. And then she died after five years. She had a heart condition. It's a beautiful place. It's outside the Oscarsham. Oskygle is a small little… where six farmers have gone together. And there's a great big lake there, Illern. And the farmers around there own most of the lake. So one of the farmers that I met in 37, they were awfully friendly and good friends. So they said that whenever you get married, we're going to give you the property. You can build a house wherever you want to. But to stay in Sweden, was there as a free environment as being over here? Well, you stay in Sweden, and you see, it's very easy for us to stay in Sweden.