 This is cassette two, side one, this is a continuation with Dorothy Beale, Moline Lenoir, cassette two, side one. So you remember then when the Clara Lodge— I was a charter member. Charter member. And when they started it— How did it come about? Well because the men's lodge would not take in women. Some lodges had done that. But these stubborn old Swedes, they weren't going to take women into their lodge. Why was it that? Do you really think they were chauvinistic? It had nothing to do with the— Sure they were! Yeah, but who cooked the coffee and who made the dinner? Well that's all right. That's what women were supposed to do, weren't they? Not in the meeting hall. My mother cooked down at that Vikings' Nat— Well, and Mr. Davidson—you never knew Mr. Davidson. No. He was going to start this new lodge. So he was getting people signed up because he's—I don't know that my dad was against women in it, but anyway, a lot of these fellows were these prominent Swedes. Boy, they didn't want women in their lodge. So Davidson was more open-minded. Yeah. Oh, he was a saint on earth if there ever was one. So he is signing up people to join this Clara Lodge. And my dad said to him at church, you didn't ask Dorothy to join. And he said, no. He said his wife—that's who the lodge is named after, Clara—was Davidson's— Maybe she was the one who was pushing. Well anyway, he said to her, he said, we talked it over and we decided we wouldn't ask Dorothy because she had always been real active in the church. So she probably wasn't going to get involved in a lodge, see. Oh, my dad said, I think she'd join. So Mr. Davidson came and signed me up. And I'm saying to my dad, I'll join that lodge. That's okay. I'll join that lodge. But don't think I'm going to be active. And I want you to know, I have been a financial secretary for like thirty-eight years. I'm not going to be active. They had a secretary for the first year and she didn't know what she was getting into. She only had thirty-five members. We now have three hundred and fifty, you know. And I go almost nuts sometimes trying to keep these records straight. You are still very active. I'm still active. So your pledge of not being active was not good. That's right. But you mentioned the church, you know, 1940, there are things between the church and the lodges. They were all gone by that time. They passed. Well, you know, I was going to tell you, when my dad said to me, I'm going to join the church. So I said, I'll tell Reverend Magnuson and he'll come over here then and talk to you. So Reverend Magnuson came and said how very happy they were to have them want to join the church. And he said, I would think you would especially be happy to do this because of Dorothy, because she was everything in the church. I worked in the Sunday school for fifty years, you know. As a teacher? No, I'm a secretary. I count the money and take collections and attendance and that, you know. So anyway, then Reverend Magnuson said, do you belong to one of the Swedish lodges? And my dad said, I thought, boy, here it comes now. I'm not going to get in because of that. So my dad said, yes, I belong to the Vikings. And Reverend Magnuson said, well, that's fine. You'll find a lot of your friends in Salem then. He didn't say you can't belong to the Vikings. Used to be, you know, years ago. I know they were very opposed to it. So he wasn't then? No, no. And that's true. Half the people in the church belonged to the Vikings. So from meager beginning, you are up in 300 members now? 350. When I'm old, you know, 35 would be a real good number to take care of. Of course, after we moved into that new building, you know, and then people want to be a Viking. So you are as active as the men in their lodge, in Thor lodge. In other words, you have monthly meetings? Oh yeah, twice a month. Twice a month? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. What do you have on your program now, though, to stimulate the interest to join? Well, it is not what it used to be. As I say, when I was a kid, I sort of grew up with the Vikings whenever they had something. Well, they took me along. That was it. But now people have so many other things that... Too many activities. Yeah, they really do. When you joined then, was there an insurance policy? Yeah. That you could buy your insurance? No hospitalization? Well, it doesn't amount to anything. What you have is sick leave, or you get paid 70 days a dollar a day. Well, what was 70? We've never raised that. But insurance is pretty good insurance. And you're still using the insurance as a drawing card? Mm-hmm. And there's no age limit? Well, yeah, you can't... After 65, you can't... Join? Well, you can join as a social member, yeah. So when you started in the 1940s, that was during the war, what kind of activities were you involved with then? For service men or... Yeah, we did that. We used to have smorgasbord for money-making propositions and that. For the war effort? Well, no. This was after the war, before we started. We didn't start it till after the war. Well, it was 1947. It was... Yeah. That's right, I was thinking about 1940. So, 47, that's right. And were you involved also with the local affairs? We still do that. We give... Oh, to like care and share and things like that, you know, Christian friendliness. And you have some luncheons and dinners? Yeah, we have... And we have two card parties a year and various things to make money, so... But our attendance is not what it should be, but it's... This is not the social life anymore that it used to be. TV has taken away the social life. Yeah. So it is not the same. But all young people coming in, joining all them? Well, you know why they come now. So they can get into the bar room. No, but then they have to belong to the club. They have to belong. To the club. It is not enough to belong to the large, only. But you take in... They got to be of Swedish background, they're going to declare a large club. Scandinavian. Scandinavian. Yeah, doesn't have to be Swedish. They changed that a few years back. And then also, like, if a woman belongs and she's of a Scandinavian background, then her husband can become a member of the men's large. Like the president's chief, his name is Feliciak? Yeah. That's a good Swedish name. It sure is. How did he come in there? Well, he's married to... To a Swede. To a Swede, yeah. And Vi always sort of kids me. She said, gee, you even know how to spell it, don't you? And I said, well, it seems to me when I went to high school, we had a... Feliciak in there, that's how come I know how to spell it. But you know, that's just like church anymore. Used to be all Swede names in church. Well, you got to look for the Swede names in church now. We have Vandevoordes and all kinds of names. Is that through marriage then? Yeah, mostly. So you mean there are Belgian boys marrying... Oh yeah, yeah....to Swedish girls? Yes. That's what we used to say. Now which church do you belong to? St. Lutheran. Oh, do you? Oh. 41st. If we go back now a little bit about the Christmas time, did you observe the Swedish Christmas at your home? Oh, we certainly did. How was it done? Did your father pick out the Christmas tree or how did you do it? And the Christmas tree never went up until Christmas Eve. The same day? Yeah, you never did it before that. And then I told you that this bachelor friend of my dad's who introduced him to my mother, he was kind of cute, never got married. And he used to say, oh, I thought I was going to be Selma's second husband. And I introduced her to Gus and Gus married her. I said, well, I have to wait for Dorothy now, he said. So then years later when I got married, I said, well, Alfred, I couldn't wait forever. It was too bad. Anyway, he used to come and spend Christmas Eve with us. From Geneseo? Yeah. And we danced around the Christmas tree. Was there a big tree? Oh, yeah. We used to have a big tree. Spruce or fir? I don't know, whatever it was. There was a green reed? Yeah, well. Where did dad pick that up? Downtown or somewhere? Oh, probably up here on 7th Street. 7th Street used to be quite a busy. A marketplace? Mm-hmm. But we always had a real tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we used to have a Christmas tree. And we had a real tree. And then my father, you know, he had to soak this old lutefisk. I hate fish. Now, that's a poor Swede, isn't it? But you know how you soak it with lye and whatever you did? So he did that? Oh, he did that, yeah. And he evidently had some of his friends' wives teach my mother how to cook some of this Swedish stuff because my mother was an excellent cook. Yes. And in fact, my dad said when he married her that he didn't even know what a good cup of coffee was. But he said, I sure found out after I married her. I knew the difference between a good cup of coffee and one that wasn't so good. But then one thing he used to make every year at Christmas time was that silsalat. Chop the stuff up real fine, you know. Herring. Oh. So he loved all those Swedish dishes. Oh, yeah. And your mother could prepare them? Yeah. She'd been taught by her mother? No. No? No, she hadn't been taught by her mother. I think that some of my dad's friends' wives probably were the ones that taught her. I see. Did she eat them? Oh, yeah. She ate everything. So you didn't like lutefisk? I don't like any kind of fish. When I went to Sweden that first time, you know, I said to my dad, now you write and tell your brother. You write and tell him I don't like fish. He said, I'm ashamed to write and tell him I have a daughter who doesn't eat fish. Okay, so we let this go for a while. And then my uncle wrote and said, well, now write and tell us what Dorothy likes to eat so we know what to feed her when she gets here. There's your opportunity. Tell him I don't eat fish. Oh, he shook his head. Got to write and tell him you don't eat fish, you know. So I get over there. And as I say, my uncle was not like my dad. He was not reserved. He thought things were funny, you know. And I said to him, what did you think when my dad wrote and said I didn't eat fish? He said, we thought it was kind of funny. We got a son here who doesn't eat fish either. So like when everybody else was eating new potatoes and fried herring, I'm eating Italian sausages with new potatoes. But boy, my relatives, I think I've got probably the best bunch of relatives in all of Sweden. They're very perceptive. Oh, and understanding. So continue with Christmas. You had live candles in the tree. Oh, sure. We had live candles. They were lighted on Christmas Eve. Only one time. Not thereafter. I don't think so. People were scared at that time to have live candles because of the fire. Yeah. But Christmas meant a lot to my... He used to decorate. He had, you know, streamers in the ceiling. We had so many decorations. I got boxes of them. Did your dad do that? Yeah, he liked to do that. He dressed the tree too? Yeah. With flags? No, I don't recall we ever had flags, but we had karameller. You know those things. Made of paper? Yeah. So he was interested to do that. And you helped out then later on when you got older. Oh, sure. Sure. How about Santa Claus? Did he arrive on Christmas Eve too? Yeah, I guess he did. Because we have a recollection of when my brother and I were quite small and we didn't want to go to bed, you know. We'd been having a good time. My sister went out and rang some sleigh bells and my brother said, hurry up, Dorothy, let's go to bed. Here comes Santa Claus. But I think the year that I stopped believing in Santa Claus, and this would have been like after World War I, and times were kind of tough, and my dad made me some doll furniture. I have it to this day. But I think then I knew there really wasn't a Santa Claus. It made no difference. I got all... You got the Christmas gifts at Yule Club, on Christmas Eve? Yeah, we always had them on Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve was much more festive for us than Christmas Day. Christmas Day you might... Well, we didn't have turkey for years. We didn't go to Yule to them because you didn't... Oh yeah, we went to Yule to... Oh sure. Walked over to Yule to... To Salem. To Salem. We didn't have a car in those days. We didn't have a telephone. I guess we were poor and I never knew we were poor. I thought, well, we're as good as anybody in town. And when you went to the stores then, there was 7th Street? Upon 7th Street. That was the main drag. Yeah. So you very seldom went downtown? No, that was a special occasion to go downtown. When did you go down there? Was it for some... for the big stores, New York stores, and the Pennies? Fisk & Lousley's. Did you ever hear of Fisk & Lousley's? No. Yeah, Fisk & Lousley's used to be on the corner of 5th Avenue and 15th Street. 15th Street. That was a big... Was it a department store? Uh-huh. There used to be three big department stores down there. Fisk & Lousley's, New York store, and... Barnes & Barrett & Scott? Yeah, but before that it was Lunt's. Lunt & Company. How about Swedish stores now? Did the Swedes cater to them, or...? Yeah, they... I like... there were no Swedish gift shops or anything in those days. Now, like, they had several grocers that specialized in Swedish stuff. They don't on 5th Avenue or... Yeah, uh-huh. What was on there? Across from First Lutheran Church was Swanson's Grocery. Yeah. So there were enough people living down in the area, so you had to have a grocery store to... Oh, yeah....to bring in stuff to them. But up here you had several stores on 7th. They had everything up here. We had... Were they Swedish-owned stores, though, on 7th? Well, the one... But I don't think they specialized in Swedish stuff. Were Belgian-owned? No, not necessarily. This Johnny Boone, and he must have been, like, German. But, you know, when you went into a grocery store in those days, there was one wall filled with groceries and another wall filled over here. Now you go down to Jewel and you have rows and rows of nothing but crackers. That's a different world. I've lived a long time, haven't I? So when you went to the store, then they picked all the things for you. You couldn't pick it up yourself. No, and you got a lot of it in bulk. I know. Jewel have gone back to that now. But... and you used to charge your groceries, you know. In bulk? Yeah. And at the end of the week when you paid the bill, you got a sack of chocolates or something. So that was the premium. But you had to pay every week then, though. Yeah, yeah. How about the grocery men? Did they come to the house and take up orders? No, I don't recall they ever did that here. Yeah. They used to... they would deliver them. But, no, I think... I don't recall that they ever came and took orders for... But then there used to be a coffee man that came. To sell coffee? Uh-huh. I see. This was the beginning of the Jewel stores, you know. It used to be the Jewel Tea Company. They came around and sold coffee. In loose weight. Was there ungrounded coffee? Yeah, I suppose. Not ground? No. You had to do that yourself with the coffee grinder in your lab. Do you remember that? Yeah, about what happened to the old coffee grinder. That'd be a... well, if you kept all that stuff, you couldn't get in your house today. You'd have to sort it out. I'm not... That was probably worn off. Oh, I'm not... Did you drink a lot of coffee, though, years ago? I don't drink coffee to this day very much. I drink it when I go out, but I don't... I never fix coffee for myself. Like, in the morning, I have a glass of juice or mocha or something. Did they drink more coffee years ago, you think? Well, I think they drink more coffee here than they do in Sweden. Bigger cups here. But, I mean, years ago, not your parents. Did they have the coffee... Oh, yeah. My mother and dad drank a lot of coffee. So did you have coffee with them to work? Oh, yeah. And we had a couple cherry trees out in the backyard. And my mother used to can cherries. All winter long, my dad carried a little container with cherry sauce. Never got tired of them. I got tired of looking at them. It was for dessert. The Belgium families, now, did you play along with their kids or you went into their houses? How were they different in the suites, in the cooking? Actually, I can't say that I recall. Oh, yeah, we had one neighbor girl over here who was a Belgian girl. I used to go with her. But otherwise, I went with the kids I went to school with. They went to their own school? Yeah. Did most of them go to Catholic boarding school or whatever you call it? No, over at Sacred Heart, they had it. Yeah. That was the main... But see, the kids I was going to school with, why... So they continued all their schooling even through high school in the Catholic school in Belgium. What kind of work did they choose then after they came out of school? Were they better prepared, you think, than the regular... Well, I don't think they had as good a commercial course as we did in high school. But they did have commercial courses. But we didn't need to go to business college. If you took what they had in high school, why... They had to enter office and then you learn on the job what you had to do. That was before the computerized world came in. Before I quit work, we went to IBM, you know, KeyPunch. Boy, I don't have to think about that anymore. That's good. Stressful days. Yeah. So you quit working when you became... When I got married, I quit. And your husband, what kind of work? He ran a sporting goods store in Davenport. He had worked there and then he had gone to Rockford and was manager of a store there. Well, and the fellow that owned the one in Davenport wanted to plan to retire. Well, two weeks after Arnie came back, Mr. Creighton died. But Arnie went in and eventually bought the store then from the son-in-law. And he really liked that. So there was his line of business then. Mm-hmm. And it was fortunate for me because when he died then, I sold it to his junior partner. And that's 11 years ago, and I've still been getting, you know, an income from the store. I think our lives have a pattern. I always kind of feel this. We fight it sometimes, but I think they have a pattern. You saw the Roaring Twenties and the Depression and the war. Well, one day, you're sitting here interviewing me, and next door to me I have a Mexican family. Can't talk to the mother and father because they don't know English. But one day, there's two kids, and they're probably, I don't know how old they are now. This is a couple years ago. They came to the door and they said, could we interview you? Yeah. I said, what do you want to interview me? Well, when would be convenient? Well, any time. Then she had to go home and get her sister. And these kids came over, and this was really fun because they were asking me about, oh, yeah, something about the good old days. Do you remember the Depression? Yeah, I remember the Great Depression. So then they said, what about Lindbergh? Oh, yeah, I said, we went in our Model T down to meet Lindbergh when he came into the airport here. Anyway, these kids, this was part of their schoolwork. They were doing this interviewing, you know. So they are newcomers from Mexico, and the kids are born here? Yeah. The best neighbors we had, though, because they are so clean and there's no disturbance whatsoever. At one point there was, what, 11 of them living in the house, but then the one young couple and their little boy moved out. And then the one girl went with them. So I think there's seven of them over there now, but never any disturbance of those kids. When the ball goes into my yard, they'll ask me if they can come and get it. Now, how many kids do that nowadays? So I've been real fortunate. So they are taught to behave then towards the neighbor. In regard to Clara Lodge, that's the only Swedish group you belong to, Lodge, you belong to that? Well, I do belong to Vasa. The only reason I joined Vasa was because... Traveled to Sweden? Huh? Did you travel to Sweden on some of their... No, I've never done that. I'm not a coupon person myself, you know. But Roy and Lillian Peterson at New Windsor, do you happen to know them? I know the name. Well, they live on a farm out there. Roy used to work down the shop with my dad, he's, well, closer to my age than he was to my dad's, of course. But, you know, we've been good friends always. Well, he had belonged to Vasa, and his wife wanted to join, but she didn't want to go in alone. So I joined Vasa. They have a free Christmas dinner, I go to that, and then maybe one other meeting a year. So they give you some support? Yeah, yeah. Newspapers now, did your dad take Svenska Medalaren? Always. Always had that? Mm-hmm. And read it every week? Mm-hmm. So how did he keep in contact now with Swedish relations? He wrote letters about twice a year? Oh, my dad and his brother were real good about... and he wrote these big long letters. Now, his sisters didn't write, but my dad and his brother really kept in close communication, always. And when I went to Sweden that first time, I remember my dad saying to me, because I'm sure you know people like this, that they, you know, sort of brag about their families and that. And my dad said to me, well, I'll tell you one thing, you're not going to go over there and find any skeletons in the closet, because I have always been honest with you about everything. This is true. This was true. So he told you about his background? Mm-hmm. You find nothing when you came over there? Not one thing, no. I didn't find any brothers and sisters or anything like that. He was getting up there at 30 years of age, then? Yeah. Mm-hmm. High age to take a move. And to leave. Well, his father was dead, had been dead for a number of years, but his mother was still living when he came. And I think she died within a matter of months after he came here. So he had no parents left then after. He never visited Mitchell's at the Kora again? He never did. He never did. And nobody in our family had ever been there until after Arnie and I got married, and we were going to go up to the Black Hills and the Badlands in there. So Mitchell was on our way. Well, nobody could have hit it better than we did. We got there the week of the Corn Palace Festival. Lawrence Welk was performing. Everybody said, you'll never get a place to stay. We got the last motel room in the town, went to see Lawrence Welk, and Arnie thought this was real funny. I said, you know, nobody in our family ever, ever came to Mitchell, South Dakota. And Arnie said, I think you ought to go tell the newspaper about it, that your father came here like so many years ago. What would they care at the newspaper about that? But anyway, I got to Mitchell, so I've seen Mitchell. But my dad never went back there. He wasn't too fond of Mitchell. Yeah, the bad year. Too hot, and no Swedish folk. Yeah, yeah, nobody spoke Swedish up there. So your husband, he found companionship with Lawrence Welk, a fellow German. Oh yeah, yeah. Oh, it was real cute. We're sitting in the audience, you know. And of course, Lawrence Welk was from that area up there, so here are all these ladies. Oh, look at, now look what Lawrence is doing now. It's a good show. So that was a trip to South Dakota. My husband liked to travel as well as I did, which was very fortunate. So you can see other parts of the world and learn about people. I have one ambition left. I'd like to get to Russia someday. And I could go, like when I was in Sweden, I could take like a four-day trip over there, you know. But I don't know how my relatives would feel about it, whether they would... Oh, I don't think they would care about that. Whether they would like that, because any time I ever got to Sweden, you know, and I wanted to go someplace else, oh, you're having a good time here, what do you want to go there for? I had to go on a tour to get to... Search, you know, about when those people came, and there are a lot of cousins. But I'm the only one here that would, you know... You are having this for yourself. How about your stepbrother now and stepsister? They were older. Are they still living? My sister is 84 years old. She lives up in Pontiac, Michigan, and my brother lives in Rockford. Were they interested in the Swedish background as well? Not really, and you know... When your dad was talking to you now, were they also listening in then? Yeah, but I don't think they cared. They didn't care so much? I don't really think so. Why do you think they didn't care? Well, there's just a difference in people, that's all. And my sister married into a Swedish family. In fact, her father-in-law, I don't think, could even talk English. But there's just a difference in what we care about, isn't there? But they were also... You would think something would rub off, though, because they had to listen to... Oh, yeah, but I don't think... Well, and then, of course, the fact that I was at home so long. You know, they got married young, both of them, and left. So they moved off from the farm? Yeah, yeah. So I think... But you joined the Clara Lodge, they were already off then. Oh, yeah, they were long gone then. Maybe a Swedish organization? No. Yeah, my brother belongs to the Vikings up in Rockford. Baltic Lodge, isn't it? Yeah. I see the Vikings started a new lodge now. It's the first new one since Clara was organized. The latest lodge? Well, it's probably both, because now most of them are. In what city? Around Chicago some place. Crystal Lake, I think it is. Some new Vikings are sprouting up. Yeah. So they were not so much interested, were they? No, not really. And, you see, their own father was born at Geneseo. And they were so small when he died, so no memories of him. Yeah. And then your mother, she was born here, of course. Yeah, she was born at Geneseo. She didn't have that feeling for Sweden, this? No, now she never had a desire to go whatsoever. She and my uncle used to sort of kid back and forth in letters if they could meet, if they could go by land, they could probably meet, because my uncle didn't want to go over the ocean and neither did my mother. No, my mother really never had a desire to go. But you can understand with my dad, to have his whole family. He didn't have anybody here, so... So he was happy when he had you to carry the weight of the culture further. So did you learn the cooking, then, the Swedish cooking, from your mother? I'm not much of a cook. The rice pudding and... No, no, I'm not much of a cook. I walk down to the store and buy this frozen stuff. You're waiting for St. Ester Karlsson, then, to bring it to you. Yeah, that's right. That's right. I go down to the Viscons to their smorgasbord. You know, they have a smorgasbord on the second Saturday. And that's the way my mother used to cook. That's why I like that. But no, I'm not much of a cook. Do you remember the Swedish athletic club here in Moline, the soccer club? Oh, Philip Karlsson used to be in that. And was Nils in there, too? Oh, and I bet Gus Magnussen was, was he? So you remember them, then? Yeah. Did you watch any of those soccer games? No, never saw any. So you didn't date any of those Swedish immigrants that came over in the 20s? No, no. And you were saying in, I mean, in that article in the paper about... And this friend of mine, I bet you know her, Bea Swanson, she was married to Clarence Swanson. She said she had met you. Did you live next door to the Lindholms? Yes. Yeah, and she said she had met you. I didn't tell anybody else you were coming today because I thought that sounds kind of smarty to call somebody and say, do you want to come and hear my life story? Very good. But anyway, I did mention it to Bea, and she said, oh, she said they lived next door to the Lindholms in East Moline. So she knew who you were. Do you think you are more like your uncles in Sweden than your father? I definitely am. I definitely am. So your father wouldn't have called and said that... I should say not. Why is it, I think, the difference between people, how they can be open and... Well, isn't it good we're not all alike? Wouldn't it be a funny world? Boy, I'd really be in trouble if everybody wanted to talk as much as I do. And most of them don't want to listen. Like, you know, you go on a trip someplace and you come home and you're going to open your mouth and say something, you know? And right away they start in on something else. But I tell you, I can fool them once in a while because when I've gone on these trips, like at church they will ask me to talk to certain groups, you know. Then I get a captive audience. Boy, they can't get away from me. They have to listen to me then. As a matter of fact, Thursday afternoon I'm going to talk to our older ladies at the church. See their sentences. You know what I'm going to talk about? I'm going to tell them about my first trip to Sweden. Oh, I'm sure they're interested to find out. Well... They can remember someone they're only if they had taken that way. There's one thing I noticed, you know, when I talk to people, they always agree on... They never ask the questions, you know, when it was time to do it. In other words, before the parents died. But you apparently have done that. You listened to what your dad said. Your dad was old enough to understand that he should tell you as much as he knew. Yeah. But most of the parents never did that. Well, see, this is what I'm telling you, that I'm the only one that knows all of this stuff. I really am. And nobody is going to care after me about it. But now I have cousins like my one cousin. She's the youngest of seven children. And her brother has come and talked to me about some of this stuff sometimes. She doesn't care one bit about it. So you can sense that. Yeah. So I don't even talk to her about it. But her brother will come here and sit and talk. But I think it's a difference. You know, most of the immigrants came when they were in the 18 and 22, 23, and that's it. And because my dad was older. He was older. But that age group now, between 18 and 22, they don't seem to care to sit down and talk with the children even when they come up in the service. No. No. They don't. But your dad apparently did. Well, and I guess I never realized how much he did talk to me until, well, when I was a kid, you know. He'd write letters to Sweden, and I would write in English, and then he would transpose it in Swedish, and I copied it. So I sort of had this contact with these cousins. And then I think the fact that we are of an age group, I think that makes a difference. So the door was already open when you arrived in Sweden. It was easy for you to go. They knew who you were. My uncle had told my cousins when I came, you know, he said, she's going to be homesick, you know, an American coming over here. They thought that was pretty great, anybody that was born in America that wanted to come of our generation, you know. So you spent four months there the first time. It was a long time. Yes, and my dad told me when I left, you know, he said, just because you're supposed to stay four months, if you get homesick, come on home. You don't have to stay there. I don't want to come home at the end of four months. I was having a good time. So where did you stay then, on the farm? No, no. My uncle and aunt lived in Gothenburg. So you were not out in the country. No, no. And most of my relatives lived right there in that area. And back when the boat came in, the boat turns around in the harbor, you know, and here were all these relatives sitting on the dock there waiting for me. And I'm standing up with my banner, you know. Did you recognize them? Sure. And I'm saying, they're my cousins, they're my cousins. And this woman was next to me said, how do you know they're your cousins? You've never seen them before in your life. Here I am. I'm holding up a banner that says Moline, so they're going to know who I am. Maybe I don't have the banner there. Yes, you do. Yeah. I painted the house here. Yeah. July 28. Yep. July 1950. Well, it wasn't really July, it was really March. I think they will know me. Yeah, I was going to show you when we came in. Oh, those are people on the boat. Yeah. This is on the boat going over. That was my roommate. But here I was going to show you when we docked then. I'm taking pictures from the boat. This is your date on the boat. Yeah. I might have been old maid, but I had boyfriends along the way. Here I am. How did you know now? Could you really? Yeah, somebody said to me. And see, here they are. They're taking these pictures as the boat's coming in. I'm taking them from the... They're my cousins. They're my cousins. How do you know they're your cousins? You've never seen them before in your life. And there, you get off, you know, and there's all those flowers, you know, all the flowers they give you. I felt like I was at my own funeral. Did you get outside often at any time, though, because there was no cars so plentiful as there are today, for instance? Did they take you out in the... Well, I want you to know the day before I came, my cousin Stane got a brand new car. So I had transportation. You had everything? Yeah. Offered to you. Oh, now, that's wonderful pictures of you. Well, it really brings back memories, you know. But my uncle said that he told them, you know, now she's going to be homesick, you know. Here she is, an American. She's coming over here. So he said, now you've got to come and see her, because they all live right in the area, you know. He said, well, the first week, I think they sort of felt obligated. But he said after that, they'd keep saying, who gets her this weekend? And there was not too many Americans coming to Sweden before that time, because the war was going on. Yeah, that's right. Even when I went, I, you know, they still had things that were rationed in in 1950, because I took cigarettes galore with me, and coffee, sugar. They were still tough times in Sweden, I remember. What did you write back, now, to your dad after the first week in Gothenburg? What did you tell him? Not even the first, not, I wrote to him every day on board ship, you know. And mailed it from Sweden? Yeah, and I said, the night before we landed, I said, I just want you to know, even if they don't want me over here, it sure was worth it just for the boat trip. I had such a good time on that boat. It just was ten days, and you're never worried that you're out in the middle of the ocean, sitting in that little boat out there. But then I sent a telegram when I got there, you know. And, see, they all came to meet me. They all live right there. Nobody went to school nor to work that day that I came. They're all down there waiting for me when I come. They're going to see you. Oh, yeah, after all, we only got one American cousin, you know, so we're going to go meet her. And then I sent a telegram that night. Well, they still didn't know. I said everything was fine, they were there to meet me, I'm here and that. And my cousin had said to a friend of hers something about, our cousin came from America today, and she said, I know what I sent that telegram out with the funny name on it, Dorothy. That's not a Swedish name. Is that what they said? No, they aren't Dorothy's in Sweden. Well, not too many of them, I guess. They called me Dot, so they didn't have to call me Dorothy. They could have called you Christina. Yeah. You were well prepared. Yep. So how did you find other homes compared to the American homes? Well, they had much... Congenialities or... Well, now, my aunt and uncle, the apartment that they lived in, they didn't have a bathroom. They only had two rooms, you know, this big kitchen and the big living room. And my dad had written and asked if I could headquarter with them. He said, she can sleep in the kitchen. My uncle wrote back and said, it's not necessary. We sleep in the kitchen ourselves. You know, they had this... But anyway, all of these cousins then had bathrooms. So I got shifted from one place to another because I thought I might have to go to a public bathhouse, but I never did because the cousins all had bathrooms in their apartments. They lived in the old section then of town? Yeah. Yeah. And they didn't want a chance to do newer things? No. They were satisfied the way they did? Yeah, they... But most of the cousins, now the one cousin had a home. The rest of them all lived in apartments. And they didn't have a whole lot of things. But what they had was good. They don't do like we Americans, go out and buy everything on the market, you know. Did they ask you about certain things, what you had over in this country? They even asked me to explain the economy, and I didn't know how I was going to do this. This was funny because this one cousin, my cousin Gustav, he wants to know everything, see. Now you explain about this. And I'm doing this in Swedish, you understand. And I thought, my gosh, I wonder if he knows a thing I'm saying. But then another one of my cousins came, and he repeated it for him. And I thought, by golly, he did understand what I said. So it's repetition, and you could understand it much faster than you could explain it yourself. I see. So you had headaches then? But, you know, we really laughed between us because I make fun of them about some of the things they do. And they do the same thing when they come here, but they do it in a good way. You know, I mean, they're like my cousin Greta came a couple years ago. And she didn't say a thing about this when she was here. Everything was fine, good food, everything was good. But she's telling them over there when I'm there, you know, you go into a restaurant, and the first thing they do is slap down all those glasses of water. And then they give you coffee right away. They didn't want the coffee right away, you know, but they can laugh about it. So your Swedish is different. Yeah. But we don't notice it over here because you're used to it. Yeah, well. And I made fun of them because they thanked for everything. Oh, tack så mycket. Oh, tack, tack, tack så mycket, you know. And they got to laughing. They thought that was kind of funny, too. But as I say, we have a real good relationship with each other, so we can do this kind of thing. So you work it out in one way or another. So when were you last back to Sweden then? Two years ago. Two years ago. So the Hessians consider it from 1950 then? No, I've been there. That was the fifth time. Fifth time. Yeah, see, I went in 1950, and then my husband went with me in 1968, and he went with me in 1973, and then he died in 1975. So then I went in 1978. That's when I went on the tour because I was never going to get to see Norway if I didn't do that, you know. And I wanted to go to the fjords of Norway, and I was never going to get to see them. So then I went with the Augustan Alumni Group. Got to see– Ed Landerson. Yeah. And then I left the tour for six days in Sweden. From Djordje? Mm-hmm. Then I'm going by myself from Gothenburg to Leen shipping. I was going to meet them there. Changed trains twice, and my one cousin said, I'm not worried about you. You can talk Swedish. She said, I came from New York, and I couldn't talk English, and I got there. All right, you're going to get there. Here I am dragging this big old suitcase. But one thing about their trains, they run on time, so got off one, on to the other one. And that time, we went to Finland too then. So you've really been seeing the country. Did you see any similarities now with your relation over there and your dad? Were they the same? You said your uncle was different in one way, more open. Yeah. But did you see any similarities other than that? Oh, his son is one that doesn't eat fish. It's just like my dad. Just like my dad. And then I look exactly like my mother. I know that. All I have to do is look in the mirror, and I know I look like my mother. But not to my Swedish relatives. They think I look like them. I see. They could see some similarities. That's interesting. You brought the connection back. Your dad left, and you went back again to connect with him. Isn't it good, though, that I got to know them before he died? And he said to me when I went that first time then, he said, I'm happier to have you going and meet them than if I were going myself again. And I said, Why? And he said, Because I would have to say goodbye. I would be leaving them again. And I said, What about me? And he said, When you leave over there, you're coming home. So he didn't want to take this chance? No. He didn't want to go back again. He had that feeling. Mm-hmm.