 But, they had a dance hall up there, see? And, it was up about five miles from Rockford. And then, they had parties and picnics and stuff like that up there. But, there's that snow crossing on there. That's just above the bridge. The bridge over Auburn Street was high enough for these boats to go under. You know, that's a bridge they're fixing out there on Auburn Street, if you've been up that way. Yeah, you can talk Swedish or English, you don't want to. Well, both of them came from that part. So three children? Yes. And your father went to America because he had a bad job? Yes, it was a big stretch. So he was out of work for a longer period? I think for almost a year. A whole year? Yes. And that was the lighter factory? Yes. The lighters? Yes. It was a big favorite. I guess so. But you don't remember anything from Sweden? Only what they talked about. Everything we talked about was a year ago. And my mother got letters from home. She wrote every month. About how she lived. And she wrote to her sister and to her family. So your father had siblings in Sweden? Yes, his father lived there. And he had a brother who was a sailor. I don't know what he was. A sailor? Yes, a sailor. And he had another brother in Chicago. So when he came here in 1910, did he go alone or did he come to someone? He came to... I don't know who he came to. But he had another Nilsson with him when he came. And then there was a Mrs. Nilsson who came with three children. So there were two cousins and two husbands. I see. Yes. So there were six children and two mothers who came? Yes. So they had to pack up and leave with the rest of the family. So you don't remember anything from the trip? No, I was not seasick, I know. All the others were seasick. So you managed? I managed well. So you didn't have any worries? No. And when you came to the country, to America, to Ellis Island, you don't remember anything? No, only that we came there. Your mother didn't tell you anything about what happened on Ellis Island? No, there was nothing there. But we didn't have any trouble getting through. Not really? No, but when my father came, we didn't have any money. Nilsson went through the line to show us money, then he went back to give money to my father. And then he went through to show us money. Because you didn't have that much money when you came. I don't remember what it was. So it went well? Yes, sure. So you learned right away how to adjust? Yes, I heard about Chicago and how they did it. Otherwise you would have changed stops and come back again. I don't know what they did. I don't know, but they were supposed to have so much money when they came. Guaranteed, yes. So your father was in Iraq, because he had started working here? Yes, he worked in furniture shops. I see, furniture factories. Yes, and then he went out to farm. He was a boy and then we went to farm in Vindelmälven. So that's out at Kempenbod? Yes, he went up to Kempenbod and farmed. I stayed home until I was 20 on the farm, and then we stopped farming. So you went to school in Nymund for how long? Yes, a couple of years. It was a small one-room school. So you went to school here in Rakvor first? Yes, he worked in many places, so we went to school a little everywhere. I think there were eight schools I went to. And that was all around Rakvor? Yes, all around Rakvor. Frihort and Pekkatan? No, just Rakvor. It was a mile and a half from Rakvor, that's how far we were from. I see. So you went to school all around here? Oh yes. So you went into town for a mile and a half? This farm was here. That farm, yes. Yes. Räkisen, I don't know where it is now. Yes, that was all the farmland here. And everything was outside. So you had to change schools eight times? Yes. How did that go? Yes, I had to struggle a little when I first came. But my brother was a little older, so we didn't have much trouble. So he was a schoolteacher at school? Yes. So you have two children today? Yes, we made out alright. So it was a little difficult when you came to school, you had to struggle a little? Yes. But it's easy. Children forget quickly. Old people get angry and they get angry, but children, the next day they can get used to it and one day they can get used to it. So it became normal to have so many school changes? It wasn't bad today. But I think it's better if you can go to one school. It's better, because then you have the same friends. Yes, and the same teachers. So you know what you have. Yes. What kind of children were there? It wasn't all Swedes, but Italians and... At Argal there were many Scots. And at Milford there were Irish and Swedes. Then there were Catholics and they were afraid of Catholics. The Swedes? Yes. They were afraid of that? You didn't understand that they were afraid of Catholics? Now you grew up and got used to it? Well, all the people were the same, Italians, Catholics, you know. The people were alright, but the Catholics thought... They tried to go to hell. And the Catholics thought we were on the way. And with the Irish, of course, it's a bit difficult, right? No, no, they're nice people too. Boys, in school? Yes, there weren't many boys from Ireland. There were mostly girls. I see. Yes, now there were two boys and a girl. I see. In farm school there were 15 to 20, 10 children. It wasn't like in the big schools here in the city, where they have now. They hauled them in and bussed them. Not at that time? No, no. So how did the Irish work with you in the farm? They were farmers. They were farmers? Yes. Dorans and... Did the other ideas have the Swedes or were they farmers? No, they were farmers the same way, but... They were a bit weaker, I think, than the Swedes. The Swedes mostly were barely made. It took time for them, yes. Yes. Do you think the language helped the Irish a lot? That it was easier for them to do business and so on? With the language? Yes. Because you studied English. Well... The Swedes had a hard time getting along in the beginning. Yes, but my mother took everything from school, so that was good for her. So she learned English in a way? Yes, sure. My father worked for a tax office, so he had to speak English, because he didn't understand Swedish, so he could speak everything. I see. So he learned English while working. Yes. And when you came home from school, you and your brother, did you speak Swedish at home? At home we spoke Swedish. Only Swedish? Yes. And it was a bit of a struggle. Yes. The children in the farm spoke English, but first we spoke English to my mother. And then she learned how to speak. But in the last ten years, we spoke mostly Swedish. In the last ten years? Yes. You say that? Yes. Well, my father didn't want to speak English, he wanted to speak Swedish. And that a little bit hardened the arteries, I think. So he felt better at home with Swedish? Yes. My mother was the same way, and my grandmother, she spoke Swedish at home. So your grandmother was also over? Well, that's mother-in-law, isn't it? Was it father's mother? No, no, no, it was my wife's wife, my wife's mother. And in that way, yes. Yes. That's mother-in-law. Mother-in-law, yes. So she also lived with you? Yes, for a couple of years, three or four years she lived with us. But she only wanted to speak Swedish at home. Yes. Yes. But... So you came back when you were a little older? Yes. So you didn't have to be in the business world any longer? We could speak English, but we preferred to speak Swedish when we got older. So you had two siblings, you were three children? Yes, when we came over. Could you speak Swedish all the time? Yes, we spoke English at home. But you spoke Swedish to your parents? We spoke Swedish to my parents mostly. So it wasn't just you and me who spoke Swedish? No, no, no, it was the other two. The other two, yes. Yes. Even some of the children here in the country, they speak Swedish, the oldest of them. But they all left to work now. They were all sent away, yes. Yes. And dad, he stayed for a while and worked in the farms before you... What happened later, did he move to Rakow? He moved to Rakow to work at a ship. At a mill? Yes. In Scandia? Yes, he worked in cases, where they made blood and stuff. I see. Yes. I see. And what did you get to work for when you and I were in the army? You helped out at the farm until you were 20 years old, you said? Yes. And then... I worked in cement and stuff for a couple of years. And then I went into the army. In the military? Yes, yes. Yes. And you've been doing that for... 40 years. 40 years? 45. Oh. I was in the Union for 50 years. So they had the Union... Oh yes. So you were part of the Sheet Metal Workers International Association? Yes. And they were 50 years... You were with them for 50 years? Yes. So when you joined as a plumber here in Rakford, they were organized in the union? Yes, they were... They've been there for 80 years now. 80 years? Yes. But that was when I joined. There were 7 people in the union when I joined. Only 7? 7 people when I was in the 8th. Now there are 300. But you see, they built the bay where the power plant is. And a whole bunch of people worked there. And Chrysler has been working there as well. So there are a lot of people. No, they don't live here, but they built a whole bunch now. So a whole bunch of people who were at Bayern go to... Belvedere. Belvedere, yes. And some of them have gone to Chicago to work at Vermette, you know. I don't know if you understand. I understand. Yes. Oh, right. So how... It was quite unusual to be 80 years old. The factories in Rapport didn't have any unions. No, but the construction industry did. They were always first. Yes. Yes. And that wasn't a problem. You didn't have any difficulties organizing yourself. It was trouble. It was difficult. Oh, yes, every once in a while. After 1930, see, when I joined, there were 7 guys that belonged in the local. And then I got to be the 8th. And then we went out and organized and we got to be about 100 and something like that. And then this Bayern plant come up and that took a whole bunch of workers and that. So they had to put on different ones from other parts of the country and stuff. They came from all over. And now some of them will be leaving now. It's quite unusual, because you were the 8th, you said. Yes. It was strange that the workers wanted to go with you, you had your own number of workers. You were 8. Yes, but you see, before the Depression, it was after the Depression, see. And during the Depression, no one could pay the dosage. But there was a 50 before the Depression in 1925, 26, 27, 28 and so on, and then 29. Then business went to hell and then everybody dropped out. But then, I think it was 7 of them that kept the local in town. And then we started up from there. Because the other factories, like Rockford Products, for example, Svanhilde. They were hundreds of workers and they could never organize. What do you think that was? He paid almost the same as those who organized. If you got a union, if the union got a law firm like that, then he paid more. So he kept the line straight, see. So the people there thought they were better off than... But it was the other companies that made a lot of money come up. One would think that there was disagreement between the workers. One worked in the union and the other outside. Was it hard feelings between the workers? We worked a lot in small towns and so on. And there they worked for a five dollar an hour. When we got ten dollars an hour, they worked for five dollars an hour. But then they got to work a couple of hours more a day if they wanted to. But did they have better... The workplaces, you got a lot of work, for example, better working conditions and holidays. Did they get other holidays without being in the union? No. And pensions, for example? Pensions? Pensions, we didn't have no pension until... I was the first one in this local to get a pension. The first one? Yeah, that was about twelve years ago. That was the first pension we had. But the factories, they worked more on pensions and stuff like that. And now we got pension and then they're going to have sick benefit. Now that's the first... I got seventy dollars a month pension. I was the first one. I had a... I'd retired. I was sixty-three. And then the business agent says, come back to work for twelve hundred hours and then you'll get seventy dollar pension. So I went back to work and thought I was going to get it. But then the bosses wouldn't take it out. So then they come back next year and said work another twelve hundred hours. So I went back and worked the twelve hundred, then I got the pension. But then I was sixty-five. So then I got more social security and pension and everything turned out fine. So you were the first one to take the pension? Yes. They have a big......dolton board out there. They have your name and everyone who has retired. Mine is on the top up there. But I would have been down there longer and gotten more money. So you were the one who took the first step in the pension sale to get paid? Yes. Which of the factories pays better than Rockford? Sundström. Sundström. I think Woodward Governor too. I don't know which of the two, but Woodward Governor has been good all the time. But you can't organize a plant that pays good. See, because they have people in there that talk and before they hire you, they talk to you, you know. So you risk getting fired? They didn't dare fire me. No. No. But they screen you, you know. And know how you feel, kind of. So there's interrogation. Well, yes, in a way, but they claim not. But that's just about the size of it. But you only get four mechanics and one apprentice. But when I started, you had the helpers, they called them. And then you got a little card. You didn't get to headquarters, but you got a card that you could use at work. And you learned over time? Yes. When I went to school, you paid five dollars in the fall. And if you went 80% of the time, you got your five dollars back. But that was not school. But now you have a really good school and shop and everything out here where you can learn how to do things. Welding and everything. They have photographic equipment and everything. When you started in 1927, what made you start with that work? And we suggest that you didn't go to the furniture factories. No, not at housework. Did you want to do that kind of work or was it that they paid well compared to others? There were carpenters and carpenters and whatever you could get into. It was hard to get in as a beginner. 1927? Yes. So it was hard? Yes, it was hard to get a rent. Unless you had a father or uncle. And they helped you? Yes. That was the way it was in the old days. If there was a baker, the boy was a baker. And then he was allowed to come into the union. That's right. So you had some difficulties in the beginning? Well, after you started, it went well. What did you work with in the first years? We were out putting in furnaces and the hung gutters and in the factories wherever they needed work. They didn't have hot air heating at that time? Hot air? No, no, gravity heat. It was gravity? Yes. So when did they start with hot air, with ducts? That was in about 1936-1935 when I joined here. I see. It was that long ago. Yes. But in big buildings they had forced air, you know. They had? Yes. How did they start with forced air? You could get heat wherever you wanted. Did it go through quickly? Oh yes. So hot water... There are still some gravity furnaces. There are some, yes. Yes, it's the best heat. It's always hot. First you have a blower, and when it runs it's fine. And when it shuts off... It turns off. It turns off. And then it takes a while and then it turns on again. But is it that it goes fast to install hot air? Not that fast to install, but it warms up better all over the house. It does? Yes. So it became popular almost immediately everywhere. Oh yes. All the new houses. Oh, all the new houses. Yes. And then they had air, or oil heat then, you know. That was the first. And then it took... I built in 1949 here. And it was pretty hard to get gas then to heat with. But now anybody can get gas about. So that house was built in 1949? Yes. It's a very big house. Oh, you betcha. I drew the print. So here I was at. Yes. So I built... I had a carpenter to build from here and out. And I did that in the evenings and stuff. And the garage. You were a long time ago, really. It's houses like this that were built in the 50s and 60s. Yes. There weren't many that were built then. But I saw... I went to Florida in the winter. Because it was cold up here to work outside. So I went for three months. To work in Florida? No, no. To Grigi. I see. January, February, March. I didn't drink much firewood. And not much smoke. I took asnus. So I could put it away and go in the winter. I see. So you took your wife with you and started your life. Yes. I built a trailer and we went in it. I see. You followed the car? Yes. Yes. Yes. So you exploited the warm climate in the south. Yes. It was really good. It was good that we went. Because my wife didn't live many years, you know. She died when she was 64. No, 62. 63. 63. She did social security for one year. Yes. Yes. So she's not getting old. No. How did you meet? For a dance or? Yes. I danced and drank. Raising hell. She didn't go to places like that. Yes. I think so. Raising hell places. Yes. Well. When you're in your twenties, you're full of it. Full of it. Yes. And you belonged to the Zion Church. Your whole family belonged to the Zion Church. Yes. My wife belonged there. And then I went with her. And then I joined afterwards. You got married there too? Yes. What church did your parents belong to? They didn't belong to a church. No? No. So it was just you who became... Yes. They joined the church, but they never... They didn't join as a member? No. Your siblings, how did they join the church? My sisters go to church. One brother, I think. Yes. So you are... Two sisters and one brother. Three sisters and two brothers left. But one brother died ten years ago. And some of them were born here? Oh yes. Yes, sure. And two little ones died, two babies died many years ago. So you had three sisters and five... You had five... six children? Yes. All the way through, raised up. I see. Six children, yes. So... What churches did your parents belong to? Did they belong to IGT and... Lhasa, Viking... No. They had a Tidaholm club, I think they belonged to. And many of them joined the church? Yes. Yes, refugees, refugees who took their own......marriage. And they met once a month? I don't remember what they met. Were you in the Tidaholm club? No. No. You weren't? No. Only the older ones who came together? Yes. All the clubs have died here in the city. There aren't many left. And you go to the end? Yes. TV and stuff spoiled it. So when you came here in 1911, you were... Yes. How did it look at the time? If you compare it to when you came to the railway stations in downtown. Yes, but they built a new one. Yes, but all the old buildings that are left are just junk. You know, the ones you were standing on when you came over. Pretty new. They had places like on Broadway, where you could get a horse and people to drink. Yes. So how was it? Huh? How did the rain go? Was it as bad as it was? Sure. After the rain we've had all night? Oh... It's not so bad in the summertime. But in the wintertime, you know, in spring, when it starts thawing, that was mess. And then the streetcars run and they'd keep the streetcar tracks open. And then afterwards the streets got paved in the 20s. And then they got buses and the buses would plow the streets. But now the city's got to plow all the streets and everything. So the buses plow the streets? The buses plowed the streets years ago. Wherever the buses went, you'd always have a place to drive, see? But now the buses don't plow nothing or anything, the city's got to plow it all. But I think that was the same in all the cities. So they were not paved until the 20s? Well, maybe Broadway after the First World War, yeah. Yeah, there wasn't many paved streets. So Broadway was a big one that went up all the way to the east? It was one of the biggest streets? Yeah, that went to 20th Street, see? Oh, that was the end of it? That was the end of it. Then there was Newburgh Road. Oh, yeah. So that was the end of the line, so to speak. Yeah. And then a lot of the sidewalks were tar, you know, to start with. And then they come with cement. And then in the summertime it was muddy, I mean, blowing dust. Yeah, wherever they went. But there was nothing to make dust either, like the automobiles. It was horse and buggy, and you didn't get no dust. And the horses, now, they were owned by the people that came in, the grocery stores? Well, a lot of people had barns, too. If you go down, like, around 7th Street and down there, you can find barns where they kept horses. They always were pretty high barns, so they could keep the hay upstairs and feed them down below. I think you got the same in the old country, or any city you go to. So that was the look of old Rockford. Yeah. Well, that there picture there is 1914. They didn't have many paved streets then. No? So this is on the Rock River then? Yeah. Yeah. So they had a lot of boat traffic down the Rock River. Oh, it was way—well, there's a lot of boat traffic now, too, you know, with all the pleasure boats. But no excursion boats like this, though? Well, they got one, but not that big. They got one that the bank in the city run it, First National Bank, and that holds about 50 people, but that there boat would hold a thousand, pretty darn. Yeah, that's a big one. Yeah. I've rowed on that one. Oh? Yeah. And I worked with one guy who was captain. I worked a lot at a cannery. You know what that is, a cannery. Yes. Well, they started up on third floor with the—like the peas would come in, and they'd dump them in, and then they'd go down, and they'd go through grades, and then they'd go on a picking table, and they'd pick out—ladies would sit there and pick, you know. And wherever they moved them, they made them in troughs, and then hoppers and stuff like that. And I worked a lot on that. I worked about 20 years there at the cannery in Belvedere. Oh, I see. Sweet peas or what was it? Peas, yeah, all kinds of peas, green giant peas. I bought it afterwards when we started a Funderburg on it. So they was raised around here by farmers? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And how did they thresh it? Well, they had big combines that— They didn't cut them green, though. They were ripe. No, no. They cut them green. They did? Yeah. And that was way back in the 1920s? Yeah, in the 1920s they started, but I didn't start working there until in the 1930s. So you were laid off then from the sheet metal workers? No, I worked for this outfit, see? There was all sheet metal in there, see? See, we worked in the factory. But all the—like the pipe fitters and the plumbers and sheet metal workers, they were all organized, see? And so I worked right at the same tin shop. I worked in one shop for 40 years. And then I worked 20 years, see that? Whenever they needed somebody over there, I was over there and worked. Well, that was after you were retired? No, no, no, no. No, that was when I was working. So you had two jobs then? No, no. But, you see, like when you do sheet metal work, you work for a contractor, see? Then he contracts work out of someplace. You either work time material or he bids on the job, see? And then he had work over there, so that's where I— So you worked at that plant then? At that plant, yeah. I thought you worked with the peas. I worked with the peas, yeah. With the peas, but they were still getting sheet metal work done. Sheet metal work in there. For 20 years? Yeah. So they had some— Oh, they had always something to do. New machinery. And then they'd buy machines, and then they'd say, Well, we want this change and that change. And most of it was made out of sheet iron to start with, see? And things wouldn't be what they wanted, and then we'd change them, and we made troughs and fixed them up. Of course, sometimes, maybe like they started the first of June, maybe about the middle of July, I'd get off then. I'd go someplace else and work, see? And then about the first year, they'd call you back, and then you're there for eight months or so, and then bang, you go someplace else, see? Oh, I see. But that place there was a haven for me. Is that closed now, no, or is it still going? No, no, it's still going. But I don't think they canned peas anymore. They canned corn only. But they had corn and peas and lima beans when I worked there. And then everything had to be changed to different things and stuff. So that was a good place for employment? Oh, that was the best place I worked. Because they never bitched. It seemed like they were satisfied all the time. They had to take their time and do it right. Yeah. So, and is your line of work now? They were organized. How about the workers now at the plant? Oh, they ain't organized. They were not organized? No. You see, they shipped in help from down south, and then they shipped in help from Jamaica during the war, and prisoners of war worked there even during the war from Camp Grant. Oh, I see. And who owned that factory then? Funderburg, and Green Giant bought it from Funderburg, yeah. And it's a shipping center now. But they still got the plant there. I don't know how much they're going to do this year. So that was a good place to work, and nearby your home and everything so you could easily go back and forth. Oh, yeah. We went on company time. We'd start at 8 o'clock and leave the shop and be back at 4.30. You didn't have to have a strike then? You just liked it? Oh, we had strikes, but we had strikes with the contractor. You know, and then he had to raise his prices over there. Oh, I see. Do you remember now in the 20s, the factory workers, they had problems to organize there before Roosevelt came in. Do you remember if any Swedish socialists came from Chicago? They sold newspapers, New Tide. Oh, yeah. You remember that? They sold papers and stuff, I know that. Yeah, they sold papers, yeah. Was that organization big here in Rockford, Swedish socialists? Yeah, I think Blum was a socialist. Yeah, he was the mayor. Yeah, yeah. And David Kahlil. Do you remember him? He's kind of a big joke. He's in the nursing home now. He's still alive. He's still alive, yes. Didn't they call him Red? Well, all socialists they called Red. I marched with him one time from, where did we go? Down 7th Street and State Street. Over a parade or something? Yeah, just a socialist party. Well, during the Depression you didn't have nothing to do, you know. You listened to anything. They used to have, there's a Norwegian guy. Do you know him? He was a friend of Karlin's. He's a little bit nuts now. But, yeah, it ain't no use fighting with people all over, you know what I mean? So he was Norwegian? Yeah. Do you remember any of the others? Schoelder, Larsson from Chicago, Bengtson? No, no, I don't know none of them from Chicago. Oh, they probably came here, but I didn't meet them. I didn't even belong to the socialist party as far as that goes. And earlier, though, like Harry Anderson, do you remember him? He was probably in love with Eklund's brother. He was probably in love with Eklund's restaurant? Yeah. Oh. His brother-in-law, Harry Anderson, he was a communist. Oh. Well, they had communists, that was during the First World War. That's right, 1917 they were arrested at the Arbeiderkommando. Yeah, they were supposed to be blacklisted forever. But one broke his, he started a plumbing shop afterwards. So... He did all right? Sure, sure. Oh, they didn't get blacklisted. They weren't just the same. I think they sent them away for a year, some of them. Oh, I see. But they called them IWW, wasn't it? I think so. I will worker, I don't remember what it was. But it was IWW they called them. But I don't know. I don't blame them all in a way either, because wars ain't right. No. I don't know. And it was a bad time. How about you, the professional, did you have work? I loafed for about five years. Five years? Yeah, from 30 to, till I joined the unit, 36. No work to be had? Well, I dug ditches and stuff like that. I had a brother who was a plumber, and the sewers used to plug up, you know. And then we didn't have no digging machines or nothing, you know. You'd have to... By hand? You dug it by hand, yeah. But who took care of all the sheet metal work then? Was it completely stopped then? Everything was stopped. Building was stopped altogether. Nothing was moving then? No. In the building trade? And like the guys that had the shops, they done their own work, you know. And then when it started picking up, then you went back to work, one after the other. So there was a rough time then for many. How about your father? Did he work? He didn't work a heck of a lot that time either. He went on relief. We used to take a coaster wagon and go down. They give you a store you go to. We went to down on East State Street, about the 300 block, in a grocery store, and got our groceries, had a coaster wagon and pulled them home. So there was relief. Of course, you got credit, you know, a lot of places. I don't remember how big a bill it was Pa had. I don't know what's going on. Did you have a house then, your family? No. Yeah, Pa had a house, but he lost it during the Depression. They took it away? Yeah, yeah. That was a sad outfit. A lot of people lost their homes. Yeah, well, you had a mortgage. You know what business is. So there was no law then that could stop it. The bank had it right there. Oh, yeah. You would think there would be a little bit of a look upon it as a disaster, I mean, to let them pay off just a little bit less, but they just went right in. Well, it depended upon how your mortgage was set up. If you had too much to pay, then they wouldn't foreclose. But if you had enough paid down to pay them, then they foreclosed on you, see? Oh, they were foreclosing all over town. But they foreclose now a lot. It's a new Depression. Yeah. In a different way. Yeah, in a different way, kind of. Because now everybody seems to have money. Yeah, but a lot of people ain't got nothing, too. You go over on the west side, and it's terrible the way they loaf stuff. And even if you're a white guy and you ain't got a job, it's rough. So it was a bad time? Yeah. Well, I guess it was pretty tough in the old country, too, then. Yeah. Do you know if anybody went back to Sweden during that time, during the Depression? Yeah. Karl Borg, he was one teeter-outer-mutter. He went back? Yeah. Yeah, and Pa was over in the old country in around the 60s, and he wanted to come back over here. But you had to have somebody sign for you, you know. And if you signed for somebody, if he gets sick or something like that, you're responsible. So he had to stay in Sweden, then? Yeah. But he asked Pa to sign for him and stuff. But I don't think they're too bad off in Sweden. They'd like to come on a trip, I think, and have somebody pay for the trip. I don't know. But he had been there many years, though. Karl Borg, he'd probably been here 15 years. 15 years. Maybe 10. I don't know, 10, 15, something like that. So he started to work in Sweden and then stayed? Stayed over there, yeah. So this was your first time your dad went back there in 1960? Yeah. First time? Yeah, the only time. And what did he say to you then when he came back? Did he see changes and differences? Oh, he saw changes, sure. You've got to see changes, because the world changes, I think. Did he say anything about what he saw? Well, he was glad to come back, but he was glad his brother was living when he went over, and they had a good time together and stuff. So you went the whole time? Yeah, while you dream over again. How old was he then when he went back? I think he'd retired. He was about 66, I think. But your mother, she never came back? Well, she went with. They both went. They both went, yeah. They flew over. So you all flew to Bysöker till Dahlholm? Yeah, but I don't know. I have it nice here. I can't complain at all. So you don't remember anything from Sweden? So you don't have any longings to look for something? I don't know what I'd look for, unless there was a gold mine over there. But I don't think I'd find any more there than I'd find here, you know? So your dad didn't belong to any organizations? I don't think so. No? Well, everything costs money, and if you're going to raise six, seven kids, it takes a lot of money. You betcha. How about insurance? They joined the Vasa and Vikings to get insurance. Yeah, but that insurance ain't worth piss. How much is it? At that time, it was quite a bit, 30s and 40s. I don't think so. Six dollars a week. Yeah, six dollars. What can you do with six dollars? And not only that, but it costs money to be out amongst people and stuff. And when we left the farm, I think Pa owned the landlord $27. After the sale, everything was sold. So then in 27, 25 we left the farm, 26. Then he was flat broke, see? And come into town. And how are you going to get any place, you know what I mean? Your work, you made probably 70, 80 cents an hour. Well, maybe not even that. Not even that, maybe. But I think he worked the cases, and they worked hard out there, and they got pretty good pay. But they didn't have any unions, though? Not then, no. There was no union then. The patternmakers, they've had a union. My brother's a patternmaker, one. And they celebrated their 50th anniversary this year that they've had a union. And patternmakers, I don't know if you know what they are. Yes. They make molds and stuff. Modelsnickare, ja. What? Modelsnickare. Modelsnickare. Well. They make the models for the... Yeah, yeah, yeah. But he works on iron. Oh. See? Oh, the patternmaker. Yeah, iron molds. But they got wood molds out there, too, at the same shop. So it seems strange, though, you know, the carpenters, plumbers, sheep and the workers, they were able to organize. And they were smaller units. But the factory owners, now they could control hundreds and thousands of workers without organizing. I can't figure it out. Well. Why did the carpenters and the bricklayers get away with organizing and not the factory guys? The factory guys, you see, you could pick up. There was... They were not tradesmen, then, so to speak. They weren't tradesmen, no. They were actually labor. They could pick up somebody all the time from the street. And then they had some guys that done contract work, you know. They had one guy, they paid him maybe a dollar an hour, see? Then he'd get a bunch of Swedes coming over. Hell, they came by the train load, you know. And he'd get a hold of these Swedes and get them going. And then after they'd worked a while, they'd probably get a penny raise or two cents raise and stuff like that. And if they come in, bitch to beat the bat. But if you worked in a shop and made 70 cents an hour when the outside made a dollar an hour, you was damn lucky and had to work hard. Of course, one thing, the factories, when we first come over, they worked 10, 12 hours a day, all of them, you know. In the building trades, of course, they were after eight-hour day and four days on Saturday. But then, see, when did they start? I guess about 36 when they had eight hours a day or 40 hour a week. And then in the 30s, all of them organized. The bricklayers, they had big meetings, and we all went together, you know, and stopped jobs, picketed, dumped things over. So it was pretty hot there sometimes? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. It was pretty hot there for a while. Until the war started, see? And then when the war started, then labor got everything they wanted. But you couldn't strike then during the war? No. You could probably, but it was never done. Well, they struck some buildings when they come in with scabs, but they soon put on the regular, the union, how it helped. They didn't have much trouble then. But don't you think the workers were afraid to strike? They could draft them instead of go on the picket line? Well, you didn't have to. They had that threat, though, I mean. Like, you chased the guys off the job. All of them went together. It was some scab come in, and you just... Chased them off? Yeah, run them off. Yeah. Well, I suppose that's the feeling. You got to protect yourself, though. Well, sure. But I guess the union in the old country, everybody belongs to the union. Did they have a standard wage there? Well, they had different unions, you know, metal and carpenters and... Did they? Oh, yeah, they had all different. And they had different scales? Yes. Yes, they do. So during the Depression era or before, it seems to me most of the Swedes were Republicans. Can you figure it out? Why did they turn... They're a bunch of suck-asses. Do you think they went with the management? They did all right, you know, because they are Republicans, and we got to be the same? That's it. You think that was the feeling? That's the feeling I had. Yeah. But then they were really sucked into a system in the 30s that there was no recourse to... Well......poor. Of course, a lot of them are religious, and the churches all preach Republican. They did that? Yeah, they still do. Yeah, they don't understand things. Even this one? Yeah. I don't know how they preach now, but he was pretty much for the Republican Party, I know. Yeah. Do you think the preachers are afraid of the management in the factories? Well, they think nature or Christ takes care of everything, you know what I mean? But you got to have a mind of your own. You get what I mean? Yes. If you're living in a condition like when you're in Rome, you got to do like the Romans do. And they figured that the boss was Republican, I got to be Republican, see? So that's the... Well......that was the thinking you had? That's my idea of it. Like a lot of the guys I worked with, two of them were kind of holy jumpers. They played the fiddles and play and stuff, and they're terrible at it. They wouldn't say shit if they had to go twice a day, you know? But, you know, they didn't want to join the Union. They didn't want anybody to tell them, I'll work, he can pay what I'm worth, you know? Well, is that right or wrong? Who's going to say what you're supposed to get, how much you're worth? This is the thing. Yeah. Like I know, before I joined the Union here, well, I was working for a guy then, and I was working in a furniture shop. I got a job in a furniture shop for a couple months, and I was working there, and I made 50 cents an hour, see? And he come and he wanted me to go work for 75 cents. Well, I kept talking and talking, and then I got to 85, and then I went to work and got promised two months' work. When the two months was up, then he come, and it was another guy that was with Paul Eisler. You run that Eisler sheet metal over here afterwards. And he talked to us and said he couldn't pay that much money anymore and different things, and I'll have to. But I was single, you know, and I'd saved up a couple hundred dollars. So he says, I'll have to cut your wages back to 50 cents because that's all I can afford. So we had the truck loaded. We was going out and put a furnace in, and I had my toolbox up in the corner, and they unloaded, and Paul went down the basement. I said, Leave my toolbox on. I'm going home. I don't care to work for 50 cents. You can stick your job up your ass. He took the toolbox and threw it off the truck and threw it in the basement, and he said, Go to hell. He says, Go on down there and go to work, and I'll pay the 75 or 85 cents. So you stood up for your rights then? Yeah, but I got laid off afterwards, but I went to California, that winter, and me and two other guys and stayed there for about two months and come back. Then we was broke when we come back. What did we have when we left California? I won't say for sure what it was. We had a couple hundred dollars when we left, and we bought groceries and cooked and everything on the way and stuff because then we paid a dollar a night usually for sleeping, three of us. So you lived pretty inexpensively on the road. Well, what do you mean? You had to be careful with what you had. Yeah. So when you look back now at all those factory owners, you have P.A. Peterson and Swan Hillman. Well, Swan Hillman wasn't bad because he paid decent wages. Yes, and I mean they seem to be well off, all of them. Oh, you betcha. They certainly could pay better wages. They could pay another five cents an hour. Sure, sure. How much difference do they need to make sure they're going to 100? But Swan Hillman, you can't complain on Swan Hillman too much. You remember him because he was... Oh, yeah. He came from Teterhagen. He did? Pa knew his mother in the old country. And he was the one that could rip telephone books and take horseshoes and bend them and everything? I think so. You never saw him do that? No, no, no. I never seen anything like that. I wouldn't even know Swan Hillman if I met him on the street. But there's one guy by the name of... He sings and stuff like that. You ought to meet him. He's... because he can't talk Swedish very much, but he's a hell of a nice guy. So you remember him when Hoover promised a chicken? Oh, oh, oh. What do you think? How was your feeling when you were growing up? Were you Republican like the rest of them? No, Democrat all the way through. How about your father? He was Democrat. Democrat? Yeah. Was that because they came from a company town? Well, like Pa when they come over, they went on strike. You know what I mean? They were on strike. From Sweden? From Sweden. So he was for unions all the time. But you couldn't start a union in a factory before the 20s. That wouldn't work. They did try a furniture union, tried to get something going, but they never got any wages or anything built up. Or no seniority or no insurance or nothing like that. But a lot of the furniture shops, they had different departments, and the guy that run the department, he got commission on what come out of there, see? And the cheaper he could get the guys to work, the more money he made, see? And that's what I said. They were greedy, see? And that's really what hurts everybody, is greed. And then most of the workers that came now, like your dad, he was one of the exceptions because he came from a factory town. Most of them were what we call, you know, bondpojkar, out from the farm. They had no union background, they had no education. That was the trouble right there. It was easy to push in. But you know, in Chicago, they claim anybody that came from the old country and saw himself as saw, he could get on as a carpenter in Chicago. Oh, the carpenter union in Chicago was 100 percent Swedes for many years. Was it easy to get in the carpenter union here? Or were there too many carpenters? Well, if you had a father that was a carpenter or something, see? Otherwise you couldn't get on? Not very easy, no. But I never tried the carpenters, but I tried the bricklayers when I first started. But the first year after the farm, then I worked on a family apartment, two of them, one behind the other. I worked mixing cement by hand all alone, and putting in cement floors all the way through there. Just stood and shoveled it over and over. I don't know if you know how they did it. Odd carriers? No, no, not odd carriers. You just shoveled it, stand there, and you put so much sand and so much gravel, so many bags of cement, and you stood there and mixed it. And then you spread it apart and put water in there, and then you shovel it all in or hold it in, and then you threw it in and then you leveled it off, makes another batch. That makes muscles. Oh, that makes tired nights. Makes you sleep. That's right. Yeah. Do you think that your generation, you were four when you came. It's almost like being born here, you know, more or less. Yeah. I mean, you could grow up with it. Do you think you were more aggressive with the Union thoughts than your father, for instance? No, not more than my father. No? No.