 They nicknamed him Blixte in Sweden, so when he came over here and when he took out his citizenship papers, he took the name of Blixte. And he had a brother here in Rockford by the name of Henry Johnson, who has passed away, well they're all gone now. His brother's name was Henry Johnson. And my mother, I don't really know what her name was before she was married, but anyway, my dad went back, he came over here in around 1900 and worked for I think it was about seven years here, and then he went back to Sweden and got my mother. They came back here in 1908 or so I guess it was. And yeah, that's Tore Blixte in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1910, 2nd of April, in Rockford. And we have today 22nd of November, 1986. Your parents now, Mr. Blixte, they came from Sweden, both of them. Your mother was born in Ireland, your brother was born in Sweden. Your parents now, they came from Sweden, both of them. Yes. Like I said, yes, like my dad came around, it was either 1899 or I'd say 1900, and he stayed here, he worked here for about seven years, and then he went back to Sweden and came back in 1908 I think it was with my mother. So when he emigrated in the late 1800s, did he come to somebody here in the war? No, I'll tell you where he came. He didn't come to Rockford directly. He came to Lily Lake, if you know where that is. Close to Kirkland. Yeah, that's right. He came from—and he came to some—I think they were relatives named Dalstrom. They had a farm. And he stayed there for, oh, I don't know if it was a year, and then he came to Rockford. And then, like I say, he worked here for six or seven years or what it was. What kind of work was he doing there? He was a moulder. He worked in the same place for 52 years. Never lost a day for being sick. He was a healthy man. What name of the company? It was—at the time when he worked there, it was Malleable Iron Works, but now it's—what's the name of the—it was Forbes at one time, and now it's Gunite. It's Gunite. It's a big foundry out on the southeast end of Rockford. Was there organized and owned by Swedes or was it— No, no, no. That was owned by Scotch. It was Forbes. I see. But there were quite a few Swedes working there. Oh, yes. Sure, sure. But as years went on, you changed Italians and blacks, but there were a lot of Swedes that worked there. So he stayed there then for seven years? When he first came over here, now, I don't know exactly what he—oh, he worked differently. He didn't work there right then, but after he came back with my mother, he worked there for 52 years without losing a day for being sick. He was a healthy—very healthy—very—he wasn't built like me. He was a very husky man, and he'd come home from work sometime with icicles frozen out his forehead. He was really a tough Swede, a good Swede. So his wife, or your mother, Emma, they knew each other before he left? You think? Yes. No, I don't think so. Well, they knew each other in Sweden. Yes. When he went back to Sweden, evidently he'd worked there for seven years. Then he went back just to visit or whatever, and then he met my mother. Because when he worked— Because my mother was only, I think, 18 at the time. Well, she came with him. She came with him back then. That's right. Sure. For the second time, you mean? Well, and he came back, yeah. When he came back from— That would be the second time. The second time that he came here, yeah. But he couldn't have known her before because she had only been about 11 or 12 years old then, see? So he met her then when he went back. And are you the oldest son then? Yes. My brother was about five and a half years or so younger than me, and my sister was a year older than me. So they married in Rockford and— No, I think they were married in Sweden. And they came together here, and where did they live then? On 1700 Block, 1713 South Fifth Street, on Fifth Street. And they rented an apartment there then? No, no. Well, at first they went on Broadway on Fifth Street. They rented there. And then when I was about two years old, I guess, then they moved down to the 1700 Block on Fifth Street. And I went to a grade school called Brown School, which was on—it's not in existence anymore. It used to be—it was on 16th Avenue and 8th Street. And when I went through, every single kid in that school was a Scandinavian. All of them? All of them. Did you talk Swedish to any school? Oh, I talked—well, at home, I—they always spoke Swedish. I couldn't even speak English when I started grade school. Oh, you couldn't? No. I could not. No. But the same—no, I spoke Swedish at home when I was a kid. Did they interfere with your schoolwork then? No, I don't think so. You had no trouble to speak Swedish? No, no, no. Because we knew I was playing with the kids in the neighborhood, too. I mean, I spoke both English and Swedish. But I always spoke Swedish to my folks. Did you go to a Swedish school in the territory? No, I never did. Drew did, I know. Yeah, he was Swedish. So the teachers, now, they didn't complain about you using Swedish sometimes in school, or other kids? Well, I don't—I don't believe it, because most of the teachers were Swedish. So, I mean— They had the same job as you? But I do remember that there was all—all Scandinavian—I think there was a couple of Norwegians in there, but they were mostly Swedish—they were almost all Swedish. And I'm pretty sure they were all Scandinavians. So it was easy then to go to school. In other words, you all knew each other and— Oh, yes. —the background? Oh, sure, sure. There were no Italians or Polish? No, not until they changed the district. See, you know Rockford pretty good, I imagine. Yeah. Rockford, they grew up on Fifth Street, and then there's Fourth Street and then Kishwaukee Street. And on the other side of Kishwaukee Street, that is west of Kishwaukee Street and 15th Avenue, that was Italians. So when they changed the district, we got—they changed the district to school district at one time, and then we got the Italians in. They were still your time in school? Yes. So how did that affect you? Did you— No, it was—I can't really recall. I mean, it was not that much of a change. How were they received? I mean, it's not easy when outsiders are coming to— No, that's—well, you know how the Swedes were. They were clean—the Italians were too, but they weren't quite as up, you know, as the Swedes were. Did they dress— They are today, I mean, but not then they weren't. Were they dressed differently? They could have been not quite as good as the Scandinavians, but— Did they talk Italian or any language that you didn't know? No, they—we talked—as kids, we talked English. I mean, and they did too. And like I remember the teacher saying, though, that she says when they changed the district and we got the Italians in, she says, now we're going to get some good singers. Was that what she said? That's what she said, yeah, when the Italians came in. Were they good singers? Well, evidently better than the Swedes were at the time. So— What happened, though, because they were Catholics, the Catholics. Yeah. But did you have any prayers in the morning when you came in to— No, it was nothing. Nothing. No religious— No, no. We got—I can't remember when it was, if we did it right away. We pledged allegiance to the flag for—we had, you know, it's a—well, it's kind of a poem that we read every morning. No religious prayer? No. You never had it in school? No. No. I see. So there was no—so there was no problem then? No, but they did have, like the churches, they had summer school in that for religion. Like Salem Church was just a block and a half from where I grew up. I never went there, though. And my wife did. In fact, her mother was one of the original people that started the church, yeah. So your family, no, were they— My folks were more Salvation Army. My dad's sister belonged to the Salvation Army in Sweden for over 60 years. So they joined up then with the— Gosh, where's that—Gladys, where's that— So they joined the Army then, you know, very— I don't believe—they really—but they went there all the time. I don't know if they belonged or—I don't think so. Did you go to Sunday school there? No. No. In fact, I never went to Sunday school. My wife did all the time. Maybe the Salvation Army didn't have any Sunday school. Oh, I think they did. I almost think so. The church didn't go to Sunday school. They went to— My mother went to Sunday school. So then in school, you went through five years then or how many years? You went through high school too? Yes. And like I said, I went to this grade school. That was eight years. They didn't have any junior high schools then. It was eight years altogether? In grade school. In grade school. Then afterwards, it's a four-year high school. And I quit though. I didn't quite graduate, but then I went to night school. So my—I got to be—I worked in a furniture factory and was a hand carver, wood carver. And then I went—and of course, that petered out. So then I went and I apprenticed in pattern making. So then I—I combined the two. I made ornamental patterns for industry. I have made hundreds of different pulls for Amrock and National Lock handles. So you were independent? I worked for myself for over 30-some years. In fact, I worked right at home here. I got machinery in the basement. I made all kinds of—and then casket hardware, the fancy stuff that goes on the Leakshista, in the corner and on the sides. I made a lot of that for—I did for Belvedere and I did for other people in Galesburg and—oh, even in New York—in the state of New York, I did some stuff. So you made the finished product then? I made the original. And then they made a die off of the one I made. Oh, I see. I made a wooden— The prototype? Yes. That's right. And then I worked for Amrock for over 30 years. I had a contract with them. I didn't—I worked for myself, but I had a contract with them for over 30 years. With the Aldine brothers? That's right. Yeah. So did you get the patent on this? No. They gave me the drawings, and then I made it from the drawings. I see. All kinds of handles. I made hundreds. I think I made more handles than anybody in the country. Was that all handwork then? That's all handwork, yeah. All handwork? Yeah. I was a woodcarver and then a pattern maker. And then the two together is where I got the ornamental patterns, I called them. So how did you learn this? Did you go to a trade school to learn it? No. I worked in a furniture factory, and I worked with some old hand carvers and learned—and, you know, you got to pick that up. I worked with some men that had been hand carvers for years. I was the last one in Rockford to take up hand carving in a furniture factory. And then they closed up, so then I had an apprentice for—they gave me credit for six months. I had an apprentice for four and a half years more for pattern making. And then after, I worked in the different job shops. Then I went on my own. And then I got in with Law Company and Amrock. I got a—had a good contract with Amrock. That helped me out a lot because I used to chase around a lot to get work. I used to go to Sycamore to Turner Brass. I did a lot of work for them. They had a bronze and aluminum foundry, and I used to make different things for them. I made even Chinese grave markers, and I made all kinds of plaques and different things that they made into metal. I'd make the original in wood. What kind of wood were you working with? Well, if it's real—well, for real small stuff, I used cherry. That's hard because you take pine or that for small stuff. It's not that good. It's too soft, I mean, to get real fine detail. And like the bigger stuff I used, like for casket hardware, I used red gum sometimes, but then I would use, oh, mahogany. If I get some tight green mahogany, I'd use that because that was a bigger piece for the casket hardware. And like all the small stuff I did, I used cherry wood. It's good green, and it's hard, though. It's almost like maple. But for small stuff, it works out real nice. Then I made that plaque for—they have it down at the Swedish Historical Society. In bronze, they made that— Oh, called Sandberg. Yeah, I made that. With the writing and everything? Yeah, yeah. They gave me a letter they got from Sandberg, and I brought it down to photo enlarging and had them blow it up. To the original size you wanted? Yeah, for the size I wanted. And then, of course, that was nothing but I just had to saw out and cut in for the letters. How long did it take you to do that? You mean the plaque? Yeah. I don't know. There was quite a bit of work on it because it's—I made it just the way he wrote it, see. I couldn't just do it the way I wanted to do it. I had to do it the way he had written it. If you make a mistake in this kind of work, you have to start all over again then? Not really. You can always patch it. I mean, you can cut it out and glue in a piece or whatever. And they would stand up then when they molded to— Oh, yes. Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Sure. And like—I don't—I had—they had a party for me in the Sam Rock, and they gave me some of my posts back, but I don't know where they are now. They had a fellow by the name of—he came from—his family came from Irland. Oh, what the heck's his name now? He lives up in Lodi, Wisconsin. What's his name, Gladys, the designer? Tegner? Oh, yeah. Yeah, Tegner. Ray Tegner is his name. He's sweet. Yeah. He designed almost all of the stuff for Amrock, 95 percent I'd say of the stuff. And he had worked at Amrock as a tool and die maker, but he on his own was very artistic and had a lot of good ideas. So when he left there, he started designing. And then I would get his drawings and make them from his drawings. So these Amrock models, if I recall right, are they early American, quite a few of them? Well, it was all kinds of—not necessarily, no. No? No. It was just a mixture of—just design. It is for hardware for the whole house? Yeah. Yeah. The kind of drawers and doors and— That's right. That's right. Yeah. And— Made toy models? Oh, yeah. I made Nylons' first car many years ago. Nylon toy, you know who they are. Yes. I made their first car. And what else did I do? No, I don't like— But it took you a lot of time to get the first prototype out to get the hang of it. You just made one. What do you mean? You made this toy car now. Oh, yeah. Well, I got a—they gave me a drawing, and I'd make it according to the drawing. Of course, you had to know what the drawing—you had to be able to read the drawing, too. And I did a lot of—I did work off and on for Nylon. Even when I worked at Amrock, they'd call me and ask me. I'd do the interiors of a car and make the—well, I'd make the whole cab and all of that for trucks. They made a lot of trucks in it. But they would form the steel body in that themselves, but for a sample. And I would make the—like the cab, the whole—the steering mechanism and the bumpers and the hoods and all of that. And I did that work for many years with them, too. Were they still in business? Oh, yes. Nylon, yeah. They started out with nothing, and they're a pretty good-sized toy factory. Well, they advertise all over the country. And if you want to talk to—there's a Swede. I mean, they're born here, but they're Swedes. It'd be interesting to talk to Barney. He'd be real nice. Did you take cream or sugar in your coffee? So you had a very different— Well, I'll tell you, it isn't—often a person gets a chance to do work that he likes. Oh, you did? And I had work that I liked. Of course, you always would get, you know, some work that you didn't care for, but that was very rare. It was all—everything—every job I got was different. It wasn't the same thing over and over again. It wasn't—in a way, I mean, I made handles, but they were all different. So it was a challenge. Yeah, it was—yeah, that's right. And it was—I enjoyed it, really. And what else did I do now? Yeah, like this casket hardware now, the Parsons, they're out of business now. They went out of business a few years ago, but I did a lot of work for them, and they were very nice people to work for. So once you made this prototype, now, would the— They would take that and make a die off of it. A die off, and that would last them for many years as long as— Yeah, endless, yeah, right. And of course—but then they made new stuff. I mean, you know, like this, they make cars, you know. They have to keep up with the new designs right along, even in the casket hardware, which is ridiculous, I think. But— Were they more fancy, the caskets, years ago than they are today, Bruce? I don't think so. I really don't know, but I don't think so. We looked at a casket connoisseur when we go to a funeral. Yeah, when I go to a funeral— You're one of the only people that do. Yeah, that's right. But— That's ridiculous. But these fellows in Belvedere, they're both gone now, the fellows that own the—that run this place. And they used to—they'd call me up sometime and ask me if I had time, and they wanted me to go with them. They'd go out of town to some customer. And so I'd go with them, and this particular customer maybe have something in mind that they wanted, but he could get it down on paper to a degree, and then he'd tell me what he wanted. And then I'd take it from there. But most of the time, they furnished a complete drawing. So you were the only one in Rockford that could— Well, I was the only one doing it that I know of, that sort of thing. Did you start—you said after school you got a job in the furniture factory. Yes. And how soon after—how old were you when you started with this? Who gave you the idea to get into this? Well, it was just a matter of getting a job. I mean— You had no choice. That's right. But then I got a chance to work with the old hand carvers. In fact, I remember the fellow named Olson, he was an old hand carver. He'd been with Landström for many years. And he went and sent after about 30 hand carving tools for me. And then when you get—buy tools, they're not sharpened or anything. They've got a blunt end on them, so you've got to prepare the tools yourself, the cutting edge. But he did—he showed me, he did all of that for me, this old carver. And then, of course, as time went on, you learn yourself how to sharpen it and do things and grind the tools. And then as time went by, there was a fellow at our church. His father had been a hand carver, and he had passed away, and he had all of these tools he wanted to sell. It was about 160, 75 or so. It was a lot of them. So I bought them. And they were all ground down and sharpened. They were excellent. And as years have gone by now, I've given away, you know, maybe eight, ten tools to different people that were interested in monkeying with carving. How many different tools are needed now you're old young person? That—it's like anything, you can get by with this tool, but this other tool would be more convenient. So I'd say if you picked out a choice, I'd say 30, 35 tools, you'd be—it'd be fine. But I've got a bunch of tools that I've had now for years and years. And so then it's like anything, you pick things up yourself. Every assignment you had now in front of you, they were all different, new things to do all the time. Oh, yes. It was not like a production line. I mean, you have— Oh, no, no. They were all different. Which one was— The thing is, I mean, like, they maybe had something that the design would go for from the kitchen cabinets, the hardware for that, and then the hardware would go for the front door handle, the same design. I mean, a different part, but I mean it'd be the same design on a big handle for a front door, and light switches they'd have. And so, I mean, some things, it was not just a kitchen cabinet handle, it was other parts of the home, too. Oh, and the bathroom fixtures. All of the bathroom—they would match—have matching bathroom fixtures that went with the kitchen and the light switches and different things like that. So it'd be a whole series of the same design, but for the different parts. But one fixture, now, was the one on the caskets. They were one of the hardest you mentioned. Oh, wow. They're— They were hard to get out of the mold. Yeah, it was a lot of monkey business to get the corner pieces for the caskets. The side pieces were—that was no problem. It was the corner pieces when you had to be sure that you got the draft or the taper they call—on it so when you could pull it out of the mold. That was the hardest part. I mean, it wasn't just to get the design on it, you had to get the design carved out so you could draw it from the mold. So that was one that took a lot of time then to work? Yeah, it was more time consuming because of that. You also did figures for the people. Raleigh products from Freeport. They used to make—oh, what was it, Gladys? That was— Raleigh products. Raleigh products. That was products that they'd sell from house to house. They'd come around and sell. Years ago. Years ago. And he was a well-known person that put out this product. And I made just a—what would you call it? A base relief, I guess, of him. And I did quite a bit of that. And the thing about it was that nobody really knew what he looked like so it wasn't that hard to make. And then I made a football trophy for the best lineman of the year. They call it the Dr. Outland Award. I think it comes through the University of Oklahoma. It's a football player that's kneeling and they give it once a year to the best lineman of college football. In the United States? Yeah. For the whole country? Yeah. Right. For college. Was there—what size then? Well, I don't know about— About a foot wide and a foot high? I was—I don't know. This was a base relief. No, this was not the full— Oh, I see. And it was— On a plaque. Yeah, on a plaque. Yeah, it was maybe like that, yeah. And it was a foot— You were never stuck with any kind of drawing? I mean sometimes people can draw things, you know, and imagine things that they can't draw. Not really because I made it the way I thought it should look. So, and if they accepted it, well, they did accept it, but I mean the way I looked at it, that's the way I figured it should be. And sometimes you get a drawing that's not all—they don't put everything into it. So you don't need the trouble then as you go along? Well, the thing is sometimes you have to change it because just for the simple reason that the way they present it, you can't make it. I mean you got to then have to change it to a degree so they can mold it. But that one didn't happen too often. And of course they knew that too, that if they needed a change that I— Your father now, he kept working at—with his work, you said, for so many years. Yeah, he worked 52 years. 52 years, and he was never sick? Never. How about—what did he think about your line of work now? Well, I— Did he have the same gift in his hands? No. No, he was—his was altogether different. But what he did, he did a first class job, I'll say that, yeah. He was a moulder, and he was a healthy person. Imagine working in the same place for 52 years, never losing a day for being sick. And he washed his hair every single day that he worked, and he had a thick head of hair through his whole life. And if his kids got sick, he couldn't figure it out because he never was sick. So how long did you stay home now at your parents' home? I was 25, got married when I was 25. You stayed home then with your parents? Yes. I see. So you had to— My brother was about five and a half years younger, and my sister's a little over a year older than me. What kind of work— My brother, well, he was superintendent at one time over at Ekstrom Carlson, and then he was—he worked in wood, too. He was a foreman in some other place, too, and I can't remember exactly where it was now. So what happened here during the 20s, there was full employment in the factories here in Rockford, and you also worked before the 30s. What happened during the— Well, there wasn't much work, I tell you, during the Depression. A person worked maybe—or if you were fortunate to have any job at all, sometimes you'd get a couple days in a week. And I know I made, I think it was $7.55 a week during the Depression for a certain short period of time. What factory— That was at Landstrom's, furniture. And I'd give my mother five, and I had $2.55. But of course at that time, you know, gasoline was about, what, 14 cents a gallon, or—and you could go out—I could go out on a date for a dollar for both of us, because you'd take—the movies were 10 or 15 cents, and you could go and get a cup of coffee and a hamburger for a quarter. So you could spend less than a dollar on a date, or say roughly a dollar. And—but for some reason or other, I think there were good times, too, even though there was a Depression. So you had your own car then? I had a Ford Coupe, Model A Ford Coupe. And— Your dad had a car, too? Yeah. He had a—he was a—at that time he had a Maxwell, if you ever heard of it. And then later on he had a Velie. Well, that was a fancy car then. The Velie was a big clunker. You'd take about 10 miles to pass somebody if they were going 15 miles an hour ahead of you. Gosh, it was terribly slow. No pickup at all. But the Ford Coupe I had, that was a—a 19—I bought it when I was a year old. I bought it in 30, I guess it was. But that was a good little car, because anything went wrong, there wasn't much to fix. It was a very simple motor and everything. Were you interested in motors and— No. No, I cared less for that, yeah. Can I have that in just a minute? So during the Depression, how much for your dad making? You had seven— That, you know, I really don't know, because he did work a little bit, so—and I remember my dad, he used to take a walk down to 7th Street and come home with a couple of guys for dinner many times. I bet it was at least two, three times a week. He'd bring them home for—and then he would give them a quarter, and then he'd set them down at a little desk they had and hand them right to their mother in Sweden. I see. Yeah. And they were people then without work? They were out of work. There's young fellas that come from Sweden. He'd go down to 7th Street and pick up a couple of them, bring them home. He did that much during the Depression. So they had to sit down in your house then? Yeah, they came and they had dinner with us, had dinner with us, and then my dad would tell them, no, he says, you write to your mother in Sweden and her folks, and then he'd give them a quarter. Of course, a quarter then, they're getting a couple of bucks now anyway, more than that. So there was a lot of hardships then for you? Oh, yeah. It was tough for a lot of people. Was it easier for the women, you think, that came over there, because they could always get a house job or something? You know, that could be. That could be, because a lot of them did work in homes. Because you never saw any ladies roaming around? No. No, I think you're right there. I think that they maybe were able to pick up housework more so than the fellas getting work. And like if the fellas did get a job, they didn't make that much either, you know. Did your parents belong to any other organizations like the Nairons? They belonged to the Smalllands Club. That's the only one I think, yeah. I think that was the only club that they belonged to. Then they'd go to Chicago once in a while to the Smalllands Club there. Did you belong to Smalllands Club? No. No. I think I was up there a couple of times, though, when they had it. They used to have it, meet up at the SM&SF Club, I believe it was. And a lot of these clubs, they were like SM&SF and of course then you got all these other Viking clubs. A lot of, there was a lot of organizations that the Swedes had around town. Yeah, and most of them belonged to them because they got insurance if they got sick. Oh, I guess so. But like your parents, what kind of insurance did they have then during that time? Your dad was never sick. Never sick. No, I don't remember him ever being sick. Because like I say, he never lost a day from being sick at work. Which was, he, my brother was built more like him. My brother was taller than him. My dad was about 5'8", but he was real muscular, real strong. And I don't know who I took from him. My great-grandfather or somebody, I guess. So during the Depression, you still worked for Landstroms? Yeah. Did he sell out and what happened then? No, they, the Depression killed Landstroms. I mean, it went kaflouie. Some organization, I think from out of town, wasn't it, Gladys? I think so. Got ahold of it, but it was run to the ground. And it was one of the finest furniture factories in the country. So they bought it, then some outsiders bought it? Whatever happened, I really don't know. They must have bought it. They were making furniture down south so much cheaper. So I think that's why. So your father-in-law, he worked for them? He worked for Landstroms many, many years, and he was the general superintendent. That included free sewing machine, head-off piano, and Rockford cabinet and bookcase. That's what they called the, it was a consolidated outfit. And he was general superintendent of the whole works, and I think he was a vice president there, too. So he had invested money in it then? Oh, yeah, he had stock in it, sure. Oh, yeah. And he had stock in the banks, and there you had to pay back, you know. You had stock in the bank, you paid back. What money you had in there, I believe it was, something like that. Like the security bank? Yeah, I think that was the one. I think that was the one, I think. Yeah. So when they got on bad terms, the stockholders had to pay back? That's right. I think that's the way it worked, wasn't it, Gladys? Yeah. Can you imagine? I wouldn't buy any bank stock if it was like that. I mean, now, I mean, after you heard what happened. You not only lost your original investment, but you had to, if you had any other money, you had to go back in there to protect the other. But the regular depositors, they lost everything. They lost, sure. I don't know what they got out of it, how many pennies to the dollar, I don't know. So they closed the doors? They closed the doors, and they never did open. I don't mean they're open now, yeah, but I don't know under what circumstances they've been open now for several years. They opened now? Yeah. Were people afraid then to put money in the bank for a few years after that? I can imagine. You would think that? I would. I wouldn't, especially buying stock in a bank. How about your father-in-law? What did he say about a few years later? Was he bitter about it or? He never really showed it. He never said much? He never said much. I think he suffered from it, but I don't think he, he never said anything. He never said anything? At least not to us, yes. No. Never said nothing about it. I asked my mother because my mother said, you know, she's funny he didn't lose his mind because. Yeah, because he lost a lot of. Was he an older person when this happened or? He was in his fifties, I think. Wasn't he, Gladys? I don't know because he died when he was 61, so. Yeah, so he must have been in his fifties then. So then after Lansdome's closed up, did he continue? And he worked. He had offers to get work out of town, and he worked in Jamestown for a while there. He was superintendent in the factory there, and then he was, oh, a couple other places. He moved to Jamestown and. Yeah. For a while? He took his family with him there? Oh, it's just him and his, Gladys' mother. They were married. I see. And, actually, I think he went there knowing that he wasn't going to stay there very long because he rented a place by the lake. It's a big lake there. Chetauqua. Yeah, right. He rented a nice place right by the lake and they stayed there because we visited there. And it was during the thirties? Yes, yes. That had to be, yeah. We were married then, weren't we? Must have been thirty. We're not very good on dates. I know it, but we've been married since 35, so, yeah, it must have been. Do you remember the name of that factory in Jamestown? You remember, Gladys? But she had a cousin that lived in Jamestown, Edwin Johnson, his name was. And the factory, I don't know. I don't know. It was a pretty good-sized factory, I believe, the furniture. Chetauqua? Was it Chetauqua? Well, Chetauqua, that was the lake, but maybe. Was the company named after? The factory named Chetauqua? I don't know. I'm guessing, so I don't know. I don't know. So then after the Depression of 1937, 38, the factories, the furniture factories, they were out then almost in Rockport. Yeah, they, that's right. That's right. And right now, I don't think there's hardly. Who bought them out then? Oh, I think they just fell apart. I mean, the business went, and it, I guess, it settled more or less down south, and it must have been cheap labor, and they had the material down there, too, I guess. The wood was from the south. To loot, too, you know, there was furniture. That was nothing, yeah. But— How about Lennstrom's, didn't he have a son, though, that was running it for a few years in the— I don't think so, no. There was a brother or a nephew, nephew, Edgar Lennstrom. Well, he was a salesman for Lennstrom's, wasn't he? No. But no, there was nothing. No, there was no—he had a son. Lennstrom had a son, but he never, he never was into it. No. No, not after they closed up, no. So you were on your own then. In other words, you started your own business then during that time. No. I got a job in a—I learned pattern making after I left the furniture factory. I got to be an apprentice in a pattern shop, and they gave me credit, so many months' credit for being a hand carver. So I had to go through an apprenticeship in the pattern making. And then after I'd worked in different job shops in pattern making, then I went on my own because I had figured out that I could get enough work that at least to keep going. And it worked out where I had steady work. I had a lot of work, in fact. Then I got in with Parsons Casket Hardware, and I got in with Amrock and National Lock, and then it was Turner Brass and Sycamore. At that time, they were doing a lot of all kinds of different things that they needed, ornamental patterns. Grave markers. What? Grave markers. Oh, yeah, the grave markers, for one thing. They were a big business. They were doing grave markers and then casket hardware, and then they were making cheap hardware for furniture, for cheap furniture. And there was more work on some of those handles than it was on the poles that went for good furniture because a lot of gaudy stuff on it. They had plastic inserts and a bunch of junk, really junky stuff, but they had to have a pattern for it. So at that time, I had a lot of work from them. And then I'd get a job now and then from different casket hardware people. I know from Gillesburg I got some, and I got from Chicago, and then, of course, Belvedere. I did work for them for many, many years. So regardless of what kind of, like you said, junk they were using as the end product, you had to be particularly with your part of that. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. You got to come out good from the beginning. That's right. That's right. But then they could use brass and copper and plastic and all kinds of different media. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Right. You had to do it right from the beginning. That's right. Yeah. Sure. So you were able to pick up more jobs than if you had stayed with AMRA, for instance, exclusively. They would give you your lesson. Well, of course, what I got then, I mean, I was doing a little work for AMRAC and some from Lock Company. Then AMRAC propositioned me. They called me up one day to come up there, and they talked to me, asked if I would consider doing just their work. And it sounded good to me, so I said sure, because I chased all over doing work. But then that went on for about 30 years. They gave me a contract that they asked me what I wanted. I told them I wanted a guarantee of 40 weeks a year and so much money and cost of living. The cost of living, that helped a lot for a while there because, you know, sometimes things went up as much as 15 percent in a year, that much inflation. So then I got that 15 percent more raise every whatever the inflation rate was I got. And they were very nice to work for. And then I still did some stuff for Nylon Toys and Casket Hardware. I worked that in. And then in the 1930s, you know, I said I wanted 45 weeks a year. That's what it was. And 40 hours a week I wanted guaranteed. And they gave that to me. So I had that for many years, which was fine because then I didn't have to worry about chasing all over the place. And like I say, they were real nice people to work for. HURST And you were on your own, in other words, you could put yourself how many hours you wanted. SWAN Oh, sure, sure, sure. HURST You could take a day off. SWAN Yeah, sure, sure. HURST It didn't take very many days off. SWAN Yeah, sometimes I tell you, sometimes I had so much work there, I had to work even nights and Sundays. And it kept, you know, it wasn't that way all the time, but I mean it would happen. HURST So when was the increase of your business? Was that after the war when everything started with the house building and construction of different things? During the war years, for instance, what kind of SWAN Well, I worked in a pattern shop then. HURST During the war years. SWAN Yeah, yeah, I worked in a pattern shop. And there was a fellow by the name of Werner Olsen and Harold Hazelroth that run this pattern shop. It was, in fact, it was the biggest pattern shop in Rockford at the time. They were very nice to me. That's where I was an apprentice for in the pattern shop. They were the ones that gave me the job when the furniture factories went to pot. And, well, they told me that they would help me so that I could get to be a regular pattern maker. And I'm not the best pattern maker, but I learned enough about it so it helped me in the work that I like to do. HURST Yeah, you have to put in five years, yeah. But I worked ten years in the pattern shops before I went on my own. HURST How about the Germans, the Italians, did they go into wood carvers? SWAN Oh, yes. But, of course, you see, I think that whole wood carving thing, it just stopped. I mean, you know, they never put it on furniture after. Well, Weiman's Furniture Factory, you remember that? HURST No. SWAN They, in Rockford here? They had all kinds of carving on their furniture. And the fellow that was making the patterns, they had to make a pattern for the carving machine. You know, they had carving machines to duplicate the best they could. Well, they could do a crappy job if they wanted to, and that's what they did, too. The fellow that made the patterns, I knew him, and he was an excellent hand carver. But he had to make it the way they wanted it so they could slap the stuff out in a hurry. And so he couldn't do the real finesse job that he could do. And they turned out a bunch of junk. I mean, that's my personal opinion. In fact, they ruined the carving, I thought. And, but, of course— HURST So people didn't buy it then, or what? SWAN Oh, they bought it, I guess. I mean, it was a bunch of junky stuff, I thought it was. It was supposed to be good stuff, but the carving was crap as far as I was concerned. But, of course, they moved out of town or moved or quit the business here some time ago. And the fellow that was the carver, I worked with him. He was an absolutely excellent carver. But he had to do it the way they wanted it, so. HURST So they disappeared from furniture making in the 50s? SWAN Yeah. I don't know. No, I think they were still going in the 50s. No, they were—it's not—to us, a few years ago they quit. But there is still carving on furniture anymore to speak of. I don't know where they—I don't know who makes the patterns for them anymore. It must be—if they get somebody over in Europe, if they still monkey around with it, I don't know. Because they had some fantastic wood carvers over there. We were over in—wasn't it Switzerland, Gladys? We went to a carving place. And they were—they had a lot of tourists coming in there and bought stuff. And I know that they would make a pattern, and they must have had special carving machines someplace. That's my own feeling. HURST So they were not handmade? SWAN They would machine carve. I'm sure they machine carved because I looked them over. I could tell where they—you can tell if it's hand carved. And then they would just touch them up a little bit. They'd stand there and they'd touch it up. HURST So when you started to date girls now, did your mother tell you not to go to Italians or Polish or Lithuanians or Norwegians? SWAN No. HURST No. SWAN You picked your own? SWAN Mm-hmm. HURST Were the Swedes a little bit reluctant in the early years to mingle too much with Italians and foreigners? SWAN I really don't know because I— HURST I think if you were a Swede, you had to marry a Swede. SWAN Oh, yeah. That—yeah. HURST You think that was the kind of feeling? SWAN Oh, I think so at that time. Yeah. I think so. HURST But that was within you. In other words, without telling you, you— SWAN Well, you more or less knew, yeah. I think. HURST You knew. SWAN Yeah. HURST You knew. SWAN Yeah. HURST You knew. SWAN Yeah. HURST You knew. SWAN Yeah. I think so. HURST So you never dated any of the girls in the Swedes then? SWAN No. HURST Well, how did you meet your wife, for instance? SWAN I'll tell you how I met my wife. I went to—I went to Brown School. It was on 18th Avenue—no, I mean 16th Avenue and 8th Street. And she went to P.A. Peterson School. It was on—oh, about five, six blocks away. And I had to go to Peterson School for what they call manual training, wood shop. And I don't know, I was about 13 years old and I met her at the school there. And she lived about three blocks from where I grew up. And so I used to drive over on my bicycle to visit her, to see her, you know, as a kid. So I've known my wife now since I was 13 years old. And, well— SWAN He would ring the doorbell at my folks. We were kids, 13, 14 years old. And that time that was kind of young to have a boyfriend. And then my dad had answered the door and he'd hide in the bushes outside of our house. HURST Didn't everybody? SWAN So you didn't date then like they do today, when they are 10, 11, and 12? HURST Not really. I'd go up there on my bicycle. One time I got her to sit on the handlebars on my bicycle. And I was going to show off and I was going to, you know, ride along and jump the curbing, you know. HURST Yeah. SWAN I wasn't fat then. I was really skinny. HURST Anyway, it didn't work and I just crunched into the curbing and she flew over. She didn't get hurt though. So I've known her, my wife, now for many, many years. HURST So, but then you didn't engage, or didn't get engaged because of the depression, I suppose, with hitting harder? SWAN No, we—I didn't—I went out with other gals and stuff afterwards. I mean, in high school and so forth. And then we got together a little later on. HURST And then you married. SWAN And we got married. And we got married in 1930. HURST Oh, she was a skinny flint. SWAN Yeah, and with my family. I have a picture of, you know, me and our family. He's in all the pictures, so it shows he just hung with all over. SWAN Yeah, I was there pretty early. HURST It's nice to tell the time we went to Milwaukee and we went to a kind of a fancy— SWAN Yeah, her dad— HURST —we never got it up. SWAN Yeah, her dad— HURST Yeah, you never got it on, though, have you? SWAN No. HURST A fancy hotel in Milwaukee, and, of course, Terry was—he automatically went with all the time. He didn't have any money. SWAN I had five bucks on me. HURST He was scared. SWAN And I was afraid—you know, I didn't know how to—you know, if I should treat or—and I had no money to treat. And, naturally, I— HURST Naturally, he wouldn't have to treat, but he felt like— SWAN No, I felt that I should do—buy something for that, but, of course, he wouldn't—her dad would never even think of it, you know. But I didn't enjoy that at all because I—you know, I felt I should treat somehow or other, but it worked out. HURST But it was rough times, though, during— SWAN Well, it was in—oh, sure. HURST In your early thirties? SWAN Yeah, of course, at that time, no. I was only sixteen, seventeen. That's when I—they even took me with her folks. HURST It was in the late twenties, then? SWAN Yeah, late—late twenties, yeah, that's right. But, no, in thirty-two, I made—I forget now. I—I get twenty—well, yeah, I got twenty-seven cents an hour, I think, for a while there. And I only worked so many—I only took home seven dollars and fifty-five cents a week. HURST Were you able to save anything in the bank? SWAN Not really, not—not at that time. HURST So you didn't have any money in the bank then? SWAN No. HURST You had nothing to— SWAN I gave my mother five dollars, and then I kept two fifty-five. And it went a long ways, actually, for my age and everything at that particular time. And then I know when I was twenty—yeah, I was twenty, I guess, I bought—yeah, because the car was a year old, I bought a twenty-nine Ford, Model A Ford Coupe. And then I drove out to Montana to my wife's uncle, and I was only—I was twenty, yeah, twenty years old then. And that was like after we left Belfour, South Dakota, we took a road, and it turned into just like you going through a field. We had to open up fence gates to drive in, into just like a field. That was a road, a hundred and fifty-five miles, sixty miles to drive into Montana, into where her uncle was homesteading. HURST So you had your wife with you? SWAN No, no, she wasn't with me, but I was—her grandpa and cousin were with. You see, I was clinging to that family for many years, and yeah, that was—yeah. And I was twenty and—no, I was twenty-two, I guess. Well, anyway, her grandpa was with, and he had a man who had a full beard and a derby hat. And we'd stop in and go in a restaurant to eat, everybody just looked at him because, you know, he looked so different with his derby out west at that particular time. HURST So he was dressed kind of fancy. SWAN Oh, yeah, yeah. And he had his derby and his full beard. Of course, now a full beard means nothing, but at that time, I mean, nobody had it. But— HURST So it was unusual to see a bearded person at the time? SWAN Yeah, like that, because he had a—my dad had a mustache, but he had a regular full beard. And— HURST So you went out there only for— SWAN Just a visit, that's all. And then we stayed in—they didn't have motels then, they had cabins, dollar, dollar and a quarter a night you paid for it. And we had a cot with us, so we'd get a cabin and—