 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Mr. Strombeck, Moline de L'Henlois. Cassette two, side one. The name is very important. If you got the name of Johnson or some Swedish name, that's worth an awful lot in Minnesota because you can get votes. They'll vote for you just because your name is Johnson. The Swedes will. They don't know what you stand for or what you do. But they— He maybe won't like it. I've shown some of what you've done. But in politics— Just be quiet while he reads it. Yeah, but the machine is running. Very nice. Oh, I see. Okay. Very nice. All right. Yeah, but does that have any bearing today, though, on the— Yes, it does. —generation, you think? Oh, yeah. I think it's a mistake in Chicago. Now, we're Protestants, but if you're going to get to be mayor of Chicago, you better be a Catholic or you won't get it. You wouldn't give it a chance? No, no chance. So there are certain things you— There are certain things. There's a brick wall against you. Remember in politics, religion goes stronger than politics. So that if you are a Catholic in a Catholic area, I don't care if you're Democrat or Republican, you're going to win. And that holds true in a lot of stuff. But here in the local arena in Moline and the core cities, you had the Swedes, of course, back in 1900s. Not as much. Yeah, Belgium. How did they know? Because they were Democrats, they said. Yes, they were— Because they were Catholics and they were usually Democrats. Yeah, that's right. But how could they— And the Swedes were Republican. How could they come together now when electing the mayor and the city council? There was religion against religion. You get to be friends with certain fellows. You take our plumber here, Walter— Blondell. Blondell. He's a Catholic, but he's an awful good plumber. And if I have different property, I always hire him. I don't ever ask him—I never ask for a price because he's honest. But I know that if I wanted a certain fellow elected and I wanted him voted for, that if I went to Walter and asked him for his vote, he'd give it to me. You got to have friendship. So there's the personal basis. It's personal. When you get down to the city, it's all personal because your neighbors know what you're doing. You take in Moline here—Bill gets ran for alderman one time. He's a Republican. He's a Republican. He didn't spend one dime to be elected. He just went up and down the street and pressed the doorbell and told the people he was running. And they liked him. And they elected him. He's a president of Williams & Whiting Company. So they have been working very well, the Belgians and the Swedes, in the core cities? Oh, yeah. Well, and then it's Germans in Davenport. They're all German over there. But that's from the old days. They got something they're going to try to do now around here. They're going to try to make Rock Island, Moline, and East Moline and Silvas one city. What do you think about that? It'll never work. It'll never work. It'll never work. Because all those politicians in each town— They like to have the presidency. They want their job. And they all got friends and relatives. This isn't a new idea. This is an old idea from years ago. Oh, this been up before? Oh, yeah. Yeah. But it'll never work. We don't think so, anyway. But what's wrong with the core city idea? Well, it includes Davenport, I suppose. Yeah. Well— That's probably something the newspaper just threw out because they didn't have anything special to do. Well, they always like to have something. Davenport includes it now, would it? No, not in this new plan. No, not in this new plan. But when you talk about core cities, then Davenport. That's right. Then it is. There's 300,000 people there. So if we go back now to you coming back from Rock Island, and you're going to be in Davenport, and you're going to be in East Moline, and you're going to be in East Moline, and you're going to be in East Moline, and you're going to be in East Moline, and you're going to be in East Moline, and there's about 300,000 here. Yeah, that's when I got married. You met your wife in— In the factory up there. I see. Because I'll tell you how I met her. I was stock clerk at Amarok Corporation, and I had charge of all the steel up on the seventh floor. And Norma worked in the lock department, and she walked through the stockroom to get her lunch and everything to the washroom. So one day I decided—it shows how things happen when you don't know nothing. It was a Friday. There was a ballgame on, and she walked through the stockroom, and I said to her, Would you like to go to the ballgame tonight? And she said, Sure. And she'd go to the ballgame. When I came to my rooming house, I didn't know Norma's last name. I didn't know where she lived. I didn't know nothing. You just came out of thin air. Yeah. So I came home that night, and I come down to Mrs. Strumdahl. I said, Listen, do you know the girl that sits at the end of the row, second row in the choir at the free church? She said, I think it's one of the Johnson girls. Well, I said, I got a date for tonight, but I don't know where she lives. Where she live? She said, I think she lives on a certain street. Oh, you were supposed to pick her up? Yeah, I was supposed to pick her up. So I went over there, and those people weren't Johnson's at all. So they said—they thought that. They lived around the corner. She said, There's a family there that's named Johnson that's got five girls in there. So I went over there, and that's where she lived. So I picked her up the first night, and I didn't even know her name or where she lived or anything. So I picked her up at the house. We went to the ballgame, and I didn't know that her boyfriend that she was going with before, he was at the ballgame. So Norma got the idea that at the half of the ballgame, she didn't want to be there anymore. Oh, I don't— So we went up to— This isn't recorded, is it? Yes, it is. He's not recording. Yeah, this is history. I mean, this is— Is it recording now? Yes. So we went up to Broadway. What was the name of that store? Blomquist Grill. Blomquist Grill, a real nice grill. And I remember she wore a green dress that night. And we went to the Blomquist Grill the first night. Well, that's how it started. We broke up a few times during our— Yes, but in this case, you belong to the Free Church. But you didn't know that, Mrs. Stromberg, that he was a Free Church— Oh, yeah. He had just come to Rockford from Iowa, see? So you didn't know anything about— I didn't know anything about it. So you were in trouble then presenting him for your mother. Yeah, I didn't know— Because you didn't know maybe he was a Catholic or German or— I didn't know anything. I trusted Thorsten Eriksson because he's a good friend of our family, and I know he wouldn't have told me that. Otherwise, I would have said, well, no, I suppose. But I said, well, I guess so, I said, and I read— Oh, that's really funny how that— Did you know that he was a Swede by the name or— No, I didn't know anything about it. Because he didn't have any broker or anything like that. My middle name is Moritz. That's a German name. Wernher Moritz Stromberg. But otherwise, Stromberg is a brook that comes from a spring. Stromberg. Stromberg. Yeah, I'm sure that's it. Yeah, so that was kind of a funny— So that was spelled with an A in Sweden. A, Breck. Oh, Bat. With an A? B-A with two dots on it. Oh, oh. I'm sure I don't remember. I think you did. I did. You broke up a couple of times, but— Four years. Yeah, you broke up a few times. Four years. But finally— But you were steady for four years after that. Yeah, yeah. Broke up maybe two, three times. But I never give up. No, he didn't give up. Well, it's lasted 51 years now. 51 years. Yeah, so it couldn't have been too bad. We had a good party last year. I never believe in parties, but I told my wife, on the 50th year, we're going to have a party. So we went over and we— Holiday Inn. We invited how many? I thought there was 500. Oh, I don't—it was a lot of people. I don't remember exactly. You had it in Rockport? No, in Davenport. In Davenport. In Davenport. And all our grandchildren, 13 grandchildren were all there. They all had them up there singing, and it was just real, real nice. We had a lot of our friends and relatives all came. And guys I was in business with. So you mentioned here now when you met your wife here, you were in charge of the department. How many years or months did it take you before you can get in the position of telling others what to do? You know, some people have to go there for 25 years before you get the foreman position, but you seem to have advanced very rapidly. Well, I was just a truck driver to begin with, and then I got to be shipping clerk, and I had two fellows working for me, but I never went up the ladder in Amarok. I went to school in Chicago to learn to be a printer, and then I come down here, we bought a building, and we started a print shop. You see, really, I've never run anything with people working directly under me, but I've been helping other people that knew what they were doing. I found the best way for me to get together was to help other people. Like with that college there, I've never been on any board or anything. Well, the Trinity College you mean? Yeah, but I know what they need for in a college because I've been there. And when they started in 1962, I got acquainted with the president. I didn't even know him before. So, Cal Hanson Young. And I knew how colleges run. They were very poor. They didn't have much, hardly any money at all in the college. They bought a 100-acre farm, and there was cows walking around there. They didn't have any buildings. They didn't have anything. They had some people that wanted to start a school, and they made a deal with a mining company up in Canada that if they tore the buildings down, the mining company would give them half the boards. So they did that, and they hauled them down to the college, and they built some cottages down there. But I knew that they only had a little lawnmower for the grass. I couldn't begin to touch it. So I went down here to a fellow named Wilbur Sage. He sold lawnmowers, and I bought a big lawnmower, what they used for cutting grass at the golf courses, and I shipped that up to them. I helped them with different things when they needed help, like they needed a gymnasium. And I was thinking one day, I was sitting down by the typewriter, and I had the telephone by there. Hanson called up, and he said, The board's meeting now. He said, We've got the old barn out there. They're talking about making that into a gymnasium. What do we do? I said, All right. The first thing you do, you go into town, and you hire an architect, because I don't know what to do, you don't know what to do. So we'll hire the guy that knows what to do. And so that's what he did, and they called that a barnasium. And my daughter Mary was in the first class of 17 kids. I just talked to the president of Trinity here the day before yesterday and counted the kids in the summer session. They've had over 1,200 students this last year, which is pretty good. Well, I knew that after two, three years, you can't run a college without books. The first thing you do in a school is to find the best teachers, because the teachers do the teaching. And then you've got to give those teachers tools, and tools to a teacher is books. So I bought books for them. I told Hanson, Give me a list of all the books that you need up here. And we sat down in my office down here, weeks at a time, looking up where to buy books for them. And we had them shipped up to the school. Well, then you've got to have a place to keep the books. So one day I went up there and I told him, I said, Hanson, I'll tell you what I'll do. You've got to build a library. I said, I'll give you, we'll build one for $40,000 to begin with. And I give him that. And he got kind of scared, because the architect came in with a building that cost $80,000. I said, that's no trouble. I said, you tell that fellow, we told him to get a building for $40,000. And we think that he's supposed to know what he's doing. Don't come in with a building that costs twice as much. But give him the drawings back and have him come back with a building we need. Well, we built a nice little library up there. It cost a lot more than that, though. But I've kept a finger on that school all the time. So you are following in your father's footsteps then. This book, The Layman Speaks, is your father's work, in other words. No, that's Thompson. It was edited by Thompson. Yeah, he wrote it. It is about your father. But what he did, you see, Thompson was editor of The Beacon. And my dad had put many articles in The Beacon. Yaldin had articles in there. Those other fellows in there had articles in there. So all Thompson did was to take articles of The Beacon and reprint them in book form. But your father is in there also in this book. Oh, yeah, George Strumby. So it seems to me that the Free Church now, they've been very open to the layman's approach to tell. Well, they have to. In the Free Church in Moline, they built that little wood church down on 13th Avenue and 11th Street, and they never had any preacher. They had fellows coming around the country that would preach, so they invited them in to preach. But the old members of that church, they knew what they believed. So I know one time a fellow come in there and started preaching. He got halfway through when one of the old deacons got up. He said, We've heard enough of this stuff. He said, Get out of here. So the deacon went up there and finished the sermon. I mean, they knew what they believed, and that makes the Moline Church an awful tough one to be a preacher for because most people go to church and listen to anything they tell you. Now, we've been going to a little church in Davenport, Grace, even to go free. Now, you run a church. You should run a church just like you run a supermarket. You've got to have the product, so you better make sure you've got the right preacher. What's the second thing? When the people hear that preacher, they've got to hear them. So when they built that church over there, I paid for the PA system so they could sit in church and hear them. Now, what's the next important thing? They've got to come to church to sit in a church, and that means a good parking lot. So I pushed them for a good parking lot. Now, what's the next thing after that? The members of a church are the salesmen, not the preacher. And so I've got a little business card holder. I'm going to have some business cards printed, For the church, you are invited to visit the Grace Evangelical Free Church. Now, I'm going to put 25 cards in each case and give each member in the church that, so whenever they go out, they can pass out that card and invite people to come to church. Oh, wait a minute. Turn that off. I'll tell you, and I can say it over again. The Swedes are the working people. Moline is exactly different from Rockford. Up in Rockford, the Swedes started the companies. They were the bosses. They owned the companies. And Moline Deering Company had the company, and they made farm implements. So when they say that in the old days, the joke is that when the train was coming in from New York, they would say, Moline, and nobody would get off. But then they would yell, John Deere, and they would all jump off. But the workers here were a lot of Swedes in John Deere factory down here. So they worked as workers. That's right. But your family, no. It seems to me you have the Rockford spirit to start something on your own. You start on your own. Because you would think there would be 50, 60 different small wood shops, I mean metal shops here, just in Rockford. Yeah, but there isn't, no. And the wood shops are mostly out east. That's where the old timers are, 100, 150 years old, the wood plants are. And they have the advantage because they have cheaper labor out there. You see, John Deere has high wages, and that was my hardest job, was to run a factory in Moline. To compete with John Deere. To compete for the workers. We would hire a young fellow to work in the tool room, and after he learned the trade, Deere and company would hire him away. They'd give him more money. Did the workers now at your factory unionize? Yeah, they're union. They were union. But it didn't amount to nothing. Because I run the factory the way I wanted to. One time they were going to have a strike. So I stood out on the sidewalk one day, and I met the president of the union, was a woman. And she come out and I said, Listen, if you start a strike here, be sure that you want to strike. Because all the arrows go out, and nothing comes in. I'll tell you what's going to happen. If you go on strike, I'm going to sell all the machinery and go to Florida. And you can do what you want up here. They didn't have no strike. One day I sat in a negotiations meeting. They were arguing about the peace rates. And Becker had a peace rate. They wanted a few cents an hour more. Well, he said to them, he turned around to me. I was in the last row. He said, Vern, what do you say what we're doing? I said, You just tell that woman that if they don't take this price that we put on, they can run out the wood that's in the bin and then go home because I'm quitting. She said to me, she said, It looks like we don't have much of an option. I said, You got a good option. You got the option if you want to work or if you want to quit. I said, Either one. If you want to quit, ask for more money. If you want to work, just keep on working. So they kept on working. I got all the old timers out there on my side. It's the young guys that don't know me that might strike. You had one, I remember now, David Carlson. Wasn't he one of the foreman's down there? David, no, he was in, oh yeah, Dave Carlson. He followed my dad in the tool room. He was boss of the tool room after my dad retired. Yeah, that was Carlson. Is he still living? Yeah, he's still living over on 12th Street, WS. Is that right? Yeah, 12th Street. He is from Small Island. Oh, I'm sure. Don't you think, like at your plant, Stronbeck and Beckett, Eastmoreen, you had a workforce of about 200. Yeah, about 200. Wouldn't that be a more personal feeling though for a worker to work there eight hours and then go over to John Deere and just be a number? Oh yeah, what I did when I went out there, I run it different than my uncle did. Every day I took a walk through the shop, every day, and I talked to people. I started on the top floor, on the fourth floor, and all the workers at the machines or what they were doing, I would stop and ask them if there was any trouble they had. So they would tell me what was going on so that I wouldn't be the last one to find out. So you had personal contact every day? Every day. On the floor? I walked through the shop once a day, out in the lumber yard, through all the departments. I talked to all the foremen, and it took me maybe an hour or so. But I got along good with the workers. I think so because the person on the floor, he would know that you know what's going on. Like International Harvest, for instance, McCardell, he didn't walk down on the floor, or Thompson, or whoever he was. They never saw the workers. No, they didn't know anything. Well, I worked out there when I was a kid back in 1926. I worked out there in the lumber yard and took boards in. So I knew the old timers. Dave Engholm. No, not Engholm. He was an electrician. Oscar Ramberg, that's right. He was my boss. He was a tough guy. So the Swedes were tough to work for, though, I mean in the foreman position. Oh, yeah. They got the work out. They didn't stand around for any loafing either because they got their orders. You got to get this order out. They went down and they got it out. And they got competitive. Oscar Ramberg had charge of the yard. He had to cut the boards up in short lengths. And then he put them on a truck and he pushed them into the next department. And that guy was a Swede. And he had to rip them. And Oscar liked to have a bunch of trucks full with short lengths before so that he could go in and talk to the other foreman and tell him, Get going. What are you standing around for? And the other guy, he was working hard so he would catch up. So when the trucks weren't empty, when there weren't any trucks there, he would go out to Oscar and he'd say, What's the trouble? I haven't got any work. Could they continue like that or day after day, year after year, the foreman? You would think it would be a stress on them. No, they got together. The big trouble was at the end that Fred hired all these guys when they were young and they got all old together so that at the last years there weren't any young guys coming up. So there was all old fellas and the fellas in the shop decided what to do. They thought they could run the shop. I'll tell you what I did to cure that stuff. One day I told Fred, my cousin, I said, Now you buy a, we'll get a barrel, a steel barrel, and we'll put water in it. We'll take a two-wheel truck and we'll take it into a room in the back of the shop and just set it there and then we'll lock the door. And don't let them know what we're doing. And they want to know. So the head of the union come up and said, Say, I've got a right to know what's going on in there. I said, Forget it. And he didn't know what they did. Other workers come along and they wanted to know what was going on in there. All we did was empty that barrel of water back in that back room and run it down the drain. I never heard this one. Oh yeah. I had to cure them so that they didn't know everything, what was going on. And I told Fred, We'll fix them. But this is very interesting, you know, with management union. Here you have now, So there's always been the feeling that management makes more money than they serve, they call it. Yeah. Now when you run this factory here, you have 200 people employed. I was the cheapest employee in the whole factory myself. And I was president. It's hard for the worker to understand, though. Well, the old timers knew it. So it was easier to talk to the old timers, if you were a patriotic or on your side. But here is the thing now. Because there was no leverage between, they were paying, for instance, not 50 cents an hour. Yeah, well, in the old days, they were paid about 15 cents an hour. I'll just take a figure, not 50 cents. Yeah. If they know one day, come and say, No, we got to have 55. Then they started bickering right away. I can't give you that because they will break our company. I mean, what's the difference of the margins were small, actually. Well, what I did, I told the union, Okay, you go out and you get yourself an accountant. You can come in and go over the books. Oh, you offered that? Oh, yeah. I said, I didn't have anything to hide. You were honest. I didn't have nothing to hide. Because I personally, myself, got less pay than the guys in the shop. I was the cheapest employee in the shop myself. I didn't need the money. That's your idea. I see. Yeah, I worked for years without getting any pay. Because all I was doing was to keep the company going. And they knew it. So from your regular work now as a printer or the bookstore owner, you went to the factory and— Well, I run the factory. I didn't go down there. You didn't go down there? No. You were silent— That's right, not so silent. Fred, when he was president, if he spent more than $10, he would have to call me up on the telephone and ask me if they could do it. Because you got to watch— When you have a bucket, you can have two buckets. One of them is watertight, and one of them has a lot of little holes in the bottom. You can carry water in one, but you can't carry water in another one. And the trouble with most factories, they go broke. They've got too many little holes in the bottom where money is running out. So they are careless then to find out. That's right. But here you know, your father, he was very industrious and progressive in both religious and regular life. And you as a son, you had the same spirit to look forward and always invent the things. See, my dad, when he graduated from the University of Illinois, he got a job in Chicago first with the Timpkin Bearing Company. And then he went from Timpkin Bearing, he got over to Root & Vandervoort in East Moline. They built an automobile, and they built machinery, and they built a gas engine for farmers that had wheels on the side, and they made shells for the United States Navy. Well, now at that time when he worked for Root & Vandervoort, he had 28 draftsmen working for him. And that's a pretty good-sized drafting room, just drawing. And I'll tell you a little joke they had. The Cassatt 2, Cy 2, Lunenstrombach. And they shipped a car to one of the dealers, and it made a little noise, so the dealer wrote in. He said, I'm sending the car back. He said, it sounds like it's sweet eating soup. So they fixed it up, and then when they shipped it back to him after it was fixed, the sales manager wrote a letter to the guy, and he said, I think that the eating habits of the car have been greatly improved. But then while my dad was working out there, that's when Fred came. We lived over on 13th Avenue. He would come over every Sunday afternoon and beg my dad to come out there and work, because up to that time they didn't have any automatic machines. He had to buy his machines where everybody else bought them. So when my dad went out there, he was an inventor, and he was a mechanical engineer. So he would, he designed automatic machinery. That was back in 1915, back in there. After they got those automatic machines going, that's what made Strummink Banker grow. How about your uncle now, Fred? Was he also an inventor? No, no. He was more finance. He was a smart man. He was real smart. But how about his son now? He must have been different. He was. He was a playboy. He was sort of a playboy. I will be careful. Do you think he had it too easy? In other words, you had to start early in life to see what you could do. Well, I had to work hard. You had to work hard. So there's a difference between working hard and get fed with the silver spoons, so to speak. Yes, because whatever they wanted, they got. But I had to earn it. But you saw a need for years, like you said, the family needs. That's right. When I was a kid, I would mow the lawn for a quarter. I had to trim around the trees and the sidewalks. I picked cherries for four cents a box. And I got a job one summer. I dug ditches for Moline Heating Company. I made 40 cents an hour. All the other guys on the shift made 50 cents. And I dug more dirt than they did. One guy came back to me and told me, You're digging too much dirt. He tried to show me how to slow up. I never slowed up. That was Morgan Farmer. You ruined the piecework scale, you know. Yeah. Well, at 40 cents an hour, I worked so hard that I had salt on my face at the end of the day. You were sweating so much. Yeah. You didn't eat any supper. You went to bed, you think. Yeah. But what do you think is now in your philosophy is the most important for a young person to get the training? What... Well, I would decide first. If I was a young fellow, say I was 20 years old, I would first have to decide what do I want to do. Now, suppose I want to be a lawyer. But it's hard to decide that when you are 15, for instance. Well, to begin with, if you can, when you're young, is do a lot of reading and get different jobs. Just not for a long time, just for a couple months, so you know what they're doing. One time I walked in Rock Island, and I sold candlesticks for the factory from house to house. I just did that for a couple months. I was a truck driver just for about three years. What kind of vision did you have for your future to be? I took it just the way it was. One day at a time? Yeah. I didn't plan anything. But I got the best education you could ever imagine at the University of Iowa, business course, so that I had accounting, business law, insurance, railway transportation, all different kinds of subjects. So when I came to Rockford, I had to help the head of the... Reuben Aldeen once came out and asked me questions on how to close the books. I had the education, and that's the most important thing. But after, you want to know how would I start as a young guy? If I wanted to be a lawyer, I would go to a good law firm and offer to do the footwork for them for minimum wages, just to learn how it runs. If I wanted to be anything else, I'd go to the company that does that work and offer to work for them for no price, because I'm getting educated. And when I know if that's what I want to do, I could keep going. So the experience is an important feature also. Yes, and one thing that most kids don't know is that interest is the most important thing that you can get. If you can invest your money at 6% interest, every 10 years you double your money. People think that interest is small. Interest is not small. When you buy something, when I was a kid, when the folks bought anything, they'd buy an icebox. I know they would pay cash for it at the store. They would go down to the store, and you know those iceboxes they put ice in. We had one. They must have paid about $30 for it. But whatever they bought in the old days, they paid cash. The banks have got you now so that whatever you buy, if you want it, you go down and buy it on time, and you've got to pay interest. You're paying twice as much what it costs. If you can get away from paying interest, you're going to get ahead a lot faster. So, yeah, but in certain instances you have to take... Now they say, you know, the past has been too careful, like in the 20s. They saved up everything, and they've slowed down business. Yeah, that's true. The more you buy on time, the more business you can pull out. Temporarily. Temporarily only. Because if you buy a house with a 30-year mortgage, how soon are you going to buy another house? You're paying interest. You're paying two or three times what that house is worth. When you buy a car, one of the big problems on the new tax law that they're talking about in Congress today is they're not going to allow you to take interest off of your car payments for tax deduction. And the automobile business is afraid that people won't be buying cars. Well, the trouble is that people nowadays, they buy a car on time. About the time they get that car paid for, it's wore out, so they've got to buy another one. That makes good business. Sure it does. But it's good for who? Not for the guy that's working. He pays double. He pays double, that's right. But here you have one thing now. You have experience from the practical work. Yeah. Out in the field. But a lot of today's students of economics and so forth, all they have experience is schooling up to about 25 years of age. No experience out in the work field. And here you have the economic professor now. He always talks like this, on this hand I have this, but on this hand I have this. There's always two-handed economics. Most of those teachers don't know what they're talking about. Yeah, but now you came out of Iowa. Yeah. I had some good teachers. You had some good teachers, but how do you know that, if they are good? I mean, is it good to apply to the tomorrow's... Well, the dean of the school, Chester... What was I, Phillips. He was so smart in banking that he would go to Washington and work in there for the summertime. Now, I corrected papers for the dean in my senior year. The first set of papers I corrected, there was an awful howl in the class. They thought the grades wasn't high enough. So he called me in. He said, Bernie said the boys don't like what you did. But he said, I checked up on them. I checked up on the test, and he said, you did right. But he said, we're on the curve here. 20% fail, 20% get good marks, 40% get medium. He said, you can just go back and add 10 points on every grade. They like it, but it don't mean nothing because you add it to the smart ones and the dumb ones both. Now, I had another professor, Mr. Hill, in business law. He didn't believe nobody. I learned an awful good thing from him. We'd have a test in his class. He would have it in the biology laboratory where they sit in sort of lower seats. He would have every other row get the same question and every other seat in the row. He didn't trust anybody, and this is what he did. He gave a final examination one day, and we took it. The next time we come there, you see the first, in college you've got a lot of fraternities, and the boys that belong to fraternities, they studied the exams from the year before, so they got high marks in that. But the next time we went to class, he had another test that he hadn't told us about, and we had that. Then we came to the third class. He had two piles of test papers in front of him, and he would take the top paper off of each one and say the guy's name was Anderson. He would say, Mr. Anderson, I can't understand this. On the first test, you got an awful high mark, 96. On the second one, you got a low mark, 85. But he said, I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll throw away the high mark and we'll keep the second one because he knew that they studied off of their last year's examination. He'd come to a fellow that was honest. He'd say, Mr. So-and-so, the first test you made about 94. The second test you made it 96. He knew that was a kid that studied because he didn't study last year's exam. He said, I'll tell you what we'll do. We'll keep the 96. He gave the guys that studied the credit for being students. Now, we had another fellow there in railroad transportation that liked sports. He was a miler in college himself, so every day he had to go out on the racetrack and run a mile before he'd come up to class. But he liked to help athletes, so all the athletes took his exams, I mean his course. And the joker on the place was that there was one ball player that had to pass a certain test in his course in order to play football the next Saturday. So he went up to take the test, and the professor asked him a question, and he said, I don't know. The professor said, 100 percent, you don't know. It was honest. Well, there's probably a lot of bickering with grades. There's another trouble with the way things are today. People are relying too much on appliances or computers and these different things, like this thing. You don't have to think. You don't have to know how to add. You think that people will get slow in their... They don't know how to do it. My mind, when I went to Rockford after I graduated, I was shipping clerk. I learned how to multiply. Like screws, you have four screws to a hinge, and if they bought ten dozen hinges, that would be 48. They'd have to have 180-some screws, and I learned those things automatic. And then I was truck driver. When I took and delivered the freight to the freight house, we had a little puddle dumper of a truck, and when I got down there, our competitor, Lock Company, had a great big truck, and they were a big company. And I would go over to that truck driver, and I offered to help him unload the truck. All I was doing when I unloaded his truck, I memorized what was in those cases, what was inside of them. So when I came back to our factory, I'd go into my boss, Lindroth, and I would tell him what our competitor was shipping and to who they were shipping, so our salesmen could... I worked that way all the time. We had a lock company in our place, and National Lock came out with a new lock. I said, all right, I'll find out what that lock is for. I wrote to my cousin. He was principal of... he was superintendent of school out in Iowa. I told him, write in to Lock Company and ask them for a sample lock. So he did, and he gave it to me, and I brought it back and gave it to our fellas so they could saw it apart and find out how it worked. Well, you've been a foxy guy, I understand, but this bear with water, I think, is the number one, though. Which one? With the bear with water for the Union guys. Yeah. John Deere wouldn't have done a thing like that. No, I know, and they're in trouble, too. Have you driven through the John Deere place out there? Yes. Isn't it beautiful? Yeah, but who's paying for it? John Deere. He saw it right away. That was his first question. Let's not open that bag of worms. No, but it's a difference between the management's gain there. That's right. They should teach people that they should make it so they all have the same ambition to get ahead. When you make a profit at the factory, you should divide it between the help and the management. You should have so much. I had a plan out at the factory that if I stayed out there, I would have profit sharing, that if we made so much profit, we would take the profit after we got 6% or 8% for the stockholders, we'd take the extra money and we'd put that in the bank. For the workers. No, for equal. Between management, that's the president, secretary, treasurer, for the stockholders and for the workers, and divide it equally so that you're fair. Now, if a worker quits, you've got to be careful because Amarok ran into some trouble there. They're a very fair company. They give the workers a very big profit sharing. When they started, if a fellow quit, he got all his money. You can't do that because if he buys a house, he needs a down payment. If he's working at your shop and he knows he's got so many thousand dollars in the account, he'll quit so he can get that thousand dollars. The way you fix that is that when they quit, you get one-tenth of it at a time, spread it out over ten years so they don't quit for the sake of getting a hold of the money, that you just have to wait for the money. But Amarok has a very good thing. I know Fred Dornbusch, a toolmaker, told me one day out there, he said, Vern, if I... that was many years ago, if I quit today, I will get $30,000 profit sharing. So Amarok has been very fair to their workers. The union has tried to unionize Amarok several times, and the workers turned them down because they would get less money under the union than they're getting now. So when the union came in, the Ottoman Union, for instance, did they get the workers themselves locally, or did they have some outside help coming from Japan? Well, I'll tell you, the union in our factory in Moline was my uncle's fault because he didn't treat them right, and they got it down on him. If I could have run it at that time, they wouldn't have had a union. But he treated them so they had to get a union to get their money, and I don't blame them one bit. But the funny part is we had the same union that Deere and Company had, but we never paid those wages. They just forgot about how I run it. We paid what we could afford to pay. I know one time I was at American Cabinet. I had charge of entering the orders and the billing, and I went into Rubin one day and I asked him for a raise for one of the girls. He said, Has she asked for it? I said, No. I said, I'm the boss. I should know if she's worth it. If she's worth it, she should get it. If she isn't worth it, she shouldn't get it. But what I did was something that nobody, I haven't heard this anyplace else. I asked for counting machines. I had a bunch of Alexa's order writers and typewriters. I put a counter on every typewriter to find out how fast the girls worked. Yes, and you'd be surprised. Some worked three times as fast as others. Your sister-in-law was a fast one, wasn't she? She was fast. Maggie, my brother's wife. But you got to pay people. Like I told my dad, I said, I should be getting more money. And I wasn't getting it. And he said, Just tell them. I said, No way. I said, If I went in there and asked for a raise and he gave it to me, I'd quit right there. When did I get to be worth that raise? Just that minute? Or why didn't I get it before? If I'm not worth it, I don't want it. But if I'm worth it, I want it. And I don't have to ask for it. I always figure that the boss is on the top. He should know what the helper's worth. He should pay them what it's worth. And then you wouldn't have any trouble. But the thing is, if there are so many workers now standing in line, you know, begging for a job. Like today, for instance. Now they can press the wages down tremendously. They even go below the minimum wage because there are so many workers. Oh, you can't go below minimum. It's $3.35. I know what you're saying. They have them part-time. Then they can pay them $1.50 an hour. Oh, no. That's not good either. Well, the big trouble is that the union up to now has been getting a lot of wages that they're not worth. It's a fringe benefit that costs the company money. So they haven't produced them what they were paid. They're not worth it. The best way is to let the union own half of the job. They don't want to own anything now. No, they don't. The union is the worst company to pay help because they pay less than anybody. When you have people working at union headquarters, I've seen strikes at union headquarters because they're not getting paid enough. The worst kind of a boss you can get is a fellow that has worked in the shop, and he gets to be a boss. That's not good. Like the Moline Plano, they folded up in 1952. Yeah, and that's where Cauley worked. Those workers didn't get one cent in pension or any benefit, and they just disappeared. That's right. How can they disappear without people getting mad at them? Well, there was nothing set before. There were no funds set up. They said that the company paid into a bank, but there was nothing written about it. Well, it's not legal. Anything you do has to be legal. They've got to be in black and white. Yes. You didn't tell them about Luck, did you? The factory? Well, yeah. When I got into Stronachstown here, there was a company in Luck, Wisconsin, a yo-yo company. Duncan. Duncan Company, and they went broke. So Fred and I went up there at the auction, and I bought up enough machinery out of that plant to make yo-yos. It was a big business. It was 600 people working seven days a week around the clock. Was it in the 50s or—? No, in the 60s. Oh, 60s. And we built a factory up there, Fred and I. We designed one that was 200 feet long and 60 feet wide. It was your cousin then? Yeah. And we had a big door at each end. There were no posts inside, so you could drive a truck right through the place. We could have direct line production in there, but it didn't work because we couldn't hire a foreman. We had a superintendent. We had a fellow from Indianapolis down here, and we had him hired. I know on Friday night, everything was set for him to start work Monday morning. What happened to the guy, I don't know. He never showed up. I think his wife went up there and saw how big a town that was. It was 800 people, and they rolled up the sidewalks at 5 o'clock. There was nothing doing, and I think his wife wouldn't live in that town. So when we couldn't find a superintendent, we had to quit the plant. Because they were running it from here, see? But we had trouble. Just to show you, you've got to be careful. You've got to be honest, but you can't be too honest. We had a streak in there where we were always short on our orders. We started with what? If we started with 10,000 handles, we'd probably have about 9,500. We couldn't find out where the leak was, so Fred and I went up there and watched everything go through. The shipping clerk was a preacher. After he weighed up the order, he always put a couple of handles on top of it. I went up to him and said, say, listen, what are you doing? Well, he said, we've got to get a full count. Sure, I said, we've got to get a full count, but we're going broke. So I said, you give them what they pay for, and that's all. You quit that. When he stopped that, we were okay. Oh, he was going to be real generous, huh? So a small thing can make a big difference. Oh, yeah. That's what you've got to watch for in the factory more than anything. It's the little leaks. If a little leak is running all the time, it's like a light, for instance. If you've got a small light running 24 hours a day, you're going to use up a lot of electricity. You've got to watch the little leaks. That's why I told them out there at the factory that you can't spend more than $10 without me asking you if you can, because you can spend a lot of small sums, and when they add up, you're broke. Tell them who you sold it to. Yeah, we sold that factory building up there to three fellas. They wanted to move out, so we sold it to them, and I put a price of $285,000 on it. On the factory side? Yeah, but we never told them. I mean, we told them it was $285,000, but I didn't tell them what interest on the note. And Richard and I decided we'd charge them 9%, but Rich asked them what they would do. They come back with a counteroffer of $235,000. That was $50,000 less, but 15% interest. I told Richard, I said, Grab it. He said, We're taking a $50,000 loss. I said, Oh, no. The difference between 9% interest and 15% interest, we come out the winner, because at 15% they're going to pay a lot more than if they paid 9%. So they bought it, and I'm afraid they're in trouble now, but I'm not afraid because they owe us $176,000. They wrote me a letter and asked me if I wouldn't cut off some of that cost. I can't do it. I've given them $50,000 already when I sold it. So if they want to borrow the money... They are still producing uniforms? Oh, yeah. No, no, no. They're making furniture. I had a beautiful factory up there. A lot of butcher block furniture. You know what that is, don't you? Oh, yes, yes. But those fellows are workers. I play ball with them. If they're late with their payments, I just let it go. So we are talking about you are making toys and all furniture. When you look at the piece like this, I wouldn't call it toys. They're pieces of art. They're well-assembled and everything. We sold hundreds of thousands of those. They sold actually as toys then. Yeah, toys. Not for collectors. No, in those days, they were... They're collectors now. They are collectors now. I know, I understand, because it's not produced anymore. But at that time... They bought it to play with. That's for kids to play with. We get more for one of those pieces of wood. Now as a collector's item, we got for the whole set when we were selling them. Because what beat us out of that business was over in Taiwan and Hong Kong, where they do a lot of handwork cheap. Yes, but there you can see the quality right away. Yeah, even so many people go by... Oh, and they make beautiful things. Yes, yes. How can you spend so much time on each piece though? That's the trick of it. That's designed to be automatic. I mean, here you have the curb and everything. Sure, that's the tools. The tools cut them automatic. We don't spend hardly any time on it. Like when you put it together, you got to have a jig. You put the forms together, pull it, and it locks it up just perfect. And then you take the next one. So some of the tooling, you know, your dad was instrumental in. Yeah. And this complete pass form and everything. It's got to be automatic. They made a lot of other things too. Here's a little coffee table, I guess. Oh, and they made trains. Yeah, and then we got into toys. We made wood trains and airplanes and boats. This is just like regular-sized furniture. It is. The same quality is into it. That's what you have to have. You don't have any laminated... No, no laminated wood. No, or plastic. That's right. Oh, no. That buffet there, Nancy just bought one for $8. That one there. How much did it sell for a set like this? You sold it as a set then? Yes. Well, they couldn't buy it as a whole set. How much did they sell it for in the 1960s? I suppose $3, $4. Oh, they must have cost...