 I'm sitting together with Mr. Vernon Strombach, Moline, Illinois. He was born 1908, 8th of October, in East Moline, Illinois. And we have today 7th of June, 1986. Your father, George Morris Strombach, he was born in Moline. Yes. You see, my grandfather came over in about 1870, and he, it tells about it in here, he traveled from New York across the country here. He was a shoemaker, and he made shoes for a crew of railroad builders, and they were building a railroad across the country. And they got as far as Illinois, and the Depression come, so they had to stop, and they paid off all the workers. And then he, he traveled across the country. He walked. He had a little, it tells it in here, he had a little trunk that he carried, and he slept in straw stacks with farmers as he traveled across the country. And he stopped in several cities first, but he finally came to Moline, and he, he came to Moline. When he came to Moline, he married my grandmother, and she was 16 years old at the time. And he ran a shoe shop where they built the shoes from a cowhide. He would measure the feet, and then it was before they had shoe stores. And he had a small shop, a very small shop in Moline, down on 4th Avenue. That's what he did. He ran that shoe shop until he died. The date's in the book. Then in his family, my father was the oldest, and then my uncle, Fred Strombeck. I have a sister, they had a sister too, Ruth, and another sister that died. So there were four children? No, there's more than that. But Fred Strombeck, my cousin, my uncle, and my dad went to high school here. And when my dad graduated from high school, he went to Williams & White Company and learned the machinist trade. After four years learning the machinist trade, he went to the University of Illinois and worked himself through college. He waited on tables mostly. And then he met my mother, and she was a seamstress. She loaned him $60. So when they got married, she owed him, he owed her $60. Fred, after high school, went to work for a dairy company to settle freight bills. And as he traveled around, first he thought that there's a lot of small companies, they can't afford to have a fellow settle freight bills. So he quit there and started his own company. And as he traveled around the country to settle freight bills, he heard so much, many of the fellows say, that they had gone to college. So he sold his company and went to the University of Northwestern. And he made up some of his high school education and four years college in three and a half years. And he graduated with a Phi Beta Kappa. They gave him a Phi Beta Kappa key for high marks. When he got out of college, he had the certificate, but he didn't have any job. And as he walked around looking for work, he walked down back of the deer factories and saw a lot of piles of lumber, scrap lumber laying around. And in those days, they built an awful lot of farm implements from wood. So deers built, that was before the days of tractors. So they had single trees and wood wagons for horses. And he got to thinking that if I made something out of that scrap wood, I could make it cheap. So he started a handle factory and he bought the lumber from deers, that scrap. But he found out that the labor cost of cutting out all the bad parts was so high, even at that time, that it was cheaper to get new wood. So he bought wood. He was so hard up at that time that he owed a grocery bill for half a year. Q. How was he able not to be acquainted with the wood when he bought it from the supplier? A. He didn't. Q. Or he had somebody to do that for him? A. No. He just saw the scrap and he thought, I can make use of that scrap, so I'll get it cheap. But he found out that the labor cost of cutting out the bad parts was so much, even at that cheap labor in those days, they had awful small labor. Q. So he hired people and started a factory? A. Oh, yeah. He started a factory. The first fellow he hired was a baker. He was his Sunday school, Fred was Baker's Sunday school teacher. And he told the kid that if you work for me, you'll get a good job out of it. So R.D. Baker worked for him. That's the only job he ever had. He started working for him and they hired one or two fellas and they had an awful small shop. But Baker became the superintendent of the shop. They started with handles for tools, like chisels and screwdrivers and that, but that didn't last too long. Then it got into other handles. So they built the shop up. I know that my uncle came over to our house to try to get my dad to go in with him because my dad was a mechanical engineer and he was working for the Rutan Van der Wort Company in East Moline. They built an automobile and they built shells for the British Navy during the First World War and my dad could invent machinery. And Fred would come over on Sunday afternoons and talk to my dad and ask him to come over and work for him. When my dad finally decided he'd go out there and work for him, Fred sold him 10 percent of the company for coming out there. And my dad invented a lot of machinery out there. He started making woodturning machines that made handles from little blocks of wood. And before my dad invented these machines, the machinery that my uncle had bought was making about six handles a minute. But my dad invented automatic machines that turned out from 30 to 50 handles a minute. Not only that, but he invented a machine that in addition to turning round handles, because anybody can turn a round handle, he invented a machine that would turn handles with many sides and that the handles could merge from many sides down to round, any kind of a shape they wanted, automatic. And they still got the machines out there. And that factory was located? Yeah. My uncle started it and they started in 1911 out there and continued to about 1981 when I sold it to the Chicago Cutlery Company. They made handles by the millions. They sold all over the country? All over the country. They had traveling salesmen. How many were employed then, for instance? Well, at the high part during the Depression, they employed, I know they employed 235 at one time. And they got into toy furniture. Schrambeck-Becker was noted for the nicest toy furniture in the country. They sold this toy furniture in department stores like Marshall Fields in Chicago and the ones in New York City. They got into making toys. And I know they made a toy airplane that they sold through the Woolworths Tencent store, the store in Chicago, sold a thousand airplanes a day when they were running that. Then in the 1950s, late 1950s, plastic came in and that took these businesses away from them. So they went down back to wood and they were having hard times. When I came, I would go over to the drug store every day at the print shop. And one day I went over there and there in the newspaper it said that Schrambeck-Becker had quit. They were bankrupt. So I went out to Fred and I asked him what was going on. He said, We run out of gas. We've only got $300 and we owe $560,000 and we can't run no more. So he had put notices on the clocks that to tell us to get other jobs, get Social Security, just quit. I told him, Fred, you go down and take that notice off of the clock and tell them to come to work Monday morning. He said, What are you going to do? I said, I don't know what I'm going to do. But I said, Dale Carnegie said that if I got my organization, I can make anything. And I said, That's all that you have. Q. How old were you then compared to your uncle? A. My uncle was dead then. Q. That was his son? A. Yeah. They're two Freds. Q. I see. He's two Freds. A. Yeah. So I never got in there at that time. Q. And your father was also dead? A. Yeah. No, no. Oh, yeah. At that time he wasn't. No, he wasn't either. So my dad was living because my dad asked me how in the world I got that company out of the mess they were in. Q. There were only two people that thought you could do it. A. And there were only two people that thought I could do it. Q. So what happened then? A. Well, what I did, the first thing I got into, I talked to Fred. I didn't go out there. We started the company going. And I told him, You don't spend any money over ten dollars without calling me up. And I put in a direct line, a telephone line, from his office to my office. And we ran for a good many years that way. But Fred finally died. And when Fred died, they made me president out there. And I ran it for about ten years. And I always had one meeting a week where I got all the old timers together. I bought a great big round table and I got the old timers together and sat them around the table because they had the experience. I didn't know anything. And I had every fellow tell me what he thought they should do. And we talked it over. The first meeting we had, I remember, I talked too much because I always talked too much. And we were going to only spend one hour. Well, I talked the whole hour. And they said, This can't keep going. So I bought an alarm clock and I put the alarm clock in the middle of the table. And when the alarm clock went off, we quit the meeting right there. But the old fellows were good at it. Q. Were they Swedes? A. Most of them were Swedes. Q. Are some still living? A. Yes, but the old timers are dead now. I know Oscar Renberg was the boss of the lumber yard. And we had Swedes all over. Q. It's wonderful that you've done it that way. A. Oh, yeah. One fellow, well, that's beside then. Q. So those old fellows, now, they were practical people. A. Yeah, they were by experience. Q. But how about the economic side of it now? You were the one who was in the middle. A. In the beginning on the economic side, my uncle ran it. But he died and his son couldn't run it. And they were broke. I went up to Rockford where I did my banking and I borrowed $100,000 first to pay off the bills that were squeaking the worst. And I paid them off. And then we took, I told Fred, now what we're going to have to do is start closest to the shipping room and ship the stuff that's almost ready and get the money and pay the bills with that. And then we kept making stuff and shipping it out. And we owed so much money out there, I mean the factory did, that I didn't dare to have the factory order stuff because the creditors would take the money and I'd look for more. So I took the money myself that I borrowed and I would buy lumber and shellac and ferrules and lacquer and buy that myself. So the shop didn't owe that. And I had them ship that stuff direct to the shop. And then the shop could use it. And we worked ourselves out of it. So we had a first-rate credit rating when we got through that way. A. What year was that? A. Well, they were broke in 1962. And then Fred and I worked together there. I must have been out there in 19, I'd say 1970. And we worked it out that way. A. So you kept it out of the shipment of the leather then? A. We kept it going until 1981. And in 1981 I sold it to the Chicago Cutlery Company. They were a big customer of ours that bought walnut handles for their knives. And they were going to make the handles down here. They had a plant out east. They were going to make them in the knife. And they were going to own everything that went into that knife. Well, they didn't know how to run a woodshop. They thought they could run it in Minnesota and Minneapolis just by writing checks. You can't do that because when you deal with wood, you've got some wood that's good. Wood is sold by grade. Grade number one, grade number two, grade number three. We used grade number two. But the high, a good grade number two, we got a lot of handles out of. The poor grade number two, we didn't get so much. That's why you can't run a shop like that on a computer because a computer can't think. So the number buyer is an important person then? Oh, yeah. He's really important. That's where you start. If you've got a good number buyer, you've got a good chance of making it. But wasn't it impossible when you looked at it? Five hundred sixty thousand dollars in the month's time? Five hundred sixty thousand. And then ten dollars on the credit. Oh, three hundred dollars. Anybody should say right away, is it possible? That's what they all said. What gave you the power or the instinct? Well, I got a certain philosophy. In any business, in anything you do, I don't care what it is, you think you're licked. You don't have a chance. That's because you don't look at it the right way. I do what they say, fragmented. Because look at the bill, five hundred sixty thousand. When I reorganized that company, I got all the creditors together. There was a hundred and eighty-seven of them. And we had a meeting at the LeClaire Hotel, and they agreed that they would form a committee among themselves, and we would pay that committee two thousand dollars a month. And they would pay that off to the creditors, but we paid the committee. Now when I fragment something, the secret back of that is that fragment is only part of your trouble. You haven't got out of the trouble, but you've got a way of working at it. When you try to solve your whole trouble, you can't do it. You can't get your hands on it. But if you take just one part of it, the way we did then was all the bills that were less than a hundred dollars, I paid them off and got them out of there. And then we made the committee to represent the big creditors. And we just kept paying off on them, so I forget the date that we finally paid them off, but we paid them all off. The bank had confidence in us. It was Moline National and First National Bank. And I met with them, and the reason I when I first met with them, they were ready to close in on the company because we owed the banks two hundred and seventy thousand dollars. But I told them I think I thought I could get it out. You see, up to this time, I had had nothing to do with the company, and I had some money. So I told them, if you fellas will stay off my back, I'll work it out of it. And we did that. We took the bills, and we just took one bill at a time and worked on it until we got them all paid. Well, wasn't it harder to convince all the creditors sitting around the talks or on the table that I should pay first? Oh, yeah. Why didn't you pay him? Well, the secret back of that was we had the creditors meeting in the board of directors room of First National Bank, and the bankers were sitting there. And some creditors come, and they were going to they wanted their money. I know Mr. William Wondery stood up, and he told one creditor, he said, listen, he said, you either agree with this and you got a chance to get your money, or he said, they owe the bank 270,000, and we got first place. And when we get our money, there won't be anything left over for you anyway. So they shut up. They said, okay. And the banks went along with us. Wondery was a bank president. Yeah, he was a president of Moline National. He and I could get along real good. So it was – but here I wonder, you must have been a pretty good, successful businessman yourself. No, we don't. I don't want to talk about that. Why did you want to add company on your business? Well, it was a family name. It was Strombach's Manufacturing Company, and my name is Strombach. And I knew that the factory was okay. I got to wondering, they were broke. They said they were bankrupt. So in the daytime, when I walked around the factory, I felt pretty good because there were all kinds of assets, machinery, buildings, everything was there. And at nighttime I couldn't sleep because then I only could think of the bills because the bills kept coming. One day I went out and I asked the treasurer, I said, how much is this factory insured for? He said one and a half million dollars. And when he said that, I knew I was okay because the reason was that my uncle was very conservative. He depreciated everything as much as he could. So we had over a million dollars' worth of machinery, but it was on the books for only 200,000, and the books is what the bank went by. So I got a camera and I got my son to take pictures of all the machinery in the plant. There was over 175,000, no, 175 machines, and they were all depreciated on the books. So I made up a book where I took on the first page I would paste a picture of that machine and then I wrote down how much the machine was worth new, how much it was worth used, and how much we had on the books. We had three motors out there, I remember, that were worth $50,000 each. I took the pictures of the motors and pasted them on a page and put the price new on it. They were worth about 15,000 used, but all three of them were on the books together for only $2,000. So the bank thought they had machinery worth 2,000 when they had three machines that were worth 15,000 each, or 45,000. Well I took that down to the bank and showed him that we had more stuff there than they knew we had. You can go broke if you don't. So you were able to convince the bank people that… Oh yeah, they worked with me all the time. How much did this depreciation gain? You have to run that according to the Internal Revenue Service. Yeah, but that's a double-edged sword. I mean you gain from the internal revenue and then when you want to show the books to the banks, it's hard to get loan. Yeah, but you see, we depreciate every year and I wanted the banks, it's common in business, I wanted the banks to know there was plenty of value out there and they played ball with me. You see, I personally had to guarantee all the bills. One time I had an argument with, not an argument, but I had to meet with the internal revenue and I said that the stock was worth $2 a share. It was on the books for $15 a share. And a young fella come out there and he said, they got down to that stock. I said, all right, before we start talking, there are three ways to value stock. The first way is book value. But during the Depression in 1930, U.S. Steel Company was worth over $1,000 a share, but it was selling for less than $100. So I said book value isn't worth anything. I said the second way you value stock is how much is it earning. If you can have a stock that's earning a lot of money, it's worth more even if they don't have assets. It's earning money. I said that don't matter because we're broke. We're not earning nothing. I said the third way of valuing stock is what is it going to amount to in the future. And I remember the treasurer of our place was awful. He was too scared. I told the revenue man, I said, the future of our company is fantastic. I said we're going to be real good. We're going to make a go of it. But I said there's one thing that's wrong. I said I have to guarantee all the notes and it's going to go real good as long as I'm out there. But I said I have no guarantee that I'm going to walk out of this room alive. I'm over the age so that I could die any time. And I said if I died, this company wouldn't be worth anything because the banks would close in on it. My guarantee would be up. And I said that I say it's worth $2. The agent wrote okay on it. So. Well, it sounds like a one man show. Well, it is a one man show. It's a small company. You can have a board of directors meeting but usually there's in a small company the guy that runs it, he runs it. And you got the rest of the guy on there just to satisfy the government. But in this case now, your business has been in book publishing and the No, no. My own is a, I run a religious book store right now even. I've got that down there. Has this been your profession all your life? No, I was a printer for a while. But when I graduated from the University of Iowa in 1930, I went to Rockford and went to work for the Aldine Manufacturing Company. And they came to be the American Cabinet Hardware Company. That's the Aldine that I'm telling you to see. Yeah, Rubin Aldine. And that company was very successful. I worked there for about ten years and I had a lot of jobs in there. You worked in the office department also? No, I started out in the shipping room. I was truck driver for about three years. First I was truck driver. And I learned an awful lot when I was driving the truck. I didn't know Rockford at all. So my boss, Lindroth, would draw a little map whenever he sent me out to do anything. And he'd say, here's state and Maine. You start here and you go so many blocks. And I took his little map with me. So by the time I was through, I had been on streets of people that had lived their whole life in Rockford and hadn't even seen it. But the American Cabinet Hardware was very successful. The Aldine, G.W. Aldine, that's Rubin's brother, he was a great inventor. He could invent machinery for everything, no matter what it was. He'd have a meeting and he'd talk to us foreman. And after he explained it, it was so simple, we wondered why we didn't think of it ourselves. One time the plating department had some trouble in there and they had a lot of people that were polishing hinges and they were making trouble for them. Well, G.W. invented a machine that went around once on the big table and a girl could sit down, any girl. You could go out on the street and hire a girl and tell her, you just put the hinge in this place and pull the lever and let it go. And after it went all the way around the machine, it polished it automatic. So when it came around, she just took that out and put it in another tray. So after we invented that machine, there was no trouble in the plating department. Q. Who was there working? A. Rubin ran the office up there. And he said that what his practice was was to hire people that knew. He would hire lawyers. He would hire accountants. He didn't have to know it himself. He would hire the people that did know. And that's how he ran it. They were so successful that in 1966 they merged with Stanley Works, a big tool company. And in about a few years, two or three years, the government said that Stanley could not own American Cabinet because that would make a monopoly. They made 27 percent of all the hardware in the United States. So they had to sell them. And they sold the American Cabinet to Anchor Hocking Company. But that's not my line. I wasn't up there. Down here. Q. So you stayed there about eight to ten years? A. Ten years. Yeah. I was in the shipping room, truck driver. And then I got transferred into the office and I entered the orders and did the billing. And my father helped them start. When they started in 1929, he didn't help them start, but the fellows started the factory and my father loaned them some money. But the fellows up there were scared. When the Depression come, they didn't want to owe bills. So they asked my father if he would exchange the bill for stocking the company. And my dad says, okay. And that was the luckiest thing we ever did because the company was fantastic. That company, when we merged with Stanley Works, we merged for I think it was $35 million. And it only started on $144,000. And all the money was earned in the company. Q. So your father, did he also work there in the A. Well, no. No. Now, that's a story in itself. When my dad was a young fellow in church, they would have in the free church, they would have a state convention. And G. W. Aldine was the head of the young people in Rockford. He would come to the state convention. And that's when my dad and G. W. got acquainted at the state convention when they were starting up there. That's when my dad was also on the board of directors of the Herrington Seabird Corporation. That was a company in Moline here that made licorice signs. And they sold out to Gamewell Company two to one. So we got as much stock in Gamewell as we had in Herrington Seabird. And then we got the equal amount of cash. Well, at that time, that was just the time that Amarok needed money in Rockford. So my dad happened to have that money and he loaned it to them in Rockford. And that helped them get going. And that's the money that company was very successful. So we got the money back on that. And that helped us pull Strombach out of the hole in Moline. So that's – you seem to have been at the right time. You've got to be at the right time. You've got to be at the right time at the right place. But you have taken chances, though, like your father also against others. No. No. Because my father respected GW and GW respected my father. Now, there's a thing that when two smart Swedes get together – No, but they are stubborn also, the Swedes. They are stubborn. That's why they win. You can't sell them out because a Swede is stubborn. And that's a good thing. You can tell a Swede you can't tell him much. Yeah, you can tell him plenty. You can tell him nothing. Yeah, they say you can't tell a Swede much. You can tell a Swede, but you can't tell him much. Yeah, you can tell a Swede, but you can't tell him much. But the Swedes in Rockford are very successful. A lot of companies up there have been started, like Rockford School Products is another wonderful one. You'll have to get to meet them. He traveled to Sweden. He was killed in Sweden, one of them. Mr. Johnson. Yeah, Mr. Johnson. But there was about a handful of fellows. They were toolmakers, and they got together and they bought some old screw machines that were old and rusty. I used to drive the truck in those days and I'd go down to their factory in a tin shop, and those fellows would rework those machines so they were good and made them automatic and got Rockford School Products going. That company is worth several million dollars. I think their company is worth hundreds of millions. But it was all built up by smart toolmakers. That's the one thing that you can say about Swedes, that when they know something, they can make it work. It seems to me that there were so many of them that were good inventors. There were. It seems to me that the lack of that today, for instance, you know. That's right. There's hardships all over and you don't hear anybody. Well, people don't want to work. In those days, now you take an American cabinet, you got a handful of fellows. They had an idea to make hinges. We, GW, invented the machines. We built them in our own tool room and the fellows worked at it and built it up. They didn't expect stuff to happen automatic. They made it work by inventing stuff. And you take Rockford School Products, it's the same way. Now you take today a young fellow, he wants to go out and get high wages right off the bat. He don't want to work four or eight years for low wages. So they don't get jobs. They don't work hard. And that's the hardest time. If you could get a handful of young fellows together now that had a good idea and were willing to live on little or nothing while they were developing that idea and made it grow, then you could do it over again now. But in the 1930s, in the Depression, there were a lot of factories that started. Like in Rockford, a handful of Swedes would get together and they'd form a company. They had an idea what they wanted to do and they'd come to work every day and work on it and make the machinery. And after they got the machines made, so the machines started earning money for them. That's when they started getting ahead. Nowadays, they don't want to go through that. People are lazy today. They think that everybody owes them a living. In those days, nobody owed you a living. When I first came to Rockford in 1930, I went to the restaurant on Broadway and I ate suppers there. I got a full meal, meat and potatoes and vegetables, bread and butter, coffee, all of it for 25 cents. And if I wanted dessert, a piece of pie, that cost me a nickel extra. But that was 25 cents. But in those days, after I had graduated from the University of Iowa, I got a job up there and I earned 30 cents an hour. Well, today they wouldn't even think of that after you graduated from a business school. You're supposed to get high wages. That's why prices are so blame high nowadays. I'll tell you something, that we're going to have a depression come that's going to be worse than the one we had in 1930. We're going to have a real one. And I'm not afraid of it because I know exactly what I can do. If you've got a little piece of ground, I always tell all the young fellas, get ahold of a little piece of ground if you can. Even if you rent it out to a farmer, own that piece of ground. Because if a depression comes and you don't have work, you can go out there and you can plant potatoes. You can have a garden. You can raise chickens and hogs and you're going to eat. And that's the trouble today is that they don't have the land. Shut it off. Is that machine on? Yes. I'll tell you something that I thought up when I was at the university. People are always worried about depression and about inflation. Sometimes depression comes, sometimes inflation comes. I thought up a scheme that works. You take everything that you own and you divide it into two groups. It's either creditorship or equity. Now, equity is like houses, stock, things that go up and down in price. And then the other things, the creditorship, are things like U.S. government bonds, things that are set in dollars and cents and do not go up and down. Now, if you divide everything you own in one of those two groups and make them even and then you take five percent of what you own and buy gold with it, gold is the only thing that's run for 4,000 years and people will accept it. Now, if you divide your assets between creditors and equities, if it turns out that inflation comes along and prices go up, your equities go up. And that pulls you out of the mess. Suppose you get a real bad depression, the equities go way down in price. But then the creditorship, the bonds, and things that have this value, that will pull you out of the mess. And I can't understand why people don't do that now because it stabilizes things. Everybody wants to get rich quick and they're going to get into trouble. But don't you think people were spoiled now, like in the 60s? They are. The people that took – You know why they're spoiled? Because the old timers came over there, like my grandfather. He went over. He built shoes by hand. I know he had a little shop that wasn't any bigger than this room and he'd sit there and make shoes for people. But he was sending his kids to high school. When they got to high school, when they got through, they couldn't afford – he couldn't afford to send them to college. But they went to college and they worked themselves through. My dad waited on tables. And they got a good education. Now, the second generation, they know how hard it was for their fathers. So they say, well, I'm going to teach my kids, give my kids an easy way of life. So the second generation sends their kids to school, pays all the bills, don't have the kids work, and they forget how to work. And when the fourth generation comes along, they're lazy. They never did learn how to work. They don't know how their great-grandfather started to begin with, with nothing. People can't start with nothing. Today they got to have everything given to them. And that's where the trouble starts. If you will learn how to work – and I taught my kids how to work. That's the first thing. My daughter, she's married to Don Nelson, the coach of the Milwaukee Bucks. When she was 12 years old, she waited on the tray down in the bookstore because they had to learn how to work. And she knows how to work real good. All of my kids can take care of themselves if things go wrong. If things went to pot today, and I didn't – suppose I didn't have any money, I wouldn't be afraid of it. I'd go down to any town in the United States. I would go into a restaurant and say, Mr., I tell you what I'll do. I'll work for my meals and board and room for washing your dishes. And I would do that until I saw just how he run his restaurant. And all I got was my meals and board. But after I knew how he was running his business, I would come to him and say, Mr., you got to sell me half of this business. And he would say, well, I'm not going to do that. Because after I worked for him, he'd keep turning over more work to do until at the end I would be doing most of the work. And he would forget how to do it. Now, if he would not sell me half of that business, I would tell him, all right, I quit. I'll start a restaurant next door. And I'll run that and you can run your own. Well, he forgot how to run his own. But I knew how to run it. You got to learn how to work. And when you learn what makes the things go around, you're going to win. You can't stop a man that's willing to work and has a brain on him. Now, where the Swedes are, were important in the old days. When they came over here, they worked. You take my Uncle Fred Nelson, my mother's brother, he came to America first. And he worked enough so that he sent money back to Sweden and would send over for his brother to come over. Pretty soon they got the whole family together up at Beardsford. But they started with one. They didn't wait until they could send for all of them because they couldn't do that. But they just took one at a time until they got them all together. And that's the only way you can do it. So they came to Beardsford, South Dakota? Yeah, my mother's side was in Beardsford, South Dakota. They were farmers up there. They stayed there all their life? They stayed there. I got a lot of relation in Beardsford, right now even. And they were successful farmers. They, Kennedy's, Walter Kennedy was my cousin. He's dead now, but I remember I was up there one time and he plowed a field of corn, 417 acres in one field. He raised a thousand head of hogs a year. He farmed in a big way. And he told me, he said, Vern, the farmers aren't too bad off. He said the old timers that work at it, they're okay. It's the ones that gamble a lot now that are in trouble. You see, what got most farmers into trouble, one farmer, he'd get old, he'd want to sell his farm. The guy next door would go to the bank and say, I want to borrow some money. So he put his farm and the farm he was buying up for security. And the price of the farm land was high, $1,500, $2,000 an acre. Now when the price of farm land come down, it came down to maybe $1,000, maybe $500 an acre. You can't blame the banker. He's got to have security back on the loan. So he wasn't to blame for it. The farmer that was greedy and wanted to buy the neighbor's farm and he was willing to risk his own farm and the farmer and the neighbor's farm, both for the loan, that was a bad business judgment. You can't run any kind of a business that way. But why should the government bail him out? How do they know the real value of an acre? It depends on what you use it for. Every acre is different. You take now that farm out, what I bought out there just south of the airport, I'm right on the Blossomberg Road where across the street the airport is. Now if you have a farm that is in a good location and the city grows and the airport gets bigger and they need more land, they got to pay you what you want for it. Like I bought a piece of land over there for $600 an acre and the city needed it. They came to me down to the shop and they said, Vern, will you sell that? I said, okay. They said, how much? I said, $6,000 an acre. Well, the alderman said, where do you get that figure? I said, out of thin air like anybody else. He said, we'll negotiate. I said, when we get through negotiating, we're going to charge $6,000 an acre for it. I said, remember, you want to buy it, I don't want to sell it because if the guy wants to sell it, you have to come down in price. But if the guy wants to buy it, it goes up in price. Yeah, but like I said, can they condemn if they really need it? For certain things they can, yeah, but they have to pay the fair price for it. Now my son, before he died, we bought some farmland out there east of the airport and the airport was going to extend the runway. Can I find someplace to put, yeah. Is that thing on? If you want to know how to get ahead, you've got to have the right philosophy of what you're doing. You must always remember there's about 240 million people in this country. They all need things. They've got to have shoes, they've got to have clothes, they've got to have food, they've got to have a place to sleep. Now if you can think up of one thing that they really want and make that, you'll be a success because those people will pay you for making that and you can get ahead. If you try to make something that nobody wants, you're going to go broke and you can't be. Now do you know in the 1930s, if you stop to think, American cabinet, before that time they sold hinges in an ordinary craft carton in hardware stores and if you went in to buy a hinge, they would take out a just plain steel hinge. G.W. invented ornamental hinges, real beautiful hinges, and they nickel plated them, brass plated them, chrome plated them, and they mounted them on cards and they knew how to sell the stuff. Well that was developed during the 1930s. You take that. Now is a time that in Moline, it's a tough time around here now because factories are closing. This is a perfect time for a young fellow that wants to start a factory to get his stuff cheap because things are low in price. The American cabinet started in 1929 and 1930 in the Depression. You didn't pay as much then as when you started, but as times got better, the factory could get better along with them. Now you know people say I'm crazy. Who does? Everybody. Oh no, you're crazy. You're smart they say. I could start a factory. Oh that part, yeah, that's crazy. That part of it's crazy. I know that if I went after that woodturning factory, I could make them busy. I got another idea that's a steel idea made out of steel and I just asked the lawyer yesterday what he thought if I should start a factory. If I knew I could live ten years, I know that I could start that factory. I wonder why, because I laid in bed here about six months ago and the University of Illinois, I mean of Iowa, has a radio station and they said that apple crop had gone down 25 percent. I thought of something and one minute, one second I saw it and I know that if I do that it will help them raise more apples, more oranges, more grapefruit, more pears, more everything. And that idea is a good one, but it takes money. Now when you're 78 years old, you don't spend money without hoping you live long enough to make it back. Well, now you take my son John, if he would run a factory I could start one, but he doesn't want to run a factory. He has a factory, he's got a gun store. Strombeck? Yes, I visited him. Did you visit him? I asked about you because he said that you were down in Florida. Oh, you were here in the winter then. Yeah. Well, everybody tells me not to start anything, but I'm going to do it anyway. I'm going to do it anyway. You know, in this world you can have a whole lot of people, but one thing that's very, very, what's sweet are that way, that when you can have a bunch of people tell him not to do something, if he gets it in his head, he's going to do it. He's going to do it anyway. And that's what I'm just sitting around. Maybe in two, three months I'll decide to do it, and then I'm going to do it. No matter because I'm not afraid to risk what I've got to show people that I can do it. You always had an active mind like that? Yes. Ahead? That's the only way you get ahead because I bought, we bought land out by the airport. We bought it only on one reason. For Bob Coppett? Thank you. Bob Coppett, girl? Very well. When I took an airplane over Minneapolis or Chicago, I saw that all the land around the airport was industrial, and here in Molina was just farmland. Well, you don't have to be smart to know that someday that land is going to be worth something. Now you take the airport, extended the runway east, and my son and I owned 70 acres of land there. Well, the airport wanted three acres to extend the runway. Richard was smart. On one side of the runway he developed what they call a store and go, a place to store trailers. He rented space for trailers. On the other side he developed a piece of ground. So in the airport we told the airport, you appraise that land that you want, see how much you want to pay for it. It was the airport's appraiser that said it was worth 12,000 an acre. The real estate guys in town can't figure out how we got that much land, how we got such a good price. What did you figure out because you told all the men they had the price? That's right. Is this on now? It's on now. That's not on, is it? That is on. Is that on? I know when I sold that land to the city, I sold it to the city. The newspaper reporter called me up and said, Stromach, he went down to the courthouse and saw what I paid for him. He said, where did you get that price from? I said, out of thin air like the rest of them. Because if the city wanted to grow, there were 1,500 feet out there that they had to come through, and we owned the 1,500, we owned that land. If Moline wanted to grow bigger and go south, they would have to take us first because we were like the neck of a bottle. If they didn't take us, the city wouldn't grow. So they had to pay it. You know what the city asked for that land now? They've owned it for about ten years. They did some filling. Yeah, but they're asking 20,000 an acre. And they didn't want to pay us. They didn't want to pay me 6,000. That's where the politicians get held up. Yeah, but I can fool politicians. That don't bother me at all. You've never been involved with the city politics? Yes, I have. As an alderman or? No. Another fellow and I, John Lawson, we elected people. He and I hired a lot of people to work at election time for aldermen, for the mayor, for different guys, for the sheriff, and we're Republican. And John Lawson knew how to do it, and I financed it. We had over a hundred workers in town here, so we elected several aldermen. I know we elected one mayor, and one fellow thought he'd double-cross us, so he didn't tell us anything. Then he come and asked for our support. I told John we won't do nothing. He didn't consider us before. We won't do anything to help him. We won't do nothing against him, and we won't do nothing for him. And he lost the election. It is funny. You've got to find out what do people want. Right now I'm interested in one man, a man, Sam McCard. He's running for United States House of Representatives. He's a lawyer from Rhode Island. Yes, and he owns a farm out here, too. And we're backing him. And there's an article in this morning's paper for McCard, and I hope he wins. But you've got to think now. I backed McMillan, his predecessor, for two terms, and he lost to this Evans. But this Evans had the union for him. But you notice all the plants around here, the factories have closed down. They've laid off people. So the union is kind of sick. And McCard owns a farm out here. The farmers were against McMillan four years ago, but they'll be for McCard now because he can do something for them. Is he experienced enough, or he's a young guy? No, he ain't too young. He's in his thirties. He looks quite young. He looks quite young. Yeah, but you can win. Another thing with McCard, I talked to him here about two weeks ago, and I told him I want a list of all the whole district, how many cities you got in this district and how many newspapers. You got to get people on your side. So you run an ad. If you start long enough before, you can get people used to you. You run an ad for farmers in the farm paper six months ahead of time and then five months ahead of time, four months ahead of time, so that by the time the election comes, they'll know who he is. Remember, politics is just like a business. You got to sell your man. Slams his record. But around here you notice that if you got a...