 We have problems with the recorder so go forward to 20. Go forward to 20. Due to tremendous temperature, high temperature, the tape recorder will not record properly. So please go forward. Problems with the tape. Go forward to 20. We have 18th of June 1987. I'm sitting together with Lawrence Olson, Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1908, 11th of April, in Rockford. Your parents though, they both came from Sweden. Yeah. And we take your mother's side, you know, Hylma Serafia. She had two names, Larson and Lindgren. Larson in Sweden and she changed it to Lindgren in Rockford. As I understand it, her brother had the name of Lindgren and he changed it to Lindgren from Larson because he didn't get any mail from Sweden. There was fewer Lindgren's than there were Larson's. And so after he changed his name to Lindgren, the mail kept coming. He received mail from Sweden then. So he had no problems after that. And that was a common thing in Rockford at that time because there were so many John Johnson's and things like that and a lot of John Johnson's changed their name to some other name. Your father though, he kept his name though. My father? Yeah. Yeah, his father's name was Olof Petter. So he named himself after Olof. They cut it short over here and they just called it Olson. A lot of Olson's used the name Olof Olson. Your grandparents on the both sides, they didn't come over, they stayed in Sweden. My father's father was over here and his grandfather came over. Before him? Well, he came over with his grandfather, Nils Persson. And then he went back to Sweden and then he was this 1900 and he was 14 years old. And then he went back to Sweden and he came back to this country with his own father, Olof Petter. And Olof Petter didn't like it here so he went back to Sweden and my father stayed here. So he was the first of six brothers and two sisters to come to, and his family to come to this country. So the rest of them came after then? They all came, they kept coming until 1919 and they all came. There was four left in Sweden. My father's mother passed away at that time and they decided that they would come to this country and to live with their sisters and brothers. And your father he came from Löt på Öland? Yep, Löt på Öland. You've been there so you know where to play? No, no. You've never been to Sweden? I've been to Sweden but my trip in Sweden was ten days long and I spent it with my wife's, my mother's nephew. In Västergötland? No, in Göteborg. And his name is Kjellberg and he has many apartment houses there in Göteborg. He has, I think it was about 20 apartment houses with about 32 apartments in each one in Göteborg. And your mother she came from Sandheim in Västergötland? Well, a question at the time and of course my father's father wanted to keep the farm and so they decided to let him keep the farm and and they would come over here and try to set their own life. So there were six children in your father's family? There were six boys and two girls. On your mother's side how many were in the family? There was four girls and one boy. Did they also come over all of them? Wait a minute, I'm trying to count. There was six, there was six girls and one boy. So she came over here, her sister was here and her brother was here. In Rockford? In Rockford, yeah. They were oh seven, eight years older than my mother. My mother was the younger of the six girls and one boy. But her parents they stayed in Sweden? Yep, they never came here. So your dad now, what kind of work did he take when he came here the first time? Well, he was a pattern maker. Trained in Sweden? No, I think he was just a farmer. And during the first World War he was a pattern maker. And my mother at the time was, she made money. She was a very strong and smart businesswoman. She started the first shopping guide in Rockford. It was all written in Swedish because 7th Street and Broadway businesses were all Swedish and all businesses were done in Swedish at that time. So this shopping guide, she had it printed? She had it printed with the labor newsstand there. And that was mostly Swedish. The labor newsstand, was this the Arbetar Workers Party newspaper? Well, I think it was. I saw a little bit of that as a child. Because you were old enough then during the first World War? Yes, I was seven years old and I used to sell papers out at Camp Grant. My parents didn't know how I was, but I was selling papers out at Camp Grant to the soldiers. The city paper? City papers, yeah. No, wait a minute. They were Chicago papers. Chicago papers? Herald Examiner and Chicago Tribune. You picked them up at the train station? At the station there where all the Swedes used to get off. How did you get out of Camp Grant? You had a wagon? No, I had a truck. The trucks, big flat trucks. Flat bed trucks, yeah. We went into Camp Grant to all the barracks and sold papers. And I used to sing and I had a good voice. I used to sing and they passed a hat around and I made more money doing that than I did selling papers. But this Camp Grant, was there a prison at the time? No, no, there was no prison. It was only for soldiers from this time? For soldiers from the first World War. That was built, that was a new camp that was developed for the first World War. So they let you in there and you could? I had no problem. I went in with a truck. No problem. But you were not old enough to drive the truck though? Oh no, no. No, they had a driver for it. But I was old enough to sell papers. So, but how about the epidemics of the Spanish Flu? Do you remember that one? Yes, I remember that very well. My mother had it and she nearly died. And I remember them picking up the dead soldiers in Camp Grant and they hauled them in a truck and they threw them on the truck over the cordwood. Then they would take them down to the boys club, Rockford Boys Club, and they would stack them up there. Every now and then you would see an arm move. And they'd pull a body out and they'd find out he was still living. Was this in the wintertime or in the? Well, it was in the spring. In the spring of 1918. But how could they keep all those bodies though? From the heat or? I don't know what they did with them but I was not concerned about that. I thought that. Were you allowed to go out there to Camp Grant during this time or? I don't remember going out there in the flu. I remember going out there in 1917. We declared war in 1917, didn't we? And I remember going out there then but I don't remember going out there in the flu. I don't think my mother let me go. So your mother was really sick? She was very, very sick. And we didn't think she was going to live. She was the only one in your family that got it? She was the only one in the family that got it. How many children were you in the family? I had a brother named Delphin. Just two boys, that's all I had. And your father, he was a pattern maker during the first? He was a pattern maker during the First World War. So he worked for? He worked for Barbara Coleman. And his brother worked for Barbara Coleman as a pattern maker. And he had another brother, he worked out of Camp Grant building barracks with Herman Hallstrom. He was the one that was going to be the mayor of Rockville? Yeah, that was the best. So what do you remember of him now? You were a little boy when he came to your house to stay? Well, I was a boy about five, six years old. When he came? He came and he moved in our house. But he came from Sweden about the same time my mother. I think they came on the same boat. Did they know each other from Sweden then? That I don't know, but I think they were from the same part of Sweden, but they met each other on the boat. And I don't know what year that was. So he boarded with your dad and mother? He boarded with my dad and my two uncles boarded with my mother's brother and my father's brother. So you had to talk Swedish to him then? I talked Swedish all the time. I had to go to grade school in first grade for three years because I couldn't get the Swedish out of my system. Were they particular about your parents that you should talk Swedish all the time? They talked Swedish all the time. They couldn't answer me in English. They couldn't? No. My lessons I had to learn in school and I got no help at home. Did the teacher tell you anything about that to stay away from the Swedish? I don't remember that at all. But it took a long time then to get all your… All the first grade teachers were Swedish people. So they had no trouble understanding what you said then? No, they had no problem understanding my Swedish and they tried to correct me. But it took three years for me. How about the church? Which one did you belong to? I was confirmed, I mean I was baptized in First Lutheran Church. I was confirmed in Swedish Free Church. In Swedish? Everything was in Swedish. And summer school was in Swedish too? Yes, it was. Did you have summer schools in Swedish? Summer schools were in Swedish too. So we learned Swedish in the summer schools. How did you like it to go to the summer school when the rest of the kids were all playing? Were your other kids taking the summer classes? No, we only went to summer school for about six weeks. I had no problem with it, I remember. And I went on my own because my folks were not members of the Free Church. They weren't members of the Free Church. My uncle was, my father's brother was there. That's how you joined the Free Church. Otherwise, I was a member of the Socialist Sunday School. You were a member there too? Yup. With Dolby Kalin and Harry Anderson and the… You're giving me names that I've heard but I don't know. But they were not the teachers though, you remember the teachers? The teacher was Herman Halstrom. He was a teacher? He was a teacher in the Sunday School, he was a very good teacher. But there was an English Sunday School, wasn't there? I think we learned, I think Herman taught us in English. Was he able to learn English so fast? He learned very fast. He was a young guy and he was determined to learn English. When he was drafted, I think he enlisted in the First World War. He was still a young man and he had no problem with that. So he joined the Socialist Party? He joined the Socialist Party when? I don't know. He was always a Socialist until, and he and Henry Bloom were both Socialists. That you knew, didn't you? Yes, I know that. But they changed to Progressive Party when Bob LaFallette, the governor of Wisconsin, run for president. And they were their campaign managers for LaFallette in Northern Illinois. Both of them, both Bloom and Halstrom? Both of them, yes. So then they disjoined themselves from the Socialists, so what happened? Well, they really weren't Socialists. I think most immigrants were Socialists when they came here because they wanted a place to live and a property in order to get it, so they joined the Socialist Party. So the Sunday school now, how old were you then when you went to that one, the Socialist Sunday school? Well, that was, that must have been around the First World War time, so I'm probably eight, nine years old. And that was every Sunday? Every Sunday. But you were not able to go to the other schools? I went to both of them. Both of them, the same Sunday? Yeah. But how about the person, or what did he ask you? How could you combine the two? I don't know how I did it, but I did go to both of them. You had a broad education in the brotherhood. Well, I was very devoted to my uncle, and he was a strong member of the Free Church. He didn't go to the Socialist Party? No, no, he didn't go to the Socialist Party. But why did you go to this, was it because of Herman Halstom you went to the Sunday school? No, my father. Well, he was a socialist? He was a socialist. They all were on 7th Street. They were all members of the Extrum Society down there in the city. You've heard of the Extrums, haven't you? Yeah, Extrum, no, it was that— They had that confectionery store. Well, he was one of the leaders then? Yeah, he had a place there where they had their meetings. They met there too. What did you have the Sunday school now at? Up there in Socialist Hall, we call it. I don't know what they call it now. It's still standing, but it's kind of rickety old building, but it's three stories high. It was on 6th Avenue and 7th Street. Right in the corner? Right in the corner or— Yeah, I guess they call it Viking Hall now. But I don't think it belongs to the Vikings or anybody now that I know of. I think it's just somebody else. 6th Avenue and 7th— 7th Street on the southeast corner. So you were a pretty good bunch then? They met there every Sunday or— How many were you? They went up to the Vikings? I mean, socialist? Oh, we must have met 50 of us. Young people? Young people my age. And you don't remember being taught in Swedish? Or that was all in English? I think that was all in English. I think we might have got some Swedish in there because my father used to recite Swedish poetry. I remember that and I used to sing solos in Swedish. I think, but our songs were read— were all in English. So what kind of subject were you talking about? History or Swedish? I can't remember what it was. All I can remember was singing one song, we'll have pie in the sky when we die. That was the one you were finished with? I was finished with that one. So if you compare the two Sunday schools now you went to there, which one was the more your liking? Well, I was much happier in the free church. Much happier. With the Sunday school? Yeah, Sunday school. I had— My Sunday school teacher was Gider Aldin. You've heard of him? Yes, his brother, Ruben. Ruben, yeah. I had Ruben too, but Gider was the example to follow. Ruben I never did like. Gider was a different— He was a different character day and night. Is his son Norris Aldin? Norris Aldin is— Norris is the son of Gider. Gider was a mighty, mighty fine individual. He could teach you religion that you could never get along without. So he was religious and— He was very religious. Active in it. So how long did you continue to go to this Sunday school then with the Socialist? A couple of years? Oh, I think probably a couple of years at the most. And your father, he continued to be a member of it as long as— He was a member of the Socialist there, but he turned progressive too like the rest of them did. I think he was— I think after the presidential election, I think the Socialism disappeared. What's the Roosevelt time then you mean, when Roosevelt was elected? No, that was long before Roosevelt. This was when Calvin Coolidge was elected. Do you think it disappeared then, the Socialism? I think Socialism in Rockford more or less disappeared. Well, they were probably blacklisted all the management, don't you think? Well, they had to get into some organizations so they got better themselves and Socialism was bettering themselves. They all became property owners and they had a future. But after they got into the future and Socialism definition changed and the policies changed in the Socialist Party, they got out of there. I think the Socialist Party was destroyed during the First World War and the Swedes, so many of them refused to join the Army. But they were in Rockford if you had to go to Bridewell in Chicago for ten months. That's where they sent them. They refused and many of them they sent back to Sweden. But they were very, I remember a lot of them, they were just very anti-government. They didn't want to fight Germany. England, yes. My wife is English. So you had a rough time to explain that one. Yeah, I had a lot of time explaining her. So, but Herman Hallstrom, he was active though in the Socialist movement. He was active in the Socialist. Well, he was active then and I think he ran as a Socialist for mayor the first time, but then I think he ran on the Labor Party after that. I don't know whether he ever ran as a Progressive. He might have run as a Progressive. So your father and Herman Hallstrom, they got along pretty well then? Well, they got along. It was my mother and Herman that got along the best. He had a lot of respect for my mother. My mother was a strong, strong leader. She didn't take any active part in politics? No, she didn't take part in politics at all. Her love was her church, Emanuel Lutheran Church. I don't know why we don't. How long you were Baptist in the First Lutheran though? I don't know. Maybe they were married then? Now you ask me questions. Well, you see the Emanuel Lutheran Church was the English church. Yeah, that's right. They broke away from the First Lutheran Church and kept the Swedish seed. Now you've got something there. I remember that there was a break off there. So apparently she liked the English sermon better than the Swedish sermon. Well, we have so many members in our relation. My father's side of the family, they belonged to Emanuel Lutheran Church. Even on her side of the family belonged to Emanuel Lutheran Church. I suppose because First Lutheran Church was all in Swedish. And they held on to the Swedish language much longer than, even longer than Free Church. So that's why the first generation born here, they rebelled against it because they wanted to have English. How about your father? Was he religious? My father was not religious though. So he didn't go to church then? But he believed in God. He was a Mason. But he never went to church. My mother would go to church. Do you remember your father and Herman Hallström discussed politics at any time? Oh, all the time. All the time? You couldn't avoid it? Well, I... Did you? You were too young to ask any questions though at that time. Oh yes, I asked questions. You did? Yep. Well, did you ask about this Pioneer's Guide? I mean, who was going to provide the Pioneer's Guide? Well, I think much of the conversation when I was a young boy, even a teenager, was Russia. They thought how marvelous it was in Russia. They actually believed that? Yep. Well, I didn't know when to do that too. And I had my father's uncle, we were talking about the greatness of Russia. I said, if you two guys like Russia so well, why don't you move over there? What did they say then? They were mad at me. But I'm an outspoken guy, you know. Well, I learned it from Herman Hallström. But Herman Hallström was not that way, but my father was that way. He was very... Aggressive? Huh? Was he more aggressive? Your father was more aggressive than Herman Hallström? More interested in... Aggressive? Aggressive? No, nobody was as aggressive as Herman Hallström. Was he aggressive? He was very aggressive. He was? He had a... Whatever Herman Hallström decided was the best way to do it, he would pursue it until it was accomplished. How did he get into this politics though? I mean, he was a... Well, he got into the labor news. Did he write in the labor news too? Well, he might have. He was capable of doing many things. I think that's where my mother really... I don't know. I really... Did he go to school here though? Herman, no. No. You don't remember? No. I think Herman must have been born in 1890 or something like that, 91, 92. You probably know more about that than I do. Well, I... Roughly I know about that time, but he had no schooling here that you remember of. No schooling at all. The only schooling they got was night school. They had night school and they go two or three times a week at night. And I think that that's where they learned English. All of a sudden the conversation started to turn to English. So then we got Rockford Swedish. Half Swedish and half English. Nobody understands it at all outside of Rockford. And the east side, that was the... That was the territory for you? That was the territory, yeah. The west side you didn't talk about. Well, there was a lot of Swedes over there, but they were different than the east side. Were they more well-to-do or how different were they in what respect? Well, their interests were different. On the west side? They were different in interests. They weren't as... What would you say? Clannish. They weren't so clannish there. On the west side? On the west side. They were more individualist or something? I think they wanted to set them apart. The west siders wanted to set themselves apart from the east side. My best friends come from the west side in Swedish. But they attended the church over on the east side? Yeah. But then they went back home. They went back home on the west side. So maybe they were a little bit more broad-minded then because they had to fend for themselves. Yeah, I think so. They were more broad-minded than the east siders because we were kind of clannish. We hung in groups and we... The children played in groups and our conversations were different. You didn't divide yourself like the older people. They said that the Irish people couldn't go across the bridge. You don't remember that time. That was before you were born. That was before me. But I remember the battles that the Swedes had with the Italians. I saw some of those. Those were dirty fights. A lot of dirty fights. The older people? No, young people. Was there through high school then or? Well, I don't think any of them were in school at that time. They were just country difference, you know. It was about the girls then I suppose. The what? It was about girls then fighting about the girls. The Italians coming over to the Swedish side. The Italians would come over there on Kushwaka Street and fight the Swedes and the Swedes would meet them there. I saw quite a few fights. I don't think I was much more than 12, 13 years old. I was too young to fight. But you probably heard a lot about that. You don't hear what they talked about. So they were still going on then in your time when you were growing up? No. They were gone just then. During the First World War? It's all before 1920, but I saw that. But Herman Hallström, he was only here 13 years and then he was elected mayor the first time. So this is pretty fast? No. Was he here longer? He was elected what, in 1921 or 1922? 1921. Yeah, but he fought in the First World War and I think Herman came over here in 1905. Yeah, it was 13 years they said he was here and then he was elected a president, I mean mayor. Yeah, but you got to know Herman, boy. Was he aggressive? He was a very aggressive and a very smart man. And he recognized city plan and he followed that plan like to a T. He had Rockford plan 50 years ahead. Well, here he come in with two hands, bricklayer, and he had no schooling? He had no schooling, yeah. How could he sit down there as a mayor in town? Did they have respect for him? Well, they sure did because he was very, he was a good debater, very good debater. He was very good debater and he was a good convincer. What happened a lot of times, I worked for Blum in a drugstore in the early 20s. I was probably 14, 15 years old and the Italians would have a meeting with Blum, not at several Italians, and they would get organized and they were going to fight Herman Hallstrom. They were aldermen. But Herman was smart enough, he went out and got some of the other Italians and they were fighting each other all the time, but they got something done. They'd argue and argue and argue, but when it was all settled they were happy. We don't get that today. They were too sophisticated. All the arguments were right on the council floor. The council members were the majority Swedes? Well, there's quite a few of them. They're mostly businessmen, businessmen, yeah, they're contractors. They were more educated than he was though, than Hallstrom. You probably had lawyers on there, you had businessmen. Yeah, I suppose they were. There were some of these Swedes on the council that had been go back further than Hallstrom because we had a lot of Swedish people here that came over earlier, say around 1875 and like that. There was a main rush of them here between 1850 and 1875 and that's where they got the furniture factories going. Because you had the bank presidents there and you had the bank owners and everything and they got to be pretty smart, I mean, compared to Hallstrom, but he was able to cope with it and... He ran an insurance. But it was after the... After he was defeated as mayor. He never ran for office again. But when he was the mayor the first couple of times, all he did then was the mayor of Rockford. He didn't do anything else. He stopped with the... He was a full-time mayor. Full-time mayor. N2, N2, N2. This is side two. Jefferson Bridge. That was during his time there was a bit. Very much so, yeah. He fought for that and fought for that and fought for that. There was no bridge at all? No bridge at all. Why was there a need to have that bridge? What was his philosophy? How did he present it to the council? That I don't remember how he did, but he was a force behind it. There were a lot of arguments about it and I suppose what the points were what you brought up. But he was convinced, he was convincing enough that they put the bridge in, but he had the... He had problems with it all the way through with the personnel problems, with it all the way through. They built the bridge across the river and they stopped when they got over there on the west side because they didn't know whether they were going to cross over Wyman Street or come down to Wyman Street. So it was left that way for about a year and the council couldn't make up their mind and they weren't going to cooperate with Herman Hallstrom. I remember when my senior in high school, we walked down there on the bridge and we looked down here, it was 20 feet down on the abutment. There was nothing. So they didn't use the bridge for a year until they made up their mind about it. So they decided to fill it in and run it down to Wyman Street rather than over. I think the big problem there was Elks Club. Well, they were in the way that the road would come in about halfway up the building. So they had to buy that club then? No, no. They just took it down to Wyman Street and got away from all that trouble, which is probably the best solution. I think that was Herman's idea in the first place. And he wanted to build a civic center right off of Jefferson Street Bridge on the east side. That was in the 20s? That was in the 20s. That would have been cheaper than the one they built now. That's a bad location. They built now. They should have never built that thing. They should have built that outside the city, out at Camp Grant. You mean parking problems? Well, for the whole thing, they have an unusually good site for it out there. They call it the Bell Bowl. I worked on that. We put the outdoor amputator in the seats of 10,000 people and the city doesn't use it. Out at Camp Grant? Yeah. Why were they so reluctant to go out there? Was it too far then or? Well, they thought, I don't know why. I think it was the thinking of the people. We got into a lot of harassment at that time, both the state and the city. We didn't get any cooperation from the state. The government was ready to cooperate with us, but not the state. And that's the most natural location for the amputator. It's the only place we have left around here where you can see signs of the last glacier. And that's never used? Never used. There's no upkeep? It's part of the airport. That park was developed by the National Park Service to be a major entertainment and sports complex of the same design as Central Park in New York City. And we were going to be funded by two rivers. And the city of Rockford didn't respond to it? No. And today they don't know about it. That would have been the place to put the baseball game. It's a natural. They can have parking, I don't know, 10,000, 15,000 cars down there. Herman Hallstrom was behind that program. That's how much vision he had. He was behind the Woodruff-Avner program. He said that that could be the most important thing we did for Rockford, put Woodruff-Avner in. We now, I am working on that now. We are now thinking of renaming it Paul Wallenberg. Rahl Wallenberg you mean? Huh? Rahl Wallenberg. Rahl, yeah. Wallenberg. Why do you use a name like that? Because I think that we can get some activity going on. That's been on the plan or on the board since 1918. If we put that in, it will unite both the north side and south side of Rockford and it will give us an entryway into the west side of Rockford and get away from that division that the river causes. So Rock River, has there been a dividing or division always? Why did they have to have a river like that in the city, you think? Well, Herman Hallstrom didn't divide the city. He didn't? No. It just happened that the Swedes wanted to develop east of Rockford. That's where they got off at the railroad station that was on the east side of Rockford. So they never got on the west side. But the west side had all the big buildings. Downtown. The courthouse and the big things there. The library. Yep. And they'll never have the activity down there that they had when we had in the 20s and 30s and 40s. And there was 7th Street. That was the big one. That's when they got on, yeah. On 7th Street, that was the main drag in Rockford. That was the main drag and then 14th Avenue was coming in. This is Broadway. And in 1928, they changed it to Broadway. Why did they do that? Well, they wanted a finer name. And people on the west side didn't like it. They thought we were getting kind of uppish. Oh, so they caught on right away. And on Broadway there, you had Truman, Engstrom, and Gustafson on the security bank. Well, you know all about them. Truman and Gustafson. I knew Gustafson. I went to grade school with him. I see. I didn't know the guy. Huh? I thought it was an older guy. Well, he was a little older. His sister was my age. He had three sisters. It was Rupert. Gosh, I can't remember the names. It was Truman. That was his first name, Truman. Truman Johnson, yeah. Truman Johnson. That's the one that jumped out of the window, isn't it? No, wait a minute. They sent him to prison. That's security bank then. Yes. And they went belly up. Yeah. Are you sweet with expressions like that? No, but I always wonder about the name Truman. I don't know. I mean, it's a typical non-Swedish name. So he was actually—he was born here, I'm sure. He was born here, yeah. I've talked to him two or three times. But it was not the only bank that they went to. Every bank went to Kflui except the Swedish American Bank and the Third National Bank, which is now First National Bank. But the rest of them, People's Bank on the west side, they went. Yeah. See, they invested very heavy in our development in the Faust Hotel, and they put a lot of money in the manufacturers bank for the City Halls today that was just built two or three years before they had the Depression. So they weren't getting their money back on it. They just lost all their liquid assets. So then they started to get—you were old enough then to start to work in the Depression. I went to school. You went to school, yeah. I went to school in five years. That was the cheapest place to be. To college or— Yeah, I went to Champaign, yeah. Oh, I see. University of Illinois. So your parents, they wanted you to have a good education and— I wanted it. Oh, you wanted it. Yeah, I was supposed to quit school when I was 16 years old. To start to work. But I was quite an athlete, and the basketball coach wanted me to keep on in high school. So I went to high school because— Baseball or basketball? Basketball. Oh, basketball. Yeah. Do you belong to the Swedish gym? I did. There's a few of these boys still here. Yeah, one living down here, Johnson. Bank Johnson. Bank Johnson. And I think— He belonged to the Swedish gym? Yeah. They were good. I wasn't that good. They were all from Sweden. Gymnastics— But did they play—they didn't play basketball so many in Sweden, though. No, no. We had a lot of Swedes on our basketball team in high school then. We had—one year we had four members on there were Swedes. So you were able to get a scholarship down to Champaign or— No, they didn't get scholarships and those things. Well, they was unheard of. No, they didn't have scholarships. You went down there for five years? Four years? Five years, yeah. Five years. I took the fifth year and got my master's degree. And that was in horticulture? No, landscape architecture. Landscape architecture. I see. So what happened then when you came back? Was there any opening— Then it opened up. See, 33 opened up. 33. You came back around for that? No, I went down to Glacier Park as a master park planner. And they didn't have any master park planners in Illinois for the opening up of the state parks. And I got a call from Robert Kingrey, who was probably the best planner the state's ever had, public works planning. He worked at Central Park in New York. And he called me, asked me if I'd come to Rockford. I said, well, he says, your mother wants you to come here. I said, well, I hate to give it up here, but she said I got a good job. We're going to make campground into a national park. And they weren't looking for national park planners. So I came back to Rockford. Then I was there for 33 and we did a lot of planning there. We laid out many golf courses. We laid out a lot of activity, vital paths. We had two golf courses laid out. Was that paid by the state then? That's paid by the government, by the National Park Service. National Park Service. Why were they interested to do something—it was because of the old campground. Campground was going to be phased out because of the First World War. They didn't want to have another camp out there because of the flu. There were so many people, so many soldiers and so many people died from that. I think it was the worst in the country. So they had to demolish all the buildings then? Well, they demolished a lot of them in the breaking up after the First World War. A lot of the barracks had been sold to farmers to build barns out of them. But there was still a lot of them left there that they used for the 33rd—I mean for the National Guard. How many were housed out there? How many soldiers and personnel? I don't know. I told somebody it must have been 100,000, but I don't know whether it would be that many or not. That's a lot of them. So there was a whole little city out there and it was a bigger city than Rockford? Yeah. They had 250,000 out there at one time. Two hundred fifty thousand? Yeah. Don't take my words for it. I'm just trying to remember. But they weren't when they had the Second World War, though. Well, they didn't have very many then. It was kind of an induction camp. Oh, I see. Medical induction. But then they used it for a prison camp. I remember seeing the prisoners out there. But those people could not go into Rockford too often to meet— From Camp Rand? Yes. Oh, I see. Well, could the civilians— I think they took part in a lot of activities in Rockford. Well, they could do that. They had baseball teams out there. So there was a big business then for Rockford businessmen. Yes, very much so. A lot of activity. Pool halls and—well, they had saloons in those days, didn't they? But they didn't have any saloons out there, though? No. But there were a lot of them in Rockford. There was during the Prohibition, I suppose, also. No. Prohibition came— In 17—18? 19—19, wasn't it? 19. Post-That Act. Yeah, there was before that, 20. I know that. I can remember saloons running. There was three or four of them on 7th Street owned by Swedes. They were well catered. Yeah. One was named Gaslander and the other one was Albert Anderson. Then I thought, I knew another one. I can remember when Nelson Olsen had a funeral home there, and boy, was he busy during that flu epidemic. That's the grandfather of Olsen there now, Freddie Olsen. Fred Olsen. Yeah. So there's an old established— That goes way back to the First World War, yeah. I remember the old man. So you came back then to Rockford, and how long could you stay here then? When I came back? Yes. From where? When I transferred from Glacier Park to Rockford? Yes. I came back in 1933. 1933. And I stayed in Rockford one year. Then I was transferred down to White Pine State Park and I helped—I laid that out, and I designed the lodge down there. Have you been there? No, I haven't been. I was a consultant for Rockford Park. Then I did some work down there. I was a consultant in Black Hawk State Park in Rock Island and also in Palisades Park in Savannah. So you had to stay then, live there? I lived right in the Pines Park. When you developed this? Out of Oregon. And then we built the lodge there and they moved the camp out to the fairgrounds in Oregon. Were you married then at that time when you moved? I didn't get married until I left the Park Service. I left the Park Service to become chief of all roadside developments and preservation of historical markers for the state of Illinois and the highways. And you had your office station in Springfield then or— Did where? Were you in Springfield then or— I went to Springfield, yeah. Springfield. That was your office then? Uh-huh. I was chief of the whole thing. I laid up all these wayside areas and things like that. You had a lot of traveling then? Travel all the time. I know the state from north to south, east to west. You know all the shockwords. There was a lot of them down south. Well, it's an awful long state. One of the— It's about 425 miles long. It's about as long as Sweden, isn't it? What is Sweden? Oh, it's a thousand miles. Huh? It's a thousand miles. Is that a thousand miles? Yes. Oh, I didn't know. I thought they were about the same size. So you left all the Swedes then for so many years? I did what? You left all the Swedes then behind you when you left for Springfield and Oregon and you didn't— I had Swedes out there. Spokane, that was half Swedish. Yeah, there was a lot of Swedes there. Yeah, there was a lot of—in Spokane, there was—they were a great group of people out there. Oh, it's a nice area, of course, though. But then now when you grew up together with Hallström and Blom, you worked for Blom and— I worked for Blom and the Dugstor. And he told me—he showed—he helped me a lot in politics. In my classes in high school, I had a debate to present LaFallette's point of view if he became president, but I was tutored by Henry Blom. There was the one from Wisconsin? Wisconsin. And my debaters for the Democrat and Republicans, both of them, one became president of a university and the other one became assistant to a jurist at Bandeis in the U.S. Supreme Court, and I beat him. You did? Because I had Henry Blom behind me. There was—nobody could beat Henry Blom in debating. So he was—in what way was he different to Hallström? He was an educated man. Well, he was born—Henry Blom was born in this country. He was an orphan, I think. Yes, but he went to the pharmaceutical school and— He went what? To the—he was a druggist. Yeah, but he didn't go to college for that. He learned that there from Lundholm, Dr. Lundholm. Oh, he did? But he was not certified— He was not certified and then they passed the state law back in the early 20s, and he had to learn something about it in order to get—become a registered druggist. He had to take short courses or something like that. I don't know what they called them. And then he had to pass the exam, and he passed the exam. And I don't think Henry went through high school. But he was a gifted man, you said. He was a very gifted man. What did he learn, his political tricks, then, through Hallström or— Well, I think they learned them from each other. Well, I think the smartest one of the three was Gust—Ogren. Ogren? Yeah. He was beaten in the first election in 1912, wasn't he, by— Well, I think he was beaten after that, too. I think he— He was socialist. He was socialist, but he was a smart guy. He was the guy that— Oscar—Oscar Ogren. Oscar Ogren, and he was smart. He's a lot smarter than what any lawyer we got in town today. And he's another one, a self-trained lawyer. Was he a lawyer? Yeah. He had a case up against Clarence Darrow, and they beat him. Clarence Darrow says, young man, you won. And I have no excuse. Did he progress in politics now? He was beaten as a mayor, or Rockford. I think he ran against Hallström, too. Oh, he did? I think so. I'm not sure. But it was one—his name was Bennett. He beat him the first time in 1912 or 14 somewhere. Yeah. He was a good mayor. Bennett? Bennett was a good mayor. I don't know how. He was a West Sider. Back in those days, the East Siders didn't have much. I mean, they looked down on them. Yeah, because the—if you can call the classy people, they lived over there. They lived on the West Side. The English and the— They lived way out on the West End, another. They were crummy crowd then. But then the Swedes came in with the masses. But like Hallström now, he would never have been elected only on the Swedish votes. No. He needed help from the Italians. No. He got a lot of help from the others on the West Side. How was he able to win to the Italian strongholds and Lithuanians and the Poles and the Irish? I mean, Swedes were looked upon as— I think—two presentations of what he was going to do. He was a very convincing talker. Was he good in the English language? Well, he didn't have the dialect like so many of them have. Oh, he was young when he came. Yeah. He was quite a bit younger. And I think he might have gone—well, he only had a fourth grade education. That's what his secretary told me. Do you know the name of his secretary? No. You want to know? Well, yes. Then I'll have to look up some old records and I can find it. Was there a lady? The lady, yeah. It seems her name was Johnson or Nelson. She lived on Highview Avenue. And I think her husband died. But I'll have to find it. I can find it and give you the name and she'll tell you more about Halström than any of them because she was very close. Was she still living? I think she's still living. Her husband died. She's my age. Oh, I see. She could be younger, but she was sharp. So in one way he was lucky then, Halström. He had—he got some good co-workers. Well, he was a very good administrator. He picked the best you could find. Just because I went up and asked for a job, I had to show that I could do it. He had to be confident that I could do the job. So there was no way for somebody to buy the way in then to— Nobody bought their way in with Halström. Halström wanted a very efficient government. And the police chief was bargaining. Yeah, that's another case. How did they get along now, I mean, Bargrain and Halström? I think Halström just ignored him. Because Bargrain was an old Redlich from 1902. I don't know whether he was socialist or not, but he was sure a drinker. Oh, he was? Yeah, he drank at Freeburg's Drugstore all the time. Have you ever heard of Freeburg? No, I heard a name, but— It's Freeburg's on Third Avenue and Seventh Street. What was his name? But they were buddies. They were the same age. So there were some characters then. You had Bargrain and Lindström, the cop. Lindström, the cop? Yeah, yeah. I don't care if you're the President of the United States. When I say stop, you stop. That was to the general bell out here on 33rd Division. He was standing on Seventh Street and he was—I don't know what he did, speeding or something, but he stopped the car and the guy says, you know who this is? It's General Bell. He says, I don't care if you're the President of the United States. You stop when I say stop. Did people pay attention to him, though, or respect for him, or did they— Well, they had a lot of respect for him. I think people—except when he was an honest, good, well-meaning cop. To the young people in your time, you had respect for the authority and the police and so on? The only ones we didn't have much respect for was Bargrain. Bargrain, no? And then Fokke— Bankston? Bankston was in there and Manson, Oscar Manson, was a good cop. He became a cheap slinger, but I think Manson was the one that took care of the personnel and things like that and kept things on an even keel. He lived on 8th Street there, 2nd Avenue. Manson, what was his first name? You probably had that name. Erik Ekebom, you know him? Who? Erik Ekebom. Oh, yeah. He was a socialist. That's right. And we were in that—you were asking about it in that Sunday school class that we used to sing, Pie in the Sky When We Die. Very, very interesting. That's how I got to know Ekebom. And Helge Westerlin. Helge Westerlin and— Oh, yeah. We were all buddies together. She's living in Esther, Esther Erickson, that plays the piano. Yes. And then there was a girl who played piano named Margaret Dwyer, who was up there playing. I think she must have been half Swedish, but she was a socialist. But it seems to me it didn't hurt you, though, because you got a better view of people. In other words, you got a good education. I got a very good education. Because you went to the free church for your religious teaching, and then you got to this worldly socialist. Socialist, yeah. And Erik Ekebom did the same thing. He went to the Methodist Sunday school, and he went to the socialist Sunday school. I suppose he did the same thing I did. I got pulled by—my father was not—he didn't care whether I went to church or not. I don't know. I got the feeling those other things didn't give a damn about church, so I don't know. But my mother was religious. But not to the point of being in everyday discussion. But she wanted you to do everything honestly. And she hated Swedes that come up there and tell them how honest they are, but they'd chisel her for the— She didn't like that. She didn't like that one, but she said, you call yourself honest? So they worked on this all the Swedes, too. My mother was sharp. You'll find that out. Elga will tell you that. You mentioned that your parents, they had a greenhouse. Yeah. Was your mother the one that kept the books then? Yes, sir. She's the one that made it. I'll tell you what she did. When Mr. Ingersoll died, the father of the Ingersoll milling machine died. His wife came over and bought flowers. And she said, I want a geisha jar, a big geisha jar. That's a design with two gates in them. A jar means that one gate is open. I want that. And she said, Helma, can you make that? She said, sure, I made lots of them. My mother didn't know what a geisha jar was. But she— She made one. She looked it up in the book and found out how to make it. She went out the cemetery and found an old mold out there and made it. And Mrs. Ingersoll said, that's the finest geisha jar I've ever seen. So she was understanding then. She said, Helma, how many of those have you made? My mother said, that's the first one. She says, I knew that, Helma. My mother had a personality that was like—she kept many of these Swedish organizations going because she was a good administrator. Did she—did your parents belong to a lot of organizations? They belonged to almost all of them. They were good tempers. My mother was a good temper. My father was an airliner. That makes a little difference there. So he didn't belong to the tempers? Well, he did in the end, join. He belonged to the dance group? He belonged to the dance group. And your mother to a Värmland group? Yeah. Well, she belonged to everything. Oddfellas and—particularly when I was on Fourth Avenue there, the fourth floor up. How about your brother now? Was he younger or—? Well, he was younger. He was two years younger. Was he interested in those things, those Swedish going to large groups? I think he probably was more than I was because I was away from Sweden so much time. So he stayed in Rackford all the time? He stayed in Rackford. He never married. He was—he developed a rheumatic heart when he was six years old, so he had to have a very quiet life. Oh, I see. He lived to be 70 years old. That's pretty old for a guy that has a bad heart that age. Six years old, you know. Did he help out with the nursery business then, or—? No, he stayed home and did the growing. So how about your father now? Was he able to swing over from pattern making to flower arrangements and—? He was a good salesman. My father was not that ambitious. He was ambitious, but he tired—I mean, what do you call it? He was not persistent enough. Well, my father was—my father's ability was vision. He knew Rackford was going to grow. My father was the appraiser for Swedish Building and Loan, and they said— How did he get into their business? I don't know. They found out he was a good appraiser, and he had vision. So the loans come in, and they have to examine the property and examine the people and prove them. If they prove them, they prove them. Was he after the Depression or before? Well, he was in there— After the Second World War? I think after the Depression, really. That's another thing he kept on going, the Swedish Building and Loan. They never dropped out. It was a good organization run by Arvid Johnson—no, Arvid Peterson. Peterson. Yeah. He was great. He was born in this country. So you were actually lucky then to go to college during the wars to the height of the Depression. Yes, I— There were not too many in your age group.