 Were you born in Sweden? Yes, I was born in Sweden. How long ago? 1928. 1928? You know, you were harvesting around here, trashing and having a good time. Looking for girls. So you didn't have a sweetheart then in Sweden that you could send for, or... You were too young when you left. No, I don't suppose. Do you remember any Swedish people now, after so many years in in Swedesburg, Iowa? Do you remember any Swedish people? Do you understand what I'm saying? Yeah, I understand what you're saying, but... There's one monk who understands Swedish in Swedesburg. And that's David. David. David, his wife, Viola, his wife is pretty good. She's a Lendancy. She understands. She understands Swedish. Her sister understands Swedish. And David, he's still digging the graves in Swedesburg's cemetery. When someone dies, he digs the graves. David. He's still the grave digger. Yeah, yeah. I've been digging graves for 40 years, I think. Yeah. He's pretty good. Yeah, David's pretty tight. He don't throw his money away, I'll tell you that. He's a real small-towner. Yeah, he's been back to Sweden. Oh, 12 over. Anyway, maybe three. Took his wife along once. And I'm pretty sure David went back. I know he went back once by himself, I know that. No, I was going to go back when my boy was in... in Germany when he went on vacation, but when he went, it was right at the oats-cutting time. And I couldn't get away then, and then I told my wife, I guess I better give it up. That's the time I like to went. And I would have went here two, three years ago, too, if my wife wouldn't have went back. But you gotta see a little bit what it's... what she can't... if she would have understand Swedish, could read Swedish, boy, it'd be a little different, but she can't read Swedish. So you've been pretty healthy then over the years, you haven't had any... Oh, I've been in the hospital a couple of times, but got pneumonia once, caught a cold, got pleurisy with it. That was in the 68. And I was running a chainsaw down here one day, a big two-man chainsaw, and the load shifted, and the saw fell back and hit me in the belly. The handle bar hit me in the belly and ruptured my stomach. That took only three days to heal that up, but that one time I had pneumonia, and that was 21 days. In Iowa City or... Mount Pleasant? Yeah. Mount Pleasant. So now when you look back at this long time here, since 1916, would you start over again or to be a farmer today? No, not today. No, not the wages you're paying, but there are people working. They can make as much more money as you can on the farm. It doesn't take to be a farmer then? Not right now. It only takes if you can come and go as you please, but that's... Oh, I used to do it a few times on the farm, and during the end of the Depression, farming didn't pay. But it took a lot of guts and stuff to... When I come back, I guess sometimes I had too much of it, but I had neighbors there, cattle market went down, we went to Chicago about the same time, with 48 of cattle apiece. Fat cattle. And that's during the hard times of doing the kind of Depression, cattle cost quite a bit. And you went with the cattle to Chicago? Oh yeah. On the train? Well, right in the caboose. And... Three of us went, one guy from Minneapolis, he was a married to a girl from Switzerland, got on there and got up to Chicago. And I was lucky. I got sold out at the top of the market. Seven dollars and fifty cents a hundred wasn't very much, but that was the best New York that day. Well, my neighbor, Frank Miller, of course his neighbor North, I mean, he went in, he had forty head. He never got... He just got a few to steer, he started sorting his up. And he had cattle up there for three days before he got rid of them, and then he had to take the lowest six cents. And then it fell North, I mean, further North, up on the crossroads, he sent forty some head of cattle up there, and he had cattle up there for a week before he got rid of them, but he was from there, lost his shirt. Now at that time, well I got seven and a half. They paid for the cattle, but I never got a cent for all the corn I put in them, the whole crop. But... I didn't lose anything more than the crop, I didn't lose any cash. But it's worse today. You know, the bankers were so dang liberal here a few years ago, when everything was going good. In 1979, I think, a whole bean's in from down there, into Winfield, eight dollars and a half cents a bushel, eight dollars and fifty cents a bushel. And here, this spring, or last spring or last fall, you couldn't get four sheds. That's what they were. And then the interest went up to 17, 18, 19 percent, some of them paid 20. And these tractors and stuff went from 800 into a thousand, went up to, well these big combines went up to a hundred thousand. You go buy one of them, why? And the combine won't last over, I don't care how good they're to care of, they won't last over five or six years. And there's a lot of repair work in between. Well they last only six years? That's all they ever run. And it's a good thing, six years, that's all they ever run. And the only trouble is, you've got to run them to get some money out of them, you've got to try to do somebody else's work. Or you get that kind of money investing in the interest, you don't pay you no more than yourself. It's impossible to rent, I mean, to pay a mortgage of a hundred thousand for a combine. That's crazy. You just won't pay. Well, ten thousand for an automobile is just as bad. You know, when I come back from Minnesota and to Hartsfield, I went down to Burlington, I bought a car that had been out two years, look like new, for two hundred and fifty dollars. It was a good investment. Yeah, but you, that's the difference, right now today I'd pay the same kind of car, it costs you, oh, five to six thousand, used. Well, I better go out and work. This was the end of the interview with John L. Wynfield, Iowa, and we have 23rd of September, 1987.