 Here we have 28th of June, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Herbert Johnson, Muscatine, Iowa, and he was born 20th of January, 1918, in Moline, Illinois. So your parents, now, they both came from Sweden? Yes. My mother came from Hamnadal, and Dad was from Kveppersted. They didn't know each other before they came here, though? No, they did not know each other before they came here. So your father came the first time in 1911? 1911, yes. And then he did go back to Sweden in 1914 to bring his sister back with him to America. When he came in, well, I'll let you ask. Yes. Okay. When he first came in 1911, he mentioned that when he got into New York, he went through Ellis Island and what they had to do there. And then he got on a train, and they put a sign around his neck that said Moline on it, because he couldn't talk English. And so when he got to Moline, well, then the conductor said, this is where you get off. So he got off in Moline here. And then his first work that he did, he went to the Dakotas to the wheat fields and was shocking wheat and one thing or another. And he was out there for, oh, just a few months, I guess. Then he came back to Moline, and he went to live with his sister, Sophie Lind. And at that time, he went to work at the plow company, John Deere Plow Company. Well, he worked there for a while, and then when the business there began to slack off, why, he started looking for other work, and he finally ended up in New Windsor working for a farmer out there by the name of Brooks. The last name was Brooks. And I remember Dad saying that he walked all the way from here out there to New Windsor, and he would stop at different farmhouses along the way and ask if they had any work to do, you know. So he got to this Mr. Brooks' place, and Mr. Brooks said, well, can you plow corn, you know? And he said, I've never plowed corn in my life, but he said, I said, well, I'll sure try it. So he said he went out and plowed a little bit, and the farmer followed him around. He said, well, you're all right. You can have a job. So that's how he got a job out there. And then when he came back to Moline, why, then he and my mother at that time were acquainted, and they went down to Galesburg and were married, and that was in 1914 or 15. I'd have to look it up and see, but that's about what the time period was. Then they both worked there for Brooks' after that for quite a while. Mom was doing housework, and Dad was doing the farm work. And they got a salary, I think, of somewhere around $300 a year for the two of them, and a place to stay and their food that they got, see. Then he came back from there, and he went to, back to the plow company for a while, and then from the plow company he went to McLaughlin Body Company, and then after McLaughlin Body Company, why, he left and went to Roy Roth Company, and he retired from Roy Roth's, and the folks moved to Florida in 1961, I believe it was. And they lived there until Dad died, and then my mother still lives there. Did he mention to you the reason why he left to Sweden? Well, there's some question about that. His mother passed away, and there was the five or six children I'd have to look at. But his father was in the Swedish Army. He was a professional soldier in the Swedish Army, and he was gone a lot of the time. And there were some statements made that the stepmother was not in accord with the children at all, and there got to be a lot of hard feelings between them. And that, besides the fact that the place they were living on didn't really amount to much in the way of farming or anything like that, so there was not much chance for any improvement or such at that point. So then they all decided that they would come over here, and his sister and one brother came first, and then he came, and then the rest of them came afterwards. And your grandfather, your father's name was Sven Johan Pihl? Yes, uh-huh. He was a professional soldier. So your father, he had that name too, then, Pihl, in Sweden? He had the name Pihl in Sweden, and then when he came, when they came to America, his brother Gust got the idea that maybe they should change it to Johnson. And that's what they did, and they changed it to Johnson, so the boys went by Johnson after that. Do you think they were told by someone here that it was hard to pronounce? I don't know. I never really did hear that, why they wanted to change it. The only thing I could think of was that Sven Johan, you know, they maybe took the Johan and made Johnson out of it. Johan's son made Johnson out of it, see. That's the only thing I could figure out. Was he able to pay for his ticket over, or did he have somebody here to send the money to him, you think? No, I think he paid for his ticket over. He did? What kind of work was he doing then when he decided to leave? Just working on the farm there. Just working on the farm. Yeah, what little ground that they had there. And did he tell anything about the trip coming over here, and his island, going through there? It was just what you mentioned before. Yeah, it's just what I mentioned before. He didn't say much about that, but he did say that they left from Copenhagen, I believe it was, and they were... On the Danish boat then? Yes, I think so. And I think they were quite some time at sea because of storms and stuff, and he said that they laid for two days, you know, just doing nothing but blowing the fog horn all the time because it was so foggy that the boat couldn't travel. And I don't know the name of the boat that he came on, but I do have the name of the boat that my mother came over on. You mentioned he came to Berlin and almost immediately left for Dakotas. Was there some other... There were some Swedish people out there who had homesteaded there. Did he know? Yes, through one of his brothers, he knew them. And so he went out there and started working there. And then when his brother came over to America, his brother went to Dakota also, and he rented some land from this fellow who was doing the homesteading. Do you know where in Dakotas? Yes, I can find... You work for South Dakota? I have the name in here someplace. Yeah. They rented land in Lyman County near Reliance, South Dakota, and it was rented from a homesteader named Record. This is the fellow's name that they rented from. It was near an Indian reservation, and they said that they... My uncle used to say that he could remember that the Indians crossing their property quite often, the Sioux Indians, were near there. Some years ago. Yes, you bet. It was 1912. 1912, around there. But he decided that it was not the land for him. Right. There was... Well, it was pretty barren up there, you know, and it wasn't raising the crops, and I think they got his dad's brother, which is my uncle, they almost went bankrupt there because they had so many crop failures, so they left there and came back here to Moline. They set it up here at Coe Valley. Yeah, but he worked in the Moline plow shop where dad worked too for quite some time, and then they went back to farming up at Coe Valley. So your dad, was he interested in to get some land and farm it himself, do you think? My dad? He tried for that? No, I don't think so. I think he just got into it because he needed a job, he needed to eat, you know, so that's why he got into that. But then when he... as soon as the Tri-Cities picked up again, then he came back in here and worked in the factories the rest of his life. So when he came into Moline then, did he settle the... did he rent a house then, or how did they... When he first came, he went to Dakota, and then when he came back, he moved in with his sister and his one brother who lived in Moline. Sophie Lind and Gus Johnson, they lived in Moline and he moved in with them for a while. And then from there he went to New Windsor and then came back again after that. And then he started off at... John Deere Plow. John Deere Plow. He was a sheet metal worker and a tinsmith there at John Deere Plow. So there was some war production when he came into Moline? Yes, there was, but then he left here, he left Moline in 1914 to go back to Sweden to get his sister, because she was... one sister was the only one left over there of the children. And so he went back to get her and it was like you say, it was in the wartime, and he could remember laying over in England for a couple, three days while the minesweepers were clearing the channel of mines and stuff from the war, you know, before they went over to Europe proper. But then he came back here and brought his sister back and she lived here about a year and a half or two years and then she moved to Chicago. And this Hamnedeg branch now, they are related to Arvid Svansson? Oh yes, my mother and Arvid are sister and brother. And there was more, Arvid probably told you the rest of the children that were in the family? Yes, there was quite a few. Yes, there was five of them. Al, Ebba and Vera. They're all still living. Yes, they're all still living. Mom is the oldest one, she's 92. She's still living? Oh yes. Well she's the one that's only growing up. In Florida, yeah. That's right. Aha, so then there was a lot of Hamnede people here in Moline. Yeah, I guess a lot of Swedes in Moline, that's one reason the rest of them were headed this way. It was probably easier then when several of them in the same relation came here. Oh sure, much easier, yeah. Of course, when they first came they just spoke nothing but Swedish, you know. Well, when I started school, when I started kindergarten, I didn't speak English, I just spoke Swedish, because that's all I ever heard around home, you know. Where were they living then when you were born? 13th Street, Moline. They had their own house then? No, they were renting a house there. They had a chicken coop in the back, like many others? No, I don't know. I don't remember that. No, they never said anything about that. They said that when they first came to Moline, they lived at 119 5th Avenue, Moline. And then they moved to 717 13th Street, Moline. And that's where I was and my sister were both born, on 13th Street. And the church they attended, was that 1st Lutheran? 1st Lutheran in Moline. And I was confirmed there at the 1st Lutheran, and my sister was confirmed there too. Reverend Moreland was at the time. So you went to summer school there? Yes. You were not Swedish schooled in the summer school in the summer? No, the only Swedish that I ever did take was in high school. I took two years of Swedish in high school. It's been a long time. Miss Graham, or what's her name? Yes, uh-huh. Graham. Graham, I believe. I think so, something like that. The rest of the children on my father's side, he had a sister by the name of Sophie, and she had married a fellow in Sweden, from Småland, Sweden, and I don't know what part of Småland, by the name of Ed Engström. And they came to this country, and they had four children, three children, I'm sorry. And then they got a divorce, and she married another fellow from Småland. His name was Linder Lind, and they had one child together after that. But I have the names and dates when they were born, and when they came to America, and where they came to, and one thing or another, if you want anything like that. Well, there's a bit too much in detail. Yeah, right. But on your father's side now, did he leave anybody? His parents were still living in Sweden when he left. He was remarried, you said. Yes. Oh, gee, I don't know what... Well, no, his mother had passed away before he left, because the first time he came here was 1911, and she had died in 1906. So it was just his father that was left. And his stepmother was dead. And his stepmother, yeah. So he was able to go back then, 1914? Yes. He'd earned enough money to go back and get his sister and come back here again. So they all were all here. So she probably wrote to him then and said that she... Would like to come. Felt the heat for the stepmother. I suppose, yeah. Did he talk much about his home community in Sweden? No, Dad never did really say very much about it. He did tell me one time that he had about a mile and a half to go to school, and he can remember wearing those old wooden shoes to go to school with, you know, in the wintertime or summertime. It was just the wooden shoes. They didn't have boots. But he didn't really say too much about Sweden. How about your mother? Was she left with the whole family? Yes. Well, like I probably already told you, her father came over here first. He was a carpenter and furniture maker, cabinet maker, and things like that. He came over here first and got a job, you know. But before he came, he had built them a home and one thing or another there in Sweden. And so they all came over together really. When was 1910 that you came over, the rest of the family? Sweden on the 4th of May 1910 when they left, yes. And they came to New York and they got to New York on the 18th of... the 16th, I'm sorry, and then they got to Moline on the 18th of May. And they came on a Norwegian boat called Helig Oluv. Yes, something like that. However you pronounce it. She said she remembers that they stopped in Ireland to pick up a couple of people who came out in a small boat to get on the boat with the rest of them and come over. And she also said that before they left, she could remember that in order to get money to come over and have enough money for the family to come over, they had to get a sale and sold everything that they had over there and that they couldn't take with them. And she said she could also remember a bunch of the neighbors coming over with a lot of food and stuff to give to them to take with them on the trip. And she mentioned too about the wooden shoes that they had. And then she said they finally graduated to a shoe that was wooden bottom and a leather top that's called trefla or something like that. And the first pair of shoes she ever had was given to her by some lady in Sweden so she could attend a funeral over there when she was small. She said they were high butt and she was way too big for it but she said that's what I had to wear. And her and her brother Al, let me back up, her father was custodian of the church because the church was right next door to their home there and the Lutheran school was right there too so that's where they went to school. Her brother being custodian of the church and also the sextant for the cemetery there. So her and Al, they had certain chores which they had to perform. And one of the chores was to help clean up the church and keep the cemetery clean, one thing or another. And she said that one day when they were over there to the church the trap door on the floor was open so she said they just shut it. But before they left they found out why it was open because the organist was down in the basement where they kept all the wine. She said they found out where the wine was going too. But she said they didn't dare report him to anybody because he was their school teacher too. So... They found out some secrets. Yeah, right. So your mother and Al, were they the same age then? Arvid was the younger one? No, Arvid is not the youngest one. Vera, Vera is the youngest boy, yeah. Vera is the youngest girl. My mother was the oldest, then Al, then Arvid, then Eba and then Vera. That was a big family that came over. Yes, it was. It's kind of amazing, they have long longevity apparently because they're all still living and all pretty sharp. Yeah, Arvid is very sharp. Al is... And the girls too, really. I guess we do have a relative living in Sweden yet, which is a distant cousin to us. In fact, they tell me it's a third cousin, his name is John, or Eric Christofferson. We haven't corresponded with him for several years, I guess. We had a letter from him, but we haven't corresponded for several years. So when your dad entered the factory scene, there was no unions? No unions whatsoever, no. They got 12½ cents an hour is what they got. He said he can remember that the boss, the foreman, was quite strict and if you didn't do your work, there was no question about it, you were gone because there was another line of people standing outside waiting to get a job. And the pay at that time was 12½ cents an hour is what they got for their work. So then when he moved over to... Dauphlin Body Works, wasn't it? McLaughlin Body, yes. Was there a reason there was too low pay, you think, over at John Deere or was it some other conditions that made him... Well, it may have been both, but when he went to McLaughlin Body Company then he got a promotion, he was made the supervisor in McLaughlin Body Company. And of course that carried additional money, you know. Did he know somebody over there, you think? He knew one fellow that worked in the tool room, but that's about all that he knew when he went to work there. So he became the supervisor, everyone... Yes, and at that time they were making cabs for Diamond Tee Trucks and he had the sheet metal area where they did all the fabrication for it. And Arvid Swanson worked for him. Was that kind of unusual, he got the supervision without working there first? You would think they would try out him? Yes, you would think so, but I think he probably had a pretty good record, a work record in one thing or another, so they probably considered that. And sometimes it's an advantage to bring someone in from the outside that isn't part of the gang, you might say. Just more respect with them. Yes, right. So there was still no union at McLaughlin? No, no union, no. Did he... What time did he come in then, in the 30s, late 30s? Well, I was in the late 30s and I went to work for him there too when I got out of high school in 35. I worked there for about a year and a half before I went to the Arsenal. So he was with them and the Roth Pump Company until I believe 61 when he retired. Didn't he go to Edgerton? Yes, he did go to Edgerton. He had a friend up there at Edgerton, the Frouhoff Trailer, no, the Highway Trailer Company, and he worked with them for a few years but not too long. And then he came back here. So being a supervision person, he didn't have to join the union then? No, there was no union anyway at the plant. Not at any time? Not when I was there. I don't think there was any time, no. There probably is now. So you went to church then, the First Lutheran, and then Moline High School, and then you started on there for a year and a half, you said, at MacLachlan. Yes, I worked there for a year and a half and then I went to the Arsenal. And I worked there at the Arsenal from 1937 to 1945. And then I went into service and I was over in Germany, in France. And then when I came back, I went back to the Arsenal again. And then we bought a farm down by Muscatine together with Lois's father, and we farmed that for a few years and then I left there, still owning part of the farm, and went to California and worked for a place in California called Consolidated Electrodynamics, which was later bought out by Bell & Howell. But while I worked there, I worked as a manufacturing engineer for a while and then I worked as a production manager for the plant for a while also. And then we came back here to the Tri-Cities because we really didn't like California as far as a place to bring the children up. And we came back and I went back to work at the Arsenal. And I also worked at Home & Eyes in Muscatine for a while, doing tool design work there. And I came back to the Arsenal and I started in the planning room as a production planner and then they put me in charge of the estimating section for the Rock Island Arsenal and then I went to the Plans and Programs Office later on. And then eventually to the head of what we called, or they called, the commodity management and customer relations job. And that's where I retired from there. Did your father comment at any time about the difference between Sweden and the United States? Because he saw a lot of different changes in his life. Oh yes. Well, not so much, like I said. He doesn't really say too much about conditions in Sweden, other than that they were hard for them at the time. He didn't see too much of his father because being a professional soldier, while he was gone so much of the time. So did he correspond with anybody in Sweden? Yes, he corresponded for a while with his stepmother. And then they had some other friends, some distant relatives there that they corresponded with and some friends, long back friends that they corresponded with, but that's about all I think. So was there anything that he... Apparently he became settled down there. I mean, there was no way to think about going back or anything like that. Going back to Sweden to stay? No. One way ticket, so to speak. Right. And when they come together, you know, the Swedes, having coffee or dinner or parties or whatever it was, what were they talking about? They were all conducted in Swedish, do you remember? When I was young it was all in Swedish because they associated with the Swedish people that were here, and then the lodge people, and that was all Swedes, and they did a lot of Swedish talking. In fact, like I said, that's all I could talk when I went to school because that's all I learned around home, that's all I ever heard was the Swedish language. And then they also joined the Scandinavian fraternity. Yes. And now mother, she is a charter member. She's about the only living charter member left. Of Vasa. Vasa, 139 in Olin. Her brother Al is a form of a charter member, but he didn't get in until after she did, a year or two after she did. She's gone through all the offices and the chairs in the lodge, you know, at different times and stuff. Did you attend a meeting with them when you were... Yes, I attended meetings. I went through some of the chairs in the lodge when I... But it got to a point where there were young people weren't getting into it, you know, and the older people were getting older, and then of course we moved out of the area, and it's quite... it's kind of a long drive for us to come up from Muscatine for the meetings, you know. How old were you then when you were offered the position as a chairman, a vice chairman or... In the lodge? Yeah. I was about 18. I see. It was kind of unusual because they were all sweet. They liked to keep it wherever they sat. Yeah. Well, I was a sentinel for a while, and then I was a chaplain, and then I was the vice chairman. That's as far as I went in the chairs. Did you have to read the Swedish rituals too? No, no. They had it in English in the book, too. It was all in English then? Yeah, at that time. Yeah. Well, I shouldn't say that because they had some songs and one thing or another that they did sing that were in Swedish, you know. The opening... Yeah, right. Yeah. And then they had a hospitalization to help the members in case they got sick. They got there a couple of days, a couple of hours. Yes, it didn't amount to very much. It was about, you know, I think at one time it was down to about a dollar, two dollars a day was all you got. But, of course, at that time the hospital was only about ten or twelve dollars a day for a room, too, you know. So it was good at all times. Yeah, sure. Gave you a few cents. Yeah. I don't know what's left of the lodge there, the 139. I don't think there's very much of it left because when they have their meetings now, they have them generally in someone's home, you know, and maybe four or five attend and that's about it anymore. Are you still a member? I'm still a member, yeah. So you met downtown then in the meeting hall? Olive Hall or... Swedish Olive, yeah, up on the second floor. So there was a big meeting hall in Sweden. Oh, yeah. And your parents didn't belong to Viking or the... Yeah, they belonged to the Viking, they belonged to Swichards, they belonged to, or Swichard, whatever you call it, and they belonged to 288 and the 139. Oh, they belonged to all of them. Yeah. Very active in all of them. Yeah. You wonder whether you're time to... Well, I suppose they stayed at the meeting nights. Oh, I'm sure they did, yeah. They did, too. Yeah. Yes. So, and were they active within the church? Not too active in the church, no. They attended church, but really not too regularly, even on their attendance. But they insisted that my sister and I be confirmed, you know, and of course, which was fine with us. I was confirmed in... 32? 1932. It was all English then? It was all English, yes. There was no Swedish confirmation class? No, not that I knew of, no. And did they stress anything in Swedish? Your parents particularly, did you read something in Swedish? No, they really didn't. Did you have something by heart? I remember in high school, they wanted me to take Swedish, you know. They thought it would be good if I go back and brush up a little bit. Of course, the Swedish that you learn in the school isn't the speaking Swedish that you would normally think. I can remember Selma Lagerlöf's, one of her poems, but that's about it. So you read her book in school? Oh, yes. In the Swedish version or the translation? The Swedish version. So she had it on her program. At Christmas time, do you remember what happened? Oh, yes. Every Christmas we'd have a Christmas tree, and Dad and Mom, we had candles on the tree. We didn't have lights, we had candles on the tree, with a little clip put on the branch. About once or twice during the Christmas season, we'd get to light those things because it was a fire hazard at all times. But I can remember every Christmas Eve, we would go to my grandmother's house on my mother's side, and we would travel by this old Model T car, which we had, and generally get stuck in the snow, or else the car wouldn't start or something, there was no heater in it at all. But anyway, Grandma, she would always have the traditional Swedish meal, döpigritan, kalsylta, and brunabönor, and things like this. We would go up there on Christmas Eve and have the meal, and then they would distribute the gifts to the children afterwards. And then we would all go to Yuleta on Christmas morning. Do you remember how the tree was decorated? It was only live candles in it. Only live candles on it. We had some round bulbs or globes, whatever you want, hung on the tree, and then we used to make popcorn strings and things like that to put on the tree, and paper decorations that we made ourselves. Was it a spruce or a fir tree? Short needles? Short needles. And it was a tall one, standing in the... About six foot tall. Did your dad bring it home a few days before Christmas? Yes, he'd... Oh, probably a week before Christmas, he'd bring it home. And of course, we always left it outside so that the needles would stay on as long as possible, until we brought it in. And then you had it standing for about three weeks or something like that? Yes, until the needles began to fall. So, you didn't have a party then for your friends that you could invite? Not for the children. You danced around the Christmas tree? No, we didn't do that, no. Just threw it off? Yeah, right. The parents always had a party where they had some of their friends come, you know, but there was no dancing around the tree or anything like that. They always served the Swedish foods is what they served, and some of the Swedish drinks like glögg and things like that, you know. But nothing, no party for us kids, per se. But you had all the typical Swedish... Oh yes, we still have it. My new cook has it now. You don't have it there, you're not of a Swedish background even now. But I like it. You had to go to school then. Did you learn how to prepare some lutefisk and rice pudding? No, I didn't learn that at all. What did you... From my mother. Oh, I see. His mother's a terrific cook, always was. That's how she learned. Of course, now I can remember when we were kids making the patatas skörd, we used to get the casings, you know, and then we'd stuff that by hand with your finger, you know, put a funnel in the end, stuff that by hand. That's the way it was made at the time. I used to get into a lot of that at Christmas time, helping to do that sort of thing. You all helped out. Yeah. And you remember any Christmas party at the church at that time when you were... Not really, not really. They had them, but there was... About all that it amounted to was that they would have Santa Claus come and then they'd give out candies to the kids and that, you know, and that's about it. Do you remember if they had any Lucia party? You know, the 13th of December, they had Lucia, Santa Lucia. Yes, they did. At the church? Mm-hmm. Yeah. But that was never celebrated in the homestall? No. There was talk about it a lot, you know, but... And we knew what it was, but it wasn't celebrated in the home that I know of. How about visiting Augustana now for the people in Moline? Did they participate in their doings at Augustana College? What kind of impact did they have on the Swedish population or what it is? I really couldn't answer that. I'm sure they had a... Do you remember if you went over there with your parents? To Augustana? Yes. No, I don't remember going there at all. So they were, like, secluded in a way? In a way, yeah. Your mother worked there. Well, Mother worked at Augustana Book Concern for a while when she came here, and she also worked for Mosenfelders for quite some time as a house lady, you know, cooking, cleaning, stuff like that. But you don't remember going to Augustana with some of your friends when you were in high school, for instance? No. No. So the outside of the... It didn't have too much to do with them, then, there was only... Well, there may have been a lot of... How did you see Augustana, for instance, from the outside? Well, I always had a lot of admiration for Augustana, and I knew that it was a Scandinavian background to it, you know, and that they had some information there about the Swedes, but that's the extent of it. I never have even been into the Svensson Library to see what they do have. I want to go there. I want to see what they have. But I've never been there yet. So you never thought of going to Augustana, for instance, after you went to work? No. I went to work, yeah. And your sister, did she go...? No, she went to work. She used to work at the New York store in Moline when that was there, and then she got married and they moved down to Alabama, Cullman, Alabama, and they had a Dairy Queen store in Cullman, Alabama, and then they sold that and they moved down to Florida. And she's still living. She's remarried. Her first husband died and she's remarried. When your parents or your mother ordered something from the grocery store, the grocery came around and took an order, or did she go to the grocery store? She went to the grocery store. Herself? And picked out what she wanted? Right. We didn't live, where we lived, we weren't even close to a grocery store. We had a little country store, you might say, where they sold bread and milk and candy. It was about all that there was. But anything else that she wanted, we generally had to go a few miles to get that. So the grocery owner, he didn't go too far out of his circle? No, no. I can remember the milkman coming around, delivering milk, and the iceman coming around with the horse and wagon delivering ice. How often did they do that? Oh, about twice a week. Twice a week? Uh-huh. And there was a 25-pound block then? Yeah, you could buy a 25, 50, or 100-pound block, whatever you could use. Twice a week? Uh-huh. And there was something that every house had for, they had to have it, I suppose. An icebox, yeah. That's the only way to... Yeah, and there were no refrigerators at that time. And the milkman, of course, he came every day, and I think he would skip Sundays, but otherwise he came every day. They had the old bottles, you know, that they used to use. And when they returned, there was the glass bottles? Yes, glass bottles. They were washed then when they were returned? That's right. You wonder how they could keep in the hot... Keep in the hot sun. Keep in the dairy, you know, to keep it. And I remember the milkman used to, the horse he had was so well-trained with his wagon, the milkman would get off at one house, and then he had his little carrier with him with the milk bottles in the carrier, and he would walk behind two or three houses, you know, and deliver the milk that he had with him, and then he'd come out the street, and there was a horse standing there waiting for him when he'd come out to the street, you know. So the horse knew the route just as well as he did. So he knew exactly where to stop. Sure. And the milkman was an old guy? No, well, I would say, as I recall, about 35, 40 years old, something like that. How about the politics now? What impact did it set upon you when you came in in the age of 20 and 21, the politics of moving? Were there any Swedish influence on it? Yes, there was. I can't remember what the mayor's name was at that time. There was a mayor, he was called Johnson, wasn't it? I think so, yes. And Oakleaf was one? Yes, Oakleaf, yeah. And the police? And I'm sure that the Swedish people, as many of them as there were here, had pretty good influence on what was going on in the city. And they were Republicans? Yes, most of them were. Why was that, do you think? I don't know, unless they're just conservative type of people. Could it have anything to do with, they said John Deere always been Republicans. Could there have been a stamp on all the people? That could very well, maybe. Could very well have been. Defending the right line. Like your dad, for instance, was he a Republican? He was to start with, then he changed to a Democrat. During the Depression? Yeah, I think so. He changed. I was a Democrat too, until I married this Republican. So he was able to trade with the Swedish food and the party. Yeah, right. I remember when he came over, or his sister that preceded him here, Sophie Lynn, she used to have a boarding house down on 2nd Avenue or something like that in Moline, and about 5th Street, somewhere in that area. And I can remember going down there, and a lot of the boarders that she had were Swedish boarders that came in. And they worked at different factories around. I was small then, I suppose probably four, five, eight years old, somewhere in that vicinity. But I know that I used to go to the table with the boarders, because she had them all sit down at one time, and there was a lot of Swedish talk going on all the time. So that's where you pick up some of the strange words. Some of them you didn't hear at home even. But I suppose the political discussion was not that hot among the newcomers. They couldn't follow the papers or anything. Like your home, did you have a Swedish-American paper? We had a Swedish-American magazine at one time, and then we did have a paper too, that's right. Have you seen this one? No, I don't think so. Well, Tribunen? Yes. Yeah, I've seen that one. My dad and my mother had that one, to read. To find something about Sweden. Right. And when they came to this country, of course, they didn't speak English at all. So mom mentioned several times that she went to night school for a while to learn to speak English. And then when she worked at Augustana, some of the other ladies that worked there, they spoke English, so she learned a lot from them too. They had a Scandinavian background, but they didn't speak English. So when she worked at Bokers, that was before she was married, though? Yes. And then, like I say, she worked at Mosenfelders for quite some time too. I think she told me she got seven and a half dollars a week for doing the housework and the cooking at Mosenfelders when she came here. She did the cooking also? Yeah. And then her Railsbacks for a while too did their cooking and cleaning for them too. So she had to conform to American cooking, though? Yes. Because I suppose they didn't particularly like the herring and stuff like that. Not only that, but the Jewish cooking for Mosenfelders, she had certain things she had to use for different meals and different meats. So she had a lot to learn. No pork? No pork, no. She said she got a lot of hints from the Mosenfelders, had a lady that came in twice a week to help with the cleaning. She spoke English and she knew what the Mosenfelder family wanted and what they ate, so she got a lot of help that way from this lady that came in to do the cleaning. So she had a pretty good job then? Pretty good job, a lot of hard work, but not much pay. She said when she worked for Mosenfelders, she said not only did I have to do the cooking and the house cleaning, except when that other lady was in, but she said I had to take care of the yard too, all for $7.50 a week. Outside work too? Outside work too, yeah. Did she stay there overnight? Yeah, she stayed there. The most of the workers. Yeah, the immigrants, I suppose they figured, well, here's one I can really lay it on to. So today is a different life? Sure is. No housemates or any cooks? No. So there was an affluent society down there on 8th Street and Butterworth's? Oh, yes. She did some part-time work I think at Butterworth's too and Getz's, she did some work at Getz's too. Some of that was after she was married actually. She mentioned about the Vasa Lodge, which I didn't say too much about, that she joined the Vasa Lodge here in Moline in January 1913. She was one of the charter members and she's the only one left now. Al, like I said before, was a charter member, but he didn't come in when it was first organized. They left it open for 60 days and then Al had to come in. She said originally the lodge was just for men. I couldn't quite figure that out when she was a charter member. That's what I say, I couldn't figure that out. She said in 1913 their treasurer ran off with their money, so then they had to reorganize and start over again. So you skipped on. Yeah, I guess so. That's why you have to be very particular with passwords and everything and the black ball, you know. Yeah, right, right. But there was apparently not too much money in the treasury. Oh no, not in that short period of time, there wouldn't have been. But it was enough for him to... To take it and go, I guess....feel the temptation. Yeah, my mother and father were both confirmed in Sweden also, because my mom lived close by the church. I don't know just where dad was confirmed, but I think some place around Stockyard, some church there in Stockyard. And when you were growing up now, every generation you always see something wrong with the previous one. I mean, that's the way I suppose the world is turning. Yeah. What did you see now in the old Swedes? They had a trouble now with the language, of course, to understand the English spoken word and also reading it. Did they take a back seat then in discussions and so on, or were they... Well, they did to some degree, but when they were together, well, there was a lot of noise. And especially, I can remember some of the Swedes were pretty heavy drinkers. And things would get pretty loud sometimes, I can remember. They worked hard and drank hard. Yeah, they worked hard and they played hard, yeah. What could you see as the difference now between... We had the Belgians also in Morin, and you were going to high school with Belgians. What was the difference between the Belgians and the Swedes? What did you see? I thought the Belgians were more of a, I would say, a clique. They stayed by themselves more than the Swedes did, I thought. In fact, they got a section of town and they pretty much fenced themselves in in that section of town, you know. And didn't associate too much with the other people. But the Swedes were kind of an ongoing group and they associated more with other people. Do you think the religion played a part there because they were Catholics? They were Catholics, yeah, and that could be. I guess I never thought about it that way, but that could very well be. Did you have any Belgian friends in high school? Yes, I had some Belgian neighbors. One family of Belgian neighbors. And they were quite nice people, you know. In fact, they were very nice people. But many of their children went to private school or Catholic school. Yeah, Sacred Heart and St. Mary's and things like that, yeah. Did they have a handicap or was it progress for them to be in a private school, you think? Were they better educated? I think there was progress for them, really. Were they more strict? Yes, they were more strict and I think they had a better class of teachers. How about in sport, football? Did you play football in high school? No, I didn't. Baseball? No, no. See, we lived so far away from school. I lived about three or four miles. And the only way I had to get in there was walking, you know, or with my thumb to hitch a ride. To go back down for activities. Yeah, right. I always liked sports, but we have a grandson that I guess I kind of followed him around. He's been quarterback for the football team at the school for three years and they went to state. And he's been a basketball player and now he's going to college next year. So what happened when you brought home your date here, non-Swede? What did Mama say then? Mom didn't say much of anything. She was stunned. Maybe that was it. She kind of liked her, so she thought it was all right. And your father didn't pose either? He didn't say anything. No, he didn't pose. He didn't make a long face. I think that they realized, you know, by that time that there was enough intermingling of people in one thing and another. And that they couldn't probably maintain the strict Swedish heritage all the way through. So they didn't object at all. Some years earlier, though, there were discussions. Oh, yeah. When they first came and when I was small, I was pretty strict. They were pretty good disciplinarians, I'll tell you. Because I can remember many times getting that strap laid across me. So you had to obey? You bet. But wasn't it, you think, that they wanted to meet your partner in the same church to be sure you came of a good stock and good nationality? But that didn't happen then in your case. You met your wife in a different way. Right. That's because he roved. Well, she means I traveled and run around a little bit is what she's saying. So when did you buy your first car? I bought my first car in 1936 and it was a Chevrolet. I bought it over at the Coliseum in Davenport. They had an automobile show over there. And I bought it right off the floor for $625. And it was right after the Depression. You had saved up enough then? Well, between me and the bank we bought it. So you didn't go to your dad then? No, no, no. Dad had a Dodge. I don't remember just what year it was at the time. About a 1930, I guess. And I always wanted to learn to drive it. So one day it was parked out in the lot in our yard. And he said, well, go drive it in the garage. So I went in the garage. But I didn't stop. I came right out the other end of the garage. So that was the end of that. So he said, now if you want a car, you go buy one of your own. So that's what I had to do. That was not the way to do it? No, that was wrong. But he didn't get mad enough, though, to tell you to buy a car? No, no. No, he told me to go buy one myself, buy it quick, and leave his alone. I suppose it was a bit hard in the dry years, you were on those models. Yeah, we had the old clutch on the floor. Well, it was up at the garage, it was a little bit uphill. I had to give it a little gas to get uphill. I wasn't quick enough to get back on the brake and right out the other end. Do you remember the soccer team here in Morin? Yes, yes. Scandinavian Athletic Club? Yes. Now Swedish Athletic. Right. But you were not interested in soccer? No, I never played soccer or anything like that. My sister went with a fellow one time by the name of Elmer Westland. He was a soccer player. That's how I got just on the outskirts of it, and knew what was going on a little bit. I knew that the club existed and that they had the soccer team and so forth. But then they had a car hangar, and it was only the one that came from Sweden that started this. When they went through playing... It just disappeared, yeah. Now of course it's coming back. I'd forgotten about that completely, but now that you mention it, I didn't know. I think they played up on 7th Street when I used to go see them, 7th Street, Moline. There was a field up there someplace that they played on. Another strange thing is that the Belgians didn't seem to care too much about soccer. No, the Belgians were all tied up with their roly-poly. That's all they did. And the pigeons, of course. Yes, right. The racing pigeons and the homing pigeons. And the Swedes, they didn't race pigeons or roly-poly. No. There were two different worlds. I do remember the Swedes, as far as entertainment goes, a lot of times we would go out to Rock River. The Switchards had a camp out there and the Noble Lodge had a camp out there and so forth. And they always had the good old Swedish music, you know, the accordion and the violin and maybe a banjo, and they played the Tchadish and the Humbos and things like that. Did you learn to do that? Oh yes, yes. But now I've forgotten. I would like to get back to it again. We'd go to Decorah, Iowa every once in a while to the Norwegian Fest out there. And we enjoy that a lot because they have that type of music and it's kind of hard to find anymore, really, you know. I think the only one that I could think of is, well, there's a Hildur Hedin. This is your dad's side. This is my dad's side. There's a Hildur Hedin. She lives in Rock Island. There's a Robert Lind. He lives up around Ely, Minnesota. There's a Clarence Engstrom who lives over in Davenport. And then there's a Mildred Hedin who lives in Colorado. And then, well, there is a sister of Dad's, Gertrude Carlson. She lives in Chicago. And I don't know if she's still living or not. The last I heard, she was still living. How did they fare, though, in different families, what I said, with your dad's? Pretty good. Now, the sister that went to Chicago, she's the one that Dad went over in 1914 and brought her back here. She stayed here in Moline for about a year and a half, and then she went to Chicago, and she married a fellow by the name of Emil Carlson, who was also from Sweden, and he was a violin maker and repairman, so that's the kind of work that he did. They were married about eight or ten years before they had any children, and then they had a set of twins, and the twins are still living, and they have their own families up there. And Hilder married a fellow by the name of Clarence Engstrom, and I can remember, and I probably shouldn't tell this, but I can remember that during Prohibition they used to bootleg. That's one way that they used to make their money, and I talked before about a lot of the Swedes drinking. Well, they would congregate down there, and he'd tell them his booze, and then they'd get bombed, you might say. And then there was Mildred. She had a little hard luck. Her husband died, and her health hasn't been too good. Clarence Engstrom, that's my dad's sister's first husband. He's living in Davenport, and I understand now that he's in a nursing home. And I guess that's about it. I think so. So they are spread out all over? Yes, all over the country, you might say. Do you keep in contact with each other, or are there reunions, for instance? No. The family doesn't have a reunion. During the Depression, how did they affect your parents? Was it a hard time because you don't remember them? Yes, yes. Yes, it affected them greatly. Of course, Dad was fortunate enough to have some work, and they were buying a house at the time and trying to pay for the house. And I know that they cashed in all those insurance policies and one thing and the other to get what money he could that way. I know that there were a lot of times when the only thing that we had to eat was bread. Mom always baked bread. Bread and coffee was about the only thing we ever had to eat at that time. So you drank coffee from the stove? Oh, yeah. Coffee and bread, yeah. Did you have cream in it? We did, yeah. And I can remember not my folks doing it because my dad went out and cut wood to burn in the furnace. But I remember Mom having the old washboard and doing her washing on the old... What do they call them? Washboard. Washboard, yeah, and heating her water in these old copper tubs. And then she finally got a hand-operated washing machine. But to get back to the Depression era, my one aunt, Vera Sulzer, she said that... And I can remember, too, that they were very hard up at that time. And it got to a point where they didn't have anything to burn in the furnace to keep warm, so they had to hook up their furniture to burn, to keep warm. They were hard set. But it's interesting. First they came into a new environment, didn't know what they were doing, and then the Depression hit them. Because the twenties were not that bad, in other words, they could save a little bit then, and look forward. And then the Depression. So you saw some of that. But now in your lifetime, when you started off to work for a living and get married, you didn't have that setback in your life compared to your parents, for instance. Well, the Depression was pretty well over because I didn't graduate from high school until 35. But you had the knowledge of it. Oh, yes, yes, I lived through a lot of it, yeah. All the way through life. But the generation born in the fifties and sixties... Had no knowledge of it, no feeling for it at all. When I first started work, I got 26 cents an hour. And then... Well, I shouldn't say that. I worked for a dad down at McLaughlin Body Company, and I got about 40 cents an hour there. And then I took a test to go to the Arsenal to go to work, and got on over there, and I got 26 cents an hour over there. But they took out $2.00 and some cents a week for schooling, because I had to also go to school over there, see. So I got about $8.00 a week is what I got for my 40. You didn't have to pay for the schooling? Oh, yeah, yeah. I got about $8.00 a week, what my first paychecks were. No free ride? No free ride, no. You were still in apprentice class when we were married. Yeah. Mm-hmm. I see. Yeah, we ended up in our apprentice class getting probably about $2.00 an hour after four years, you know. And now they start them out at $5.00 or $6.00 an hour to start with, you know. So it's different. But they steadily went up, though. Oh, yeah. Over the years. Mm-hmm. But now it's a different… Different ballgame now. Well, I don't want to… So you actually haven't been with any unions then, because your work has always come into areas there were no union. I was involved with the unions at the Arsenal because I was a… What would you call it? Mediator. Mediator, not mediator so much really as I represented the Arsenal in the negotiations with the union. Would they have a union over there? Oh, they got several unions over there, yeah. But you were never a member. I was… No, they tried to get me to belong to the union when I was a toolmaker over there at the Arsenal, but I never did join. But when I got into the administrative type of work, well, then they made me a representative for the Arsenal as far as negotiations and stuff going with the different unions. There was about six or seven different unions over there. We had the production workers' union, we had electrical workers, fire workers, the firemen's union and the police union, and a lot of different things like that that they had. So I sat in on the negotiations when we were negotiating contracts and things like that, and labor disputes and so on. But this is a governmental thing, or you think the union would have no… Well, they had no right to negotiate for money. But they… No, they couldn't do that. But they could negotiate for other things, side benefits and things like this, but money they could not negotiate. Working conditions, yes, but… You married a Swede, completely different. Your background is… German and English. How was it not to meet a Swede? I was fine. Was he a Swede to you or was he an American? No. How did you see it? He was an American, really, until I got to know him better and learned his background, which to me was very interesting. And I think I got his mother and father to talk about things and Swedish words, and ask them about those things. I just was interested in it. I'm trying to put together now… You see, this history here was my… Is it on? Your cousin. This is my cousin's, and I'm trying to put one together now for my family and our children.