 I'm sitting together with Frances Newland in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 1907, 2nd of March, in Rockford. So your grandfather now, he was the inventor John Nelson. What do you remember of him? I never knew him. No, he was dead long before you. I think so. I don't remember him. He's in all different books. One, and I've lost it, because I moved from my house here, where I lived before, and up here. But otherwise, they had nice pictures of him. He was a good looking man. When did you first realize who John Nelson was? He was dead before I came on the scene. But your father, did he tell you about him or your mother? No, my father lived at home. I had a foster mother, you see. So your father died or did they divorce or whatever? No, no. My mother died. And we were, my mother, you see, she died, and she was living in Rockford at that time. In the big house, we call it, because that was my grandma's house. But Nelson, I don't know when he got that big house, but he's the one that really, although my father was somewhat of an inventor, because he, my grandfather invented the stocking machine, but you had to have, did you ever see the stocking? Yes. Well, he had, they had to have the rib sewn, sewed by girls, you know. But then he made it so that you could do it in one operation. So your father also was an inventor? He was my father. Yeah, he was the inventor. Oh, yeah, he was, yeah. He did. Did he take over the business then? Oh, no, there were five boys. They all took it over. I think five, I don't know exactly. My father, Uncle Bill was the oldest. And then, I don't even remember anymore. I'm so forgetful really now. And I have a cousin, Martha Ahrens, and her father was one of the boys, but my father was the one that invented it, putting the stock together, you know. And then there was Bill Nelson. He bought real estate and stuff. He bought the Crystal, I don't know, Ballroom or whatever it's called in downtown. Rockford. Rockford, where they had meetings and parties and stuff. And then I, then, let's see, I'm getting all mixed up again. So when you were growing up then, do you remember knitting factories and the – Not much because – You didn't work with it at all? Oh, no, no. We had, I had foster parents. How old were you then when you left? Your mother died. How old were you? I was only a few weeks, I think, or so, a month or something. So I came when she died. They had nurses for me down at the big house. And then my foster father worked for Bill Nelson. That was the old son, you see. He was, I think he's always – And so he worked with the knitting factory then? My father? No. Bill? Bill Nelson? Bill? Oh, yeah, sure. He, well, I don't know. You see, I wasn't even born then, so I don't know how they handled it, but he was down there. Bill, Uncle Bill the oldest, and then it was, I don't even remember their names now. Did you have any sisters and brothers? Yeah, I had a sister and a brother, and I was the youngest. You were three then? My brother died. He lived in the big house, we say, with Grandma. See, they all lived there with Grandma, because she had the money. And then, but Edna was – when my mother died, then it was Edna and my brother and Edna and me. We were the three of my father, three children of my father. And – So your Grandma, now, she was the mother of your mother or of your father? No, my father. Your father, I see. And she was a stern Swedish Grandma. You don't remember her? Oh, yeah. You don't? A little bit, uh-huh. She always said, yeah, she spoke Swedish. She was born in Sweden, you see. They came over on the same boat, my Grandma and Grandfather. And then they married. Years ago, they used to say – it was always written that my grandfather was the first Swede that came to Rockford. But now they change it. They say he was who was a boatload, and that's true. But I wonder if they didn't all go down to Sycamore, because some Swedes went down to Sycamore, Illinois. And then he probably came up alone for some reason, because it had something to do with the rivers, I think, how they did with the – I don't know. So Grandma, now, did you speak – were you old enough then to speak Swedish, too? Oh, yeah. That you remember? She always said, that's a Frenkie. That was my father. Frenkie's Tösser. That's Edna and me. That's what she said. And we'd go visit her, you see. Frenkie's Tösser. Tösser. Uh-huh. We had a brother. He was the oldest, but he died. He was neglected terribly. But I remember seeing him when he'd play Heidenguss, something with the boys. You see, my grandmother had one girl. I can't remember her name now. And they all – the boys went into education, I think. So – So you were adopted away, then your father – We were not adopted, ever. We paid – Grandma paid for our keep. I see. So you stayed with your father, then? No, no, no, no. Ma took us in because she used to take in about five washes in the afternoon. She thought it would be easier because my father – my foster father – when I say pa, that's my foster father. Well, there's no Frenkie Nelson, then. There is a Frenkie – Frank Nelson was my father. Real father? Sure. My mother was Hilda Larsson. Yeah, this. But I get it. But then they had three children, and the oldest one was – he was Frankie, I guess. He had Frankie. And then he got my father's name. And then Edna came, that was my sister. And then I. And Edna went home with one of the – a girl that was taking care of the children down there. She went home with them. And then when I say pa, that's my foster father. He was working for my uncle, Bill, the oldest one. So you were taken away from your real home, then, to another – Well, my mother was dead, so we didn't do a real – Yeah, yeah. So a nurse came and said, here I come to you with something to do, Mrs. Johnson. That was my foster mother's. And she was awfully good. She was so good kind. And how she knew the Bible by heart, and how she could fold it and everything. Den Gud elska den agar han. And different passages, she knew. And since she couldn't read and write very well, she had a little bit of training in Sweden. So. And you were the only child in that house. Were there more children in that house? Oh yeah. And my foster folks' house, that was I Disnäfi. The oldest one was Hilda, I think, too. I don't remember the oldest one. Because she died, and ma – when I say ma, that's my foster mother. And hunsöd, just for himst. Then when pa came home and said, they've got a – he worked for my uncle. And they said my mother had died in the big house. And so they didn't know what to do with the baby. And so pa came home and wondered if ma wanted to do it. And she said yes, and she brought me up, and I had a wonderful home. Just wonderful. And it was right here in Rockford? Sure. So did you associate very much with your grandma? Oh, we went over to see her. Ma was all – She stayed at the – In the big house, and there she died. – grandmother's home then. Uh-huh. That was her home, you see. She stayed there. She stayed there until she died. And she had a girl, and oh, they had all kinds of kids in those days, you know. And so there's a gravestone. I don't know the name of the cemetery, though, where my – The Swedish Cemetery? Well, there's – The Scandinavian, you know where they call it. That's the one I think that we're buried in. My father, my brother, and my sister, and I will be there. You have all places reserved for the whole family? Well, they bought the whole lot, you know, and so – and actually the family gets in first. So you grew up then in Johnson's home? Oh, sure. And I had a very happy childhood, except I couldn't – my legs were always sore. My grandfather was the same – my brother was the same way, because when he'd go walking with Grandma or somebody, he'd stumble and fall and stumble and fall. And Ma took such awfully good care of me. She was just an angel. And then I'd be playing run, sheep, run, or one of the – you know, that was a lot of running. And then at night my legs would ache and ache, and she'd rub them and rub them, and she'd say, you've been running too much, she'd say. And it was true. And even now my legs ache, so I can't do more than just so much. So du sprang för mycket? Yeah, that's right. Du sprang för mycket. So how – you went to skolan, high school? I went to – we started at – I don't know. We started at P.A. Peterson, I think. And P.A. is a – he's one of the Swedes that came over, too. You know that, I suppose? You remember him, though? A little bit, not too much. How about the church? What church did you go to? Well, my father started – these are rumors, because I don't know. I haven't got any facts. Maybe somebody else will say the same thing. My father started – my grandfather was the one that organized the first Lutheran church. John Nelson. So you belonged there then? No, not at all. I wasn't even born. You see, my grandfather – I know that, but I mean, after you started the school, it was – No, we went to the Mission Church. The Mission Church? Because they had just – we had just started – we had moved up there to – you're catching all this, huh? You have to get rid of some of it. So you went with your foster parents then, the Nelsons, to the Mission Church? Well, they were the preachers people. Everything is kind of mixed up. They were really preachers. But then one day, when we went to P.A. Peterson School, a little building was being built, a little chapel. And we stopped by and asked the men, what is going to be here? And they told us it's a Sunday school. And I went home and told Ma. I said, can we go? Oh, she was delighted, because she was a very Christian woman. And so then we started P.A. Peterson School. I think we graduated there, too. And then I went to North Park College – or Minnehaha Academy for my high school. Up in Minneapolis? Uh-huh. And then we went to North Park College and left. That's it. How about the high school in Rockford? Did they offer any Swedish at that time? No, I don't think so. I don't remember. There was no request for that by the parents? No, not that I know of. You see, that was built by Yankees, people that came from the East Coast. Yes, but you would think so much high percentage of Swedes, though, that they'd like to push their heritage. Well, they hadn't – You never heard of that? There was such a high percentage of Swedes at that time, I don't think. Could you see any difference if there were Swedes or Italians or Irish or Yankees or Polish or anything? Sure, by their hair and their coloring and everything, of course. Could you detect it by the way they spoke? Because you spoke – how did you speak? We spoke Swedish at home, but we got out and played with the kids. Were you always Swedish at home? Yeah, I think so. We answered in English. So Grandpa Johnson, when she read the Bible, she did that in Swedish? That was Ma. No, she didn't read very much. She didn't have much education in Swedish, but she was a wonderful, smart, brilliant woman. But she couldn't read? She could read, but she didn't have any time. But it was awfully hard for her to write. So your real grandma was the one that read in the – no, that was Grandma Johnson. Yeah, Ma. Ma Johnson. She read from the Bible? No, she couldn't read very well. My father, foster father, would sit every Sunday and have the big, really big Bible on his lap and read it. He was the one that read? He read it. But Ma Johnson, she was good for it, yes? Yeah, sure, she sure was. How did she show that to you? Well, we have to say grace to the table all the time. In Swedish? Yeah, you just sing the mahtnisna mamman. And then afterwards, takk seda gud for mahtnisna. Of course, we said it as fast as we could. You all said it in a chorus? Well, that was – see, Edna hadn't come to me at first, but she came to us too when I was, I don't know, about four or five, five, six years old, I guess. But all this you can find in the library, because I forget. I'm forgetful, very forgetful. But only you lived it, though. That's why I'm interested to find out how you saw it. Did you – how did you see upon this reading of the Bible and the prayers and so on? We took it – sure, we took it naturally, because we were brought up that way. But you wanted to rush the prayers to those who believed? Oh, sure, of course. We were going to sit at the table. She was a very good cook, very good. Nobody could make krepkaker as she did. Was she from Irland, perhaps? No, no, but she had a friend, a very good friend, who was a dressmaker, and she came from Irland. And she made krepkaker? Oh, boy, Ma made krepkaker. I think I ate – I can't say that, but it seemed like six at one time. They were so good. Even the krepkaker at Stockholm don't come up to hers. But you had that once a week, or? No, no, just certain times of the year, I think. Huh? It seems to me it was certain times of the year. Oh, I see. Because Stockholm doesn't have them all the time. You could find out from somebody like that why, if it's a certain time they celebrate or what it is, I don't know. So did they belong to the Mission Church, then? No, no, they belonged to the Free Church. Oh, they did the Johnson's? Yeah, but I belonged to the Mission Church. Oh, that's because of the Sunday School, you went over to the Mission Church? Yeah, because of the Sunday School, that's right, exactly. I see. And they didn't object to that then? No, no. Ma was absolutely delighted, because the Free and the Mission Church were about the same. It wasn't much different, I think. Well, I don't know, a friend of mine and I, we argued once in a while, which came first. With the Free or the Covenant? Yeah, Free or the Covenant, I don't know yet. To this day, to us, it's the Covenant. And the Princell, have you ever heard of him? Oh, that was the Free Church? Yeah, that's right. And I can't remember who the... You see, he was a former Lutheran minister. Oh, I see. He turned over. That's Princell, huh? Yeah. Well, I can't remember much about the Mission Church. And Josephine Princell, his wife. You don't remember seeing those persons, though, or people here in Rockport? No, I don't. And you don't remember Skooksburg, the founder of the Minnehaha Academy? I went to Minnehaha, you know. But you don't remember the founder of it, Skooksburg? I can't say. I don't remember. He wasn't that active at that point, but he may be still alive. So, when you chose going to Minnehaha, how did you get that idea? Did somebody tell you? Well, no. By that time, you see, we were old enough to think for ourselves and listen to sermons. And so we'd heard one man who preached, I don't know who it was, he said that everybody loses their faith when they go to college. What did he say? And he said, uh-huh, to go there and all these wise guys, they think they know everything, and so forth. And they were coming that way. That's true right now. They don't believe anything, those very, very brilliant men, you know. So then we had a preacher from Minnehaha come to our church. And he told us about Minnehaha Academy, high school. And I went home and told Ma, and she was very happy about that. And so we went out, that was our home, but we went to Minnehaha Academy. And, well, you see, we got lost a little time there, but I don't know, we graduated, both Edna and I graduated together. Well, she went to Minnehaha too? She came and stayed with, when my mother died, I don't remember, well, she came and stayed with John since. Both sisters then stayed? Uh-huh. I was, yeah. Well, she, how much older than you? Only, I think it's only a year. So you grew up together then? Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. Yes, we certainly did. So you girls together then, you could run Grandma Johnson or Ma Johnson, you were there. It was not usual, though, that you could tell the parents what to do or... Well, we couldn't just do anything, but we... But they had to support you, though, with the... Well, my father gave, or the Nelson, I don't know how, they paid for us. Did you visit your father often after? Yes, we lived, as long as he lived, but then he died soon after, you see. I think he died 1918 or something. And so then we just went down. We didn't go down very much, but... So you didn't have close contact then with other Nelsons? No, no. Your uncles? No, no, no. Now I do more because when I grew up and got married and came back, I, one cousin especially, my cousin Martha, she was born, she was, her mother was married to, you don't know in Rockford very much, I guess, because Esprous Bakery, she worked there. And my uncle, I can't remember what his name was, went in there and he thought she was a beautiful woman, you know. And so they married. Then Martha, and she had two children, but anyway, that's beside the point. So you went both to Minnehaha, then? We, at Nanihaha. And how long did you stay there? Until we graduated, I think it was about a year and a half or something like that. And then I went to North Park. So that was like getting a head start into North Park. In other words, you were prepared for it. Well, as much... Through the Academy. Through the Academy as much as anybody, you know. Just high school. Because you had high school there in Rockford. No, we did not. Because we went to Minnehaha Academy. How old were you then? Well, I don't know, 17, 18, because we lost a little time not going to school at all after. I don't remember all the details, though. But then you came into North Park. Yeah, we came into North Park. And you stayed there two years or three? I stayed two and I went back for some music education because we had so much fun over there, you see. But we never worked. We went to Sweden a few times and things like that. So that education in North Park, were you looking forward to some kind of special vocation or were you looking for a boyfriend? Well, we weren't looking exactly, but we didn't think about that. But that's what happened really. So you got a boyfriend then at North Park? We all had several boyfriends. He'd date a girl, you know. Did you back here in Rockford? No, we lived in the dormitories. We had to live there, you see. You came away from Rockford, I'm afraid. So that's how you met the Admiral Kermit Sandberg. I met him in North Park. He was also a student there. What was he studying? Minister I think it was. But he didn't live too long. So you married him? Yeah, we got married. In what year? Oh, I really don't remember. You'll have to get on the courthouse and find out these things because I don't remember. So you had a covenant minister marry you then? Yeah, from the tabernacle, as they called it. You see, things have changed terribly. We had the main church. And then they split up, you see, because that was all Swedish. And someone from the younger generation came on, older than I, and they wanted English. So then they started Bethesda. And now there are other churches of the same faith. I don't know where or how. You have Bethesda and Broadway? Yeah, that's right, Broadway. That's the one, uh-huh. The first covenant, that's the old one? That's the one, uh-huh. Do you still belong to that one? Well, I don't belong anywhere really because I haven't taken my name out or anything. So you married him. And what happened then? Did you move back to Rockford? Or was he from Rockford? No. I can't remember all these things now. I think he was born in Chicago. I don't remember because that family was split up too, you see, because the mother died. Or the father, I don't know. But you married him. And did you buy a house or you rented an apartment at first? Oh dear, I can't. We rented first and then, I don't know. Then he was a minister, you see, so we go and live in the park. So he became a minister? Sure. So then you moved around to different parishes? Uh-huh. Different places? Yeah, but you see, he died so suddenly. He died young. Do you have any children? We had one. One daughter? Uh-huh. Mary Tuck Tilley. Mary Tuck Sundberg Tilley because her maiden name was Sundberg and she married a Tilley. She died now. And what happened then when your husband died? Did you move back to Rockford then or how did you continue on your life? I don't remember. Continue on your own or? I honestly don't remember. I'm getting pretty old, you see. I don't remember all the things. Well, you're not that old. I sure am because there's so many details. I mean, it was hard to survive without your husband. So did you have to go to work then? Oh no, we had the money. We had money and all we did was go down to the factory and get some money. Well, so you were still connected with your family? Well, the factory, as long as they were insured, we had stock in it, you see. We didn't have money lying around, big stock in the factory, so we'd get some dollars every... You were still connected with them? Oh, sure. Until, well, now we got stock and other things. I don't remember what. How about during the Depression, the one the whole time? Well, that's when we had a pretty good... You had a pretty good time? Yeah. The factories were giving us, you know, was going very good because they made men's socks and that was for work. The farmers and everybody, and boy, they sold. Everybody needed it. All the men, I liked them. So there was no... Depression....holding back on the Depression then? It was going full blast. That's when we were going. So, but you never worked officially with the factory in any capacity or anything? No. Only looking and knowing what they were doing? Well, no, we didn't even do that. No, well, I mean, it was nice to be connected with it then at that time. Were you still living during the Depression here in Rockport? Well, I don't, I can't remember all these details because when I married Kermit, we had, he had a church in, out east. His first church was in Western Connecticut. As soon as I went there, this is where I belong. I just loved the East Coast. Oh, so you liked it there? But now in my old age, I feel that we got the gravestones and the graves here in Rockford and so we might as well move back. You might as well move back. And your daughter was born out east then? No, I came back and had her at Rockford. I would have been better off because I thought Rockford was the only place that had any good doctors, but there were a lot of Jewish doctors out east, you know, and you couldn't begin to compare them. They were brilliant. So... Yeah, but they had good medication, medical care out there too, though. Out there, I should say so. Yeah, but I mean here in Rockford, wasn't there a big city enough to... Oh yeah, they had a good... Some of the best. They had some good, I don't know about that, you see. Well, you came back then and you had your... Yeah. And everything went well. So, and then you married again. Well, I married Kermit and he died. Oh, Kermit died? Uh-huh. And then you married... What's his name? Roger Newland. He was an Englishman and very kind. Oh, he was good. How did you meet him? Through friends. Just through friends out east. He lived out east, you see. And Kermit had had a church out in western Connecticut. And so, I liked it out east. And so, when he died, he had a brother too, Kermit had a brother. And he came out east too. I don't know. It's also muddled. There's so many, many things. So, this Roger Newland, what kind of work was he doing? He was a stockbroker. Stockbroker? Uh-huh, yeah. Then you moved yourself up there in the war? No, no, no. No, no, no. Well, I... No, I had the money. So, you didn't... It was not for the wealth you had? No, I should say that. It's because he was so kind and so courteous. And so, he was a true Englishman. That's what I fell in love with. Very formal. Yeah. You had tea in the morning and... No, no. We liked coffee as well as I did. But I had another friend, Dorothy Forrest, that I met through him. We were a group. There's Kermit... or no, not Kermit. Roger and I and Olsen's, they were Swedish. But then there was... I can't remember their names now, really. But you still had a lot of Swedish friends though here in Rockport, didn't you? In Rockport, but not in Connecticut. Not out east? No. Did you live out east then for a while with Roger Newland? Sure. For how many years? Oh, I can't... I don't remember those things. No, I don't remember at all. Did he move back to Rockport with you? No, he didn't come back. We were thinking about it, but... So he died out there then? Uh-huh. He's buried in New York State somewhere. I see. So then you came back on your own? Yeah. Chuckie died. And your daughter married... Yeah. She married Killing. Is that a Swedish name? Sure. I don't remember either now. It's not too long ago, but I'm a little upset about things. My daughter just died, you see, not long ago. She was not that old? No. She was about 50, though. Did you have grandchildren? I have grandchildren. One very, very nice grandson. He lives out in California. So... So that's... that's part of your life. That's it. That's about all. Now you're back in Rockport. That's right. Enjoying your retirement. And that was the end of the interview with Frances Newland, Rockport, Illinois.