 This is cassette two, continuation with Martin Palmer, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, segment one. When you came to Sweden with your mother and the rest of your brothers and sisters, you also had grandpa, Morfard. Morfard, right. He was with. How old was he then when he... He was 80 years old. Eighty. Eighty, right. And he didn't want to stay in Sweden then, or... No, he wanted to come with us. How long? All his daughters were over here, and his wife was gone, so he came with us. And he stayed with you then here in Rockford? Stayed with my aunt, with one of my other aunts. How long did he live now after he came here? Four years. So he was 84 when he died. Well, you don't remember him more than vaguely, I suppose. No, not too much. He wasn't too active at that age. He just sat around on a porch most of the time. But he was able to go down to 7th Street and meet some of the... No, he didn't even do that. He didn't do that? No, he stayed right around the house. Did you live far away from the 7th Street area? About four blocks away. Four blocks? We lived on 11th Street at that time. So comparing with Jönköping, Rockford was larger, of course. Yeah. Quite a bit larger, or was it... I think about twice. Twice, so... He stayed there all along, so he didn't trust himself apparently enough to go down into the bustling traffic. No, he... When we came over, we were in Ellis Island, he had developed an affection in his eye. And it was see-and-so of whether he was going to send him back or let him come into the country. It was important to the eyes. Yeah. And eventually he decided to let him come in. But I think we sat there at Ellis Island three or four days before we were finally left. Before they left to you too? Yeah. Did your dad meet you out in New York, or did he... No, he met us down on 7th Street and 6th Avenue at this depot. Some other kid with five kids and grandpa, no English, managed to get to Rockford. What did she say about the experience later on when you got old enough to ask her questions about it? Was she bewildered about the new country, or...? No, she got along real well. My mother was very, very good at that. She didn't have any qualms about coming over here or anything. And she had her sisters here, and that made a lot of difference. But first on the boat over and then the train? She was... It was old for everybody on the train. It was not easy. No, she never talked about it too much, although all my other brothers and sisters, because they were older and they remembered. You were like your brother, you could ask him, though, later on what happened. What did he say about Ellis Island? You had to stay overnight there and sleep? No, they didn't like it. They didn't like it, like a herd of cattle. You got fed breakfast, green eggs, and they were boiled too hard. From what I understand, I was crying most of the time when I was there, out of strangeness, I suppose. Yeah, finally there was a big colored woman that took me and... What did she do to make you better? Well, she got me calmed down. That's about all I remember as far as the trip is over here. And your uncle? No, that was your mother up in Ironwood. Was your father? No, it was my... Let's see, it was... Your mother? My mother's sister. Oh, I see. So they were on the mother's sister's side, okay. So did they continue with their sash and door business up there in Ironwood? Yeah, for quite a few years. So they didn't come down here then? No. They stayed up there? So did you, the whole family, go up and visit them sometimes, or...? Yeah, we would go up there every other year or so and visit them. So what year did your dad buy the first car? Let's see, he had an old Model T, was his first car. And I think it was in 1926, if I remember right. We had it stolen one day in front of the church, one night. Was the key in it then, or how did they...? No, they evidently stole it the same way when the police called and said they'd found the car out in the country. My brother went out there and he used a hairpin on the ignition and turned it on. That was easy back then. That was security in those days. So they found it out in the country? Kids are taking it for a joyride, I guess, and no damage to it or anything. But I think it was a 26 Ford Model T. So did you go up with the car then after Ironwood? Was it too far away? Oh yeah, no, we'd take two or three days to go up there and we'd camp, sleep in the barns, the farmer's barns or tent. That was a real vacation. And a lot of flat tires. Yeah, you had enough spare tires hanging on the sides. But were you able to fix it, though, if you ran out of spare tires eventually? Yeah, most of them, there'd be a puncture, you could take the inner tube out and patch it and put it back in. And you had a hand pump with them? Hand pump, yeah. So how long did it take now before you could drive that, use the hairpin? No, I never drove that one. I didn't start driving until I was... Started to work? Yeah. I'd already worked for about a year or so before I started to drive. You stayed at home then when you first started at the traffic? Yeah, I was at home until we got married. That was in 1941. So how did you meet your wife now, Pearl Magnuson? She was in the same church, Sylvester Northridge? Well, not at that time. Well, yes, she was in Escanaba, Michigan, actually. Her dad had died. Her mother moved down here to Rockford to be with the other daughter. She came down here, came to the church because she had been with the church up there in Escanaba. And then we got together. With Salvation Army? Yeah, yeah. So then you had an interest in religious wives. And then you were married? Yeah, in 1941. In Rockford? Yeah. I had three daughters. Were you married in English ceremony, in English language or Swedish? English. English. Yeah, I was married by Captain Perry at that time, George Perry. The same one that's alive today? Well, he's dead now. But that's his son then? That was his son, yeah. He was secretary to the bishop or archbishop in Sweden. But he is now transferred to Germany. So he's going to take over some duties in Germany. He's been to Rockford several times. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, he lived here back in those days. So you mentioned you go back to Grandpa, you know. Has he ever encountered Oskar Lindström, the cop, the Swedish cop? No, I don't think so. I don't think so. No? No. You mentioned before, I don't think I got in, about Lindström's seven street beat. He had some different ideas and he was known as a... Was he a joker or was he... That was the way he acted, you know. That was just normal. He just said what comes out of his mouth. That's what he said. It was his daily business. That was his daily habits, yeah. He met this guy, you said, with a bent nose. What did he say to him? Oh, he saw this Jewish fellow driving down this... No, he had parked his car at the curb and got out. And he looked at him and he says, Hey you, he says, is that the way you park in Jerusalem? Right on. Yeah. There was no excuses or anything there. Then he met that physician who was speeding. He flagged him down. He said, hey, you stop. He said, I'm in a hurry. I'm a physician. He said, I don't care if you're going fisking, he says. You stop when I say stop. The streets now in Rockport, how were they laid out? The main street, it was a state street then at that time. Well, it was main street and state street. Main street is right on the other side of the river. And that goes north and south. It was the main thoroughfare through Rockport and north and south. Yeah, and then state street. State street. Yeah. Were there traffic signals at that time when you were growing up in the 20s? Oh, yeah. Traffic signals. Yeah, there was a few, not too many. Not too many. How about stop signs? Were they as plenty as they were today? Oh, yeah. So there was a busy street and main street. Oh, yes. That was the main street coming out from the south. Well, 11th Street was also from the south. But I don't remember if 11th Street was a highway at that time, but main street was a highway. Highway 2. But now Lindstrom's duty, there was 7th Street. Was there a lot of traffic on there with cars? Saturday nights. That's when all the Swedes come down on 7th Street, was Saturday night. But they parked their cars and walked around? A lot of them walked down from home. So the whole family went out then on town? Yeah. Did they go to a restaurant like they do today? No, no, they didn't go to the restaurant very much. They didn't eat out. It was only the well-to-do that could do that. Yeah, but they would go down there and do shopping or just meet the people. The way they used to do on little small towns on Saturdays. So there was a custom then when the weeks were up, Saturday night. And Broadway was another one. Fjortan och gatan. And that was, of course, heavily Swedish too. What was the reason they changed the name to Broadway there? Was it to be more big? Be more modern, I guess, more than anything else. I don't know what Broadway meant down there. It certainly was a wide street. But it wasn't Broadway like you think of Broadway in New York or any place like that. But all these little towns wanted to have names the same as they have in the big towns. Was that done in the 30s, Broadway? No, in the 20s and the early 30s it was 14th Avenue. And right around there somewhere it was changed to Broadway. So do you remember all the politicians there? Hallström, you vaguely remember him as a mayor though. Yeah. And then Blom came in. Blom was there. Boy, they come and go. Your father, did he mention anything about politics? What was his...? He was basically a Democrat. Democrat from Sweden. Oh, yeah. Nobody liked the Democrats. They were for the working people. So he voted for Roosevelt and the Democrats and probably for Hallström and Blom too then. Right. And Hallström, though, he turned around a little bit in the later years, didn't he, and became a...? I don't remember that. More big city people? Blom was a typical little town mayor. He was a... Pharmacist. He was a pharmacist on 7th Street and was a third, no, fifth, sixth, fifth Avenue. And he was...story about him when he come in, somebody come in, he had a post office there too, and come in and buy stamps off of them. He'd give you a sheet of stamps you'd already printed out, and if it was 25, it'd be 5 and 10, he wouldn't count 5 and then 10 down and say that's 50 or what. He would just count each one of them. He wasn't going to miss any. He was particular. Oh, he was...yeah. Is that true that he went on every day, every morning to count the shovels in the garage? Well, that's what the story was. But being a full-time mayor this time, he was not acting like a mayor today, I mean, in his office. No. He kept his drugs... I think the duties of a mayor is a lot different today than what it was in those days. And you didn't have all the other politicians around. So he had more power than perhaps what they have today. Yeah, he probably had a little more. When he said something, they listened to him. Yeah. When there was a shovel missing, they'd better fork it off. Better find it. Yeah, there was probably a more simple life at that time, but it was less money though. Oh, yeah. They had to be frugal to stay in business. Sure. I mean, they built this Jefferson Street Bridge. There was a horse-to-hoofs turn. Yeah. It was a costly thing to do. Was there need of it, though? What was the reason to have that bypassed on Business 20? Over on the Jefferson Street Bridge? Yeah, isn't there Business 20? Yeah. Not Business 20. Because 20 is the one that goes by the... You're right. That was Business 20. Yeah. What was the reason to have that? Well, it wasn't Business 20 before that, though. Business 20 went down State Street in the old days. So there was just 20. There was no Business... No. There was one. But the Jefferson Street, I think, basically they had to have it because it was getting to be too many cars coming down State Street. And that was one of these old steel, what do you call them, trestle-type bridges. And then later on they took the Auburn Street Bridge, which used to be known as the High Bridge, and that was quite high off the water. And they cut it down somewhat. And then later on they had to rebuild. The reason it was high above the water, was it because of the river traffic? Yeah, we used to have some boats on the river. We used to have excursion boats on there. All the way up to Beloit? It would go up to up around Martin Park, up in Bloods Park. And, no, it didn't go to Beloit. But then it also used to go to the old Harlem Park. There used to be an amusement park at Harlem right along the river. That's up north. That's north of the Auburn Street Bridge. It's all homes there now. But that used to be a full-scale amusement park with roller coasters and tunnels of love and whatever rides and sights and amusement parks the parts have. And then we had another one out on West Auburn Street, too. So you could step on the boat and on town and go all the way up? Yeah. And did families do that? Well, even families or lodges or churches would sometimes charter the boat for a ride up and down the river. And that was a big business in the 1920s? Yeah. And then the 30s, I suppose, it petered out a little bit, though, because of— Yeah, one boat burnt. And I think that was just about the end of it. Do you remember going on those boats then? Yeah. So how much did they charge then, ten cents a ride? I don't remember that. I didn't probably even pay. So it was deep enough then to have Pezio boats? Oh, yeah, but they were shallow draft. So you didn't get seasick or anything like that? No. No, the worst thing you could do is fall overboard. And the fishing at that time, did they catch catfish there or what kind of—? I don't know. I didn't do any fishing in those days. But I know my brother and—my oldest brother and my dad used to go up to the high bridges, which they called at that time. And there's a creek that comes in from the east. It was all sandy, and it used to be a beautiful place for catching crabs. They'd come home with a bushel basket of crabs. Oh, you mean the crayfish? Yeah. Yeah, crafter. And then they'd take them home, and then on Saturday they would have a crafts sex, huh? Was there one particular time during the year did they do it often? Do you remember? I think it was mostly like in the spring of the year when everything was— when there was a lot of crabs up there. Not in the fall? I don't—I can't—can't remember. But they disappeared? Or were they—? Pollution. Pollution, yeah. Yeah. That river's pretty muddy now. That's the problem with the growing city and small houses and cottages and everything. Everybody went to the river with it. Yeah, yeah. So which mayor had that on his schedule to clean up the sewage system in the town? Was it after Bloom or before? That probably was sometime around Hallstrom, I think. Or before the Depression? I think it was. So there was none then. Yeah. Do you not remember any chicken coops or chickens in Rockport in the 20s? Chicken coops, you know, sometimes— In the backyards of a house? Oh, yes. Oh, they had that? Oh, yeah. Here and there, yes. In the late 20s? Sure. In fact, there was one place that had a horse. So there was no city ordinance again? No. That all comes by evolution. Things change. It was after the Second World War, and it started to change more and more. Your biggest changes came right after the war, yeah. Biggest changes came when your taxes went up. Well, I suppose in the 30s, there was not too many taxes collected of the working man. No. I don't think my dad hardly ever paid tax. I reckon those days, too, there was no garbage pickup like we have here. No. What did they do with it? Each one— Oh, they would pick it up. Farmers would come in and pick them up and take it out and spread it on their fields for the pigs. Most of the garbage was fed to the pigs in those days. They had cans then, or they just emptied it in their wagon? They had wagons, yeah. And the garbage at that time, what did it consist of? There was not too many packages like they have today, cans and— No, there wasn't. There was very little garbage. Well, it was mostly your refuse from eating and stuff like that. So they would spread it on the farmers' fields, actually. Sure. And then, in the 40s, when we had the polio epidemic, that's when that stopped. Oh, they took the whole thing off like that? Yeah. Do you think they had anything to do with it? Well, they claimed the flies was carrying it. Because the farmers at that time, they were close to the city line. Yeah, yeah. Right outside. We had the shopping centers today. They were all farmland. That was all farmland. And pig stice and pig crumb. But that's the way they used to get rid of their garbage. That's interesting. Of course, in those days, you could burn—you could paper and stuff like that— and burn in your backyard, or you'd have a barrel out there and burn. But nowadays, it seems that every household has four or five bags every week. You wonder where it comes from. A lot of that is grass, though. It's more than sticks and stumps and branches. Every time I mow the grass, I pick it up. And then newspapers, quite a bit. Newspapers go, yeah. They're recycling that, though. But then they have kids, a lot of cans and bottles. Yeah. Now they have another trouble to find a suitable place to dump it, even if they have the trucks to haul it in. Yeah, the farmers don't want it anymore. Now they don't even want to dump. They're afraid that too many different insecticides get into it, too, and it gets polluted. Groundwater. Yeah, groundwater is flooded out into the other fields and into the wells. And not only that, but there's a lot of chemicals that people use in their house that gets disposed of that way, too. Every little bit adds to it. Yeah. And I imagine it's pretty much that way over in Sweden, too, nowadays. Yeah, the refuge and the garbage. It's a headache, you know, when they are depopulating. You didn't join any organizations like the Temperance and the Lyren or Vasa or Viking? No, the only thing I belong to is the Lions Club. The Lions Club? Yeah. That's the only thing I belong to outside of the Army. It was like a—oh, you went into the Army? No. Oh, you mean as a veteran? As a veteran, yeah. Okay, excuse me. So the Lions, now, they're more for management people? Pretty well, but although anybody can— Professional people. Yeah. They have to be asked to join. I mean, they just don't say, hey, I want to join you, fellas. It doesn't work that way. Somebody asks you to join. And they are all nationalities, regardless of creed, color, and religion. Yeah. How is the cooperation now with the different religious bodies? Years ago, you know, the Lutherans were strict and the Baptists and so forth. I think today there's a lot more cooperation between the various denominations. Sure, there's some differences of opinions, but they tolerate each other. Let's put it that way. They tolerate. They are more open about it than understanding. But years ago, there were some— Oh, Catholic or Protestant or whatever. There weren't divisions. Big divisions, yes. Yeah. But you don't see that so much anymore. They cooperate. We've had— Why do you think it is more cooperation? Does the people really care anything about it in the first place nowadays? I mean, years ago, they were very—whatever they did, I mean, they went into it, the old people, if you call it that way. But the younger ones don't seem to care. Well, I think that's probably part of it. It all depends on how deep you are into your religion and your beliefs. But I think there's gotten to be that there's more love between the people than there was before. And so you don't look down upon them. They're a little more tolerant about what their beliefs are, although you don't believe them yourself. You are tolerant of it, that they have a right to believe what they want to, and that makes a lot of difference. There has been a change over the last 50 years of the outreach, you know, the religious denominations. How about the Salvation Army? Have they changed in their delivering of the message and music, the song? Not a whole lot. They have stayed— They've stayed pretty much the way they have been for years and years. Oh, there's a little more modern music coming into it. And their teachings are exactly the same as what it's always been. But our outreach, of course, changes, and we have to change with the times on that, as long as we don't take and compromise our belief. But to reach people, you have to go at it differently today than what you did years ago. You can go down a street corner and have a crowd any time. You can't do that today. Why is that? Well, everybody is so mobile that there's nobody walking around anymore. They don't congregate down on the business districts like they used to, and they're just going by in cars. So that has changed a lot. So 50 years ago, people had more time than to stop for half an hour and listen. Yeah, they weren't in such a hurry. But today you couldn't do that. They wouldn't even stop their car and find a parking place. In fact, you go downtown, you can't find a parking place. So there's a different society completely. The young people are rushing, rushing, rushing. I think so. And there's a lot more types of entertainments than there used to be, so that you don't have the big crowds of people in any one area anymore. It seems like they're pretty well spread out. We used to always have open-air meetings on Sundays and Saturdays down on 7th Street. But today we don't, because you'd be standing there just blown to the wind. There's nobody around. Did you go out to the parks, too, in different sections of town? Oh, yeah. We, every year in the summertime, we go up to Mississippi and have Sunday night services. Outdoors? Outdoor services, right. Do they attract the people? Well, I like to say, yeah, they attract the people, but they're mostly church-going people. A few stragglers will sit there for a while and listen, and then they'll pack up and leave. You know, some of the other denominations, not illiterates, I know from different cities I've been to, they complain about they don't understand the music anymore. They can't follow along singing in the book. Do you have the same problem, too? Are you able to follow along without no problems? When I go to Lutheran church, I can't sing with them because I don't know their songs. You can't? No, but I mean, those are Lutherans now. They've been in the church their whole lives. Yeah, I know what you mean. And they changed the hymnal. Years ago, they never changed the hymnal. In other words, they were brought into it one generation after another. They're getting a little more of the modern songs, a little more modern. How do you take the modern? Do they try to attract younger people, then? It's basically for trying to attract the younger people and keeping up with what they're interested in. The Southeast Army music hasn't been modernized too much, but there are a lot of band numbers and things like that that has changed quite a bit. Because, let's face it, the new composers are younger people, so it's going to be followed with their time. So they will be changing whether you like it or not. Right. But like now, when you were growing up, you went to the corps with your parents, and you learned the hymnals and the songs, whatever they were singing, and you didn't complain about it. But do young people complain today? They don't like it or anything like that. You couldn't talk like that years ago, but now they... Why can't they learn like you had to do? It's like everything else today. People never used to complain years ago. This is cassette two, side two. Cassette two, side two. Why should the young people have their way? It's always like the unions, you know, why should they have their way? Yeah, yeah. Why should you suffer? You've been in the corps now, I mean, for, let's say, 60 years. Yeah, that's right. And you did exactly what your parents and what the officers told you to do. Sunday school confirmation, and later on as a member. I don't think it's... They suffer because a lot of older people do not like to change. When you mention change to people, especially the older ones, that's been doing the same for years and years. They don't want to have ruffled feathers. That's right, they don't want to change. And I don't think that is right. I think they should fall right in line with everybody else. And if there's change to be made for the better, fine. If it's just a change for the sake of making a change, well, then I don't want to go along with it either. But it seems to be that saying, you know, we've got to please the young people. Yeah. But don't the young people come from a group of parents? Young people come from a group of parents, but all the parents don't have control over their young people. They had less control than they did 50 years ago. Yeah. But they were the bottom-down folks. And it's like anything else, you have a lot of attractions that attract young people. It was not their year. It wasn't their years ago. And therefore, you try and do everything you possibly can to keep them so they don't stray. So you have to use a lot of diplomatic things to do it. Various different things so it doesn't get monotonous. You can't scare the young people today like you did years ago. No. No, I guess preach hell, fire, and brimstone, that doesn't always work today like it did years ago. But some people go for it, like this Jimmy Schweiberg, you know, his tactics. Oh, yeah. And they seem to be a lot of followers. Yeah. So they better tone down the messages a little bit more acceptable, as it was in the long run. As long as they don't compromise the truth. But that hasn't changed, in other words, in your world, really. No. You feel comfortable with it. And the young people, now, do they follow their parents, like in your immediate friendship circle now? They stay with the Salvation Army. Most of them have. There are some that move on. Are they married to perhaps Baptist or Methodist? Well, I got a daughter that married a Lutheran, so she goes to the Zion Lutheran Church instead. But as a whole, most of them pretty well stay with their parents. Is there any problems not to recruit new officers for the work? Yeah. They have cycles, and I think right now they're having a little problem getting enough of them. But there's a high rate, you say, of losing to private business. Yeah. Being a Salvation Army officer is not a high-paying business. No, you've got to have the – you do it with your heart. That's right. So when you seek employment outside, there's the money factor that plays the first important role. Right. So what is happening now in Rockport, do you think, the next 20 years ahead? How do you see it? Are they going to be the old Swedish philosophy, working hard, and if you work hard, everything will be all right? I think Rockport's going to be in for a big change. Where will it come from, though? How is it going to change? The old time of factories, places of manufacturing, seems to be updated. You're going to see more things coming along in the professional line. Even the last 20 years are updated, in other words, if you mark 1970, for instance? I think so. We've made an awful lot of different changes in the last 10 years. The oncoming of computers and the way business is handled and the number of people that they need in the manufacturing lines today against what they used to be. I think we're going to switch to a business banking type of industry and also a service industry. Who's going to pay all the services? Nobody seems to have to work for themselves. They're going to rely on service. I guess we have to get Japan to buy it from us. That's what they want, have you? We buy it from Japan, that's good. So... No, that's the big problem of the whole country, not just Rockford. Do you think it will come to a time where they will be working only three days a week or four days a week and everybody has a job? I think four days. But the junior doesn't go along with that at all? They do in some places. Because you have to be laid off for five years, it doesn't bother them one bit. In some places, they go along with it. They work half and half? Yeah. But they want to save money. So hospitalization, there's probably one that's going to be phased out from all industry. In other words, you take care of your own hospitalization. Do you think they went too far there? Like UAW and all that, they have everything covered under the sun. Well, when they started to come out and say that they wanted coverage for lawsuits and things like that, too, that was going too far. They wanted the companies to pay for it. If I get in trouble and I have to have an attorney, that should be covered by the company. Well, that's carrying too far. But I can see hospitalizations where you've got a workforce that you want to keep them so they're not worried about where the next meal is coming from or anything like that or if they get sick. I can understand that because I think that made for a good atmosphere in the working place. But doesn't it add tremendously to the burden, though? Oh, sure it does. Do you think the worker actually realized how much he's paying here? No, no. We always made it a point to tell them exactly whatever benefit we made, now this is worth the value of that per hour. And at the end, when we total up the contract, we say here's what you got in wages, this is the number of dollars you've got in fringe benefits. And you've got to put the two together because that's the cost. But unfortunately, they only look at what they take home. Well, if you ask, I know that I ask those guys, I talk to them, they never mention the fringe benefits. They say they have $13 an hour, but actually they have $24.75. Right. They don't see the difference as a... We try to stress that out to them all the time. Are they told to talk that way then? In other words, just mention the $13 and not the next $5 or $10? I don't know, but if I wanted to brag about my earnings, I would go the other way. But they don't do that? No. There was even one time when we were talking pensions where they didn't want to talk about pensions because that's not what I'm going to take home today. That's just something in the future they didn't care about. But they were something that didn't stress them, pension plans? Not to start with. I think the union hierarchy pushed that more than what the union man did. They want cash in their pocket. Yeah. So it was always heavily in the hourly rate rather than fringe benefits. But now you have a tremendous number of retirees. Don't you think they regret that pension plan was not put in effect? In other words, now they have to realize what they didn't save. When they retire and all of a sudden they realize they aren't getting anything, it makes a lot of difference. Because the individual will never save up for a pension. No. It will never be done. No. If you're on the management level, you can afford it. In other words, it doesn't hurt you that much. In most cases, they're smart enough to do it. And I'm not saying the workers are not smart, but they don't always look that far ahead. There hasn't been any need for it. So there's a difference. But there's probably one that's going to be hurt, though, benefits and fringe benefits and things like that. Yeah. Well, today when most of the jobs that you can get are part-time jobs, that's one of the reasons. You don't have it. You don't get any fringe benefits. So what do you do when you're sick? You pay for it yourself. If it's under 40 hours, there's no law that you have to pay the fringe benefits. No. 36 or 40. Well, I don't think there's any law that you have to pay them fringe benefits anyways as far as that goes, except for unemployment insurance. Unemployment insurance. Yeah. That's the only one that's on the books. That's right. That's right. So there's changes every year, I suppose. You've been in a lot of meetings with facing the opposite side. Well, I had three unions to deal with. And every three years was a contract. So you know, the sooner you get done with one, you start with another. Why did it come up in three years? Was there an happy medium between? Well, it used to be one, and then it was two, and then it went to three. There were very few that I think that went to four. We never had any four. Three was the most. Management wanted, like, three years because that would give them a more stable platform to calculate their costs and everything else. So they knew exactly what they've got to be earning for next year and the next year. If you have it every year, well, then you never knew what it was going to be because their demands would just go up and up and up. Like your old company, Rockford Drop Forge, what are they producing today? They are very way down. I don't know. They're just holding together. What kind of material are they producing? Well, we were making all the time. We was making forgings for off-the-road equipment. Big machinery? Big machinery, caterpillar tractor-type things, farm machinery, and replacement parts for automobiles. We didn't do any real automobile business directly. And stationary machines, things of that nature. And that's what they're doing today. But ever since the strike, they haven't never recovered from it. What do the workers say then when they see that something is bubbling under their feet? Serves them well. Serves the company well for doing that. You don't have any dinners together with them, parties and stuff like that once a year? No. They haven't got any money to have dinners. Here we have this national lock, a tremendous building there with four or five stories high or whatever it is. And now you have some math cleaning business in there. Well, there's quite a few little industries in there. Very, very small though compared to... Small industries, yeah. Who owns that building? Is that a waste of space? Who in the world was it that bought that? Do they have to pay tax to enter the city of Rockport for that building? There's a whole city block. Well, they pay a property tax according to its value. They can't get away with that? No. Without paying it? No, not as long as it's still useful. The only way to get away from doing it is to tear it down. So that's a dormant place compared to what it was. Yeah. Man, they'd had about four or five parking lots all around the place. Now they don't need any of them. You can always tell about the life of a company by the parking lots standing empty. Well, there was about 4,000 workers employed there, I understand. It was the highest. Yeah, and we had 450 to 500 most of the time at our place. And I think they've got 80 now. Is this still owned by Rockport people? Yeah. But National Rockport was bought by Keystone. Keystone Wire bought them quite a few years ago, yeah. And they still have that. I thought they were bought by somebody after that. I think Keystone dumped them. Will it be possible, you think, in the future for someone like Eric Anderson, Rockport Tool and I, and Swan Hillman was one, you can even know it, two empty hands, to Ellis Island, took the trade, put up a little garage shop or something like that. Will they happen again, you think, in Rockport? Or does it have to be a big computer concern coming in and push buttons? I don't know. How about doing the change? You know, there's a lot of small companies where guys have just gone in and bought a few machines and started up. They're still going on in Rockport, you think? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And they're trying them with their own money. I doubt if they will ever grow to a big corporation like these other ones did. I don't think so. Maybe they were too big, like National Lock. That could very easily be, too. Because when they start tumbling down, it's hard to know where you're going to put your shoulder underneath. Yeah, as your size grows, your problems grow, too. Sunstance, of course, is an old government airplane. Yeah, it's not all government, but it's a big part of it. That used to be a machine tool. Now, they sold the machine tool part to White. This is the part of the Belvedere. And that now has been sold to a Swedish company. Lectrolux. Lectrolux, the vacuum cleaner. And I bet even their biggest business isn't Lectrolux, isn't vacuum cleaners anymore. You're talking about things that I'm not too familiar with anymore. I don't even care now that I'm not working. Yeah, you wonder how can some company come in here and buy up a place and make a success out of it. And some of them don't, though. Some of them fall by the wayside, even on that. But, I don't know, it's just a matter of money changing hands and papers changing hands, and that's about it. There's very few that purchase a car in the morning. There's only banks through the, papers through the bank. Just about it. So, that's a new era, but there are no new emigration coming in. That part is probably past. Yeah. You were with one group in the 20s that... Yeah, and then in the 20s, I was with a group of people that were in the 20s. Yeah, and then in the 40s there we had another group that came in. But there was a much, much larger number, though. Oh yeah, yeah. And those people were educated from Sweden. Yeah, and they had trades, too. They had trades. And down in our church, we got, oh man, we must have got about eight, ten families. Yes, they came in the 50s or late 40s. Yeah. Like Hammerbergs and... Hammerbergs, Egghorn was one. Sir Hoggy and Egghorn. But they all had education with Sweden in their particular trade they pursued. We had some that came here, and then later on they moved out to California. Hank Ledeen was one of them. They went out there and got jobs in the airplane industries and done real well. So you have heard about the Great West. Yeah. Were there many your age group now, for instance, that left California and west? No. Your age group that were born in Sweden, you came here, you stayed here? Most of them stayed here in Minnesota, Wisconsin. There were mostly people that came in the late 40s and 50s, some of them. Yeah, they seemed to only hesitate here for a while and then moved on out towards California, in Washington. Maybe the climate was one drawback for them, too hot in the summer and cold in the winter? I don't know, out there it's hot all the time. You didn't know that before they came there? Ur askan och ilden. Yeah, the frying pan of the fire, we say in English. So when you went back to Sweden for a visit, what did you look for then? A bird place? Yeah, I went and stood there, and I had a picture here. It showed me standing by one of these källare, what do they call them? Jordkällare? Well, no, I was going into the apartment, going down to the basement. And I went and stood there and took another picture of myself. Oh, they were still there, the same house? Yes, I was there. It's not there now, I understand it's been torn down since. It wasn't close to got done. Your mother, did she live there when you went back the first time? No, she was... They were both dead then, your parents? They were dead then, yeah. But you were able to ask your older brother though? Yeah. How things were in Sweden, isn't it? Yeah, in fact, we stayed together with our relatives over there for... He went with you, the older brother? Yeah, well, the first time I went over there was with our band, the Salvation Army band. We went over to Europe on a concert tour. So you got to do a horse-down tour? We were at the Salvation Army there in Jönköping, and we were going in for a Saturday night concert. We were standing outside, or we was marching in from the outside, and that hall was packed. So people were standing outside. Outside there was some of my relatives standing. I didn't know, and they hadn't seen me. And one of my cousins, a girl, came up and said, That's a Trondgård and Tibor and a Martin. She hadn't seen me since I was three years old. Your brother, was he in the band too? Yeah. So you had good contact then with the area in Jönköping? Yeah, we was there in 1963. That was the first time? And I went back in 1966 and had my wife with me. Yeah, I wanted to see what it looked like and what... What your dad looked like? Yeah, see, I was trying to think of the name of the... I can't remember the name of the factory. He didn't work for the match factory? My mother did when she was younger. I had a bistbruk, where I made a lot of kitchen stoves. He didn't work there? No, it was... The last part was my queen's factory. It was a big one. It was a good-sized place. But there were probably rough times after the first war. Yeah, I imagine it was. Because if he left in 1920, that shows that... He was looking for some better income. So he never regretted the move then, too? No, not one bit. He was able to swing the hard times? Not one bit. He done well. Patternmakers were well paid.