 I'll show you that after. We have the 15th of October 1987 and I'm sitting together with Dr. and Mrs. Carol Nelson, Omaha, Nebraska. So if I start to ask you, Dr. Nelson, about your father, Eamon Nelson, he was born in Illinois. Right. And his parents came from Sweden. That's right. Do you know from where in Sweden? No, I can't tell you where they came from in Sweden. But they were both born in Sweden. I guess all of my grandparents were born in Sweden. And how old were your father when he moved from Illinois to Iowa? That I'm not sure about either. I think he was relatively young though. So the grandparents came with him then to Essex? Yes, to Essex. He moved with his parents to Essex. Did they take a homestead there perhaps? I think they did, yes. They homesteaded out northeast of Essex. And they were not all Swedes? Oh, yes. A lot of Swedish people there. You were born in 1907? Right. Did you grow up in the Lipschitzerhafen in the country? Yes. Well, we lived there two years and then we moved to Nebraska for two years, Wakefield, Nebraska. The whole family? Yes. Well, just my father and mother and my brother. I had one brother. And we moved to Wakefield, Nebraska in 1911. And then we only lived there two years and moved back to Essex in 1913. Your father knows. He's a farmer? Yes. So he tried to get more activity in Wakefield? Well, as I understand it, they did all right out in Wakefield. But my mother wasn't. She was lonesome for her family to the point where they moved back to Essex. It was too far away. Yeah. So they came back then to their old friends. Right. Did he buy a farm then? Yes. He bought the one in Wakefield and also bought the one in Essex. So apparently they had done pretty well then. Well, they'd done fairly well. They worked hard, both of them. So, but at that time, it was very soiled, though, in Iowa compared to Wakefield. Right. Yes, it was. He was not afraid then to take a chance of being dried out in Nebraska because it was dry and... It was a little drier out in Nebraska than it was in Iowa. So then you went back to Iowa again and after going a few years, you went to school. Right. Went to country school for eight years. Eight years. And there was a one-room school in Aus? Right. One room, one teacher. One teacher. Was it a lady or...? A lady. Was she of Swedish background? No, none of them were. Well, I take that back. We had one teacher that was Swedish. The rest of them, I think, were all English or Irish or German. I don't recall. Did you grow up knowing the Swedish speaking home? Well, we spoke both languages, actually. As I recall, my parents spoke more English than they did Swedish. But we went to Swedish church and I was confirmed in Swedish. Went to Swedish center school until that... We'll show you the church. Then that... about World War II, they changed over to English. Oh, not until World War II? No. It was not World War I? No, excuse me. World War I. I beg your pardon. I see. So you were able to understand Swedish when they were talking to you? Oh, yeah. I could understand it real well. How about the grandparents? Were you living close to them? My grandfather Nelson passed away before I was born. I barely remember my grandmother Levine, but my grandfather Levine and my grandmother Nelson lived until... They both died in 1918, so you see I was about 11 years old. I remember them. They were during the Spanish flu epidemic. Oh, yes. Right. I remember the flu epidemic. You remember that? Oh, yes. They also hit out in the countryside. We were sick. The whole family? I don't believe my father was sick. I can't remember that he was. The rest of us were... How were they affected? Was it like a cold? Yeah, just like we get the flu now, except it was much worse. It was a very virulent, we call it a virulent virus. So they had to go to bed then? Oh, yes. I should say so. But I didn't know anyone that died in our neighborhood from the flu. So the doctor came around then, the country doctor? Yes, I believe. I think we did have a doctor. He made house calls. Right. He had a horse that you remember? Yeah, he had a horse, horse and buggy. In fact, we used a horse and buggy for quite a number of years. Oh, when you became a doctor? No, before, when I was a child. Then it was the four-wheeled horse. Yeah. Anyway, there was a doctor then in Essex. Yes, there was. Was he Swedish? Pokerlin was Swedish. Right. So he had to speak Swedish to do all the time, when they complained about the stomach aches. I had a few patients after I started practicing that couldn't speak English that I spoke Swedish to. Is that right? Right. How were those all Swedish? No, they didn't go to the doctor unless they had to. No, they didn't. That's right. There was no pre-examination when they were healthy. No, that's right. What was mostly the complaint they had? Was it stomach aches or accidents, I suppose? Accidents? In general. Well, the usual type of gallbladder problems, ulcers of the stomach, pneumonia. Scarlet fever. Oh, yeah. Of course, we had a lot of scarlet fever in those days, strep infections. Had to be quarantined. Quarantined. But we did... Did they have to stay home then, in the home? Oh, yes. Did they post their sign then on the house? That's right. Did no person walk in there? They were very strict about it. And what was the cure at that time then? There wasn't any. No cure? You just had to pray and hope. That's right. So the doctor and the minister, they were the two leaders in the community. I don't know who they are. Your father, he was not drafted into the First World War. He was... No, he was farming and I can remember he had signed up for the draft, but being he owned his own farm and was farming, they didn't call him into service. They might have if the war had continued. In fact, I can remember my mother being a little concerned about it. Because he was at the age that he could have been. But he never was, no. So how many brothers and sisters were you in the family? I had one brother. Just two sons then? Mm-hmm. Just like you have two sons. We had three. We lost a son who was 18 years old, 20 years, 20-some years ago in an automobile accident. Of your son? Mm-hmm. I see. Our son. Oh. And so you grew up on the farm then. You had to attend to the farm duties? I sure did. You had a team and... Oh, yes. I husked corn and plowed and husked harrowed and cut grain and hayed, milked lots of cows, taking care of the pigs. Was that during your high school years or did you continue? You went to high school? I went to high school and then I had two years of college and then I went to medical school for years. I spent every summer home working on a farm. How did you be a father? Every summer until I graduated from medical school. How costly was it then for a country boy to go to college? Which college did you go to? Well, I went to, from my pre-medic studies. Are you talking about high school or... Well, the college after high school. Okay. I went to Clarinda Junior College one year, then to Iowa, and then I went to North Park College in Chicago for a year. Then I went to the University of Iowa for four years for medicine. I graduated from the University of Iowa, Iowa City. Did you work then during the time you went to school too or... In the summertime, yes. But you were not able to work during the classes though, I mean, in between. No, I did some work in Chicago in a cafeteria the year I was there. Outside of that, of course, when I went to school at Clarinda Junior College, I was home every night and helped, and on weekends I helped farm. You were close enough then to go home. So, how about your other brother? Did he also go to college? No, he did not go to college. He... He was a high school student, like Chris did. Yeah, I do not know why he was not interested in school particularly, but he did very well later on in life without a college education. Well, wasn't he in Renwick? Yeah, well, he lived in Essex for years, you know, and he was in the Fordson tractor business. And then, after he... In fact, he had a severe accident, broke his back and was laid up for a year, and he went in with an insurance company, the Pioneer Mutual in Omaha, which was... or in Red Oak, which was a mutual insurance company. And it was Swedish too. It started... It was over a hundred years old. It started in Red Oak? It started in Red Oak. And he ended up being president of that for several years before he died. Oh, I see. So, that insurance company, they insured for heal and damage of farm. That's right. And they're still there. Pioneer Mutual is... was a very good insurance company. But it was local. Local, yeah. But they... At the time he was in there, they had a hundred million dollars worth of coverage. So, they went off on a broader basis than after you. Yeah. But the first time insured were only Swedes insured. That's right. They all had it good in the beginning. Yeah. Maybe they didn't even take in Norwegians. I don't know. There weren't many Norwegians. No Danes either, then? Very few. No more than that. Very few. Uh-huh. So, how... anybody else now? Irish, Polish, Germans? We had many German neighbors where we lived in Iowa. And they were also farmers? Yeah. Uh-huh. They were either German or Swedish, really, most of them. So, you combined in the farm you worked in the summer, and then you went to med school? Right. And you went to North Park. That means that your family were Covenanters. That's right. In Essex. Well, out in the country east of Essex, we belonged to... There's a covenant church six miles east of Essex that we went to. I thought it was one in Essex. There is. There is one in Essex. Yes. And one in Red Oak. I'd like to show him. Oh. He'll show him when he's ready to leave. So, and the country should serve the farmers then around that particular area. That's right. They supported that one. That's right. And he had an uncle that was an artist. Yeah, well, we'll tell him when we're ready to go. He painted a picture of the church, and we've got it in here. I see. So he was a cousin of yours? An uncle. An uncle. He was born in Sweden. What was his name? Axel Eriksson. He is 93 years old, still living. In Essex? Yeah, east of Essex. He's in a nursing home. That's right. He's in a nursing home in Shenandoah now. And he's pretty good at it mentally? Well, not just... I believe he has a good sense of humor. Yes, just fair, but he's not too bad either. So he was born in Sweden? Oh, yeah. Oh, so he had a hardy stock. Yeah. And did you go to the Swedish Covenant Hospital in Chicago? No, no, I've never been. You didn't take any internship there? No, I took my internship in Anchor Hospital in St. Paul, Minnesota, which is a city hospital. So how many years did it take then for you to be ready for your first practice? Well, I spent a year in St. Paul, and then Mary and I were married in 1933 and started a practice in Essex. How did you meet? Well, we met in church in Iowa City. Iowa City? Yes, University of Iowa. So she was down there working? She was going to school at that time. You were a senior at that time. So she also went to college then? Oh, yeah. I was a dietician. She was a dietician in a hospital in Iowa City for four years after she graduated. So that's how you met then. That's right. Well, I was a dietician in service, and then I graduated. So when you brought home her date then, they had no calls about your family. They were Swedish background. No, no calls. No? No. No discussions? No. Was she also a covenant from Oshawa? No, she was a Lutheran. A Lutheran? Yeah. The covenant there is probably Swedbend. Swedbend was a covenant church, you know. I don't know. I don't remember that. So they were all Lutheran. But you became a covenant then? No, I became a Lutheran. Oh, I see. So she twisted your arm. I've been a Lutheran now for, well, since about... Well, just about the time, about 1943 is when I... Marion and the boys were going to the Lutheran church in Red Oak, and so I joined there before I went to the service. So you married in 1933 then. And you were married then in the covenant church in Essex? No, I married in Marion's home in Marshalltown. Oh, I see. It was a, what do I want to say? It was, well, it was, I can't... You're talking about depression? Yes. Oh, yeah, 1933. Oh, yeah. Things were pretty tough. And you were ready then to be a doctor, I mean, of the future. I was a doctor. I had spent a year in St. Paul. Oh, I see. You were already... And Marion kept working in Iowa City and made a little money because I didn't have any. They didn't pay much then? I didn't get any pay when I spent a year in... For a whole year? Not a penny. And the upkeep, then you had to pay that yourself? No, I got room and board. Why did they do it like that? Well, in those days... Depression. I know, but I mean... And the best interns in those internships in those days didn't pay anything. They didn't have to pay. They were just experienced. They felt that you got paid by the experience you got. And I got plenty. So you didn't have to pay the tuition. Oh, no. They probably saw it that way. So, and then you were married in the height of the Depression. Right. In our home. Church in Marshalltown, yeah. In Marion's home in Marshalltown. And then your first office was set up in... In Essex. Right to your hometown. Yeah. How did that work out? I mean, a country boy comes back and tells you how to live. Really, the people I knew were my best patients. They believed in you. But isn't it hard to come back? They always say that. They said so. No, I didn't find it that way. But I felt after I'd been there just two or three months that I needed more training. So we left there at the end of a year, a little over a year, and went to a... had a residency in a hospital in Battle Creek, Michigan. And after that, we moved back. Then we went to Red Oak. There was a Seventh Advantage there, yeah. Oh, yes. They have that huge... How did they mix with modern medicine? Well, we were in a Catholic hospital. The Illalois Post Montgomery Hospital was a Sisters of Mercy hospital. But the Adventists were there when we were there. That was a huge sanitarium. That's right. And then, of course, during World War II, the Army took it over. So you spent how long time there? Well, not quite a year in Battle Creek. So then you worked in the hospital then? Oh, yeah. We lived in the hospital. We lived in the basement. Didn't have any money. Rough going then, the first... Yeah. I got $75 a month there. Oh, no junior scale. So, and you needed that practice, I suppose, because when you came back to Red Oak... Yeah. And then we started... I started doing some surgery. About all I did was surgery in Battle Creek. And then I... After... We spent... I spent quite a bit of time every year taking postgraduate work for quite a number of years. So you had to improve yourself. Yeah. There were newer and newer things coming on then? Of course, nothing like it is now. In the war though, they experienced quite a bit of defeat. Oh, yes. And then you see, I went to the service. I spent... I went to the Navy in 1943 and got out in 1946. I see. And Marion was home alone with her three boys at that time. You lived in Red Oak? Yeah. Who took care of the doctor's office in Red Oak? Well, the office just stood there. Empty? Oh, yeah. There weren't many doctors left. Most of us were gone. So there was trouble on the home front then for some people. Right. So you were the only doctor in Red Oak? No, no, no, no. There were... There must have been ten doctors there. In Red Oak? Oh, yeah. But they were also... There were four of us in the service in the Army and Navy. Two of us in the Navy and two in the Army. So then a lot of new things came into being in the medical profession. And I did surgery in the Navy. Were you stationed in the Pacific or... Well, I started out in San Diego, California, in a naval hospital and was sent to the Solomon Islands. And I was there 14 months and from there the Philippines for four months and then came back. The war was over. Yeah. Well, the war ended soon after I got back. We were at a pre-flight school in Chapel Hill, North Carolina for about three months or four until the war ended. And then they closed the base in Chapel Hill and Marian and the boys went home. That's the only time she was with me. Then I was sent to Atlantic City, New Jersey at Christmas time. And then they sent me home. You were the shelter of military service. So did you work in a hospital-like atmosphere or were there small units in the war or did you have to go out in the battlefield? Well, I spent most of the time in hospitals and in smaller units. I spent nine months in Fleet Hospital 110 in the Solomon Islands, which was... We had 1,400 beds. I see. So it was a big hospital. Oh, yeah, a big place. Yeah, whatever it was. And then you came back into Red Oak. Yeah. We were there until 1949 and we moved to Fremont. So then you met a lot of country Swedes. They were the old pioneers, I suppose, probably more so when you were growing up. In Essex, yeah, we knew about more Swedish people down there. Well, there were Swedish people in Fremont too, but not as concentrated. So how were those old Swedes? Like I said before, they didn't go to doctor unless they had to. Same thing to the past. Well, I think most of them were real sick when they went to a doctor and they needed... To care. That's right. What kind of problems were there in the intestines, like gallstones? Gallstones, penicillitis. It seemed to me we had a lot more penicillitis in those days. How was that? I don't know, but we did, I'm sure, and I've been told that by many people. You never hear that anymore. Anymore, very seldom. But we had a lot of penicillitis and a lot of ruptured appendices. Those people, some of them died. There wasn't much you could do about them, really. Because they waited too long. We didn't have any antibiotics, you see, and the same was true of pneumonia. There was very little treatment. You either got well or died. How did you diagnose the appendix? Were they x-rayed then when they came in? No. You didn't have an x-ray equipment. No, not in those days. You can't make a diagnosis of penicillitis with an x-ray anyhow. You have to go by the patient's symptoms. When you examine a patient's findings, then you go by blood count. Oh, I see. You can tell quite a bit about how acute the appendix is by the blood count, the white blood count. What the insides measure in. Like the hardest weeks? No, they could go there for days and have the pain and then go to the hospital. Oh, they could be real sick. I had a lot of appendicitis there, and I had a couple that died. And the nearest hospital then was in the... Well, when I was in Essex, the nearest was in Shenandoah. I wasn't doing surgery then, but I brought them down to Dr. Gottsch in Shenandoah. But after I got them back from Battle Creek, I did my own in Red Oak and did them for years. So they had a good hospital there? Well, to start with, it was an old home, but while I was there, we built a new one. The doctors went together and then... No, it was the community that built it. So they served a big area then for the farming community. And after you became the doctor, you didn't saddle up to team amuse or horses anymore? No. No more farming? No. Not even a gentleman farmer? No, never owned a farm, never owned a piece. We owned a home and that's it. That's our property. But when you pitched in on the farm with your father, you liked the kind of work to help out? I didn't mind it at all. What did your father say when you became a doctor? Did he want to see you be a farmer instead? Do something with your head? He did. He said that? He said, I'd rather have you be a farmer. He didn't believe in him? But he did say, he said, if you're going to be a doctor, I want you to be a good one. Oh, so that was the final word. That was the end of it. So he was proud of you then when you went through the different stages? I hope he was. I think he was. So, and you delivered babies too then during that time? At that time I did. I delivered babies up until World War II. And after World War II, when I came home, I never delivered anymore. So you got a lot of experience caring for soldiers? Yeah, I understand that. It must be a tremendous thing. No, I didn't do any baby work at all. When the midwife was still on when you were married, I mean when you were born? Really not, no. The only doctors were delivering babies in those days. The midwife came in, was active before I started. Oh, I see. Before the First World War then? That's right. And of course the midwives are beginning to deliver babies again now. I don't know your acquaintance. Were they outlawed then after they stopped it? No, they really weren't outlawed, I don't believe, but for some reason. Well, they were made rules. They were certain rules, yeah. So they stopped them and then the doctors came in. But no, we didn't have any. I don't remember any of the babies in Red Oak or Essex being delivered by a midwife. But in your case, you had to be a general practitioner, as you call it. To start with, I was, yeah. You had to know everything. I was supposed to. Yeah, well, they seemed to have worked out fine. And then they come into the nose and ear and all kinds of different fancy things. We're really highly specialized now. Specialized, yeah. But in your case, though, you were a jack of all trades, in other words. Yeah, to start with. And then, of course, after going to Michigan, I quit some of the things. And after we moved to Fremont, I didn't do hardly anything but injuries. That's about all I took care of. What kind of injuries? Crime, an automobile accident, athletic injuries. I did some general surgery, too, appendices and hernias and gallbladders and hysterectomies. But I didn't do any deliveries, didn't take care of any children, didn't do any nose and throat or any of those things, didn't take care of any pneumonias or heart trouble. I was just doing surgery. You were needed in that field. How come you moved to Fremont? Was it a big area? It was a larger city, larger town. And, of course, there's Midland Colleges at Fremont. I don't know whether you've been out there or not. And we became acquainted with Fremont through some friends that we had met in New York from Columbus, Nebraska. And there was a man that sold orthopedic equipment who lived in Fremont who used to call on me in Red Oak, and he was telling me that Dr. Moore was retiring in Fremont. And so we became interested, and after a couple of years, we decided to move out there. Wasn't it Mrs. Ettinger? Ettinger, yeah. So your boys had gone through high school then? Well, no, they were in high school in Fremont. But to make a long story short, we moved out there. One of the reasons we moved out, of course, was Midland. None of our boys went to Midland. They didn't. They were too close. Well... I followed the pediatrician. Oh, so he followed in the doctors? Both of them are doctors. And the other two are surgeons. Yeah, well, Phil is a surgeon, an orthopedic surgeon in Denver. So they went to college then in up in Minnesota? No, they went to Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa. Oh, Grinnell. They went back to... Went back to Iowa. Uh-huh. I see. So, and then you stayed there until retirement? You stayed in Fremont until your retirement? Yes, right. We've lived down here three and a half years now. So you served many years down there. Yeah, I practiced 47 years. So you moved away from the Swedes and came out to the Danes? Well, there are a few Danes here. We've got some Swedes here, too. You've talked to Pauline Nelson. I know she's Swedish. Continues next site. Next site. Next site. Site 2, continuation with Dr. Nelson, Omaha, Nebraska. So you were specializing then in injuries? Yes, I did traumatic surgery. We call it traumatic injury surgery. And I did some regular orthopedic surgery, too, like knee operations. And also sport... I took care of athletes at Midland College for 33 years and high school athletes for 25. So you've seen a lot of bent knees. Quite a few. Do you recommend that kind of sport, the football, for instance? Oh, I sure do. You do? Yeah, I think it's great. But there's no way to train to get... Oh, it's too bad that they're injured. But I've often told the mothers that they're not injured nearly as badly as when they start riding motorcycles and driving automobiles. That's part of a different story. And how about farm accidents then? Yes, we had a lot of farm accidents. Too many. Young people, they didn't care. But it has been better there, too, now with... A lot of safety devices on these new machines. They have those... Roll bars. Roll bars, yeah. There are nearly as many corn picker accidents. Years ago, we had a lot of corn picker accidents. People would get their hands on those rollers. Yeah, and the chains. Yeah. Oof. That's... And there was injuries that it took a long time to heal. Oh, some of them didn't. And plastic surgery was not used at that time. No, we tried to save as much as we could. When did they come into... More in the 60s and 70s, plastic surgery? Well, it's been coming on. We had plastic surgery. Magnetherapy? Oh, yes. But, of course, I've done a lot of skin grafting. From one part of the body, I know. Part of plastic surgery. So that's been going on for quite a while. And nowadays, they can even put limbs together, if they think, for instance, they just have it. That's right. They're not all successful, but sometimes they are. Years ago, that was not possible because of... Why was that? Well, of course, they were not able to splice arteries at that time. They used microscopes, not splice vessels. And unless you have blood, you see, nothing will heal. And you have to reroute the blood back into the artery that was cut off. If you can't do that, you lose the limb. This here is from sitting here. This sounds almost impossible, though, how you can get all those... But they can get some of the big vessels back together again, and they do it. And then, of course, the nerves, they splice the nerves. I splice nerves, and some of them work afterward. And they've done them under the microscope, then? No, I didn't do them under the microscope. We didn't have any microscopic surgery ever. But you would think they were small, though. Well, you take, for example, in the wrist, the arteries are... the nerves are quite large. When I say large, they're half as big as a lead pencil. As you can see, well enough to splice them. Well, you had some... Oh, I should have. I had a broken arm. Oh. Really? Yeah. But that's when the whole thing comes out. And you have, like, phone accidents, I suppose, can really be bad. Yeah, or saws. Well, that's not really... You should be, when you think about it. But you get so used to it after a while, though, so you have to be stiff in your thinking. I mean, this looks bad and so on. Yeah, you have to, yeah. You've got to be calm and do the right thing. Use common sense. Yeah. So your parents, now, they... Did they... Your grandparents, they never went back to Sweden for a visit, did you remember? Were there any contacts with Sweden when you were little, growing up in Essex? No, I can't remember that there was. There might have been, but I don't know. Did they talk about Sweden? Letters. Well, I think your family did. I can't remember that any of our family were getting letters from Sweden. Now, you see, later on, a cousin of mine from Stanton, Iowa, she's gone now, Mrs. Anderson, became real interested in a family tree, and she spent a couple of summers, parts of summers, in Sweden. And I'll show you what she gave me quite ten years ago, at least. On your side? On my mother's side. Not my father's side. My father just didn't know anything about his family. They were too far removed. I don't know. They probably came in the 50s or 60s. I don't know. I can't even tell you that. Did they talk often about Sweden and the relation back there? What kind of expression were they using when they talked about Sweden? Did they say back there? I think they did. Now, you were closer to your grandparents than I was. I was. They never used the expression back home or anything like that? You can't remember that? No, I can't remember that. I'm soon going to be 79. Yes, the years are flying by, you know. I should have. We were too busy. When you were young, that's usually what happened. Yeah, and for a family tree, how do you think of that? Do you still feel Swedish, though? I can see now in your arm hair, you have everything Swedish. Marianne especially, she loves Swedish things. How about Christmas in your home now, Dr. Nelson? Do you remember the old Christmas when you were a little boy? Oh, sure. You had a Christmas tree? Oh, yeah, always. With candles, regular candles on. Lit. We didn't have fire, I don't know. Where did Dad pick up the Christmas tree? Did he buy it in Essex? Yeah. Because there was nothing growing around on your farm? No, we didn't raise any. No weeds. Do you remember Santa Claus, if he came? We didn't. I did, but I don't know. You had a Santa Claus? I don't think we did. We might have had Santa Claus in school. I think maybe we did. Like a Christmas party. How about church? Do you remember any Christmas party in the church? No, we always had Christmas services. You looked out, sure. It was in Sweden? Four o'clock in the morning in Sweden. Four o'clock? Yes, sir. Like Christ was born. Do you remember Hultman, the sunshine singer, did he come to Essex? Yes. With his little organ? I don't remember the organ, but I remember Hultman. And his singing? Yes. So he was an interesting man. He must have been. He preached a few sentences and then he was singing. He must have been. So your family were very religious? They went to church often and every Sunday? Oh, yes. They were very dedicated. They belonged to a different mission society and sewing circle. Yes. How about your father, was he on the board? Oh, yes, for years. Like a deacon? Yes. Trustee? Both. Did you read the Bible at home at any time, do you remember? Oh, yes, my father every morning. Every morning? Oh, yes. He read then himself? Yes. Your mother never read? Very seldom. Just Dad. Just Dad. It was for the men. Oh, well. They don't think so today, though. And did you read, like when you set out for Emil, did you read the prayer? Oh, yes. The Swedish prayer? Yes, that's right. Do you remember the wording of it? I think I do. Yesenam, towards we go, we'll sing the good and mighty for, so for we might be yesenam. So that was used way back and you kept it. Do you still use it sometimes? Occasionally. Did you say thank you for the food also in the prayer like that? Once in a while we did, as I recall, after we were through eating. Oh, yes, amen. Did you read the prayer when you had a cup of coffee and a coffee break? No, I don't think so. It was not done. And the food on Christmas, your mother was able to prepare the old Swedish type sylta. Fruitcake. Fruitcake, too. Sylta. Did you ever hear of palt? Palt, yes. Well, they're supposed to be good. You are a doctor. There's a lot of iron in it. That's right. And the osterkaka. So all those good things. All kinds of things. Did you like lutefisk? Oh, sure, I liked lutefisk. With the white sauce on it? Right. And what mother prepared was very good, too. It was tasteful and you felt good. She used wood ashes on the cod, on the lutefisk. Oh, yeah. And they bought it in Essex. There was a store there. Oh, yeah. So they had Swedish stores down in Shenandoah, Essex, Red Oak, and Stanton. There was a whole area there of Swedish grocers that kept the better with the cod outside. That's right. And they said the dog was lifting his leg when he was eating. Is that true or not? I heard that. I heard. Did you hear that one? So now I have to live through all the childhood with the Swedish parents and customs and various food. I suppose their food was not too much different from their parents. Probably not. They had to go back many, many years. Probably so. And some of them lived to a ripe old age. They were healthy and strong. I can't remember. I think my grandfather Levine and my grandmother Levine lived to be about mid-70s, I would say. My grandfather Nelson died when he was a relatively young man. In fact, my father was only 16 years old when he died. And my father doesn't know what he died from. I don't think they had any medical help at all. He thought he might have had a bleeding ulcer and died from that. My grandmother Levine, I think she probably died when she was around 60 or 55 from a cancer. Did they call it cancer way back then? Yeah. They did? I can't remember the Swedish name for cancer. Kräfta? I never heard of it. But they use cancer in Sweden too nowadays. But years ago they called it kräfta. Oh, kräfta. Yeah, say, listen, that does come back. Yeah, I believe so. I hadn't heard that word for years. Kräfta. Here's my father. He plays the harp. When you think back now, in other words, they used in their diet something that's completely, should not be used today if you want to live long, they say. I mean, there was too much cholesterol, there was too much fat, and way, way, way too much salt. Oh, yeah. Yeah, there was. There was too much salt. There's no question about it. Because when the pig went down in the barrel there, there was a lot of salt. They used a lot of salt. But it didn't seem to affect them, though. Lots of eggs, lots of cream and butter. I remember my mother pouring that cream on the potatoes, even. Yes. But it didn't seem to affect their health. Of course, some died from it. Yeah, I think it probably did. I don't think they lived quite as long then as they do now. You don't think so? I don't believe so. No, I don't think so. Did they have more trouble, for instance, with the stomach ache and constipation and so on? Well, I think my grandfather, Levine, died from a prostate problem. Because I can even remember he was having problems passing his urine. And I think he died of uremia, which now they could have taken care of. And he might have lived longer, you see. My grandmother, Nelson, died of heart trouble. And, of course, she could have—that's possible. She would have died now. But there wasn't much you could—they did have digitalis in those days. And that's about all for heart problems. And, of course, cancer. I don't think my grandmother had any surgery, and surgery might have cured her. But the percentage of cure is pretty fair now for cancer of the breast. Was there a prevalence years ago, though? Do you remember that? They had the bumps in their breast? Oh, I think so. They had, without doing anything about it? Sure, they had cancer of the breast, yeah. So what's your relation? Is your uncle down there in— Yes, my uncle, by marriage, lives in Shenandoah now in a nursing home. He is an old guy now, yes? That's right. Now his wife, which would be my mother's youngest sister, died of cancer of the breast 10, 12 years ago. But I suppose their work—they had, now, the farmers especially, they worked the fat off. The fat they took in, that went off because of hard work, husking corn and— My father really worked hard. Mother did, too. So they could eat a fat diet then, because it didn't hurt them? No, they couldn't eat. They passed right through the system without building up on the muscles? My father certainly wasn't fat. He was a small man. He was— Not overweight? I don't think he ever weighed over 135 pounds. Is that right? He was a small man. Yeah, he was about—well, your dad was, too, the same way. They were small men, and they weren't fat, either one of them. At that time, when you were growing up, there was a style then to have a big stomach and to show wealth. Was that the common—? I don't know whether it was a style or not, really. My mother was too heavy. Oh, I see. She used to try to diet, I recall. She tried it? Yeah, tried to cut down. Well, she had to cook. She had to taste everything. Gosh, and she loved her cream and butter, too, I'll tell you. And cream in the coffee, I suppose. Oh, sure. Did you drink coffee when you were small? Yes. Started out small. Yeah. Do you still drink coffee? Decaffeinated. Decaffeinated. Yeah. So there was also a discussion about if it was good to have cream in the coffee or no cream. Well, I used cream for many, many years until the last ten years or so I haven't used any. Marian likes a little cream in her coffee. To whiten up a little. Yeah. How about your sons now? Do they have a different diet than you had when you were brought up, I suppose? Because you also had to change the diet then, coming from the farm. Oh, I ate what they did. I ate a lot of eggs and cream and butter and... All the good stuff. Oh, sure. You didn't know any of it, otherwise you got to go by mother's... That's right. It was good food, but I've never been too heavy, I don't think. But I don't eat all I want to, even now. You're more careful now, after... I get older. You don't smoke, either? Not now. I never smoked until I got in the Navy. And I started smoking and I smoked for about 15 years, which would take us up to about 1960, and I haven't smoked any since. Was it cigarettes or pipe? Cigarettes. Smoked at least a pack a day. That was because of the pressure of the workers. Well, I suppose. Habit. Habit. Everybody else is doing it. How about your sons? Are they smokers? No, Phil smokes a pipe occasionally, out in Denver, but neither Paul or Phil smoke. Our daughter's-in-law smoke. Oh, I see. Well, they're different ideas. But my one daughter-in-law is Irish and the other one's half Irish and half Swedish. Are they interested in the Swedish background, your sons? Do they have any customs? In other words, did you hand it on to them? Well, somewhat, but our- So the wife's on a- She has an office. She works and she- Kathy, what does she do? She's talking about our daughter-in-law here in town, is in the social service. She does- they call it family enrichment. It's family counseling. But no, they don't have any Swedish customs over there. And I certainly might a little bit, out in Denver. But that part of their heritage is forgotten, I think, pretty much. It fades away over the years. Do you go back to Essex and Shenandoah and Red Oak occasionally? Well, of course we used to go over there quite frequently. We were over to see my uncle this summer. That's the last time we were over in that country, in Shenandoah. We haven't been back to Essex for some time. Is the farm still in the family? No, no, that was sold years ago. And your parents, when did they die in the 40s? My mother died in 1948. My father died in 1952. And they were retired from farming then? Oh, yeah. They lived in Essex. So they moved into town. So that's a good feeling, not to live in a town like that. There is no rush. You can go to the drugstore and have a cup of coffee or a coffee in the morning. You get all the latest news. And the problems of the area. That's why Fremont isn't that big. You can do the same thing here. So you keep the same thing up there? Oh, yeah. We thought Fremont was just a grand place to raise a family and to live. But we had a large home, and we weren't able to really take care of it any longer. And we felt we'd better move while we were able to, so that we came down here. We lived in a brick house. Brick house. Kind of old-fashioned. English style. With two floors, I suppose, as well, to walk upstairs. Yeah, and then we had a basement, too, so she had all those stairs and just too much. It can be too much. I fell down the basement stairs. Oh. Then it helps to have a doctor as a husband. To do the washing. Oh, I see. Accidents can happen. So there have been many things since you became a med student up to the present time. What is the most revolutionary thing that happened in medicine, do you think? Well, there's so many things, I ought to put a finger on it. Polio was bad in the 30s when you were a scholar. Sure. I didn't take care of any, but I saw some in Fremont, even in Fremont. In the early 50s, we had polio. And that's about the time that Salk and Sabin vaccines came in. And, of course, we haven't had any since. No, I saw some real bad ones. And there was no cure for it then? In other words, you didn't want to see deterioration? No. They had what they call a Sister Kenny treatment, which was physiotherapy, really. I had a cousin here in Omaha that was a healthy, good-looking youngster. When he was about six years old, he had polio, and he was just a wreck afterward. His back was all out of line, his legs were shriveled. I think he died when he was about 18 years old. I see. What did it come with? Was it a virus? It was a virus. Contagious? Oh, sure. I see. Nobody thinks about it now, but... Not in this country. You see, there are other countries, though. For example, the Philippine Islands a few years ago had a lot of polio. And some of the... I think the South Asian countries have polio. Well, I think there's some polio all over the world. But then this little drop on a piece of sugar took it away. Isn't that something? That's probably one of the biggest breakthroughs of all we've talked about. Yes, that's right. It is. Unbelievable. I have a great con with Swedish... Antibiotics. I think the antibiotics... You mean penicillin, then? Oh, yes. The discovery of sulfa, sulfa drugs, penicillin. And that was the product during the war? That's about that time. It was driving the war zone. Oh, yes. We used it. The first penicillin I ever used was in the Navy. So that was a blessing for... Oh, it was. To recover the sick. Sure. But there seems to be always a new disease coming in every day. We've got a new one now. That's bad. They never went to it. But I suppose the system gets immune to certain things after a while, but then... Well, we never got immune to polio until we started vaccinating for it. Your mother's uncle, Johannes August Levine... Right. And his wife, Anna Carey-Manson. And he died in 1902, and she died in 1928. They had nine children. Right. And you told me there was something extraordinary with a bunch of nine kids there. There was boys and girls. Boys and girls, and not any of them were ever married. Not one of them? Not one. But as they grew older, they paired off, even brother and sister, and moved to a farm and bought the farm. And there must have been at least four different farms with four brothers and sisters. And when they passed away, they owned a tremendous amount of land. So they were able to gather more and more acres. That's right. They lived well, and they weren't so-called tightwads, as we say. And still, they didn't spend any more money than they needed to, and they saved. They worked hard. They were frugal and knew what to do. That's right. They were good farmers. Were they able to be in companionship? I mean, did they agree on anything? And apparently they got along pretty well. I never heard of any. Did you visit any of them? Oh, many times. They lived out, all of them lived in that same area that we lived. And they were also members of the covenant church then? No, they were all on the Lutheran side. They were all, they belonged to the St. John's Lutheran Church in Essex. I see. So they were able to gather a lot of land and stay on it. That's right. Did they live to a higher old age? There were a couple of them that died, I suppose, in their 40s. But the rest of them all lived up into their 70s. I think Emma, the last one, died probably around seven, eight years ago. Or maybe it's on there. Emma Levine, did it say when she died? Emma, no, she was still living. Yeah. And she was born in 81, born in Essex. They were all born in Essex. Yeah. No, there was two born in Sweden. Oh, I didn't realize that. No. They were born in Sweden in 1863. When I was a boy, we used to go and visit the family. Now, the mother and the father were gone. I didn't remember them at any time. I never saw or met them. I knew all the brothers and sisters. So Johannes Alfred and Carl August you probably met. Oh, sure. All of those I've met. So Emma Otilia, she was the one, the last one. I think Ida died just a year or so before Emma. And their mother, Anna Carey Manson. You see, I never met her. She was 88 when she died. But I don't remember her. None of the kids. Yeah, I don't remember her. It's a high, ripe age. That's right. And these people now, if you take this as a sample, they probably didn't travel too far outside Page and Montgomery counties. I can't remember that they ever traveled anyplace. They stayed there. That's right. They were born there and they stayed there. That's right. So what did they talk about when you met them? Did you, were you able to, you talked about the farm life, I suppose. Farm prices. Farm prices, yeah. Price of corn. And the neighbors and they were, I can remember one of them was very interested in the original radios that came on the market. And they had a real good one and we used to go over there and listen to radio. I don't remember which one it was. I think it was Amel was the one that was interested. So they helped each other and I suppose they knew what they needed and so on. Oh, yeah, they certainly did. They all worked together. They had a whole class of two right there. I think you remember Ida and Emma, I'm sure. Sure. But I think the rest of them were. They lived in a good house. Oh, and Alfred, do you remember, we had them up to see us in Red Oak one time. One of the brothers, some, I don't know how many of them I don't recall. And Alfred had a new Chevy car. He was going to take us for a ride. And I can remember my brother and I were sitting in the back seat and coming back from our trip up to Elliott, Iowa, which was about ten miles. Alfred put it in second gear and drove it in second gear all the way back to Red Oak. My brother and I used to really laugh about that. He forgot to switch it into high. Probably had a hot transmission there. They didn't live that close together. As I recall, one farm was west of Essex and I think a couple of them were east of Essex, the other one was south. But they weren't just right all in one cluster.