 This is cassette two and side one, continuation with Walter Johnson, Rackburn and I. Cassette two, side one. You have two children, one daughter and one boy. That's right. One son. And he is a farmer. Right. How come he come into that kind of line of work? Well, it all happened because we moved out in the country. We bought this place here on Carmen Drive 35 years ago. So there was farming land here then? That's right. And Dr. Swanson owns a big farm on a corner of Perryville Road and Harrison Avenue. Well, my son used to go down there and there was a man by the name of Johnson who ran the farm for the doctor. And he took a liking to Randy and he let him drive the tractors and the trucks and so on. He became interested in farming. So he became a member of the 4-H clubs. And one of the boys who belonged in the 4-H went to the University of Illinois and he talked Randy into going to college and he went to the University of Illinois too and finally got his degree in agronomy from the University of Illinois. And then he went to Chicago and worked for Swifton Company. And then he became secretary for the Livestock Buyers Association in Chicago. Spent a few years at that and then he went to a big cattle ranch up in Wisconsin as an assistant manager up there. Spent a few years there. In the meantime he had married a farmer's daughter from Mononk, which is 90 miles from Rockford. And they decided to go to Mononk and he worked for a manufacturing plant down there and he finally got into farming and rented about 400-some acres and worked on that for a few years and then his father-in-law retired so Randy took over that family farm and now he farms about 800 acres. And it's located how far from Rockford? Well, it's actually 100 miles from my house to his house. South? South, right off of 51. Mononk is an old mining town, it used to be deep shaft coal mining in that whole region. But it has probably some of the best farm ground in the state of Illinois. It used to be a swampy area that was drained and it has terrifically rich soil. Probably black dirt goes down 8-10 feet, which is very unusual. And it provides excellent crops, corn and soybeans and so on. So he is diversified in grain and hog farming? Grain and hog farming, right. And everything goes to his hogs and he doesn't sell any grain? Oh, he sells because he grows a lot more grain than he can feed. But raising hogs is a scientific process today where you have about 15 different items goes into a diet raising hogs. It isn't like it used to be years ago, a matter of slopping hogs. It's all scientific, so many pounds of feed to so many pounds of pork. Got it all figured out. And I think in a matter of five months a hog has finished about 240 pounds. It's an amazing thing to see how clean and how active these animals are in a confinement area. Some people think it's not a good thing that you put too much stress on them, but you go in and look at it and they seem perfectly contented to be raised the way they are. How about the heat now? The ventilation process must be accurate. Well, you see, they have in these buildings, these confinement buildings, they have an area where he has 24 sows at one time with their litters. And after the small pigs are weaned, they are put into a nursery which has heat. They stay in a nursery for so many weeks and then from the nursery they go into a finishing area. Because of the number of animals in that area, no heat is needed even in the winter. And ventilation is controlled automatically. There are doors, well actually they're not windows, but they're more like doors. When a temperature reaches a certain point, if it's too hot, the door's open to allow fresh air to come in. As it cools down, the doors close. It all works automatically. They're fed automatically. You press a button and the feed is brought right into the big feed boxes. So one man can handle a job that normally would take three or four people. A matter of hour, hour and a half, morning, hour and a half at night takes care of the whole process. And it's tremendously clean. It has white pigs and they're just as clean and good looking as they could possibly be. Pigs are a clean animal if you give them half a chance. They don't necessarily like to lay in the mud, but raised in confinement, it's a beautiful process. So he doesn't have those small pig houses like you see in Hendry County? No, he started with that when he first got into the hog business, but then he built this building. And it has like a big swimming pool under the whole thing. I think it holds 400,000 gallons. All the droppings drop through the slotted grates that they have. And that's pumped out two or three times during the year. And of course that takes the place of a lot of fertilizer. The only bad thing is a fantastic odor, but you raise hogs, you have to put up with that. So what is the features now better with this confinement than having them outside? Well... Is it easier to control? Much easier to control. Well, of course, he's been very fortunate. I've had no disease or any problems. Because he has to be like a veterinarian to know how to use every shot and all the supplements. You've got to dock the tails and castrate and so on. But especially in the winter, he's got his office right there. It's heated, comfortable, and dry and pleasantly warm in the winter. You just can't beat it. How many is running this 800 acres farm now? Well, his father-in-law still helps him some, but he does most of the work himself. There's no hired helper? No hired help, no. Now with the machinery they've got today, he could take care of even more land. So he's been in business now with this for about how many years? Oh, about 15 years all together. So he was prepared for this slump in farming? Well, it's pretty hard to get prepared. He made the same mistake as most farmers did. They expanded. You see, farmland down there was selling for as much as $4,000 an acre, and now that same land is probably selling for less than $2,000 an acre. So they took a tremendous beating on that. And when he built that confinement hog building, the interest rates were probably 16 to 18 percent. But it's adjustable type of a mortgage. Mortgage rates go down, his rates go down. But even so it was tremendous interest payments. So he's had problems, but I'm sure he's going to make it. So the prices are good now, extremely high. Extremely high on the hogs, but your grain prices, of course, are depressed. If it wasn't for government programs that pay the farmers, none of them can make it. If you're not under the government programs today, you can't make it, because with corn selling for $1.60 a bushel, and it costs you over $2 to produce it, something's got to give. So with the set-aside programs they've got today, farmers can barely make it. Is he using the no-till farming method? He was one of the first to start. He plants his soybeans right into the corn stalks. Does absolutely no cultivation of any kind. Sprays for weeds once or twice, and that's it. Of course, you have to have special machinery today to do that kind of farming, to plant it and so on. You've got to have special planters, which he does have. But he was one of the first to go into no-tillage in that whole area. So he has retired the plow then? Oh, yes. He's retired the plow. So that makes it different than the operation of less driving? Oh, yes. No compacting of the soil. It's amazing how well it grows. You use the word amazing. I mean, this must be amazing ground on it, extremely high quality. Oh, yes. The topsoil must be 6, 7 feet. Yes, it is. It's beautiful soil. Somewhere the average farmer will get, say, 35, 40 bushels of soybeans to the acre. You'll get 50. And the same with corn, 100, 125. For the average, you'll probably get 175. So it's, like I say, very fertile, very fertile soil. And he doesn't have any irrigation? He is not needed irrigation? No, no. No. It's fortunate they get enough rain. Because it's deep topsoil. And he's fortunate, too, because, of course, his hogs and so on use a lot of water. But he's got an artesian thing where he gets all the water he needs to take care of his livestock. And it's piped right into the hog houses. So you went down there, too, to help him with the farming skill? Well, I have very little farming skill. I used to go down and help him at harvest time. I used to run the dryers for him. Because he'd run a combine, his father-in-law, to truck the corn in, and I'd run it through the dryers. We'd work until 10 o'clock at night sometimes. But now he's got two automatic dryers. Well, his wife goes out and helps him. But she's working full-time in a bank now. But still, he managed to do most of the work himself. And now I've got a grandson who was just 16 here last month, and he can help a lot. And he's interested in following in his father's footsteps? It's hard to tell yet, but I think he probably will. Because he's into future Farmers of America set up. And his grandfather down there, that family has been on that farm for over 100 years. So they want to keep the land and the family as long as they can, obviously. What kind of nationality are they? His in-laws are of German extraction. That's kind of odd. A couple years ago, Randy had two German exchange students staying with him. One stayed for six, eight months, and another one came for over a year. These German fellows. So one of them is getting married in Germany now, and they invited Randy and his wife to come to Germany for the wedding. Because Randy, with all the hogs and that, can't leave. So the father-in-law and his wife are leaving now in August to go to this wedding in Germany. And the exchange students, real nice boys, came over and stayed with Randy. He was there to learn farming, or he just went to high school? No, they worked on a farm. They were exchange students while they were... Well, it's the same kind of deal, but they were both from farm families in Germany, and they wanted the experience to see what was done in this country. So it worked out well for everybody. So there's a different vocation for everybody, and a lot of choices you have. Yeah, but I'm sure the reason he got interested in farming was because we moved out to the country, and it was a good deal. If you lived down on Broadway, it might be different. That's right. You know, what are kids going to do in town? Out here, a lot of open space, and it was the best thing we could have ever done. So now you are taking it easy and using your memories, going back. My wife and I have been very fortunate. We've enjoyed good health. And like I say, adequate pension. I don't have to worry. We can come and go as we please, travel if we want to, and no problems. And you belonged to a union they couldn't strike? That's right. That's right. We couldn't. When I was a clerk, I was a vice president of the union, so I was active in union affairs. And the supervisors, we have a union too, or did have. No, when you go in there, you sign a pledge that you will not strike. I see they're having labor troubles now. There's big agitation going on, but if they strike, they get fired, and that's it. Same as the controllers, yeah. No, it's a... You know, see, the post office has changed. Everything is mechanical, you know, automation, letter sorting machines. When I started, everything was done manually, and now it's all... There's nobody to blame today. No, that's right. That's right. Progress, of course, but, you know, it's the same idea that if the telephone company hadn't come up with dialing, automatic dialing and so on, the telephone company wouldn't be able to build enough buildings to hold all the operators. That's the same with the post office. They hadn't come up with automatic machinery, so they wouldn't be able to build enough buildings to handle the volume of mail that goes through the average post office. Who was instrumental in getting this big post office in Longharrison? This is a tremendous size. Well, of course... Was it John B. Anderson? I don't know if John B. had an awful lot to do with it, but when they put in the zip code system, Rockford was made what they call a sectional center. In other words, we processed mail not only for Rockford, but for about 65 cities. That's why the size of it is... That's why it's so big. It's not just local. So we processed mail for all cities like Dixon, Sterling, Rock Falls, Savannah, Dubuque, Rochelle, Mount Morris, Mount Carroll, all this whole area. All the mail coming into those cities and going away from them come through Rockford. It's processed automatic machinery and so on, where one big facility can handle a much bigger volume of mail much more efficiently. Also, the Rockford Postmaster is also a postmaster for a LaSalle sectional center, which takes in an additional 65, 70 smaller offices. So it's a big thing anymore, but Rockford is a sectional center. So it's not just local. People don't realize all the work is done at night, and I was night superintendent for a number of years. We do all the mail processing, especially the incoming mail, because we'd have semis, half a dozen semis during the night, come in out of Chicago, out of Dubuque, out of Madison, out of LaSalle. We had air taxis coming from faraways, Kentucky. They'd come into Rockford, pick up the mail, and they'd meet other planes at Midway from various areas. You know, when you figure Kentucky is 600 miles away, if you post a letter in Kentucky during the day, there's no way you can run it by truck, but by using planes, you speed that whole process up. People don't realize that. You know, they complain about service, but like in Rockford, all the years I was there, there were very few times when every piece of mail in a Rockford office wasn't being delivered that same morning. So when they complain about mail service, the problem is in your bigger facilities like Chicago, where millions and millions of pieces of mail is dumped, say, from 4 o'clock until 6 o'clock every afternoon. It's such a tremendous volume that sometimes it overwhelms them and delays mail. A facility like Rockford, because of its size, it's probably as efficient an operation as you find anywhere because of its size and so on. But it was a very interesting career, and I enjoyed every bit of it. And I was fortunate enough to get up high enough in the status here that my pension is much higher than the average postal employee. So maybe the drafts were in Peoria and gave you a break. Could be. That's where it all started. You didn't think about it at the time, but as it turned out, it was probably a good deal. Probably a good deal. There probably happened not too many occupations during the war. They got to start. Right. It was something they never even dreamt of. Yeah, just circumstance. Sure, you actually had no control. But, you know, during the war, it was a matter of alphabetical designation. We went out in the service as replacement for the fleet. There were 6,000 of us went out on a Matson liner to Hawaii, and from that, about 2,000 of us were put on a ship called the Orvetta, and we were shipped out in the South Pacific as replacement for people injured and killed. And there were three of us got on as fleet repair, Jansen, Johnson, and Jones, because alphabetical selection, that this ship needed three people. Well, the two people ahead of us, a guy by the name of Houston and Ireland, were both killed on a ship they got on. So, you know, it was a matter of chance because of just the selection. And Ireland, a real good friend, he was from Peoria. He never made it back. So it was just a chance that you'd make it. You'd been with the IOGT for many years, and the chairman for so many years, 25 years more or less. Did you join any other organization, like VASA, Switzerland? Well, I belonged to VASA. Of course, I'm still interested in postal organizations that I belong to, retirement clubs and so on. But I've mainly worked with the good Templars. I've more or less been spokesman for them for a number of years. I've been chairman of a lot of the district lodges in the central states, and I was chairman. Not on the national, I was... Oh, yeah, I've been active in a lot of them. I went to Switzerland with a good Templar group last year to an international meeting in Zurich, Switzerland. But I see the handwriting on a wall, we're a dying organization. Yeah, but there's a lot of members still coming in from all over the rest of the world. The rest of the world, yeah, but not in the United States. Your third world countries especially, millions of new members. But in this country, well, I suppose the Scandinavian countries are still pretty active, because they get government help. The government gives them a lot of help, financial and otherwise. But in this country, it's a dying cause. No ifs and ands about it. Did you petition to the state legislatures any time for some laws or improvement against drunken drivers or something like that? Like Massachusetts or Connecticut, I think. They went into the state courts. Massachusetts, I believe it was. Yeah, that could be. No, we haven't really. Have you heard anything like that going on from there? We really haven't been that militant. Through the high school, for instance? A few of the members have taken some interest in that, but here in Rockford, the people haven't been that militant. No. We have a few in Chicago. There's Per Hugo Christensen. Of course, he's into the international organization. He's got black members and Asian and everything in his lodge in Chicago. He's a hard worker. He gets in with the mayor of Chicago at various social events and so on. He spends a lot of time with them. But he's probably the most militant of all the good Templars in this country. In Rockford, there hasn't been any? No, no, no. When the old active Swedes have died out, that's put a kibosh on it. You can't interest your own children in that setup. It's pretty difficult to get any members. TV has probably been one of the worst aggressive against the— I think so. That was the beginning of the end, really. Because all movie industry is based on alcoholic consumption. That's right. How can you beat it? They have the money to do it any way you want. You figure Anheuser-Busch spends over $100 million a year in advertising. How can you counteract that? Your magazines, television, the whole works. Drinking is a socially accepted thing. And then when the athletic field— That's right. People are getting paid for it. That's right. They make believers to the American people that drinking is a smart thing. But it's also amazing that, like this woman who started Mothers Against Drunk and Driving— You're mad, or is it— Mad, yeah, that this one woman has caused legislation in practically all 50 states. She started it all and made the laws stringent. Like in Illinois, it probably got some of the toughest drunken driving laws in the country. And it all started because this one woman's daughter was killed by a drunken driver. So it shows that one individual with enough spunk can get up and go, can change how things are operated. But she had good help, though, from Governor Dukakis. Oh, yeah. Because his brother was also killed. So they got to be tied in with something so you get the ball rolling. That's right. But once it gets rolling, they can move mountains. It's possible. It's possible, yeah. But like you said, fighting $100 million a year is not easy. No, no, that's true. And we're not militant either. I can appreciate if a man wants to take a drink, that's his business. And anything to moderation, it isn't going to be all that bad. So I'm not what you call militant. But there was probably a need for it, both in Sweden and this country. There had been organizations like the IOGT. Oh, yes. Because they went overboard, everything. Oh, sure. It practically killed Sweden. You know, it was terrible over there with the drinking. So they made a difference at that time. Oh, yeah. They brought a lot of young people. And, you know, the Swedish government recognizes that fact, whereas this country, of course, doesn't. Because it's accepted that everybody's going to drink. But the Swedes were far ahead of the rest of them. But, you know, it's an amazing thing what people can do. We went to this international thing in Zurich, Switzerland. There were only eight active members in Zurich and put on this thing for over 2,000 people. Eight? Eight active people in Zurich that put on a fantastic week over there. Actually, two weeks, because they arranged bus trips for us and so on. But that's all. Eight active people arranged a world congress with over 2,000 delegates from all over the world, including Russia. Just fantastic what those people did. They did everything imaginable for us. So you can see it doesn't take great leadership. Leadership is right. Just fantastic. And we really enjoyed that. Switzerland is a fantastic country. Fantastic. And it's probably more beautiful, cleaner, than even Sweden. I never saw such a clean... Zurich is a big city. Every morning about 6 o'clock, everybody's out washing the sidewalks in their downtown sections. You get on a streetcar, you don't see any gum wrappers, cigarette butts. Everything is clean. Wherever you went, clean. Just fantastic. How those good Templars in Zurich, eight active members, could do what they did, it always will amaze me. It sounds unbelievable. Yeah, it does. It does. And, you know, they had fantastic...