 This is cassette two, this continuation with Christine Kohlberg, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. Your parents, Mrs. Kohlberg, Clarence Gersh Larsen and Ruth Elizabeth Carlson. Yes. What kind of business were they in, or your father? My father was always in retail business. As a very, very young boy, he was out and sold vegetables in a little cart, I remember them telling me. But then, very, very young, he started in business on his own, and he was in meat business. That was when meat alone was sold in a shop, you know, no groceries. Apparently he worked in different places to learn it. That's what he did, he went out and worked as a young boy. And he was born out here in Rockford? Oh yes. Both your parents? Both of them were born in Rockford, but both of their parents were born in Sweden. So you remember them very well, then, your grandparents? Oh yes, oh absolutely, oh surely. Were they living in your home at the end of their lives? No, none of them lived in our home. They all passed away in their home. If perhaps, I think maybe at the very last, they might have been in the hospital a week or so. But no, nobody, there were no nursing homes. No. They had their own homes. Of course we went over there and helped them, but no. And you were located not too far from Broadway, or the business area of Rockford, when you were growing up then? Ah yes, for a time I lived on 7th Avenue, and Broadway was 14th Avenue. But then as a young child of about six years old, we moved up into the northeast section on Rockford Avenue. It was in the beginning of the Depression, and was going to start in 29. That would have been about 1929. What kind of business were you doing then? Always a meat man. You never ever had anything different. Yes, all through the Depression. How did it affect his business? Was he able to collect from people? I suppose they used a book to charge. I imagine there must have been charging, but you see, my only being six, seven, eight years old, I wouldn't really know. But there must have been a lot of charging, and I remember there wasn't. We always had food on the table, but we didn't have extras at all. Mother and I used to walk all the time. We didn't even ride a bus or streetcar or anything, so I'm sure there must have been a pinch. I'm positive. But he was able to stay with it. Yes, he stayed with it. And he had his store then on Broadway, or? Yes, as far, all that I remember is Broadway, right there. But I guess he was in business on Broadway the whole while, but other locations where he was working. Broadway on the 6th or 7th? The block of the bank, between. Oh, I see the bank. Between 7th and 8th Street. That was the heart of Broadway, that block. And that was called Security? No, no, this was called Kelly's Market. He always. No, but I mean the bank at that time. Oh, the bank, oh yes, way back. That was, I believe. Do you remember the Security Bank, or? I don't. And, you know, back in those days when the meat market was a meat market, they killed their own chickens, they processed their own meat. It was not a place for a little girl to go. So I was not there that much. So you were not interested in going to that trade? No, I would not think about it. And you were all three girls in your family? Yes, we were just three girls. No boys. They could carry on the meat market business. No, no boys could do it. So this bank now, if I go back to Security, that folded during the Depression? Yes, that closed up. Yes. And any deposits that were there were lost. Did your father have deposits there, because being so close, he probably had it as his bank? I would assume so, yes. Because it was next door neighbor, so to speak. Oh yes, yes, it was right half a block away. I'm positive. So they disappeared for good? Yes. And then he did his banking with Illinois National, which was way downtown. Can you read the part of that in Rock Valley History of 1926, is it? Yes, it was published in 1926. It's a book, The Rock River Valley Biographical. Clarence Larson, a well-known and popular young retail meat dealer on 14th Avenue, Rockford, was born in that city October 10, 1897, a son of Gust and Elizabeth Larson, both of whom were born in the Kingdom of Sweden. Reared in Rockford, Clarence Larson completed his education in the high school there and early became interested in the retail meat business, taking employment in the meat market of Reinholdt Johnson, becoming a cutter in that establishment. In 1919, he engaged in business on his own account, opening a meat market at number 1124 14th Avenue, and has since been quite successful in business there, one of the most popular merchants on that flourishing commercial thoroughfare. On November 5, 1922, Clarence Larson was united in marriage to Miss Ruth Carlson, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. J.P. Carlson of Rockford. Mr. and Mrs. Larson have one child, a daughter, Clarice, born September 26, 1923. Mr. and Mrs. Larson are Republicans and give their interested attention to general community affairs. Mr. Larson is a member of the Masonic fraternity and is also affiliated with the local lodge of the Knights of Pythias. He is known pleasantly and familiarly among his friends as Kelly, and his place of business is known in the neighborhood as Kelly's Meat Market. Where did he get the nickname Kelly? Apparently the nickname for Clarence is Kelly. I have known other people to have had that nickname. Yes, that is a nickname. And it became a business name then? And that's his business name, yes. And it's still continuing in the family? It will continue in the family, right. So there was your husband who was going to take care of your father's profession then? Yes, there were no boys. So I had to find one. You had to look for them, yes. Right. So he belonged then to American organizations, Masonic and Pythias? Yes, yes. And no Swedish organization? The Swedish Church? Yes. The Free Church? Yes, the Swedish Free Church. But I don't remember them. I think his business took care of so much time. I recall. He had a lot of people there, too. Yes, and I recall never at night him coming home until 7 o'clock. Saturday nights the store was open. He didn't get home until after 9. I don't think there was time to go socializing with clubs. Yes, socializing 18 hours a day with the customers. Right. He was very dedicated to his business. Oh my. Did your mother also help out behind the counter? No, no. It was not a ladies' place, a meat market at that time. It was heavy work at that time. Oh, very heavy work. No, it was not. For meat and hot dogs. And I recall there was no heat in the wintertime. It was so cold in there. Right, yes. And all the sawdust on the floor. Those days, you see, the feminine movement wasn't on. What kind of shoes were they using on those cement floors or cold floors during that time? Did they use regular shoes? I think regular. I don't recall. They never used wooden shoes? No, no. No, we never had wooden shoes. Not in my family. I never recall seeing any. No, I don't. Because it must be cold there. I would think it would have been terribly cold. So that was not a ladies' place then? No, it was definitely not. They loved cutting up meat. And then they killed the chickens in the basement. We called that the blue room. So they brought up, they were killed every day then. In other words, they were not hanging more than necessary. Oh no. I imagine it was probably weekend orders. And then, of course, they were delivered. You know, not much delivery was going on in those days. They did not pluck them though? They did that too? Dress them? Yes, everything. So that was no place for ladies to go. So there was no customers coming in picking up a dead chicken with feathers on them? Oh, they could do that too. I guess either way they preferred. To cut some of the cost, I mean. And there was no mechanical pluckers at that time. There was? Oh, I see. So they had that. So there was no mechanical pluckers. Yeah, so there was a big turnaround then of chickens. I said, was there one of the more less expensive food items at that time, chickens, compared to beef and pork? Not really. I really, I guess I'm a little lost on that. I don't know back in that time. I really don't know. Not having been in the store and being, you know, at that time just so you had food home we didn't think about cost and perhaps they didn't bring all those things home to the women. I mean, other people know if they, because during the Depression, they probably had to be very frugal to be able to buy economically and so on. I would imagine. I would suppose maybe if the farmers brought them in that might have been the cheaper of the meats. But I don't recall. So he rode out of the Depression. Yes. Can I talk? Yeah, well sure. The interesting thing is veal at that time people really liked and they bought veal as cheap as anything else and that was one of their favorite foods was veal. Today it's out of the, you can't. It's too expensive. Too expensive. But at that time veal was just as cheap as chicken and the farmers would bring in the veals and they'd be just cut up in the back room. So they were calves then fed on milk up to about, weighing about? Oh, 100 pounds. 100 pounds. Right. And they'd be split in the back room and that was a very, now today you can't get a veal like that. They're not done that anymore, they feed them for beef now. Right. Well they have veal but it's so expensive you can't buy it. Expensive. I see. So there was a dish then that was used very often then. Yes, we used to make a lot of veal roast with pork wrapped around it. Delicacy. Delicacy for the Swedes. That's why they figure out why they can't find it today like that. Was that boiled or broiled or fried? Roasted just like a beef roast. Oh, I see. Or done with a pork roast. So that was the Sunday dinner then? I think that was a Swedish custom even over there, they would do it that way in Sweden. So did he employ any Swedish help, immigrants from Sweden at that time? He had about, well he had two stores. He had Security Market parted up on Broadway and he had two other stores at one time. I think he had four stores at one time. And he had Swedish butchers at those places. Security Market? Security Market. Why was their name so often used, like the bank, the Security Bank? I think that was taken from Security Bank. You think so? I think so. I don't know but I would guess. There was two on the west side if I remember correctly. With also the name Security. The names of those markets I don't remember. There was one on Chicago Avenue. And I don't remember the name of that. It's down here. Oh right. There was one almost close to State Street. And I'm trying to think of who ran that market and I can't remember offhand right now. But it was a Swedish fellow that ran that market. You see this is when I was a very young girl and my father had told my husband about this. And you see that wouldn't even be in my thoughts to ask him. No. No. Of course not. Of course not. So that's why he knows and I don't know. There was one more on Toots Peterson's, one of the operators of one of them. Oh I can recall that name. Was that west of State Street? He worked for us for a little bit. Yeah he worked up on Chicago Avenue. Oh that's where he worked. When you started to date your husband, did your father pick him up from the store immediately to teach him? No, not really. No. I was an engineer at Greenlees. Is that what I mean? Oh there was so much difference in the... Right, it was. And then we got together and he wanted me to... To learn the trade. To learn the trade. When he came back from World War II, he went back to Greenlees for a while and worked in the drafting department. But then I believe he thought that it would be a nice thing to have him come in and join and carry on. Because he didn't know how to get out of it. So... It's a little different today. I don't know how to get out of it. At that time they worked many, many hours. Right. Yes, yes. It is different today. It is different. Altogether different. Well maybe you learn from the old people though. I mean you saw their mistakes and you try to correct it for you. Right. At that time everybody wanted to work themselves to death, you know, until the last day. I'm about the only Swede left in the meat business in Rockford. Is that right? One of the only Swedes? You're the only one with Silta and... The others are trying to follow it with an Italian background. But it won't be the same. It doesn't work out. It's like Kentucky Fried Chicken, no one can do it. Right, right. So that's why we're very hesitant in giving it up. We want to try and keep it up. But I am the only one I think left in Rockford of a Swedish descent of making Silta. Carry on the tradition. Right. And we want to carry it on as long as we can. They do have the Siltas in other stores, but the Mr. Johnson that made it for this one store has now died, so they are just trying to carry it on, but they are not Swedish descent. So you have Italian-Swedish Silta. I suppose they use different kind of ingredients, so it won't be the same. They're not that fussy about what they do and what they use. There's other fat perhaps in there. It's something that's different. We don't really know, but we have people come in and it doesn't taste alike. We have stores that want to buy it from us, but we don't want to sell it to the other stores. We did it one time, we sold it to supermarkets and they didn't know how to handle it, and so it didn't work out well that way. So now we just have it on ourselves. So then in 1944, that was still during the war. Yes. Yes, in 1944 there were four businessmen in particular that felt the need for this bank to reopen on Broadway. Well they had felt it before that, but in 1944 they got together and I have a little book here called The Night on Broadway, and it said in November 1944, four Broadway merchants got serious about organizing a bank. They were Gust E. Blomquist, Carl E. Lindquist, Clarence Larson, and Roy Johnson. Roy Johnson was elected chairman of the committee. His major task was to guide the operations necessary to create the new bank. But I might add that Gust E. Blomquist was the furniture store man on Broadway, Carl E. Lindquist was the jeweler on Broadway, Clarence Larson was the meat man, and Roy Johnson was the sporting store and automotive. So they were all Broadway merchants and they put in their first dollars to open City National Bank. And in 1945, on September 8th, it was opened. And there was over half a million dollars deposited then. Yes, I believe that does say that in here in the booklet, yes. And it has really, really gone. But how were they able to do this so shortly after the first bank failed? Oh, that would have been from 1929. It was reluctant. Very reluctant, yes. Because where did they bank now when Security Bank failed? Did they have to go to the Swedish bank then? Yes, they went there. And they felt it was too far away or inconvenience? Well, then they had to go out and push for the business. Which they had the bank president came in from, what was it, ABIC? No, this was Mr. Ball was our first president of the bank, yes. So he came in from out of town. And he went out and pushed to the businesses. But I think they just felt they needed something closer than to go way down to 7th Street. 7th Street encompassed the 7th Street businessmen. And here sits this building. It is a bank. It's got everything in there. It's just been closed. What was in it during that time? It was closed? Nothing? Nothing. It was empty? Beautiful marble inside there. No, just closed. It was there, everything. Who owned it at that time? I don't know if I know. Because there was a bank up the coast. Yes, I don't know. But I always remember that it was just sitting there. So I think they, I don't know. Because this group then had to buy the building. That I don't know the particulars. And then they had to have a deposit themselves, I mean, to make it a bank. There was a... Yeah, but they had to have enough money to start the bank with the state in the federal. And that we don't really know. Maybe he tells me. I can just... Because the deposition was so close, all of the... From 29 to 45. It failed in 31 or was it 30? Or did it fail the first year? In the 30s, I think. Or 29. I don't recall. This book doesn't go into all those details. It says in this book, though, the first commercial account, that of Blomquist Furniture Store was opened by Gus Blomquist. It was an appropriate climax to this man's dream and work for the founding of a bank on Broadway. The business district that he had helped to build. You can bank on Broadway in more ways than one. For a Blomquist, that was reality. A dream no more. So I think all the businessmen felt that this bank had failed and they wanted to reopen it and show that it can be. It can be done. But it took a lot of guts, don't you think? Because most of them probably burned pretty heavily. And there were probably some voices raised there. I don't want to get burned once more. That's right. Although now, of course, we have that F-L-S-L-I-C. Federal. The bank is gone. Just... But now... But a half a million dollars the first day is remarkable. Right. Five thousand people. Yes. The opening ceremony there. Right. Five hundred thousand is deposited at New Bank on opening day. Yeah. Five thousand people. People had a lot of money at that time because they were working overtime. Yes. After the war. They had the money. They had the money. They didn't know what to do with the money. And then it would... Life was ripe then. And then it would have been secured, I imagine, now. I don't think it was secured at that time. Don't you think so? No. Right at the... At the I-C-P later? At the I-C-P later. So I don't have these particulars. But the people had the money and they wanted something to... Close by to go to. So you then, Mrs. Culberry, you were old enough then to start working with the bank? In fact, I worked on opening day. On opening day. I was a savings teller. Yes. I was one of the very first workers. So you had gone to business college and headed up, or... No. I never... Rockford College. I went to Rockford College. However, I did not take up business. Home economics was my major. But I've always liked bookkeeping. Always. And it just fell in line. And I worked there for five years until my son was born. And then from then on, I worked in the business. The meat business. So you saw the beginning then of the bank, then? Absolutely. Day one. And it took off... Beautifully. Pretty good. Absolutely. Yes. And now the bank has been merged with First of America. I don't know if you've noticed that in the papers. Yes, I... It's just... Yes, it's gone fabulous. And now they're putting their corporate headquarters in the old Swedenhouse restaurant on State Street. Oh, I see. Yes. That's going to be the corporate offices. So, yes, it's been a wonderful thing to see grow and happen. So Mr. Frieden, is he also a stockholder in the... I would imagine. I really don't know about... Yes, I don't know all these particulars. He's the one that's in the construction, I see. Right, yes. He has a construction. Yeah, he has a... So he must be. He must be quite a stockholder. Yes. So you had loans then to people to build houses and is this your father? That's my father right there in the front row there. And that's on the opening day of the bank. So, and this now, the night on Broadway, you had a symbol there, you said? Yes, for a while there. That didn't start out on opening day, but they had a big knight in armor inside and so they just took that off. Oh, inside the bank? Inside the bank. They had a big person, all the silver armor wear on there and they just used that as a logo. This is the watchman for your money. Yeah. Right. But I don't see that around anymore. And then they used security, I know. Oh, no, no security. What happened to the people, Truman and Engstrom and Truman Johnson? That I don't know. You must have talked to people. I wonder. Have you talked to people? You don't remember them personally? No. No. No, I don't. Because I'm sure you talked to Rubinold. Yes, they mentioned their names. Yes, they would know them. Did they know what happened? Well, they were probably clobbered in the wrong time and the wrong instance, I suppose. I think Truman did something wrong there. I understand, but I don't, that's all I heard. But everything was going so good then in the 20s, so they probably, they were not afraid to take risks. Right. Apparently. Because they were easily covered up. And then when everything starts going, the paying time falls in. Then there was problems. So you worked then until your first time was born? Yes, so I worked five years in those days. Then I didn't go back, but I started working for him. I do all his book work. But you have to tell him about that opening day you were waiting for a telephone call from me from overseas. No, no, I was not. The interesting part is we were married on September 1, 1944. So on September 1, 1945, I was to have received a long distance phone call from Hawaii. He was stationed with the United States Navy Band. He was conductor of the band over there. And I was most worried because that was opening day of the bank. But for some reason, things did not gel and the bank did not open until September 8, 1945. So I had no problem getting my phone call. So you had to stay home then for your phone call? No, the bank did not. No, but I mean you had to receive his phone call. Oh, yes, yes. So the bank did not open until September 8, so I had a week. They canceled everything else? Yes. So they didn't know why they did it. No, it's just things weren't gelling right and they wasn't quite ready to open. Yes. And the interesting thing, the telephone call from there, I had to sit and wait two hours to make it. And it cost $45. $45? Yeah, for three minutes. Did you send a telegram then to tell her to be... I wrote a letter. You wrote a letter? You were calling so and so hours? Right. And I will call at a certain time. So $45? $45. How was the reception though of the call? Could you hear it? It was very good. I don't think it was too bad. But now I can call for maybe five hours. You didn't tell me how long you were talking though. No. Yes. Maybe you were on there for two hours. Three minutes, I think. Oh, three minutes? Well, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how long you were talking. Oh, well, I don't even recall at this point. Well, I remember. You remember. He had to pay for it. I didn't have quite enough money hardly. That was the last call you made overseas. Right. Right. Then he also sent me a lay of orchids. And they arrived and they were a brownish tone color. And I thought they had been spoiled. To me, an orchid is purple. And I wasn't aware of all these different kinds of orchids. And it was not. It was a cymbidium or some other kind of orchid. So it wasn't that color. I suppose over there you have a different. All these different. Well, they are not. We have them here now too, but. Oh, yes. So it was kind of interesting. Have you been there? No. I've never been there. I've never been to Hawaii. Well, he was there for a whole year. A whole year. So he, yeah. It's beautiful, I understand. Beautiful. Yeah, beautiful. So, you were in Hawaii for a while. Yeah. And then you moved to New York. So then your father, he was a stockholder and a trustee of the bank. Yes. As long as he lived all the way to. Oh, yes. Yes. And he, well, he had a heart attack. So suddenly at age 62. Oh, I see. In 1960, he was 62. Very young. Hard working Swedes. Yes, I think Gus Blomquist had a heart attack too. I think he was not too old either. Yes. So that was very sad for us to lose him because he was such a vibrant person. He loved people. Knew everybody when they came in the store by their name. Yeah, just was his life. Well that familiar. Oh, thank you. Touch is probably lost nowadays. I mean, when you go to the store today, you don't know the manager. You don't know the clerk. And I mean, you know them by, but you never talked to them like you did years ago. No, see that's what we're. They probably trusted the store owner in a different way than they do today. Oh, definitely. Now you go into a store and you don't see the same clerk each time you go in. But I do have a plaque that the bank presented us upon my father's death. Why don't you read that? Board of Directors Meeting, City National Bank of Rockford, July 18, 1960. Whereas the chairman brought to the attention of the board the sudden and unexpected death of one of our founding directors, Clarence G. Larson. And whereas it is the desire of the board of directors in record their personal sympathy to Mr. Larson's widow and family, and also to recognize the dedicated service that Mr. Larson rendered the City National Bank of Rockford during his incumbency as director. Now therefore be it resolved that this day the City National Bank of Rockford, through its board of directors, is a material expression of deep gratitude paid tribute of our founding directors Clarence G. Kelly Larson. Mr. Larson was a member at the original board of directors and served continuously to the date of his death. He was instrumental in obtaining new business and his novice and counsel have been invaluable to the bank and its board of directors. We as members of the board of directors personally extend our sincere sympathy to Mr. Larson's widow Ruth E. Larson and his surviving children. Be it further resolved that the foregoing resolution be spread upon the corporate records at the bank and a copy thereof be sent to Mr. Larson's widow Ruth E. Larson and to his surviving children. So he was working as a director right up to the time. Were you offered a directorship then in the bank? No, no that was not. So it was the end of the Larson Bank? That was the end as far as the bank, yes. But when he, time of his passing though he could see that it worked out all right and there was a foresight. Oh yes, he was pleased with the bank, yes I should say so. So there were good years then on Broadway during the 50s and 60s? Yes, yes I would say so. I think after the late 60s and 70s started sort of a turnaround. Supermarkets came in, well then they went to the outlying areas, to the shopping centers right? And then some of the bigger stores like the Penny Company closed up their store on Broadway and they went out to the supermarkets. The furniture stores still stayed, they were large enough but the smaller stores, the people did not come as much, they went to the shopping centers and supermarkets. During that time then, 20s and 30s and 40s, you didn't see any packages that said expiration date, three weeks from now or two days from now. You wonder many times, I know there's people who don't understand that if you talk to them that there's got to be an expiration date on it. But you never heard about anybody get sick or anything like that, there was hanging and meats and... Is it overdone you think? It's overdone because I have, I'm in the meat business, which encounters inspectors coming in every day to check things. Every day? Every day, to be cleanliness you know. Years ago we never washed that grinder from the beginning of Monday until maybe Wednesday. That's right because you know you have natural... You put it in the refrigeration. But today everything... Is that enough? It has to be washed every day, the floors, everything. Boiling water. So you cannot have sawdust on the floor anymore then. Oh no. In some places they can now, I guess they're coming back to it. Why are they getting sawdust though? It has bugs in it. Yeah but there's turpentine in there. This is cassette two, side two, continuation with Mr. and Mrs. Kohlberg, Rockford, Illinois, side two, cassette two. The government that wants to have somebody to work. But the cost involved though. That's right, so they need to create jobs. And this is what they're doing. They create jobs so they can come and harass the poor retailer or wholesaler or whatever. It's a sad situation. And here you're not allowed to use the, what we call in Swedish, saltpeter, you know the white on the... No, that you can't use. That's been outlawed for many years. What is the reason for that? I don't know if it is or not really outlawed, if it's put on the label. You know for hamburger meats for instance because if they... Well that's not saltpeter they use for that. That was another... Well there's something else. That would make it red. Yes, but it looks fresh right away. You can't use, no. That's saltpeter. That was another thing they had but... Which is fine, that doesn't bother me. But saltpeter is used in corned beef and stuff like that. They still can use that. Still use that. Yeah right. But in hamburger, to make it fresh, the supermarkets can get by with it because they don't have inspectors. Well they don't inspect those places. It's just where it's processed. The processing plants, the state inspector is there every day. That's what's wrong I think. Because they can put out anything they want to. Now this one's French. Yeah, it isn't. Right. So I like this to go out because I think that's great. Well it's interesting because you see all this date, I mean date pack packages. Years ago, I'm old enough so I understand. Years ago you never had that problem. I never get sick from anything and other people probably never... It's overdone. If it don't taste good, you don't eat it. Right, right. But the common sense is not there anymore. You got to be... You got to be... Government sense. It's to make jobs. Yes, definitely to make... To create jobs. And it makes it more expensive too of course to go to the... Of course. We have to pay fees. Yeah. Sure. If you make it more purified, the less your body is able to counteract it. That's it. Four years ago, it's going to come to the day when it's too cleansing and you're going to get sick like that. Because your body hasn't got the immune effect on it. So they go with the cycles. Yeah, they go with the cycles. I hope it will change. It's like religion. They go with the cycles. It's wrong, it's wrong. I think Scrooge Brook can tell you this too. If they went into the bakeries today or years ago... It's a different story. It's a different story. It's a different story. They'd never be able to pass. The health inspection. Because it's all done on wood. Yes. There can be no wood. Oh, they can't do that. It's got to be stainless steel. Stainless steel. Right. It's different. And that's why I say I don't think... Sure, but how about in the meat shop? Can you use the cleaver on the wood? No. You cannot? No. It's got to be stainless steel and it's got to be a plastic. Sure, but how can you cut the bones with the cleaver then? You don't cut on a cleaver anymore. You don't use that anymore? No. You use a knife or a saw. A saw. A saw. A saw's got to be immaculate when you finish. They ruined the whole tradition of the good meat, man. Yes. Oh, yes. There's no more chopper. You don't use this... No more choppers. That cleaver's got to be... That wooden handle on the cleaver would pass. See, it's got to be a plastic handle on the knife or anything that's used in there. What do they have against wood? It can be... What do you call it when it goes into the wood? The bacteria? Bacteria. Goes in there? Get into the wood. In the plastic, they can't. In the plastic, it's... Well, Sweden has a bone as far as... Plastic is even worse to keep clean than wood, though. If you have a piece of wood that's really worn good, it's easy to clean that handle and the plastic handle. Yeah, but it's still getting into the wood. Yeah, but look in the car seats and everything, it's made of plastic. It's impossible to clean. Yeah, we agree with you. But you can't sell it. But you can't... No, you can't sell. They have made up the... I don't think the ones that make the laws know anything about the business. No. So they are not trained in the field and... Oh, they're trained very highly. In the field? In the field. To detect all those fallacies. From the colleges and so forth. I know, but not out in the meat, on the meat counter. They don't know what they're talking about, really. They sit there and... It's hard to say, because they have studied it chemically, and this sort of thing that is wrong. But... It's most scientific, is what it is. But there's another thing. Still, they can have this enzyme, you know, about to make the meat tender. Yes. They use that for many years. Yes, and still... And I know how that works, because they're sprayed into the animal before they are killed. Right. And if they get too much of that, in other words, then the animal gets a hemorrhage. Right. And they die from a stroke. How can they detect it coming out in the meat, though? I mean, they don't expect those things happening. I mean, it's poison. Right. It's poison. But they wouldn't handle it on a knife. On a knife. It's not allowable. It's bad. Because it can't be cleaned. Well, I tell you, but you can't argue with them. No. Or they'll close you up. Oh, no. They'll close you up, then. Oh, yes. Close your door. Yes. They'll lock your door and put a sign on it, and you can't operate. How can they come every day? I mean, if they check you out now for a month, why do they have to come every day? I mean, I think it's really silly, though. I mean, this is ridiculous. Well, maybe they clean that grinder, though, at night before. This, like, this... Which is why I told you before, we never used to do that. No, I know, because, you know, the same thing when you bake certain Swedish cookies. Yeah. The ladies don't clean those metal forms. Cutters. Yeah, the forms. Because, you know, otherwise they will stick if you clean them every time. Yes, yes. It's a custom. You don't do that. No, that's right. And if you tell people today, they say, well, you've got to clean this. It's no good, you know. Yeah. But, you know, I mean, this is the way it's done. I mean, it's an old, you know, thousands of years, maybe. Tradition, and everybody has lived through it. They never got sick. But 1962, they changed it. No, they changed it. That's right. Sure, so you put the grinder in the refrigeration, which certainly stopped any germs. Right. But now they come every day to check to be sure that you have scoured that down with hot water. It's got to be hot water. Hot water. So they don't do anything then, before closing time? No, no, they might come in the morning to make sure everything was clean before you started. You've got to live here in Rockford, then. Yeah. Oh, yeah. There's three of them in here in Rockford. They live steady all year long. Yeah, yeah. It is all they do. That's all they do. They make up tickets. And every city that has it, like Beloit, Freeport, Rochelle, all of them. Any processing. Just think of the expense of that. Imagine the expense. It sounds unbelievable. In Chicago. There must be thousands of them. They won't even let them in the place. They'll go out and cut their tires. They do. The inspectors are scared to go in there. There's no other tape. And there you have the courier in B2, though. Oh, sure. They have several inspectors. That's a different situation with the Jewish people. But do they also go into their stores? Oh, absolutely. But you see, they have so many in the Chicago area that... They are strong enough to keep them away. The Swedes are not strong enough. There's one against the governmental mafia. But they don't have that type of inspection in the supermarkets. This even... That's the worst thing. But they must have a city inspection there. They have a city inspection. But what does a city inspection know about that sort of thing? No, no, no. So it's very unequal. They don't want to enter their ground meat. When they're on a special... It's processed right there. Sure. And it's never checked. Here we have to have sent stuff to the state to be inspected and chemically tested. How often do you do that? That's once every three months, I think. They take a water sample. Pork sausage or whatever you process. Then they send in to see if it's enough fat versus the leanest. How can you stand all this regimentation? You would think you would get mad at it and upset and hot-tempered. What can you do? You still have to relax. What can you do? You get used to the system then. You get used to it and you go along with it. You think how foolish it is. If you get upset about it and get perturbed and mad, you just aggravate everything. So it's better to be quiet and go along with it. Once you get into this... You can't break the system. You can't break the system, no. But I think in a few years it's going to change. I don't know. I don't think they can afford it. So there's a lot of taxpayers' money that goes to waste. Absolutely. We pay fees twice a year. Oh, yes, and it keeps going up all the time. So you can see why there aren't so many people in the old business anymore. They couldn't take it and force them out then. Yes, you can't carry on. So there are no third generation and fourth generation aren't keeping up in so many things anymore because they can go out and work in the computers and make lots of money. They don't want to work these long hours. So we're losing all our heritage, our original. That's a sad thing. We're losing our Swedish heritage here in Rostock because it's going more commercialized. Especially food, that's one of the richest cultures, trend you have. But your father-in-law now and your father, I mean, when he worked in the meat store, the people could feel confidence in talking to him about meat because he knew that. Yes, right. But like I said before, today the young people don't have that. They really don't know what they are shopping for. They would trust him like they would a jeweler. Yes. And they would be a trustee between. Right. Oh, yes. And if they called up and they wanted some good meat, they'd have good meat because they could trust him. But in the supermarket there is a different... You get a different job every day. Every day. So you never know. You never know. So is it going to die out there, you think, the customer of Swedish pressyltan? I think it is. And you can cut up kåkor now with Kalisvik's. Yes, with Kalisvik gone now. There is probably one line that is going to... Unless his son... His son was going to try and come back and open up with some bakers that would come back and bake for him because I don't think he is a baker. He was trained a little bit, but I don't think he liked it. No, he didn't like it and he didn't know that much about it. No, you've got to be... He's been a daughter and I don't think he cares about it. But I heard that he was going to try and come back and open it up again. But they went to Sweden, I guess, to take care of his affairs, I heard. Do you hear differently? No, I haven't heard anything more than he was cremated and sent to Sweden. Yeah. They probably are for service. Oh, I see. So that was the end of an era. On Broadway. Yes. But the bank flourished. Yes, the bank went ahead. It's wonderful. It's growing leaps and bounds even today. So there was a venture, there were some Swedes, Blomqvist, Larsson, Lindqvist, or was it Johnson? Johnson, and Johnson. All Swedes. All Swedes. That whole block, it was just Swedish town. Did they continue on then also until they died? The rest of the stockholders? So Lindqvist, did he sell off? Yes, I think so. Yeah. I think they all continued on. He carried on for a while, and then he sold out and moved to California. Miss Johnson... Oh, he meant at the bank. At the bank. At the bank. Oh. Oh, no, not... By a stockholder. Lindqvist's son was not a stockholder. No, no. No, no, no. Yes, they all continued until they passed away. Oh, yes. Yes, yes. Yeah, they were right there. And you never went back then to work for the bank? No, I never did go back after because I got too involved in the market. Because then we had the groceries, so we had like a little supermarket. Oh, yes, then we had that. And this is the same place as you are having today? Oh, no, we were a little bit bigger. Just next door. Bigger. Yeah, next door. Expanded. So then we went smaller because, you know, there were too many hours having the little grocery store and meat market and trying to keep help. They never would show up. I was working just all hours. So then we decided to go the little Swedish ethnic at Christmas time. As a gift shop and also with meat. Yes, at the Christmas. Sausage. Just the Christmas. And then he has the wholesale meats all year round. That's when we started. That was in 1973. We turned to that. You don't have krokkalkur on your menu? No, we don't because you see Kalsvik made that. Oh, yeah, this right there. Yes, oh, yeah, he made that. And I don't know when, you know, if you're going to do that, you don't go into gifts and all these other things you can't handle. There's a lot of work I understand. Oh, a terrible lot of work. It's an art. It's an art. Do you like them? I have very few krokkalkur, but I can eat them. Some are too heavy. They're too heavy. You've got to have heavy work done. Yes, right. Otherwise I think they're not too good for your stomach. There was one other lady that made them, and she worked for a certified. And I'm trying to think, she was from Sweden. I don't know whether she still does or not, but she just had certain times of the year that she made them. That's all I know of, and I don't. So I think it's a lot lost. Yeah, it's a lot lost. Oh, it's sad. The old-timers and the young people didn't catch on to it that much. No, no. No, they really didn't. I guess they didn't care for them or something. Well, it was the people that came, they were so familiar with them. Yes. So they had like a, there was like a glow-in-the-home country the way they saw those krokkalkur. Sure, sure. Most of the people made them at home. Yes, of course, yes, of course they did. If you went out and saw a pork, you had to cut the, you know, cut it up. So they made them at home then. And then they made them. They went home and made it. Some people couldn't make them and some could. It's funny about that. It's important to get the water out of the potatoes. It's something that they... It's a trick. And now the, you know, offspring want them and they don't know how to make them. Yes. So that's... It's interesting. But now in Rockford we have all the Mexican. My, we have different culture. Pepperonis. Oh, my. So you're not going to let any pepperonis in to silt them? No. No, no. No. It would be... No. It's freezing. Are you going to be here at Christmas time this year? Oh, I might be here at... You open up in November? Yes. Yes, so you have to stop down in November. November, December. Oh, yes, you have to stop. November, December, January. January, but, yeah, a little after, to January. And that's the end of the interview.