 This is cassette two, side one, cassette two, continuation with the Reverend Lundquist, Oma, Nebraska. Cassette two, side one. So your roots then in Lundeberga, were you able to find it or was it Homestead where your grandparents came from? I could not find a precise place. We have never been able, I couldn't. Did you go to the pastor or talk to him? No, we didn't get there. We got to the church. That we got there. There are some people that are related to my dad. They are covenant people, both in this country and over in Sweden. They must have come over from the covenant area back there. These are second cousins and they were the ones that piloted us around that day. And so I got into the church. I got a picture of myself standing in the pulpit with a red sweater on. That was kind of fun. But I don't know, when you get into some of these things, it's hard to find the precise place sometimes. Well, you've got to really, you could find it, but you've got to stay there and you've got to do that more than one day when you're going to root out some of that stuff. You could see the groan. Oh yeah. And there was one piece, there's these Carlson's nephew from Linsburg. They just both died here recently. Their nephew lived on one of these places that may have been one of the homes of an up on a hill, rocks, how in the world he could make a living even there to this day, I don't know. It was full of rocks. Then we stayed with some relatives of my mother's that we had prearranged on in Mjöllanda, and a little town there. And they did not speak a word of English. And my wife does not speak either Norwegian or Swedish because she's Norwegian background. But I conjured up enough Swedish both over in Norway and in Sweden so that I could get along. I couldn't believe that I could remember that much because I hadn't used it for years on end. I said to my wife, I says, I think we're in for a long weekend because these people are Pentecostals. I didn't know that until we got there, but we found out somehow sooner in conversation. But I thought if they're the overbearing kind, this could be kind of tough. But they turned out to be very considerate and very nice and very charitable. And it got to be Sunday morning and we had the proverbial great big Swedish breakfast. And he said, now we're going to go and watch television. And it's a Lutheran, it was a Lutheran service from Kalmar. It is one of the best produced religious services I have ever in my life seen. It was technically absolutely perfect in my opinion. I'm not a technician, but, and the pastor was in St. Michael's Sunday and the pastor was preaching on children. And every so often in his message, he'd have a children's choir come in, they'd stand up and they'd sing. It was just glorious. Well, and we got all through with that and I said, well, we'll go on to church with you. Whenever you're ready to go to your church, we'll go with you. Oh no, no, we just got to go to Stuttgart, you know. They were Pentecostal. Pingsvenner. Yeah, Pingsvenner. Philadelphia. Yeah, that's Pingsvenner. No, no, we just got to go to Stuttgart. They honor us. And I said, no, we'll go with you. Well, he says, our pastor's name is Lindquist, but he's not there today. He's out someplace else. And they were having some kind of a group of young people coming in from northern Sweden or something. So they insisted. Oh, we went over to the church. Our church service lasted two and a half hours. First of all, a guy had a baptism that lasted 30 minutes. Just never quit. Then they had a visiting fireman, a lay evangelist from up in northern Sweden someplace who was on the border because he referred to a lot of things in Norway. And he couldn't even use the pulpit, so they had set up a little lectern with a speaker, I mean with a rope speaker, a microphone to him. And he went on and on. And every time you'd think he was through, he'd flip the Bible over and he'd find another Bible verse and on he'd go again. And he just kept on like that. It went on for a good time. Was this younger people that did this or older? No, they were pretty much an older people. Some young people there, not bad. This Lundstorp was a long service. And then they had a new cantor that had just come and he was up in the balcony and doing the organ and all that stuff. Then they invited him to come down and be introduced. And he had this young woman with him and a baby. I thought, gosh, that must be his daughter. And it turned out to be his wife and kid. And kid, he was old enough to be the grandfather of the woman. And then they said, well, there'll be coffee over in the parish hall afterwards. And that was just a few little steps away from the church. We walked out of church. Nobody said a word to us. Just walked right out. Nobody ever said anything to us. Nobody, the pastor didn't greet anybody. He wasn't even there. So anyway, we were walking back to home, which was within walking distance of where they lived. And I started commenting about what a nice service it was. But I had said to my wife, I said, I'll bet you Nicolese people are going to, they're going to have liked this today because this guy was a real evangelist. Sure enough, they thought that was a good sermon. That's why they didn't hesitate to go with you. Well, I don't think they knew that this was going to happen, but it's just something that we got into. Were there many in this church? I would say there was a third full. It was, of course, a big church. But then we went out and walked out in the cemetery after. It's probably one of the most beautiful cemeteries we've looked at. It's terraced and absolutely gorgeous. And sure enough, we discovered the grave of some one of our relatives that had passed away just about 1970 or something like that, 72, 73, something like that. There was a relative of these people on that side of the family, my mother's side. That was kind of an interesting experience. Do you remember receiving any letters from Sweden when you were a little boy? My mother, she wrote to a number of people that would have been her, either brothers or sisters of her dad or mother. And she wrote, she was the last one of the group that kept in touch with people over there and wrote Swedish letters. Yeah, very much so. But then they'd die off and then letters wouldn't come anymore and the next generation didn't follow on. Oh, I could spend half a whole summer trying to root up people over there if I ever had the time to do it. So the area, as you saw it, it was completely different compared to Smoky Valley. Well, in some parts we then drove from Jorlanda, we went down to Orifos. And I had, while we were up in Uppsala, I asked this pastor, the chaplain that's the chief pastor, chaplain of the Church of Sweden, I said, you wouldn't by any chance know a guy by the name of Olle Madalen. Olle Madalen? He says, I sure do. He just finished being one of my chaplains down around some town around near Orifos. He's now in a congregation. He says, let's call him up. So we got on the phone and talked to him. He says, I got somebody here who wants to talk to you. Well, he had served a year as a exchange pastor in a German Lutheran church just three blocks from Old Gethsemane in Austin. So I had gotten to know him because he had a lot of, made friends with a lot of our Swede people even though he was working in a German church as an exchange. I don't know if it was a full year or not. So we set up an appointment with him and met him at his house in his parish, an open country parish outside of Orifos. Just delightful. It was a surprise. That was fun. And then he started asking questions. And he said, what ever happened to Mary Gustus? Well, I said, she got married and she's got a couple of kids and is a member of that St. Martin, no, St. Martin, she had married somebody from that church. And then pretty soon he'd come walking out. He says, well, I thought I'd ask, he says, here's her picture. Great, big. And he had dated her while he was there. So I says, well, does your wife know you got this? Oh, yeah, she says, she knows I've got this picture laying in here. He had married a Swedish deaconess. They had at that time a 16, 17 year old son, but I didn't, she was gone someplace. We didn't get to meet her, but he cooked coffee for us. How come he got the German church? I don't know how come. I don't know. It was some kind of an exchange program that was going on after World War II there in Rauhlquater. It was in the middle 50s. And just why he got to his, maybe they had the money to pay for it or something. They were a big church. They were about three times as big as ours was. Did you find out anything about the Swedish theological approach now, modern times, compared to United States, I mean to the LCA? You mean in Sweden? Yeah, how do they do with that compared to United States or LCA? I really didn't get into that too much. You didn't go to the Pentecostal church? You had no idea? No. The only thing I learned from the chaplains, my whole purpose over there was to meet with chaplains in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. I had set up a whole series of meetings. So good night. We met with chaplains in these different countries during the weekdays, and then we had prearranged meetings with relatives on long weekends. And my wife comes from, my wife's heritage is near Bergen, Norway. We literally saw the spot where her grandfather was buried, where he was raised. It was her first time? Yeah, oh it was delightful. We rented a car and drove 4,000 American miles and drove by nuts. And they had arranged a coffee party for her on a Sunday afternoon in Bergen, Norway. And she had 24 second cousins. Only one or two of them spoke English, the rest of them couldn't speak a word of English. She couldn't say a word in Swedish, she heard Norwegian. But her cousin with whom we stayed, her husband was a jeweler, ran a jewelry store in downtown Bergen off the waterfront there on a walking street. And he could speak English. So between he and myself, we could run around and interpret. It was fun. They were delightful people. Getting close to the big roots. Yeah, the old roots. So if we go back now to, you had a lot of experience as I mentioned before, and you told me about the Washington State and schooling in Minnesota of course, and then Texas and then up in Nebraska. How has this changed now? The preaching for instance, from LCA, from Augustana to LCA, and now ELCA. Yeah. There's tremendous change. Well I think we have gone through a period of, and I don't like the word liberal, but I think some of our professors have gone a little far over on the liberal side of theology. And I think we are probably beginning to come back to the center of where we belong. And I think there are several influences for that. I met with Dave Vickner, you know the Vickner tribe, we are classmates. And we were together up in Chicago here a few years ago. And Dave said, he said the influence of this Seminex group from Missouri that once had left AELC. Dr. Titchen. Yes. He said the influence of that group in our seminary is one of the most wholesome things he says I have seen since we were in seminary. Did they bring in something that fit right into the Old Augustana and the German? Well closer to it, and I think the closeness to it is basically the ability to take the scriptures and interpret them and relate them to life. Old Dr. Sebelius, who was our homiletics professor, who passed out yellow sheets of paper that he had stacked up for 20 years before, never had a fresh thought in his mind since then. But he had an influence on a lot of us, and the one phrase I will never forget, he says, young men, he says, connect up with life. He says connect up with life. Connect the Bible and the teachings of the gospel to where people live. You know that is worth something. But do you think that... That's one influence. I think the second influence that's going to be wholesome in the ELCA is some of the influence of some of the Norwegian, not necessarily the piety, but some of the stalwarts in the old Norwegian church. They are very conservative though, some of them. They have been extremely conservative, but there are some of those that are more towards the middle where they belong, and the extreme conservatives, of course, there are some of those going to leave, so they're not going to be involved. But I think there will be a synthesis of a coming together of these streams of the Finnish and the Danish and the German and the old Augustano. But I think the center of this whole new church is going to be this old Augustano spirit that has not died. We walked out of that gathering in Chicago two or three years ago. A lot of us said that is not a dead church yet. People may think we got swallowed up by the ULCA, but the ULCA knew darn well that they were up against some stubborn Swedes that weren't going to budge. I remember just throwing away very recently a letter that Sigurheim wrote to Franklin Clark Fye. It must have been four or five pages long, and he was cussing Frank up high heavens. I don't know how come I got a letter. I must have been involved in something that was involved with that, and that's why I got the copy of it. But old Franklin Fye also said that if he didn't get the Augustano with him, he'd never have a church, and he never would have had a church. But he promised Augustano quite a bit, though. Well, yeah, there were a lot of things that didn't get fulfilled, but I have a lot of hope for this ELCA. I don't like what I hear in Philadelphia where there's four seminary professors being divorced. I don't like that kind of stuff. I got kids that are divorced, and I don't like it. I don't understand it. I think we've got to come to grips with some standards in this new church that has got to... After all, we're going to be pastors and examples to people. I don't mean we have to be holier than thou, but we at least ought to have some standards that are meaningful to people. So do you think the Seminix group, now they broke off from Missouri, it seems that rift is going to give a lot of pluses for the ELCA, then? We have... We thought that rift wouldn't have been this... That's right....new birth of... That's right. I think that that is a real shining light in the new church to have that group. As an example, we have a young pastor in the church we belong to that is out of the Seminix movement. And last Sunday he preached on that difficult text of the parable where the guys had been out working and then the boss said, well, I'll pay you, you just worked an hour, I'm going to pay you the same price I gave the other guys. I'm telling you, that guy did... I told him after church that that was one of the best explanations I've ever heard. But he was so full of it. He'd walk away from the little pulpit, isn't that bigger thing, isn't where you're cooped in the thing. He was just so enthused. He said, well, imagine what old Gene Upshaw is going to do now with Dolan in this NFL strike. He relates to people. But boy, he stuck to that text and he explained it. And I sense this from these young Missouri pastors that have been raised up. They really are solid in their theology, but they know how to connect up with life too, and I think this is where we need to be. And I'm hoping that that influence, that plus a certain segment of the old ELC and ALC and the old Augustana. But I think Chilstrom's election, I have predicted that the next president will be out of the old Augustana church when Chilstrom is through. I may not live to see that. You think so? But he is in Augustana now, though. He is the new bishop now. Chilstrom grew out of the old Augustana tradition, and I'm suggesting that the possibility is great that the next bishop after him will come out of the Augustana church. I predicted in writing a history of Texas Conference 25 years ago, in an introductory part of the little, this is just a little bit of a thing, I predicted that there will be a merger in 25 years, and I hit it right on the head. I'm not a prophet or a son of a prophet, I'm just a son of a farmer, but it was kind of fun. You're better than Jimmie the Greek. So Bishop Chilstrom, is he in the middle of the road, you think, or is he... I think so. I think he is the epitome of the old Augustana church. That guy is something else. I was up to Minneapolis for a funeral of a friend of mine who used to be a pastor, and he and I had gone all through college and seminary together. And he had had the funeral, and after the committal at the grave, I went up to him and I says, well, I'm Mert Lundquist, and so I said, oh, I know who you are. I said, how do you know me? He says, I was scared to death of you. When you guys came up to the seminary and walked around those sacred halls, and we were nothing but a bunch of peons around there, and we knew that someday our lives and our future was in the hands of you guys. I used to be scared of you. Great big tall lanky sweet looking down at me. But I think it says something about him. Says a lot about a man of real spiritual stature. Nothing cockier about him. And of course, he's been knocked off the pins with his son's death and his own cancer and problems with his kids, the ones he does have. So I think this new church, because I've spent my whole life in inter-Lutheran relationships, and I've also spent it in ecumenical stuff. So I guess that's one reason why I'm here, because I can walk into a room of a Pentecostalist or a high church Catholic or anything else and feel at home and make hope that I feel at home with them. It's the personal feeling. Yeah. The denomination doesn't play any role here in your daily work. When you're meeting with people in the crisis of death and life, the denominational stuff doesn't mean very much. I've met people from every walk of life around here in the last 12 years. And yesterday I got called up into the medicine clinic at 2.30. I didn't get out of the little quarter after 4 yesterday. It was a black family. The lady died right on the bed up there, 36 years old. Small kids coming to see their dead mother out at Junior High. Quite an afternoon. Well, the pastor has an important role to play, and I always had. For the Swedes, they were thinking about the church before they were on the home many times in Kansas, for instance. They came with their psalm book and their prayer book and their Bibles and their hymn book, and they really gave something to us. Going back now to Kansas, Carl Swanson, of course, the founder of Bethany there, he was also a Mr. Republican. Yes. How did they mix? Today there's a lot of discussion about it, you know, should I mix politics with the public? He got along with it pretty good. I mean, the people were... he was out having Republican Party speeches every other night with the Senate in Kansas and everything, the legislature. I have kidded about when I grew up in Kansas, you were Republican first and a Christian second. And if you had that order in line, you were going to make it okay. Your parents, were they Republican? Oh, yes. And my brothers are Republicans. And you continue the same? I lean far more towards the Democratic Party right now than I do. I'm registered Republican. Was that Lyndon Johnson leanings you had when you were in Texas, and what happened? Well... He didn't like Lyndon. Oh, he didn't like... he was a dyed-in-the-wool Republican, old Carl. A lot of things Carl didn't like. I'm not sure he even liked me too well, because I didn't back off from some things sometimes. But in the state of Washington, there was a lot of Republican, Democratic... there were pretty even groups. So I've been more inclined to vote in terms of the person than proverbial type of thing. Well, then when you got to Texas, you didn't have to register anything there. You didn't in Washington either. To vote as a Republican in 1952 in Texas was just ridiculous, because you were just... there was no Republicans. There were no Republicans around to start voting. So what you had was a split in the Democratic Party of those that would be much more identifiable with the Republican Party, and then those that were the Democratic side, true Democratic people. So the primaries was the most important vote, because that's where you voted for the... what I call the Republican side, as reported the Democrat. So you pretty near had to be in the Democratic area in order to vote for anything viable. When it came to the general election, there weren't enough Republicans to even become viable. Of course, that's all changed now in the last 20 years. So now the Republican Party... Well, you were the only... the Democrats were strong. Oh yeah, that was the only thing. That's the only way you could vote. But you didn't have to register. You just went and voted. In fact, old Lyndon Johnson, he'd go out and buy up the poll taxes for... I don't know if he did, but a lot of those big ranchers did. According to... he voted in several counties, Lyndon Johnson. Yeah. Well, he's... Nobody will ever know what happened to the 87 votes that got him into office the first time, and probably illegally, but... Everything is possible in the big Texas. Oh yeah, yeah, you betcha. Yeah, that's a big state, and they think big and act big. Oh yeah. Yeah, we have a son that... We're going down there... I'm going down to Gethsemane and speak of the dedication of a new rock glass window in the church now on the fourth Sunday in November. In fact, I just talked to the secretary down there. They sent me up some literature on the different themes of the window. Were you the dean for Palm Valley and Bethlehem and Elgin and... Well, I was the president of the old Texas conference when we had 13 conferences. It's in the old Augustana church, so I did a dual role. I was president of the conference and also served as pastor of the congregation. Then the conference provided me some excellent help in the parish, first of which was an executive secretary that knew how to be an executive secretary, which was a big help to me. And then I would have either an associate pastor or an intern that would help with the day-to-day work while I was chasing around the country, so... So you went down to Kennedy and Galveston? Oh yeah. I went down to Galveston, installed pastors. At Stanford, Bethlehem Lutheran Church, Sven Magnus Svensson's old... Yeah, yeah....John's County... Yes, yes. And then, you see, Heterius was my predecessor in the conference presidency. Oh, I see. He was still... Oh yeah, he was......at that time, yeah. He married one of the... Of the... Well, he married a gal from Topeka, Kansas, originally. Dr. Heterius? Yeah, his... She was... Oh yeah, that was his daughter. But it was his daughter that married one of the Svensson people, the old Svensson that came from Sweden and came over there. Yeah, from Svarkar, in Småland. Yeah. Yeah, it's a remarkable bunch down there. Oh. You see, I've served two parishes, both of which were the original Swedish churches. Gethsemane was the first Swedish church in Texas, and Augustana the first one here. Well, Emanuel and Zion became Augustana. So how about the Palm Valley Church now, out in the cotton field? I said when I was down there that that's going to become one of the biggest rural churches in the country. Of course, no more rural now, it's gotten to be urban, but I could see what was going to happen, and that's gotten to be a big church. Good church. So there's a good, solid membership then. Oh, and when we relocated, see, the state came through in Austin and had the right of eminent domain, so we had to move out of Congress Avenue. We spent 13 months negotiating with the state to get the fair price that we felt we needed to get a toehold. And then during that period of time, we also did a study of all of the, we studied the movement of the congregation, we studied the developing, what the developers were planning on, we studied the school system where they were buying land and where they were going to put up schools, we studied the utility routes, we studied the highway routes that were in planning stages. We did every conceivable type of study we could. And then every time we completed something, then we called the congregation together. We didn't vote. Voting sometimes is the worst thing you can do if you want to split a church. So we just informed them, and we'd pass out the stuff, and we'd say, now you take this home and talk about it, and then you ask us questions if you've got some doubts and so on. Well, we got through that whole process, and we took the vote. We had about 80 percent in favor of relocation. Well, we had to relocate. It was either a choice of going downtown or going way out, didn't it? The interview continues, next slide. Next slide. The church is there now. And that church has grown by leaps and bounds. But there's a different structure also, a lot of Spanish people, of course. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think the impact of this whole new ELCA on Spanish is, their impact on us and we, if we're open to them, like at Salem down here in Omaha, is going to be a real viable thing in the new church. Very much so. And some of those Spanish people now, they are former Catholics. Oh, yes. They're coming over, and they're still over. Yeah. And a lot of members in the ELCA, the previous years I understand, are divorced women that want to get out of the Catholic church and come into the Lutherans. Yeah. Is this why they are leaning towards some of the Catholic customs, you think, in the Lutheran church? The sign of the cross and... Yeah. I don't think so. I think that that stems from some of our younger theologians in the seminaries, and going back and looking at old traditions in the Christian church, Catholic or whatever, and anything that comes up like making the sign of the cross. Now, in Gethsemane, the pastor there has taught them how to do it. Now, my daughter-in-law and son, they say, we just don't feel like, we don't feel free to do it. I say, why should you if you don't feel like you're doing it? I don't feel free to do it, and I'm not doing it. I'm not saying it's wrong, because the tradition is that it is the sign of the cross of Christ in whom I believe. But traditions are hard to come... Well, the traditions of the past, but then they come up new, and people say, well, that's something new, and it really isn't new at all. So some of the old people then object to it, I'm sure. Oh, I'm sure that... They don't feel comfortable....don't feel comfortable. I don't object to it. I do it as a pastor, I make the sign of the cross, but I've had to learn to do that, because when I got out of seminary, we didn't even think of anything like that. Dr. Sebelius and Madson, they didn't do it. I don't think either one of those would do that. Would you think Hasselquist and Erskine and Allan Carlson and Carl Svensson, Jonas Svensson, would they object to what they see today in the churches? I don't think so. That may be debatable by others. But I can't help but feel that people that had such a vision of where this old bunch of Swedes were going to go, that they would object to what the church has done in all of these years. I still think that the Augustan influence is going to be very influential in this new church, because I think the spirit... I have had a lot of pastors in the former ULCA just say, we are jealous of the way you guys interpret your theology. You're stuck together, and you've got a spirit that is enviable. We can get together, a bunch of us, and we have a Friday night dinner party. Every Friday night, a bunch of the retired pastors, and of course I don't have sense enough to retire. You ain't got no while. Yeah. But there are three families there of us, four of us, that are old Augustana people. Bernard Spong and Doris up there at Emmanuel, and Carl Larson and Laverne. He's the former bishop of... Red River Valley, yeah. And then Herbert Peterson over here at Bethel, and Arden and myself. I say we get so much stuff from the past. We have to be careful, because there's three or four other former ULCA pastors that are now with us that are retired. But they get to talking among themselves, and they've got a lot of stories to tell about their past, too. But it's a fun, it's an integrated group. But I know many of them have said that you guys have got something that we never had in the old. But it's crisscrossed all over the country. So you believe that Augustana and LCA, they have grown with the times? I think so. And I can't help but feel the guys like Hesselquist and Esbjerg and Carlson and Swanson, those guys would have done the same thing. When you look at from where they came, they had a lot of guts, too, to tackle what they did in a vision of sociologically and politically and church. Well, you heard about the union, of course, with the Episcopal Church in Chicago. There was another Swede that started a church there, Episcopalian. And his idea was that Esbjerg's teaching and also Carlson's was not true Swedish Lutheran. They were too informal. But it didn't last long. His church didn't, well, it disappeared after a few years, and he left the country, of course. So it's like the Missouri Synod. They are very, very orthodox in their belief. They haven't changed then over the years. Our youngest son and his wife belonged to a Missouri Synod church in Texas, in Dallas, Plano, actually. And they had a new little daughter here the day we came back from China, by the summer. So Tom had asked the pastor if I could baptize this child, and he said yes. He didn't dare to say no. So I have fun with my Missouri Synod friends. I tell them I have been in a Missouri Synod church and baptized my grandchild. You have? So how did that happen? I asked the pastor what I was supposed to do. He says, you baptize the baby, period. And he did not mention my name. He just said that's the grandfather of the child. He did not put my name in the bulletin. He didn't even put the name of our other son and daughter-in-law in the bulletin, who were the sponsors. He really covered up his tracks to make sure there was no evidence that I had gotten into that church. Now to me, I may be paranoid about it, and I may read a lot more into it than is fair, but I've said this to some of my Missouri friends that are, you know, more like my thinking. I said, no, you're probably right. He wasn't going to give any kind of evidence that an LCA guy had gotten in there and baptized him. Yeah, I remember I talked to some people, like Burgess Wenderson of Augustana. Oh, yeah, I know, Burgess. Dr. Burgendorf, of course. Sure. Well, they went down to meetings in St. Louis for the publication side of the church. They wanted to have some togetherness with him. They have to pray alone, and the Missouri Synod, they prayed 15 minutes before. They couldn't be in the same room. They really disturbed me. I mean, they are all Christians, and they couldn't sit around the table and have the prayer together. Well, let me tell you another one. When I was in Austin, we had a joint evangelism, some kind of a joint thing, where we had visiting pastors from all our churches with the Missouri Synod. And we had a committee in which the Missouri pastor and I were the co-chairmen, and we would meet for breakfast because if we had to meet early in the morning, we would get them together. Only Missouri could pray at those breakfasts. None of us could pray. It only had to be Missouri Synod prayer. I wouldn't tolerate that for one minute today. Did they say different, though? They didn't say anything different. It's just that it was unionism if one of us prayed with them. But for them to pray, as long as we were there and shut up, that was okay. But if I prayed, I couldn't pray. Then they would have walked off. Yeah, then they would have walked off. Dr. Hoffman, who is the Lutheran Hour speaker, we were at a Reformation service out here in Dana College some years ago. He would not sit on the platform as long as Reuben Swanson was up there. He walked from the audience up to give his sermon, but as long as Reuben was up there. Now, that's Hoffman, who is supposed to be a big shot in Missouri Synod. And one of our pastors wrote him a letter and told him, that is a disgrace to Christianity. And he wrote back some dumb answer. But didn't they scare, though, the former Augustana pastors, now with this teaching group coming to NCA in Chicago? They were an offspring of that group, though. I mean, wasn't that a disgrace, a little eyebrow there? I did not, in my context, did not sense anybody getting scared. In fact, if it was anything, I think they welcomed them, I think we had a feeling that these guys were finally being liberated from that shackle of the law, which is what they preach. The very Sunday I was down in Texas baptizing my little granddaughter, there was a half a page cussing the Presbyterians in the United Church of Christ up because of something that they had said about the Jewish people or something. They spend more time fighting something than they do spending time preaching the Gospel for positive purposes. So, it's for healing purposes. Yeah. They're always fighting something, all the time. I've lost my patience with those guys. In the name of Christ. Yeah. I've lost my patience. I wouldn't do what I did in the 50s. I just probably would refuse. I just lost my patience. But at that point in time in history, you felt that we could at least talk to each other, we could do some things together, so we'd sacrifice the prayer and you'd get spit on. Now you're older and wiser. So, what do you think? Do you think the Missouri Synod will be in the year 2000 with the EMCA? I think there are going to be one or two things that may happen. One is they will keep their head in the sand like an ostrich until they die. Or through the process of osmosis, where through integration of marriage and community affiliation with people, across sections of society, they're going to find out that they can't stand there alone, in isolation, as an isolated church. I have ministered to lots of Missouri Synod people in this hospital. Once in 12 years have I been asked to find a Missouri Synod pastor to give communion. The lay people, if they want communion, they never even ask. As long as they know I'm a Lutheran pastor, they don't even ask whether I'm Missouri or anything else. And I don't tell them. Because if they don't ask, I'm not going to tell them. Unless you're a ordained pastor. That's right. And I think, by and large, the lay people in the Missouri Synod Church are far ahead of their pastors. Way ahead. You take a salesman that I have met down in my son's home church down there and his wife, that travels all over the world, said to me one day, a guy about 50 years old, he says, good gravy, he says, there are going to be a lot more Christians in heaven than Lutheran church Missouri Synod people. But he's a member of that church. They do a lot of good community work. They're a well-organized, integrated community church. But a pastor is just something else. Do you think people are too much educated today? It is hard for a pastor to stand up, like years ago when I came to Lynchburg and Fremont and Marquette. I mean, they had a flock of people. They were very eager to listen. And they didn't question as much. Nowadays, everybody knows more than a pastor. They question that and question that. Is that good or is it bad? I think it's good. I think it's good because where would pastors be if they didn't have lay people? What's a church made up of? It's made up of lay people, Christian lay people. And I think the educational process that's gone on has been very healthy for our church because as a pastor today, you can't pull off the stuff I could pull off 45 years ago when I started out. Because like I said, I was probably the only educated, outside of one college, graduate in the whole parish. They believed in you. They believed and they trusted me. I had one layman that had had a business college education. He was the smartest guy I ever had that told me something that I needed to learn. He came into my office one day, a very nice person. He said, Pastor, I enjoy your sermons. But he says, why don't you talk to us so we can understand you? But you see, I didn't realize, I'd just been in seminary and I was full of seminary jargon. Four years of this stuff in college. It's just like I had a gut ache and I had to spew all this stuff out, you know. But had he not been kind enough to tell me that, I would never, I would have been preaching above those people. And he says, get off your high horse and talk to us so we can understand. During your ministry in different places, have you met someone that had been well read in the Bible, but the trouble with those people, they can be lame and very well know everything in the Bible, but are they able to interpret it the way that you see it to have been taught? Well, some, particularly if they have the pietistic and the fundamentalist tinge, then you don't communicate with them too well. Because they've got the answer and there's no use for you to even try. And I had people in Augustana that sent money to Oral Roberts or whatever they sent the stuff to. They were all into that stuff. And I suppose I had some in Texas too, I don't know. But on the other hand, you meet some lay people that want a good biblical theological understanding and they want it for the right purpose. They want to be able to communicate with you in small group discussions. And I think it's very wholesome. It's a fun group. Well, we've been shooting. Did you belong to any Swedish-American organizations, for instance, in Everett and in Austin? I never got involved in Everett. I got involved with the group in Texas. The Swedish Pioneer? The one in Bordain was it. I think they called that thing down. The Swedish Pioneer. I can't remember the exact name. I don't remember. I was never deeply into it. And here, the Noonday Club, we've been coming and going whenever we have a chance, we go to. We enjoy that. But you haven't belonged to Vasa or the Swedish Viking? No, I've never been a part of those. We had, the Vasa was quite active in Everett. And what's the women's part of the thing? But I never got involved with it up there for some reason, excepting the funerals. That's when the milestone. That was no problem. I never had any problems with anything like that. So. This was the end of the interview with Dr. Merton Lindquist of Omaha, Nebraska. End of interview.