 of the world. April 1986 and I'm sitting together with Viola Freberg in Moline, Illinois. She was born 1902, 29th of July in Moline. Your parents, Mrs. Freberg, they were both from Small Island. Mother Angelica De Los Angeles, California Your father and your mother and your father's name was Gustav Swanson. Mother Angelica De Los Angeles, California Well, in those days, you know, they changed their name. Your father's name was Gunnarsson. And then, Swan Gunnarsson. So then he took the name Swanson, see, because he was the only son. Did he do that when he came over here or in Sweden? In Sweden. I'm sure that was in Sweden. And your parents, they met each other in Sweden and married there. Yeah. But you mentioned that your mother-in-law, Lina Peterson, or Karen Peterson, she has been to the United States before. Yeah. She'd been here and then got sick and moved back, and went back to Sweden. And not long after that, then her and my father came here. So she got malaria, you said? Yeah, that's what she said. It was called malaria. Was she down south then? She was right in Rock Island, right in Moline. Oh, I see. My mother's brother had a brother and a sister. And they all came, and then the, the, the, the, the sister and my mother came to America. And my uncle was here. Her, her brother was here already. So then he got them a place to live with an old aunt. And that was down in, they called it in those days Halvega. You heard of that, halfway. Halvega. Halvega, down in Moline, at the very west end of Moline. Oh, I never heard of it. Halvega. Halvega. Oh yeah, that they talked. They were halfway down to Moline. Uh-huh, halfway to Rock Island. Halvega, they called it. Interesting. And she lived with an old aunt there. And then she got a job. And of course she couldn't speak a word of English. So she got into the worst thing she could have gotten into, a laundry. And she got sick there. Oh, I see. And that was such hard work in those days, you know, laundry. They had to stand in iron all day long. I think that's what made her sick. She probably could get something for the clothing too, or the washing and everything. Sure, she could. Some people brought in wood. Yeah, sure. Was there a big laundry down, Carlson's Laundry, or? Well, now I couldn't tell you what laundry it was. No, I don't think Carlson's was going that long ago. No, it's later. Uh-huh, that laundry was on the, at the bottom of 12th Street Hill. And no, I, that wasn't it. But she never did say the name, and I never did ask. And this Halvegan, where is that located? Well, that was down there about on, well, the closest I can say is about on 3rd Street and between 4th and 5th Avenue in Moline. Oh, there. And that was called Halvegan. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So there was a road mark they had down there. Yeah. Uh-huh. Well, I guess. So she went back to Sweden then when she got sick? Yeah. Back to her parents? She didn't have any parents. Well, she didn't? No, they were gone. Oh, I see. And I think that's one reason that, well, no, I'll take that back. Grandpa was still living, but the mother died when the kids were real little, so they got a stepmother. And of course, they never liked her. So then when the kids got big enough, they all come to America. So when she came back and met your father, she hurried back here again. Yeah. And he, my dad, when he was a little boy, he used to help his father paint houses because my grandfather was a painter. And of course, like boys, he fell off the roof. And they had to rush him to Vex-Feu. Yeah, Vex-Feu. Vex-Feu. And he was there for a long time, and they never did set that hip right. Well, he broke the hip. He broke his hip, and they never set it perfect, so he limped all his life. Not bad, but, and then when he came to this country, then while that was healing, of course, he had to sit still all the time. And then he learned to make shoes out of leather. In those days, the shoe men would go to the houses out in the country and make the shoes and stay right in the house there till the shoes were done. That was in Sweden, you mean? That was in Sweden, sure. So then when he came to this country, he knew how to half-sole shoes and how to fix shoes, and so he got a job. No, first he got a job in the shop. You know, almost all the Swedes got in the shops, but he didn't like it. He didn't like it a bit. So he, some way or other, got a hold of this shoe man that was a Swede, and he got a job in the shoe store and fixed shoes and done that till he died. He was a shoe man. But then he got so when he could talk English, you know, then he got so that he, and then years after that, they quit having men repair shoes in shoe shops, and he got a job as a salesman. So he sold shoes, and so he was all dressed up all the time, you know, and was a salesman. Did he travel outside the Moline? No, just in Moline. Just in Moline? Uh-huh, and he was in the shoe store, you know. And the people all liked him so well. So many of the, well, it was one of the finest shoe stores in Moline, and most of the rich people went there. And they knew my dad so well, and when they came in to buy shoes, they'd say, we want Swanson to wait on us. And he was in that shoe store. Well, then that shoe store, of course, that man died that had the shoe store. That was Don Tom Moline. That was Don Tom Moline. His name was Hallgren, and he got TB. And in those days, when you got TB, then you were gone, you know. So he, um, then another man bought the store, and my dad stayed right there. And then another one and another one, and he stayed right with everybody that bought the store. He was just like a fixture there, and he stayed right there. And, of course, when he, but then he retired about, well, I think he was only retired about 10 years, and then he died. Not quite 10 years. But, uh... So your mother, now, she never worked outside at all? No, never. No? Never, no. Because, and, uh... Oh, she... And you were the only child? I was the only child. Oh, so you were spoiled a little bit, then? I don't think so. You know what they say, though, you know, when there's only one, they get... That's what they say. Have more attention. Well, I, uh... You have more than any... I was a good little girl, I'll say that. They didn't have any trouble with me. No? And it was cute. We lived in a house on 13th Avenue and, uh, Leaven Street. And then there was a grocery store, a little grocery store around the corner. In those days, you know, there was little grocery stores all over instead of these big ones. And my mother would give me some money and tell me, and I was awful little, I don't know how she dared to, but there was no traffic then. And she'd say, I should go to the store and buy a cake of yeast. And I would say, yeast, I want yeast. But the lady in the store was Swedish and she knew what I wanted. But my mother said, if I turned the right... She would watch till I got to the corner. And she says, if I turned the right way, then it was all right. But if I turned the other way, she'd have to run after me because then I would go down the hill. And she says, I was so smart then. I'd look behind me and if I saw her coming, I'd go the wrong way and then start to run. Oh, so that was... So, did you talk Swedish then when you were growing up? No. No? They talked Swedish to me and I answered in English. I never did talk Swedish. I never learned to write it. But I did learn to read it. But you went to church or the Sunday school? Well, sure, I say I learned to read Swedish because I was confirmed in Swedish. In those days, well, in our church then, they had both English classes and Swedish. But all us kids that come from Swede people, we went, we're in the Swedish class. And the kids whose parents had lived here a long time, they went to the English class. And... So you think your parents wanted you to take the Swedish test? Oh, yes, they wanted me to take Swedish. And you didn't object to it either? And I didn't care. The kids in my block were all from Swedish people and they all took, went to confirmation in Swedish. So, in the past, you had two classes then, one English class? Yeah. On different days? No, the same day. One was, it seemed to me, one was before the other one. But... And you know how many people, kids there were in my confirmation class? Now there's about ten in the classes. Forty-two. Forty-two? Forty-two kids. Boys and girls? Boys together. That was a big class. And half of them are dead now. Because they're all, you know, way over 80. So, like I say, most of them are gone. And you all took Swedish lessons? Oh, yes. So you didn't have any trouble to understand Swedish, though? Oh, not a bit. No, no. Our sermons were in Swedish. So you understood them? I understood Swedish. And... What was I going to say? Well, it wasn't too long after that when they cut out the Swedish and they only had the English. And then they only had English services. So you had to recite in... In Swedish. In Swedish? Yes. Jag har hävande en gudiskallinga. I can't remember it now. And to have... Ain't that awful? I just can't remember it now. Well, when you don't hear a word of Swedish spoken year after year after year... It disappears. You bet it does. So, like your parents, then they talked mostly Swedish at home? That's all they talked. All they talked? All they talked was Swedish. Even when they got old? Yeah, even when they got old. And of course, you see, my dad had to learn English. He had a hard way to learn. Yeah, but he had to learn because he couldn't be in the shoe store and not talk English. But my mother, she would blab on Swedish. Well, she sent them, come out and to... She sent you then to go to the store, I suppose. Yeah, it was her that sent me to the store to get... So you understood both the languages? Well, I wanted to take it east. So, because I didn't talk plain. I was so little. Oh, gee. So, there was... How about now in the... Did they have any Swedish-American newspapers? Oh, my mother took the Svenska Amerikanaren. And she took that paper, and the minute it came in the morning, she would sit down and look at it. She loved to read so much. My dad didn't love to... He didn't care to read like she did, but she, I think, read every bit in that newspaper. And we took that till she died because I had her with me the last six months, and it used to come to our house then. And she read it from... Oh, yes. Cover to cover. She did, that Svenska Amerikanaren. Maybe I don't say it right, but you know what I mean. You didn't pay attention to it, was it? No. Didn't interest me any. No, no. Did they talk about Sweden? Well, they did between themselves. But, you know, I didn't... If it was now, I would have listened. But then I didn't care. To me, that was just nothing. You didn't know what they were talking about? No, I didn't know what they were talking... We didn't know until Slutback, and then we'd done this. Oh, and then my husband had seven... Oh, I was going to tell you. Then in 1955, we went to Sweden, Harold and I. He had retired then from the post office. And we went to Sweden, and we stayed in Halmstad. That was where my husband's... my father's sister lived. It was only my father and his sister. They didn't have big families either. But then his sister had seven kids, and they all lived around Halmstad. Three of them lived, one across the street, one next door here, one next door there. They were just so close, those people. And we stayed with my aunt and uncle. Of course, they're gone now, but we stayed with them, and then they had an old maid's daughter and a bachelor boy, and they lived home. And they had a car, a Volvo, and Harold thought that was so much fun to ride in the Volvo because then they weren't so common here in this country 30 years ago. So they would take us all over in the Volvo. And then we went to Helsingborg and stayed about a week with Harold's cousins, my husband's cousins. He had, I believe, six cousins. Nobody married but one. All the rest were old maids, and the man was a bachelor. And they were quite much older than Harold's mother. But see, his mother was dead by that time. But anyway, we stayed there, and then we'd sit in Sweden. I don't know, it'd be by the ocean, and we could see Helsingborg across. And then when we left Sweden, we took the boat to Helsingborg and then went around. We were in eight countries, and we stopped. The first place we stopped was Berlin, Germany. And we had a lovely trip. So you had a good sightseeing. So you visited the places then where your parents came from. You were in Grimmslöv too, in Småland? Yeah, we were there, but I don't remember what it looked like, but we were in Småland. And your mother, was she still living then, 1955? No, they both died in 1953. 1953, same year. That's how we could go to Sweden. Because you cared for your mother. Well, I cared for her, and they left us money. They had been very saving in their life. So he was able to save... He was able to save. Well, he was shrewd. He knew how to buy stocks. That was your father? Yeah, uh-huh. Oh, I see, so he bought stocks. He knew how. And he used to say to Harold and me, do you want to buy such and such a stock? I think it's going up. He was shrewd. So he followed that? Oh, yes, he followed that. He even had men that came to the house and explained stuff to him, and the people next door noticed that, and they got scared. They thought maybe those men are trying to cheat him, you know. And they said to Harold and me, you watch those guys that come to your father's house, because we don't like the looks of them. No, no. You know, they would want to make money. But he done good. So he was smart enough to understand what to follow then? Yes. Now, my husband couldn't. He wasn't interested in it. He didn't know anything about stocks and bonds, but my father did. And to be a Swede from Sweden, you know, that's pretty smart. So he, because his livelihood, not to be first a shoemaker, then selling shoes, he didn't get too much. No, he didn't get too much money there, you see. But he took some of it and invested it. And invested it, and he took more and invested it, and finally he, and then of course when they died, he died first, and then in six months she died. But after he died, then we took her in with us to live, because we didn't want, she was 84 then, and we didn't want her to live alone. And then in 55 we took that trip. So when they came here, they rented an apartment then first? Yeah, they rented an upstairs, and I know just where it was, and that's where I was born. So you remember living in that apartment? I know that you moved. No, we lived there, but it wasn't long, I'll tell you, till my dad bought, had a real nice house built. Oh, he built a house? He had it built, real nice house, but they didn't realize it was too big, because my mother wasn't well. She was well, but she wasn't strong, and she couldn't take care of it. So they sold that house, and then they rented a house upstairs. That they didn't like. And then my uncle had built a house about five years before, which is practically a new house. Your uncle's name was? John Peterson. John Peterson. Was he a contractor or a carpenter? No, he was, no, no, he worked in the shop. Oh, he worked in the shop. But then, let's see, then that Uncle John's wife got TB. Well, then in those days, so many people, if they could, they moved out to Colorado when they got TB. Out to Englewood? Well, I don't know where. The sanatorium there? Oh, no, they lived in the house. They must have lived in the morgue. And my uncle and his two boys went out there. And lo and behold, in about, and then I was going to say, when they moved, then my father bought their house. And that was, like I say, practically new, about four or five years old. And I lived there until I got married. Then we stayed in that house. And then the funny thing was, my uncle's wife went out to Colorado to try and get rid of her TB. And instead, after a couple, three years, she got typhoid fever and died. And then died from the other, died from, see, a long time ago, if you got typhoid fever or diphtheria, then you were about gone. But now, you never hear of those diseases hardly. So they're gone, or they can treat them very easily, I suppose. I think so. I think they treat. Well, now I'm blabbing on and on. I bet you're getting tired. No, this is interesting, because you know, it's going to happen, and therefore we are trying to recoup. So your uncle now, John Pearson, he stayed in Colorado, right? No, he had two boys, and they came home then. He had his mother, her mother was living. And so they went home, all three of them, and lived with Grandma. And it wasn't long until my uncle got TB and had to go out to the Rock Island Sanitarium, and he died there. And I think he was only about, oh, say 68. He wasn't any older, because now 68 to me don't seem old at all. But in those days, I thought he was ready to die he was so old. But they looked much older in those days. Yeah, that's it. They worked harder. They worked harder. He worked in the shop, and he worked hard. So this TB, you know, almost every other house had one or... Yeah, an awful lot of people had tuberculosis. Do you remember if they had them in the school children's having it? Like in your school class? No, I don't remember kids, but grownups. I remember in our neighborhood, we had a couple young women that had it, and they built a little house for them out in the backyard with screens all around. They done that in those days, if you could afford it. And they stayed there and died there. They stayed there and died. It was like a private sanatorium. Yeah, that's right. Like my uncle, he did go to sanatorium and died there. What did they do for them though if they kept them at home? Did they treat them? I don't think there was much they could treat, I think. They just waited for them to die. They just waited to die, that's all. Now here you don't hear of TB hardly at all anymore. But see, that was a long time ago. There was many hesitant waiting for people, all over I suppose, with infectious sicknesses. Sure. And stomach aches, but other than that, people were kind of healthy though. Yeah. They didn't use too much of medication and tablets. That's right. Like your parents, when you were growing up, when you were a teenager, did you see your parents taking any pills? Yes. My dad's hip hurt him, I could tell that. And he would take Doan's kidney pills. I can remember that so well. And then he used to get Sloan's liniment. And he would sit on the edge of his bed before he went to sleep at night, and I could see how he would rub his leg and rub it. So he had acne in that leg. Yeah, well, he fell off that roof in Sweden. And they didn't get it fixed right. They didn't do it right. So it was bothering him all the time. But you never could see it on him. Of course, when he walked, he limped, but not bad. And he used to walk home for dinner at noon and down, and I think that's what kept him going, that he kept walking so much. So he was interested in stocks. You bet he was. Did he read the Wall Street Journal then? I don't know if he did or not. I don't remember that. Did he go down to the bank often then to check with them? Yeah, he was in the bank often, because I worked in the bank before I was married. So you went to grammar school and then high school in Moline, all through the grades. And did you continue on then to study? No. I got married then when I was 20. But I mean, you got a job in the bank. Did you have to go to business school to get a job? Yes, I went to business school and graduated. It was called Brown's Business College. At first I went to high school three years, and then I went to Brown's Business College and graduated from there. And then I got a job at one of the big automobile factories in Moline. Wheatley's? Wheatley's. That's right. And then they left town, and they busted up, you know, Wheatley's. And then I got a job in the bank, and I worked there until I got married. But see, it was only a short time. And now my daughter works in the bank. And my granddaughter works in the assessor's office at the Rock Island Courthouse. Nowadays it takes two to make a living almost. So you quit working there when you got married? That's what everybody did in those days. And they called me back once, and my husband said, No, I got a steady job. You're not going to work, and I never worked a day after. So he didn't want you to work? No, he didn't want me to. Was there a reason you think the husband didn't want his wife to work? Because he felt not supportive enough? Well, I don't know. Of course, when we got married, we were both so young. So we lived home. And my mother and father liked that, because they just felt like we were young, and they could kind of look after us. And my dad bought a new car in Oakland. For you and your husband? No, he bought it for them. But he couldn't drive, so we were the ones that had it, really. So you learned to drive too then? Oh, yes. And I was only about 17 then. But then, like I say, there was no traffic, but then the streets were bad. We went to St. Louis on our honeymoon, and we'd ride on the bumpiest, ugliest roads you ever saw, and then it would be paved for about two miles. And oh, we thought that was wonderful. And then we'd get on those roads again, those bumpy roads. Was that on 67 South on Illinois Highway? I don't know the numbers anymore. But anyway, then coming back from St. Louis, Harold's aunt and uncle, they'd never had a car, and they thought, oh, it'd be so much fun if they could ride back with us and then stay at Harold's mother's, because they were kind of related. And it rained, and those mud roads got so terrible. We had to be pulled out with a team of horses, the car. And you should have seen that car when we got back. Oh, and my mother cried when she saw the car. She thought it was ruined. Yeah, she thought, now it's gone. But Tara washed it real good and shined it, and it didn't seem to hurt it any. Oh, and I saw that big team of horses in front and how they had to pull that car out of the ruts. So that was your honeymoon. It was a honeymoon. You remember that one. I should say so. So you got married then in the First Lutheran in Moline? In the Parsonage. In the Parsonage. Yeah, we didn't get married in the church. So your husband was here also, remember? Oh, yeah. He got confirmed in the same church. And his parents were living there also then? They were living then, sure. And he worked for the post office in Moline? Uh-huh, for 37 years. So he retired when he was only 55 when he retired. 54, I think. Why did he retire so early? They couldn't get along with the boss down there. So soon as the fellas could, they retired. And that was a shame. But then he got a little job in a florist's place in Moline called Kniese's. And he delivered flowers. And they were so happy to get them because he knew all the addresses in Moline. And so he worked for Kniese's for about, oh, I'd say maybe seven years. And then he retired for good. So they had a bad boss at the post office? Yeah. I shouldn't say his name. Was he no sweet? No, no. He was no sweet. But then they had a sweet postmaster. When Haro first carried mail, and they got along real good. He liked him so well. And then this one got in, and nobody liked him. So that's why they retired before they really should have. Of course, 37 years is a long time. So their pension continued all this life then? Yeah, and thank God I get it now. See, I get a government check, or I couldn't live here even. But I get a government check and then, of course, Social Security. So that was a good security. You bet. So he was never without a job then during the Depression? Never. During the Depression even he had a job. They gave him time off and that, and of course no raises or anything. But still we could help his brother that was laid off and didn't have a thing. Every Saturday we brought them a basket of groceries and helped them get along. So there was hardship for many people. There was. Even if you had a job, you had to feel like helping others. So your father, now, was he still playing on the stock market? Has this been recorded so you've got everything I've said? Yeah, now we get the history of Freebergs and Swansons. Yeah, I should say so. How about, you had one girl, you said? Yeah. And you never went back to work then at any time? Never. Never went back to work? There's my granddaughter and her husband that was just taken not too long ago. Uh-huh. That's my granddaughter. She's grown up and... Oh yeah, she's 33. So she's no little kid anymore. Were you interested in how to carry on the Swedish traditions? Like if we start off, for instance, with Christmas, I'm sure that your parents, they had a Christmas tree. Oh yeah, we had a little Christmas tree. But my mother was very good at cooking. She made pressylta. And she made, well, kalvasylta, that we'd have during the year, but pressylta was for Christmas. And, oh, she would make, what would I say, brown beans and the regular, and uskakka, and the regular Swedish foods. So every Christmas, and ljutfisk, that we had to have, ljutfisk. Did she take care of all that or your father helped out? No, he didn't help with that. She took care of all that? She took care of that. And I remember when we had company, and she would have three chickens in the roaster. And then she'd cut them up herself. Three chickens? Three chickens. I couldn't have done it. I couldn't have done it. And my dad, I remember, would always mash the potatoes, because every Christmas or Thanksgiving, we would have a big party. And, well, all the people did those days. Like, we'd go to one of our houses at Christmas, one at Thanksgiving, and one New Year's Day. And... There was a three big holidays. Yeah, that was the three big holidays. And that's the ones that my aunts and Sir Vins and our house, and they took turns. And it seemed like mostly we would have them on Christmas Day. But that was a lot of work for the women, believe me. It was, and there was a lot of people. And they didn't buy everything, like, half made like it is now. It was all done... Yes, and bread. They all baked their own bread and rolls. And we made little Christmas cookies, and we used to celebrate quite a bit at Christmas. How about Thanksgiving? You had the turkey then? No, we never had a turkey. We always had a couple chickens. And I don't know, in those days, the common people didn't have turkey like they do now. Now it's so common that any time of the year almost you can go and buy turkey. But that time maybe there was no turkeys though. Well, could be, could be. So there were chickens then? Then they went for chickens. Did you have your own flakkerke? No, no, no, we never had any animals. Oh. No. So you had to buy the eggs then, then? Oh, yes. And the milk? And eggnog. Eggnog. That, that we had to have. And your mother made that too? Her and my father made the eggnog. I think you pour a little whiskey in that, don't you? Yes, I believe there's something in there. It's, you beat up the eggs and, so I don't know. So he made that. And the Christmas tree, did he buy that on, from a store or the Christmas tree? Well, you know, I don't remember. I think mostly we just had an artificial one. And light candles? The first trees did have candles, but then later on we had electric lights. But candles are too dangerous. Yes, but there was a custom of it. Yeah, that, yeah, you had, we had candles, I know that. And how about Santa Claus, did he come on Christmas Eve? Yulee Tompton. Yulee Tompton, yeah. Yeah, he would, you know, in those days my father's store would be open until about nine or ten on Christmas Eve. And then he would come home and then he would put my presents, or my mother had done it when I was sleeping in the evening, in the storm porch. We had a storm porch. And then he'd come and then he'd say that Santa Claus has been here. And I was so excited. And I remember some of the little things. I remember one Christmas I asked for a little table and chairs, and I got them. And one Christmas a doll buggy. And so I didn't have very much, but I had as much as the other kids in the neighborhood. And you got them at Christmas Eve? Christmas Eve. Not in the morning? No, no, Christmas Eve, that was... Did you have a stocking on the... Yeah, I used to hang a stocking, and you know, now I don't even remember where I hung it. Over a chair or something, because we didn't have a fireplace. And that was the present on Christmas morning? Yeah, I suppose it was. I really don't remember. Because then you went to Yuletide in the morning. Oh yes, five o'clock we went to Yuletide. And had to walk, because we didn't have a car then. And it was a long walk, but it wasn't Christmas if we didn't go to Yuletide. So the church was filled up with people. And candles all over. It was really beautiful. Did they have a Christmas tree in the church? Oh yes. A big Christmas tree? A big one, and they still do every Christmas, of course. That's an old tradition. Yeah. And they were dressed with different ornaments. Yeah, tinsel and... Tinsel and stuff like that. And then the children were singing. You were, as a little girl... Yeah, we had a little choir, and we would sing little songs. So then the old people, they came together on Christmas Day. Yeah. I forgot to ask one thing, Helen. Do you remember if you doppa i grytan? I know I had heard that, and I'd heard people talk about that, but we never did. You never did? Never did. Never did. Did your mother make any sausages, like potato... Oh, potato sausage. Green corv, she called it. She liked it. What was it called? She liked the green corv. Oh yes, she made that in long... You know how a corv is. Yeah, she made green corv. That was one thing. And she made green corv... No, it was presuta she made about three days before she died. And, you know, she got sick all of a sudden and died. So that, I mean, she didn't have to lay and suffer, thank God. But, and she made that, so when we ate that presuta, we felt so bad because she had made it. And we knew that would be the last thing in this world we would eat that she had made. So she was up and around then, up to her... She got sick one afternoon when Harold came home from the post office. We called the doctor. He said, bring her to the hospital. And we did, and the nurse said, if I see anything wrong, I'll call you. And the next morning, the nurse found her dead. So she died so suddenly. I says, I hope I go that way. Oh, that's wonderful. So she... And how old was she then when she died? Eighty-four. That's as old as I'll be now this summer. Did you carry on any of those traditions, like presuta and corv, and green corv? No, I didn't. I used to... There was a Swedish store on 23rd Avenue that sold all that. And we used to go there and buy the stuff. And it was real good. No, I never made it. I wasn't that much of a Swede, I guess. How about your grandchildren? Your daughter, for instance, has she picked up anything of that? No, no. And she married... My daughter married a boy whose father was English, but his mother was Swedish. Her name was Larson. But he's not used to that stuff because they never had it at home, he said. So Carol don't. But she's like... And bundost. We always have to buy a chunk of bundost. And we would always just buy the stuff. Of course, I used to make cake and pie and cookies and stuff like that, but not the real Swede stuff. So you don't prepare any ljudesk for Christmas? Any what? Ljudesk? No. That I didn't like. Even my mother... I like codfish. We used to always buy codfish and cream it and put it on cooked potatoes. We liked that, but I never... My mother and father, of course, always had ljudesk. They used to even get those ljudesk that stood outside of the store in a barrel hard as a rock. And they would have to soften it with ashes and stuff. And they monkeyed some of that stuff, but they were used to that, so they liked to do that. So they disappeared with the second generation? I should say it did. Second generation. How do you like these apartments? Very nice. I think they're nice. Nothing fancy, but they're really nice, I think, and clean. Very, very good. You have a good view here. Oh, yeah, I have a good view. The trees are getting green. Yeah. I hope we don't get a lot of snow and cold weather now. Well, it's typical spring. It'll be over within a few days. Yeah. When the sun comes out now, I stand in that window when the sun comes out, and it's really hot. And look at my plant. I don't know what to do with it. It's just falling off. I got that plant from my granddaughter on my 75th birthday, and it was so pretty. It was about this high, and the leaves, you know, were straight and nice. And now it's gotten so crazy, I don't know what to do with it. It's seeking the light. Well, I got it. My granddaughter stuck it up that way because she was afraid it was going to break right off. Did your parents belong to any Swedish organizations here in Moline, like Vasa, Svittjot, Viking, Temperance? No, they didn't belong to a thing. Nothing like that? No, they didn't. My dad wasn't interested in stuff like that at all. How about you and your husband? We never did either. But like your family, I mean your parents, what kind of insurance did they have if they got sick, for instance, and had to go to the doctor? Well, it was a company in those days named North Star. You've heard of that maybe. North Star. They belonged to that, and that was all. Politics now. Was your father interested in politics? No. He didn't care for politics. You never discussed that at any time? No. Was he a Republican or a Democrat? I think he was a Democrat. I'm sure he was. Well, they'd talk about it, but they didn't get in any hot discussions or anything. My mother used to go and vote every time they had a – there was a voting place just about three blocks from our house, and her and my aunt used to go there and vote. And then it was so nice because all they had to do was write an X in what they won, and now those old people don't know how to vote hardly. Easy to cast a ballot then. Yeah. And there were some Swedes running for office, like Mayor Oakleaf? Oh, yeah. Do you remember him? Oh, yes. I remember Oakleaf. He was an old Swede. What was he doing? He was not related to the insurance or the lawyer family. I think he was related some way. Because they were a very prominent family. Yeah, that was a prominent family, Oakleaf's. Yeah. And during the Depression, your parents, they had their own house. They didn't have any trouble to get the payments done, or – he had a steady job then, your dad? Well, no, not real, but he was – there was a place on 7th Street in Moline that had a store that sold shoes. Yeah. And they sold men's clothing. And he got a job there during the Depression selling shoes. So he worked. He worked enough so that they didn't have to borrow money or anything. They got along. And then you were living at home too with your husband? No, then we had gone during the Depression. See, we were married in 22, and our daughter was born in 27. And, well, then we moved a couple years later. Well, then it was just about the Depression time. So you had bought your own house too then? Not then, but then we bought it a few years later. In 32 we bought our house. Because my dad was that kind, he didn't believe in renting. You should buy your house. So we got this house, and we lived in that house, well, until Harold died. He died 15 years ago. But then it was getting – so it needed fixing now. It didn't need anything big, because I put in a new furnace after Harold died, and I put all the aluminum combination windows in the whole house. But it was a yard I couldn't hardly take care of. The lady next door had taken care of it ever since Harold died, but then she got – so she couldn't take care of it anymore. And the man next door, he can't do anything. He just sits all day. So I said, well, now it's time that I'm looking for a place to move to. So then Carol mentioned this place, and I thought, oh, gee, I don't think I'd like it in a place like that. But, you know, I like it real well. And we have – every Sunday night we have a little Bible study, and it's a colored minister that lives here, and he has a little service for us. And then on Tuesday night we play bingo. That the ladies like. And then every month we have a catered-in dinner. And we have to – last time it was a $7 dinner, and we had to pay $3, and this place paid the rest of it. And so they have a little – a lot of little extra things like that. And when some women have a birthday – not all of them, but once in a while – then they treat on donuts and coffee. Oh, there's only women living here? Oh, no, there's men too. Families? Married couples? They're married couples. They can't have, like, a family and kids. There's no kids in the building. But they have a man and woman. A man and woman just moved in about two weeks ago, named Olson. But they're all nice people, so you don't have to worry. It is security, in other words. Yeah. And then you have a shovel car so you can go downtown? No, they don't have that here. You can catch the bus though, if you want. Oh, yeah, the bus goes right by here. Right out the door? No, no, right out to the street. But they don't – some of the places have a bus that will, you know, pick up the people, but they don't here. The Swedish businesses downtown, were there a lot of Swedish stores? You said the Hallgren's and – Hallgren's and Wiedeen's. Josephson's. Yes, they just moved out of there, you know, about a year ago. Well, there was a lot of Swedish places downtown. There was? This was a Swedish town. The Mayor and Johnson, they were Swedes. Right off the bat, I can't – oh, and then the Shaleen Brothers, that was one of the finest furniture stores. They were Swedish. They went – when Shaleen went to our church. But now it's getting all mixed up. You know, you can't say it's just a Swede town anymore. They disappeared after the Depression, more or less. Yeah. But in the early 1900s and up to the 1930s, that was a booming business. The Third Avenue was the business district downtown. That started – that was the First Avenue. And then went to Fourth Avenue and then Fifth Avenue, and Fifth Avenue's been the main business. Of course, now it's, you know, nothing. Excuse me. Since they got South Park, Mold, by then the people all go out there. Did the people go out on Saturday afternoons downtown and stroll around or – That's all we did. Every Saturday night, we would dress up and take our little girl and go downtown and walk around. And Harold knew everybody. Hello, Bill. Hello, Ned. Hello, so-and-so. And we just – he knew everybody. And now I go downtown, I'm just a stranger. I don't know anybody. But in those days – and that was the most fun we had on Saturday night or afternoon to go downtown and walk around, go in the dime store, buy a bag of candy. That was fun, we thought. Was there any restaurants you could go in and have a cup of coffee or – Oh, yeah. – you just didn't have it or – Well, I'll tell you, there was two dime stores that sold coffee. And we used to go in that Woolworths dime store every time we were downtown, Harold and I. And then they used to sell homemade pies. And we used to always take home a pie and get a cup of coffee and a roll or a donut. And that's what we called fun. That was fun. And when your daughter was growing up, did she do the same thing? Well – In Shenston? No, she – no, they didn't go downtown so much then even. But then I'll tell you what it was. When she got married, then they had cars. See, a lot of times we – They took them around to a wider circle, didn't they? Yeah. And – but, of course, we had a car, too, so I shouldn't say that because we – when we got married, we got a car almost right away, a little Chevrolet. But you didn't take it downtown, though. You walked on. No, we used to take the car. You took the car? Oh, yeah, and we'd park and then walk around. And I used to drive – like I say, I had to learn to drive because my – and then the funny thing was, then after Harold and I left my father's house, and he didn't have a car, then he thought it was so terrible, so he learned to drive. And he'd even go up to Iron Mountain, Michigan in the car, him and my mother. Then he thought he – then he thought he had to drive, and he did. Yeah, and we used to laugh because we said before every time they wanted to go someplace, ask Harold Viola to take them, and we did. But then when we left the house and they saw that they – you know, we weren't there, then he would take – then he learned to drive, and he drove. As long as he drove, for years, he never had an accident. So he was – the necessity made it – Yeah. It's right. – possible for him. And he was quite old then when he learned to drive. Oh, yeah, sure. Up in the 50s, 60s, or – No, not that old. In the 50s, I imagine. So they went up to Michigan, you said, did they have – Well, we had some friends up there, and my mother had hay fever. So then people, if they could, they went up to Michigan because that seemed to help hay fever. So they used to go every fall about the middle of August. That's when the hay fever starts. And then we used to go with them sometimes, but my dad always had his own car. They didn't have a cabin up there, or they stayed with – Oh, no, they stayed with some people. So they took a week vacation and – A couple of weeks. A couple of weeks in the summer. Yeah, in August. It usually was in August. The hay fever, did you have any – I didn't have any hay fever. And not your – None of us did but my mother. She's the only – you know, then they sneeze and they cough, and their eyes get so bleary and – It's bad. Oh, she used to suffer so with hay fever. Poor mama. When you went to school, your mother couldn't help you with – No. There was no way. No, I didn't get a speck of help with any lessons. My mother and father couldn't help me, and that's why my husband had six older brothers and sisters. And they used to help him, so when he started school, he knew so much that he didn't even have to go to kindergarten. They put him right in first grade. See, that made the difference because they – you know, he would read and they would help him, and here I – poor little me – I had nobody to help me. And then I think I even talked kind of broken Swedish when I started school. But you went to every day. Yes, I did. The paper, I can hear them when they drop the paper. Did you hear that noise? And then the church. Were you active in the church, First Lutheran? Well, I can't say I was so active. I went to church, and I'd go to different things they had, but – and I belonged to the Ladies' Missionary Society, but otherwise I wasn't one that was in everything. I never was. How about your mother? No, she didn't either. She wasn't strong enough, really. If she could do her work and be at home and do the cooking and stuff, that's all she could do. She wasn't – like some women, they could go every day and be out, but she couldn't. But still, like I say, she lived to be old. I call 84 old. I call that old. It is. Yes, you bet it is. Like you now. You look much younger. Oh, I don't think so. Old? Oh, I think I look so old. So wrinkled, but that comes with age, so I have to make the best of it. That's right. Did you live close to Belgian people? They lived on 7th Street and around 16th and 15th and 7th Street, and I lived on 11th Street right across the street from that big Lincoln School. Of course, now the school, they tore it down, and now it's Lincoln Irving School. And we lived right across the street, so we had a pretty view, like a park in the summertime. The janitors used to have pretty round flower beds all over, and it was just like a park. So you didn't have that associated too much with the Belgian people? No, not at all. They were by themselves, and the Swedes were by – I was in a Swedish neighborhood, and they stuck together. And the Belgians, they are separate too because of religion, I suppose. Well, they're Catholics, you know. Well, it was funny here about six weeks ago, there was a note that we should go down to the community room. They were going to have mass. Well, I'd never been to a mass. I didn't know what it was. And I said to some of the ladies – Oh, my goodness. And so I said the Catholic father was going to come, of course, and I said to some of the ladies, I think I'll go down there, because it said everybody welcome. And I says, I'd never been to a mass, and I'd like to see what they do. It's almost just like a service. And it was real nice, and then they had communion. And me and two ladies from this place, Lutherans, were sitting in one bunch, and I says, can we take communion? And they said, I don't know. And I says, I'm going to take it. I says, they invited us down. I'm going to take communion. And of course, they break the bread up. Their wafers are about this big, and you know, ours are about this big. And they break them up and then give you a piece. But they don't give you wine. The father drinks the wine. Oh, you don't get the wine? Oh, no. Nobody gets the wine. The father or the priest, he takes the wine and drinks it in a big cup like. Of course, he don't drink after everyone. Then he'd get drunk. He would take the wine, and so when they come to us, I thought, I wonder if they'll say anything, because they recognize the people, you know. But they didn't. They were just as nice to us. And I said, I really enjoyed it. So that was your first experience then with the Catholic Mass? Yeah, that's the first time. And, yeah. So years ago, when you were dating your boys, did your mother warn you to go with other than the Swedes? No. She was happy, though, when you came home with Harold. Yes, they liked Harold awful well. He was a good boy, a good man, and worked steady and nice-looking man. There he is on the, that's our passport picture. You'll have to look at that. And he was a nice man. Everybody liked Harold, and on his route, they all liked him. So he started out as a mailman, and then he came into the post office? Uh-huh. No.