 This is cassette 5, continuation with Stephen Northsea, Rockford, Illinois, cassette 5, side 1. But he didn't drink gay love. So your dad didn't taste liquor? No. I never see him drunk. So what should I... No. Well, we had a good time anyway, so... So why not? Yeah, it was a good old time. Yeah. You had your... you had a long life ahead of you. Yeah. When you went for Britta Nylingfjärn. Yeah, yeah. Just think now if you had stayed, though. What? If you had stayed now there with your girlfriend. Yeah. At this big godsølle herregård. Yeah. You'd be in Baro Nordsjö now. Oh, yeah, I do. Of course. No. I guess she... I think there was one he took there. And he called her for studenten. Ja, studenten, ja. For farmer stuff, you know. So I think that was the youngest one, boy. That one, he was in the army. He was a big shot there. His dad was a big shot in the army. Did he die, her dad? Ja, de var gående, I guess, when I... De var i lägen när I left them. You left them? Ja. The whole crew, you know. De had two boys and one girl. But I think, but I couldn't stay down here. I think... Probably some of the boys were gone too. I don't know. Because she didn't mention that to me when I was home. So I just told her about Britta as girl, she was. But she was a nice girl. And the baroness, she was awful nice to me. You didn't fare enough. Ja. You had it all made there. Va? You had it all made there. Ja, sure. You would have missed Landström and Magnusson. And the salt herring and everything. Well, then I don't think I'd go into the United States then. It was the spirit of the moment. Va? Spirit of the moment. Well, all my sisters liked to have me here, see. So then my brother said, well, Ma, have your money so I can go too. Your brother Albin, was he happy to come here to Rockport? He felt... No. Well, I don't know. He had a girl in Sweden. She loved him like the deck. And she wished everything could come on him so he could stay in Engelhorn. So, she was really in love. She had a really fine girl. So she had a sister too, so I took her home. So, yeah, I think I told you that before, that Albin, he was sitting in all the time, you know. So I told you that, see. So then I got letter from my mother's wife and she wrote to me. So I don't like to show it to him right away, so so I said to him the day after, you like to see, write my letter? I got from Hildegard. Yeah. Well, I don't be surprised. So then I told him. He got mad. He ran out to have a good time. And she was sitting in there, say money thing, take her over here. And he was in love. So they were all set to... Yeah, sure. To get together over here. Was she ready to come over to Sweden? I mean, willing to come? Yeah, but she couldn't come now because my my brother's wife wrote a letter to me that she had been out with the sailor, she got pregnant, she had a baby. So then I said, well, he was faster than you, I told him. But she gave it to him and she never gave it to you. So I don't know, there must be something wrong. Well, she said I never fool around with her. Because I don't think I'm not even nice if she's going to be pregnant. Well, you could try and see if she was willing. But you trust her, don't you? I said, you can trust her. He said, I guess not. He said, you can't if she has so much love. Oh, if you can broke an arm, if you can broke a leg. So you just can't be home here. So his sister said to me, why are you going to United States? He is my age. Yeah, I said, why not? I'd like to go out to see the world. She said, don't you like me? Oh, I said, I like you. There ain't no question about that. So probably, if I had been home here now, then probably I'd have taken you out and we could have a good time. But probably you have to wait for two, over two weeks, because I had walked up to Lassen for the Capri race. I had walked up to Lassen for Baron Jürgensen. So, but I never thought about the Ady though, before I went over here. But she wrote to me to Sweden though, and I wrote to her. So then, I wrote to her saying, well, if you like, then I wrote the first letter, if you'd like to answer the letter, I'm glad, just if you do. So she did, she said, oh, you're not over here, I said, and? So then I engaged with her, I think I was 19 years old. I gave her a ring. Then you know what I told you. But you didn't want to go to Brisbane? No, no, that jabber I had there. Should it be a fool? Of course, didn't have any fool in his life. But anyway, when he followed up, then I went. So you had to come there anyway? So then, yes. You were happy? They made your wife happy? Yes, sure. For three or four years. You should be close to your father-in-law and mother-in-law. Yeah, but she didn't like me though. She didn't? No. Why? Not first. No, because. Was it a coxy or? Well, she said, I can't understand that you marry a Swede. I thought there should be a plus though. Yeah, the idea is that. A Swedish girl marrying a Swede. Yeah, sure. But not in your case. No. Anybody but the Swede. Yeah, sure. So, so then I said to her, how's that? You was born in Sweden. You were born in the same city where I am. Because I know your grandma, but I don't think I know you. But I know your other two sisters in Sweden. And I said, had you come to her grandma and you went to school. So, really, we are like that from the first beginning. So I said then, then your sister up in Boston, and she went to Sweden. So she had, he stuck that. So that's why Addy and I were together. So I never know I could see Addy anymore. But then she was in Sweden, her and I, we were out having a good time. Went in cafe, had a talk and coffee. Then we took confirmation, then we had a bottle of wine, I had a few drinks of wine. Three girls and three boys together, so I treated them everything. Yeah, I taught social philosophy. So then she said, Ben, I think I told you that. She said, when I move back here to Lansdowne. No, I didn't. So she said, well, you had to do so much to me. Every time I went to New York, you gave me $10. And then my birthday, you gave me $10. And then you made a club, the whole family together. And you played pinnacle. And then you chip in all of your 50 cents a piece. And you had been so nice to me. So, otherwise the kids didn't give me anything. Not this summer you make that club. So every Sunday morning, she lived with her younger sister in the next house. We rented an apartment there every night. So I come down and say, Steve, did I get the money today? Yeah, I said, she said, three, so we had that. She was the secretary, so we had meat and two, just for fun. So then I went back to Lansdowne. And I was over here, and he said he was going to see me. So then I said, Teddy, well, if you'd like to go back with me, then I'd go back and try to make up the plywood company for Lansdowne again. So he said, well, I think you'd like the furnishings in your bedroom. No, I don't like that, but I can do what I please. So that's what I like to do. I have to sit in that darn jigsaw machine day after day in. But that's OK, too, I said, so it doesn't make a difference to me. But then they talk about that, well, my son-in-law was, I told her that, so then he come home, and I liked to go to Rathfell, and then he'd come back home. So you became good friends then with your mother-in-law? Yeah. How about your father-in-law? What did he say? Was he a... Well, he died when we were here, see? Oh, I see. So then he said, now I miss my money. Well, I said, you miss your money for 10 acres, Mattie, I tell you. I'm going to give you everything I gave you before. Every month, when you go to Brooklyn, then I'll sell you $10, $30, $10, or Christmas $10. She had over $1,000, so she could pay for her funeral. So she got a good son-in-law? Yeah, she said, you're one of the best. Oh, but she was the only daughter-in-law, wasn't she? No, there were four kids left. There were four kids in the family? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Sure. Oh, well, it's probably not easy to please Grandma. No, but I... No, I mean... No. So, but she liked me best. And one morning, she was going to church. So her youngest son-in-law, he couldn't do it. Rather sweet. Because he was supposed to go in business to New York that Sunday morning. So then she asked me. I said, yeah. I said, well, it's... When you be ready? Oh, it's just about 10 minutes, and I'm ready. So I was down there, so... And then Loretta said, would you like to have a cup of coffee? Well, if you can put a half cup to me, because you're my son-in-law. I said, Ma, I call on Ma too. So she come. Yeah, I'm ready. We drove halfway. Oh, I forgot my tape. I don't know what it's that. So, so I drove back home. She said, no, we come late. Yeah, you come late, but not me. So I said, well, let's go with me in. So then I come back with Ma. She said, where have you been? Well, I said, I've been in church with your Ma. Because we were late, and she didn't like to go in by herself, so I went with her in. Oh. Yeah. Where do you think I've been? There are no tables open, anything like that, and you know I don't drink anyway, so... No, she said, I know that. But I thought probably you drove down to... You have a place there where they have a... A date and stuff like that, so you go over there and look on the girls. No, she said, I didn't look on any girls, I just look on you. Yeah, she said, I know that, but I was surprised. I thought probably you were in an accident, anything like that. No, so... So then Ma, she come up, so she said, yeah, stay in church with me, because I was late. Otherwise I didn't stay there. So she said, no, you can't go with me in. I said, sure I'll go with you in. But she liked me. So you hit it off pretty good then at the end. Huh? Oh yeah. You hit it off pretty good. Yeah, it's a long life in a new country, and you have experienced a lot of different things. Oh yeah. So I like to have different kind of experience. Same thing, you know, when I was in Sweden, when I was helping the farmers. And I was not afraid. To take charge? No, no. You didn't like too much to stand at the jigging machine, or what you call it, the drill press? No, no. It was too much of the same? Yeah, yeah, there were... I liked to do different things, you see. But he was awfully nice to me because I had some way to some experience. Well, he raised me for nearly a week. Twenty-five cents a year now. He saw your potentials. Yeah. And he must have liked me because... The old man halfling, because he was going to have twelve pins about that long. Six go, or six no go. So he said to me, you can work all night long if you want to, just to get it. Well, you know, the labs are many. They take over four days. But you had just four and a half days. So they work overtime one Thursday of the week. So he said, you can come in Friday, or you like to come in Wednesday. I gave you the key and everything so you can go in here. No, he says, I don't think I need the key. Yeah, but I don't think you can get it ready. I said, oh yes, I think so. If I can, then I can figure out how many I can make. So they said ten hours, you work overnight, or every day. Oh, you see, I work hard. So I said, well, Mr. Halfling, okay. I think I'll get them ready now. Because I just have a few more to lab, and they're going to be ready till twelve o'clock. So I took them in, and he checked them. Yeah, they're okay. They come down now and get them so they can get them after dinner. I guess they must use them right away. So then next week, then I had 25 cents more. So then I asked my brother-in-law, so I said, well, I guess I'll be the first one to lay off. Oh no, you're under top. I said, what do you mean under top? He, Mr. Halfling, he didn't want you to go. He wanted you to stay here. To sit in there, I said. Oh no, I go to Rockford now and see, because Lansdome, he... He needs you. Yeah, so. So when I come, so I said, no. The first of January I move down to Rockford, Illinois. So I did. You came back to old friends and old foes. Yeah, true. Yeah, I... It was the end of the interview with Stephen Northsey, Rockford, Illinois. The end of interview.