 This is cassette four side one, it's continuation with Joel Jernberg, Rockford, Illinois. On this cassette Jernberg will go into treatment of the greenhorns from Sweden. 14th of July 1986, cassette four side one. You mentioned before when the greenhorns were coming over from Sweden? Yeah. And about this Eric Anderson, tell me now what happened when you met him down in the shop there? Well, this was at Mechanics. Is this easier on your eyes or do you want it on either way? Mechanics Machine Company. And my boss Bill Johnson asked me to go down and measure up the drill press. They were drilling. Well I tell you, you've had your eat. The whole end of… You can't be hungry if you can't drill. There was a piece of steel that went off. Yeah, yeah. I tell them don't worry about it, it'll be straightened out, I know it will be. Cluster gear. Cluster gear, yeah. There's a whole cluster of… Transmission. Transmission, yeah. And it was an awful heavy one. And they had a three jaw chuck on the spindle of the drill press. And they chucked that… Do you want to go outside? Why don't you go outside if I listen? I'll go do what I have to do. That heavy casting, casting, forging. And they had to raise the spindle continually by hand. The operator of the drill. Yes. It took a strong man to do that. And then they squirted… Water and oil down there. Yeah. To cool it down. Yeah. And that was Erik Andersen from Sweden. Yes. So I asked him, I'd have to measure up to take the table off. And he was holding this heavy thing on the handle of the drill press. So he dropped it, the handle, to help me lift the table, round table. And come down and hit me right on the head, the handle of the drill press. And in those days they didn't have any helmets on. He was holding it. And I thought the fellow would faint. So I began talking to him. And I says, I've seen you off and on here working. And nobody's been talking to you. And they're all Swedes here. So you talked Swedish to him then? Oh yeah. I found out he was Swedish, so I talked Swedish to him. And so I says, I'll call some of these fellows. Call them over. I says, now listen, this fellow just came over from Sweden. This is his first job. And you treat him like any other individual. Take care of him. Come on, talk to him. Will you do that? I says, yes. I says, they were mostly Swedes there anyhow. But they froze him out then. I just didn't realize they were Danish too. So we became good friends. Then he worked for Rockford. Rockford's that person, and being a strong man, he got along fine and he liked the work. And he asked me one time when I was over there. No poster harddick comes out. He asked me, what do you think if we started a business for ourselves making dice, forging dice? Why not? I said, with the ability to make them for Rockford Drop Forge, you can make them for anybody. Yeah, thank you, he says. Well I says, you got some money, yeah? Oh sure, I got some money. So they started. Their own business? Their own. So there was actually four of them in it. And they did very well. Well at one time we were, I was in the screw machine business also. I was in a dyeing tool business first. Then I got into the screw machine business. So we had quite a time to get a permit to go up and build anything. So we looked around for different buildings. Down to Cleveland we were all over. Up in Michigan, looked at different places. And then I'm really excited. You wanted to buy a screw business to place them? Yeah, I wanted to build one. I sold out the Rockford dyeing tool. You couldn't operate a new one in Rockford then? Oh yeah, you couldn't. It's just that he had to get out of this one. Oh I see, so you didn't want to stay in Rockford? No, sure. So the four of us went over to take a look at the Rockford forging dyeing tool. So I met Eric and talked to him first. Then I saw another fellow I knew there and I went over and talked to him. And we got through there. And Eric, oh, my partner, Edward Andreeska, he said, you know what Eric Anderson said about you? Oh, what did he say? He says, you were the first man in the country that treated him like a human being. That's what he said. He appreciated that. Yeah. He never forgot it. And he always was a good friend of mine. So you spoke to Eric Anderson who started Rockford Forge Company? Yeah. So you helped him to take the first steps? Yeah. Because Joe took Swedish. You became good friends then? Yeah. For many years? Yeah. And then Joe could talk Swedish. Even though he dropped the doggone handle on my head. Poor little guy. That's interesting. Listen, we had, there were three brothers, Swedes, just came over here. And they worked with mechanics too. They got the same treatment and everybody shunned them. And they sat there at noon and ate. By themselves? By themselves. It's strange though, they would do, you would think they would treat their friends as a bunch of men. You would think, you know, most of them were Swedish, you'd think they knew what was going on. Listen. I don't think so. They went on talking, and the same way with Eric Anderson, with these boys. And I talked Swedish to them. And they were very well pleased with that. They recognized them. So wherever I met the boys, they always— Remember you? Yes, yes. So Jernberg is a good name then. Oh, you betcha. For the many Swedes. Only name in Oxford, really. Only Jernberg family. They started a furniture store on Broadway. Those three guys? Yeah. And I forget what they called that. I have too. They had used furniture too, a lot of used furniture. But they did pretty well. Picked up old furniture and made good ones out of them and sold them a little cheaper so people were more to buy. They felt the same way. They needed some companionship when they'd come here. Companionship more than anything else. Oh, I say you do. I'd meet one or the other. If there was something I needed, I'd go over there and talk to them. Yeah, they were good guys.