 Yeah, we have February 18, 1987. I'm sitting together with Mildred Lundell and Edward Lundell in Rockford, Illinois. And your parents, they both came from Sweden. They did. So if we start with your father now, John Peter Lundell. Can you tell me a little bit about him? He came to this country when he was 16 years old. Alone or with his parents? No, alone. And that's when he changed his name. And about two or three years after that, his older sister and a younger sister and a younger brother came to this country. The younger brother changed his name to Lundell, but the two sisters retained the name of Larsen. And they were of the Mormon religion. Mormon? Yeah. They was there from Sweden? Yeah, from Sweden. And that's why they settled out in Utah and they both married Mormon men. And the other younger brother never married, but he stayed right here in Rockford. So where did he get Lundell from? I have no idea. Lundell is rather a common name over in Sweden too, you know. And I don't know how my father chose that name. Maybe it was a name he liked. I don't know. Did he take that name when he took out the citizenship paper, you think? Apparently so. So he came here when he was 16? That's right. That means that he came 75. He was a young man. He came here in 81 then, 1881. Who did he come to here in Rockford? He settled first in Milwaukee and then he came to Rockford. And he had friends by the name of Burquists. And that's how he got started in Rockford, through the Burquist family. So this is when he moved here then? Then he moved here. So what kind of work did he get then to start with? Well when he lived in Milwaukee, he was interested in lumber and he did some upholstery. And then when he came to Rockford, he got interested in lumber. So he was president of the Scandia Coal and Lumber Company for over 40 years. And then he started furniture factories, got interested in that. And that's what led him on down into Arkansas for lumber. You mentioned Scandia Coal and Lumber. Coal and Lumber Company. There was not a furniture factory of it. No, no, no, no. It was a complete difference. It was over on 7th Street. It's not anymore. It's all... But did they spell the same way? Yes. S-K-A-N-D-I-A. But they had no connection? No, no. No, no. Years ago everything was Scandia. So he started to work down for Scandia? He started working and then he... Worked his way up. That's right. And then he married your mother, Linda Matilda Jonsson from Småland. That's right. She came here when she was eight. Eight weeks. Eight weeks. So that's why I say Sweden didn't mean much to her, although she was back there. Did she still speak Swedish during the war? Oh yes, she spoke beautiful Swedish. Her parents come along with her, then? Well, her mother died when she was just about a year old. And the grandmother had her for a while. And then the father remarried. So she was torn between, if I may say it, an ugly stepmother. Like a storybook stepmother. And then an aunt and uncle took her. So then she and her sister finally came to Rockford. Was there a Swedish stepmother? Oh yes. Still ugly? She was a witch. Well, you would expect something better. You read about the ugly stepmother in storybooks. Well, that's just what she was. Do you remember her? Yes, I remember as a little girl when she came one time to visit. And then when she was, then she stayed in Iowa. And when she was on her deathbed, they asked for my mother to come. And I went with her, thinking that because they had farms out in Iowa, and my father's mother had told her that he had a farm for each of his children. So when he passed on, my mother was to inherit a farm. But it didn't work out that way. She was a clever woman. So there was nothing written in her name? Apparently not. See, years ago, they didn't do all that stuff. So when the will came, we went out there. My father said, well, you better go. Maybe this is what she wants to tell you. And we're taken care of. Well, she never said a thing. She just wanted to be sure we didn't eat all her food. That was all. And so she finally died, and my mother got notice of the will that she and her sister, or the heirs of the two girls, would receive $50 and no more. And I remember my father said, well, you can give them the $50 back. And my mother said, no, I won't. It's mine. I'm going to get it. So she kept it, and she bought a coat. I can remember that so well. Was your mother upset about her behavior? Did you notice anything that she was mad at her? Oh, she had no love for her, none whatsoever. What did your mother say about that? Was she upset? Well, it wasn't fair, because she should have had the stepchildren. Her half-brothers and sisters got the farms. So she brought her children with her then into this marriage with your... She had children. She had children. So she brought some with her. She had been married before, but apparently didn't have any children. So she and my mother's father had... Oh, I see. She didn't bring any children with her. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. She didn't have any children. But there was a difference than the way your mother was treated. That's right. I'll tell you, my mother and sister would have to stand up and eat, and they would have to have bread and milk, where her own children could sit at the table and eat a meal. That's what I told you. She was a storybook stepmother, a witch. Where did she stay in Iowa when you visited her? In a little community called Alta, Iowa, A-L-T-A. And all the farms are around there. That's where she stayed. She died out there, too, then? She died out there. And her own son couldn't stand her. She was... Something else. She was Cinderella's... Oh, she was not only a witch, but a bitch. You didn't see her too often, though, because... Oh, no, I can remember meeting her as a little girl. Do you remember that, Ed? Mother's aunt was living with us at the time. Oh, yeah, that's right. And, oh, of course, my father couldn't stand her. But she stayed with us, I think, one night. And of course, I was... The one that stayed upstairs? Yes. And I was such a little girl, you know. It didn't mean anything to me other than I suppose I didn't like her because from what I'd heard my mother tell me. And my mother's aunt told me the same thing, how mean she was. And then when we got notice that she was dying and had... In fact, she had requested that my mother come. And that's why my mother went, but it didn't amount to anything. How about you now, Edward? Did you remember her going there to Alta to visit her? You remember? Briefly, I... Yeah, it was in the spring. It must have been like in March because you know what it looks like in Iowa in March. Did you travel by car then? Oh, no, we went on... We took it. We took it. Yes, on the train. You went to Mount Pleasant then? No, no, we could go... It would stop right in Alta. It would stop right on... Yeah, you go through Waterloo and all those places. And we took the midnight train from Rockford and got there about five or five-thirty or six o'clock the next morning. Well, you traveled during the night then? Oh, yeah. That was the only way you could get there. So then you packed a little lunch or something like that with your... Oh, I don't remember that bad, but I remember there were mice on the train. On the train? Oh, well, this is so many years ago. My mother sat on one seat with her feet up over on the other side of her and I did likewise because the mice were running up the train. There must have been the mice hobos then, traveling the train. Well, it's quite a few years ago. Did they have a restaurant coach on the train? No, no, no, no, no. They did stop in Fort Dodge because they would meet another train there and I think you could get coffee or something there. But by that time, we were so close to... But there were mice on the train. Sure, there were mice. People brought food with them. People brought food with them. Sure, because that train went all the way over to Omaha, from Chicago to Omaha. I think it was called the Omaha Fly. We went to Estherville, we went to Fort Dodge and then they shifted the car up to Estherville. My folks were in Iowa too, but didn't know them. No, they had no knowledge. So then she died down there in Delta. The stepmother didn't. And her children, did they move out of your home? Oh, no, no. All of them, they all live out in Iowa. The brother, the half-brother's dead and the three half-sisters are all dead. So your mother was the only one then of your grandfather's estate in Rockford? Yeah, well, her sister came too, but then her sister finally went to Chicago and was married and lived there until she died. How did your father meet your mother now? At the First Lutheran Church. There were members there? Oh, yes. My mother was confirmed there. My father was confirmed in Sweden. So that's where you went then. Yeah. Did you have confirmation lessons in Swedish then? No, no, we went to the Trinity Lutheran Church. Oh, Trinity Lutheran? Mm-hmm, because when it came time for the older boys to be confirmed, the one brother said, well, if he couldn't be confirmed at Trinity, he wouldn't be confirmed at all because he wouldn't get anything out of the Swedish language. And he had apparently been, that's his art, been going to the Sunday school at Trinity Lutheran Church and had made, you know, good friends there. So that's why we were all confirmed. So you transferred your membership then? We never, I never went to any other church for Trinity Lutheran. I started when I was three years old, go to Sunday school there. But your parents were members then of the church? They never took out their membership of First Lutheran. They retained that. Mm-hmm. So then they apparently didn't have any English lessons then in the church? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. My mother went to what they used to call Swede school. Swede school, yes. Yeah, she went there to the First Lutheran Church. Was it on Broadway too? Yeah, they had a little chapel over on Broadway and 8th Street. It was Pastor Seedorf then at that time? No, no, it was a Pastor Peters. Oh, Peters? Yes. That's way back. Way back, yes. That was up in the, later on Seedorf came in. Yes, Seedorf came later. In fact, I think Seedorf was there when my older brothers were about to be confirmed. And they didn't like him either. I'm telling you the truth. Well, that's what I want to know. Now is the time to speak up. Or forever hold your tongue. We're not going to do it better, we're just going to do it the way it was. Yeah. So anyway, then your daddy got into the Scandia Coal and Lumber. Oh, yes. And he worked himself up. That's right. So he became the... He was president for over 40 years. He became secretary, treasurer, and then up to presidency. So this lumber business now, or department of Scandia Coal, was there also including lumber to the furniture factories? Oh, yes. Not only for the building industry. Oh, no. Also to furniture. So there was fir, spruce, birch, what kind of wood was it? Maple? Maple, pine, all sorts. Walnut, mahogany. Mahogany and walnut, but there's some other kind of... Birch? No. They imported them from other states? Oak. A lot of it came from... Was it around here? Oh, no, no, they'd have to import it. We don't have any... Not like black walnut. We don't have anything like that. But at one time, though, you had it around here. Yes, yes, yes. It was all taken away then when you were there. That's right. So what happened then? Was it in the late 20s? They went on to Arkansas. What happened about that? Oh, it was before that, that they were in the 20s. Yes. I was just a little, little girl. And I can remember my father going down, and then one summer he took all the boys down. To Arkansas? Yeah. So they could see what it was, and they rode on flat cars through the woods and the swamps. How did they get hold of that area? Well, there was an archer lumber company. Archer lumber company was the background of it. In Helena, Arkansas. And that's how it became started. So there was a few guys up there in Rockford. Oh, yes, my father got others. He was one of them. Yeah, my father was the head, one that started it all. Yeah, because he was strictly strong on lumber. So did he have any furniture guys with him, like Scandia or Rockford? Oh, yes, they were all furniture men. Genstrom, Republican, were they also into this deal then? No, no, they had no interest in it, I mean money-wise or anything like that. It was not a corporation or anything like that. So your dad was the one that handled it? That's right. So, and that was a big land. Oh, yes. How many acres was it, you think, of a forest? Oh, well, they had cotton, too, you know. Open land? Uh-huh, and then in later years it went into rice and soybeans. But, oh, gosh, I can't remember the actual acreage. Thousands of acres? Oh, yes, it would be maybe close to 10,000. Something like that, but, oh, I see. It was, some was, Lundell itself was the larger area, and then there were two or three other sections. So in combining all the acreage, it would be approximately 10,000. Oh, I see. So there was almost like a continent. Uh-huh. And what kind of forest was it down there? Hardwood? Maple? Oh, yes, it would all be hardwood. They have a lot of cypress down there, too, you know. And they were shipped back then to Rockford on railroad? Yeah. Oh. So you went down there several times? Oh, yes. How about you now? I've been down. Oh, here? Were you down working down there at some time? I've been working down, but I've been down there. You've been down there a lot. Yeah. There were no Swedes other than you down there. I mean, they didn't take any Swedes? Oh, no, they were all blacks. Oh, I see. There was no Swedish workers down there? Oh, heavens, no. Well, I'll take that back. There was one man who came from Sweden, Harold Swenson, and he was the one who was running it. He was the manager on it? Yes. Oh. And, um... Who's that? Swenson. Swenson, yeah, sure. And, um, well, he was just like a member of the family, and he went a little over his head, quite a bit over his head. He got bigger ideas. Yeah, and he was going to be married in October. I do not remember the year, of course, to Pastor Cedia's daughter. Carrie Rockford. Yeah, he had gone to Euletta's service with my mother, and he saw her singing in the choir, and he wanted to meet her. So my mother introduced them, and it was a romance right away. And she had been down there, and they had built their home in Helena and bought all their furniture, which came from Rockford, and they were to be married in October. It was to be a wedding here, and it must have been in September of that same year he committed suicide. He dressed himself as a bribed groom, went into the vault, and killed himself. What was his name again? Harold Swenson. Yeah, so he shot himself in the vault. Yeah, because he was so in debt. He dressed him as a bribed groom. Yeah, he dressed as a bribed groom. So we were up at the lake. We had a place at the lake, and it was a Saturday, and it was a beautiful fall weekend, and my father got the call, so he had to come right home and go down there. And he was like the manager down there? Yes, he was. Was he a young guy? Oh, yes, he was old enough to know better, but he was younger than my father, of course. But he was a very likable person and a smart person. He seemed to have wild ideas. Oh, yes, he had big ideas. So you remember him then? Oh, sure. He was just like an uncle to me. Well, you remember him very well. Was this before the 20s, you think, or what year? Oh, yes, surely it was. Because I was just a little girl, and oh, sure, I was still in grade school. When this happened? Yes. What was this guy, Swenson, from Sweden, do you remember? Oh, that I don't remember. Was there no relation to your dad? Oh, no, no, no. He came here, and I don't know, he must have worked here in Rockford and was very likable and knew what he was after. Oh, sure. So that's how he got started. They thought he would be a good man to have down there, and he was. He was too good. So he must have borrowed some money. Oh, he went way over his head. So what happened then with his girlfriend, Seedorf's daughter? I suppose it broke her up, but she married and she married a minister. And is she still living? I don't know because she moved away from Rockford. What happened after this, Harris Swenson? Was he shipped back to Sweden or was he buried down there? No, he was buried down there. In Arkansas? Mm-hmm. But I can remember my father took his watch home. He had a beautiful gold watch, and he sent that to Sweden. To his parents? To, well, whomever were survivors, yeah. But he was with us at Christmas. He was just like a member of the family. He always came for Christmas and stayed right at our house. And then he'd come up and be with us at the lake during the summer. So he was just like. We had lost a brother when he was 13, 14 years old. And then this, when Harold Swenson came in, it just sort of took care of that empty space at the table, so to speak. His fiancée now, Mrs. Seedorf, she wasn't down there with him when it happened? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. They were supposed to be married shortly after. Yeah, they were married in about a month. It was going to be a big wedding up here. So that must have been a tremendous. Oh, it was a terrific shock. Did the newspaper write anything about it in Rockford? Do you remember that? I don't recall. I just don't recall. If they did, it may. I just don't know. I shouldn't say anything about it. I don't know. But you were still in grade school? Yes. So that must have been in the First World War. Yes, it was. It could have been like 1918 or 1919, something like that. So what did happen then? Your father went down there and who? He and one of the Seedorf boys went down. I don't know who else went with J.P. I think he went alone. So they were there for several days because they had a lot to take care of. And then our father came home and was home for a while, and then he went back there again so they could get things organized. But the business was still going on as usual. Oh, yes. They got another management. See, they had a big house on the plantation there, and that was a hotel. And that was used for people when they came down to get their lumber things, I suppose. So they had colored people then to be the servants down there? Colored people did all the work. They had to do all the work. We had a store there. Did they live then on the plantation? Oh, yes. We had little houses built for them. We had a cotton gin. How were they as workers, though? Did they pay off? Who was the foreman for the... Oh, they had different ones down there. There were native people down there. Well, people who, you know, the northerners cannot go down there and live. You know, we don't live the same way they do. We don't understand them, and they don't understand us. Could you see that when you visited down there? There was a different kind of life? Oh, sure. I remember one time when our mother was with us, and the manager at the time had his mother with him, and she just didn't like us because we came from the north. She was living in the days of the Civil War. Oh, I see. Yeah. So you could still feel that respect? Oh, definitely. You were Yankees, trying to run them. But they were smart cookies. Am I attached to this thing? Yes. Oh, heavens. I'm attached to that. Anyway, your father was able to keep the business there. Oh, yes. There was no other companions then running it together? No, no. He took the whole thing over. Even before the Depression? Oh, yes. And... In fact, he took it over right after Swenson died. That's right. He had two. Yeah. Oh. And then the boys... See, I had two other brothers, and there were four older boys, and then I came along. Oh, you were the only girl? Yes. I see. You were the spoiled one then. Oh, I'm spoiled rotten. They had to do the work. No, I'm independent. But anyway, then the boys were down there a lot to take care of things. To work and run things? Well, to check on things. So, were you acting as a foreman down there in... No, no. No, no. I used to go down there once in a while when my father go down there, kind of get... so he could get familiar or understand it a little better. Yeah, how was it looking then? I mean, the farming operations. Now, you rented out the land to the native people? Oh, no. To grow cotton on? No, no, no. We had it all, and they worked for us. I know, but you raised cottons, you said. We raised cotton and then went into soybeans and rice, but it was all us. You did it yourself? It was all ours, and we had people working for us. I see. I thought you rented out the farm. No, no. No, no. No, no. So, you kept the whole thing? Mm-hmm. But that must have been a big operation, though. It was. How were you able then to stay up here and running it down there? I suppose I should say it wasn't easy. Because we used to go down in a train, didn't we? Yes. How could you trust the people? Well, this is just what I'm arriving at. You should be there all the time. Because the distance will make it easier. That's right. Nobody's checking you. You have to trust your manager. I should have been watching it. Yeah, and it didn't always work out that way. But you were still able to keep it, though, in the family, in other words? Oh, yes, until we sold it in the 60s. Oh, you kept it that long? Mm-hmm. But how about the name Lundell? When did they come into being down there? The very beginning. In the beginning it was called Lundell? Yeah. Because he was... Or Lundell, Arkansas. Lundell, Arkansas, because he's the one that started it. And there was a post office? Oh, yes. We had a post office there. Mm-hmm. And a train stop. Did you know Tommy when you wrote on letters to Lundell in Lundell, Arkansas? Yeah. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. Mm-hmm. So that's the way it worked? That's the way it worked. So your dad, now, was he an active businessman? Oh, very active. He was not afraid to go into business? No, no. And he liked to help all the Swedes. What happened now during the Depression? When the Depression hit, what happened then? Well, we all had to struggle along the same way. Everybody got hit. Because there must have been a big loan in the bank to keep paying mortgage. But you were able to keep it? Yep, we could keep it. And cotton and soybeans? Mm-hmm. Sometimes they paid off well, and sometimes they didn't pay off too well. How about, you have a river close by there, isn't it? Oh, the Mississippi River on one side and the White River on the other. And sometimes they would flood. Mm-hmm. Our oldest brother went down there one time, and the only way he could get into the big house, which was the hotel, was in a rowboat to get to the second floor. It had that much water. But how could you live up here in Rockford and understand those things? Well. That would have been hard on you. Do you remember some of those hardships? I remember some of the things, but not as much as she does because she was my mother. And she knew a lot more better back then than I did. So you and your mother, you talked about all those hardships? Oh, yes. And tried to survey it? Why, I suppose we did. Did your mother try to tell your dad to sell out? Oh, no, no. You were never talking about that? No. No, because he liked it. Yeah, and he could see that there was something in it. Anything pertaining to lumber was his love. It was his business. So you still had farming land or cotton and soybeans, but you still had a lot of forest? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. That was the main reason. I don't remember the acreage, though. I really don't. But that was the main reason it was started. And then he could supply lumber to furniture factories up here. But then during the Depression, when the furniture factories moved away from here or ceased to operate, what happened to the lumber business then? Where did he ship the lumber then? Well, then we were out of the lumber business down there. Then it was mainly cotton and soybeans and rice. And then we went into rice. How about your boys now? Were you interested in the farming operations down there? Oh, sure. They would be down there. They would go down there every once in a while, but not actively going out and plowing or anything. You never lived down there? Oh, no. No. But why didn't your dad not tell you or delegate you as a manager down there? Well, I think he had his eye on something else for the boys. He started furniture factories for them. Oh, he did? Yes. Right here in Rockford? Oh, sure. Which one? He had the Rockford Desk Company and the Colonial Desk Company. So the boys had those. So they were managers and superintendents there? They were the ones who had it. You were not interested in the farm life? Well, in the business world. In the business end of it. In the business end of it, they were active and knew what was going on. When you went down there, you didn't feel like living down there all year long? Oh, no. Why was it? Was it the climate? Well, I hate hot weather anyway. No, you just don't fit into it. You could feel that? Oh, yes. That's very evident. Your mother said the same thing? Oh, yes. She would never live down there all year long? They were different kind of people and things didn't always gel well. But people down there, didn't they look up to you? In other words, they had plenty of work? Oh, they maybe looked up to you, but let me tell you, if they could chisel you out of anything. Site 2, Dundells, Rockford, Illinois, February 18, 1987. How did you notice then if they were dishonest? Oh, it showed on the books. What did they do then? Did they steal logs or cotton or rice? Well, and they wouldn't pay their bills in the store. Oh, there was the store, and you were the store owner of the store? It was like a company store? Yes, yes. It was like a big grocery store. But there you must have somebody from here running that store? Oh, no, we had a man from down there. A colored man? No, no, a white man. One was a bookkeeper and the manager's wife, the last one we had, was a very good businesswoman. From down there? Mm-hmm. She did a lot, we'll have to say that. What was her name again? Nina Mae Brandon. She saw to it that the colored people learned how to clean up themselves and the homes they lived in. You know, colored people don't care if there aren't any doors or windows or the hogs live with them or not. But she cleaned it up. She did a lot. We have to give her a lot of credit for that. She shaked up on them? She really did. She cleaned it up, and she saw to it that the little homes were taken care of. It's got to be a little different atmosphere than when they get that push. So she deserves a lot of credit. Could you see any difference now? You came down there as a young girl, I suppose, with your parents. How old were you when you went down there? Oh, gosh, I don't know. Ten, eleven? Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, uh-uh. Because that was the only business when our father would go down there, and then he took the boys down there. You could see the difference, though, between 1915, for instance, and 1930. Was there any improvement during that time? Well, generally, I suppose there were improvements because of new efforts and new ideas of things that they were going along with it and picking it up. That's the way I would look at it. Did you visit any of the houses they lived in? Oh, sure. Oh, yes. Like you said, they lived with the hogs? Oh, sure. They hung the door by one hinge, so what? Let it hang by one hinge. Well, that's the way they lived down south, you know that. Yeah, but your dad could take some locks with him down from National Lock. Yeah, you came from the lock town. Well, maybe they trusted each other. They didn't have to lock the doors down. Well, I don't think they had much to take. Maybe a little. Well, there was one reason they didn't lock the doors down. Oh, I don't think they ever locked any doors. They just had to hope that everybody was honest. Well, years ago, nobody locked their doors. If you did, you put the key under the mat. You know where you're headed. Now you bolt and bolt and bolt. You never had the aspiration to go down there as a storekeeper? Oh, heavens no. I don't think any of us did. No. But your dad, he was sold on it. Not to live there, but he was sold on it because of the lumber. He was strong on lumber. He could see a future there. And he was not afraid during the Depression then to lose it or anything? No. He kept on going on. He plugged ahead and got through it all right. And eventually it paid off, and it was a good deal. It lasted so long in the family, 1960s, 1969. Until it got to the point where your labor, you couldn't depend upon your labor. You know, the colored people became smarter and realized that they could move someplace else and get bigger jobs, join the unions, and would be protected. So you lose a lot of health through that, you know. There was no union down there during the Depression? Oh, heavens no. Uh-uh. No. They couldn't exist down there? No. You're dead now. When did he die? He died on February 12, 1938. So he's been dead for 49 years this year. So that means that you then had to come in to... Then the boys took... Well, in fact, when he died, the three boys were down south. Down there? Yes. At Lundell? Uh-huh. And they didn't know anything about it until they got off the train. But you didn't sell out at that time, though, you said? Oh, no, no, no, no. We didn't sell out until... You kept it? Keep it working and... The late, very late 50s or early 60s. How about during the war? Were you able to sell more lumber than for the war industry, or did it make any difference? That I can't answer because I don't remember. No, they kept going. Because you see, eventually, the lumber... Who was to buy enough of the lumber if the furniture factory is... Well, eventually, the lumber all, you know, depleted, yes. So that's when they went into heavier corn, not corn, cotton and soybeans and rice. And, of course, they raised corn and all that, but that was for the mules. Were they able not to... Who furnished the tractors now, I mean? We had to buy them. On their own. Oh, you didn't do that? We did. You didn't buy the tractors, the combines and... Yeah. I see. We had our own gin, and then we would gin for other people. Oh, you had a cotton gin too? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. So there was up and down with the cotton gin, I suppose. Every one year it was good years? Then, eventually, I think we ginned... I mean, it all changed, didn't it? So the cotton gin, how long was that running? All the way up to the last... No, I think that about the last maybe four or five years it became like a cooperative thing. Don't it? Yes, and people would bring all their cotton into Helena, and it was ginned in an area there. Because don't you remember, we'd have to go to the offices down there and check how many bales of cotton went in, how much came out. How about your brothers? Now, you're in here. Uh-huh. Were you familiar with the farming operation? Oh, sure he was. Like cotton and rice? Well, I knew a little about it when you'd go down there and visit and so on. Yes, you knew a little of the operations. So you understood then if they did something wrong, if they broke the machinery for instance? Oh, yes. You know what they did wrong? You don't know what they did wrong, but... How were you able to correct it? Well, you'd have to have help come and fix it for you. So you'd have to depend on managers then all the time? Oh, yes. Yes, the manager was the key person. That's right. And he was born and raised in the South. He came from Kentucky, didn't he? What was his name again? Brandon, George Brandon. Yeah, Brandon, his wife ran the store. Yes, she was the bookkeeper. She had a brain. Now, in what way did they work? Did they favor the people they worked with or did they... Well, they could tell them off. They could tell them off? Yeah, they could call a nigger a nigger right to his face. No, they could do that. We couldn't. Oh, no, we wouldn't. What would they have to have done? Oh, you'd have a shotgun put in your back. No, you were careful how you... But those managers now, Brandon, how would they favor you? Did they have respect for you? Oh, yes. They did a pretty good job then. They were not chiseling you out of anything? No. So you could depend on them? Yes. But there was still some lack of understanding of bringing in the right profit on the board? Well, and then it got to the point where the cotton market went down, the weather would be against one, and horrible weather, and soybeans didn't do too well, the rice seemed to do all right, and it just got to the point where... Everything just seemed to change. And we were all getting older, and it just was getting to be a headache. So they bothered you a little bit then? Well... How did you get news now from the operations, Donna, if you had a bad flood? I mean, was it through mail or phone, telephone? Oh, they'd phone back and forth, and we'd get a monthly report. From them? Oh, yes. So we knew what was going on. And then when the auditor came... Oh, he used to come in February, I guess, wasn't it? Then we'd go down there. With them? The boys would... So you had a board of directors meeting down there at Lundelden? Mm-hmm. Were you on the board, too? Oh, I suppose I was. It was a family thing. What kind of input did you have, though? I don't know. Open the door and close the door, maybe. Did you really have an interest in it, though? We all did. It was a pretty good income, though, when it was running. Well, sure, we got something out of it. They all had problems. Sometimes you'd get something, and sometimes you wouldn't. Maybe sometimes what you got, you'd have to put it back in again, like you do in any business. But you had to kind of keep on trying and pushing and so on. I know our father was a pusher. That's what he was so interested in. He was pushing. You were not married, you said, but your brothers, now, they all had families. How about their children now? Well, no, the one brother who died, he was only 14 when he died, and our oldest brother married and has one daughter, and she lives out in the Seattle area. In fact, she lived in Sweden for 11 years. She went to the University of Stockholm and got married while she was there. And our other brother Ray never had any children, and Ed has two daughters. One lives in Dallas, Texas, and the other one in Stockholm. No. No pojkar. Your daughters, now, they were not interested. Their husbands was not interested. None of the grandchildren were interested. No, they weren't interested. They were just accustomed on there as managers. By the time they were growing up, that was... That's right. We could see the handwriting on the wall. We wanted to get rid of it. So then in the 1960s, you got rid of that property, the whole thing, and the board of directors didn't function anymore after that. No. You were off the hook. Off the hook. Gladly. Just a few drops, you know, Phil. Thank you. Danug. But that must have been hard over several times to keep it going on the... Sure. This is decaf. Well, it's just like I told you. In any kind of business you're in, you're the last one to take a paycheck home. I suppose it is, but the other guys come first, you know. You have to pay them off to manage it. But Herbert Swenson, he didn't see... He saw the writings on the wall, too. Harold Swenson. Harold Swenson. Yeah, he went too deep. Went too deep, yeah. He got in a little deep, didn't he? Yeah. Over his head. Well, he had Bobby basic ideas, but they went a little too far. He was smart. Sure was. And handsome. Oh. Mm-hmm. And this girl he was to marry was a beautiful girl. Sure was. If they had married now, would she have moved on, do you think? Yes, they had built a home down there. They had? Mm-hmm. We saw it. It's up high on a cliff. Mm-hmm. On a cliff is right. It just fell right away. So how is the area, you know, nature-wise? Is it a beautiful area? Oh. In the right time of year? Yes. Fall, for instance? Well, I... It's too beautiful. It isn't beautiful, you know. Well, in some areas. Some areas. I think in another portion of Arkansas, it's very beautiful. When you get up around the Ozarks and over into that area, it's beautiful. It's a different kind of area. Yeah. But we're right in the area where it was farm, you know, flat land. So there was a lot of flat land? Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. And swamps, too, then, with the... Oh, yeah. It was like a basin between the two rivers. Two rivers. Mm-hmm. White River and Mississippi. Mississippi. Mississippi on the east and the white on the west. And they'd flood and put... And the railroad tracks between the farm were built up how many feet? Eight feet? Oh, they were up high. And when it would flood, they would put the flat cars up there. I can remember that. And put all the colored people on the... Mm-hmm. And stock and things on it and... Move them away. Oh, I see. They had to... I think they took them up to Helena and they lived up there, the Red Cross. You mean the flooding came there first? Oh, yeah. Well, when I told you, our oldest brother had to fly down. He'd never flown before. And to get into the big house, the hotel there, he had to... and a rowboat to get to the second floor. And I always remember the water line in the building, how high the water could get in there. Well, and when you first went down there... You used to go down and dive in the... Yes, I was going to say you would dive down there, go swimming in it. When... All your kids went to high school, through high school? Oh, we all lived in Rutgers. College school? He did. You went to college? Which one? University of Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin. But I wasn't there all through though. Two years. Did you ever take business courses then? Did you take business then? Sort of a general operation, I guess you'd call it. In those days, it would be a general... A little of everything. Liberal arts courses was what was offered most of the time. Anything to do with broadening your mind, you see. So you were groomed then to be the successor to your father? Well, I... Well, it would be... They were all... Our oldest... You were the only one that went to college though. No, no. No, our brother Ray went too. He went also. The boy who died. We went to school together. He was crippled. But we went to school all together. But I mean the boys, he was... Our oldest brother was purchasing agent for Sunstrand, Rockford Milling Machine and Sunstrand. He was there for many years. He had a very good job. Your dad, did he have any interest in Sunstrand too? Oh, yes. He had it... He had his fingers in all the pies, we'll put it that way. Who taught him that lesson? Was that P.A. Peterson? Because he had his fingers and toes in everything. No, I don't know. I think he just looked ahead and saw and his brain worked and he thought, well, you've heard the word diversified. Well, that was it. So that was the key word. Mm-hmm. Did they meet all those people now, like P.A. Peterson, Hillman, Brolin, Lind? Brolin was... Hoagland was another one for... Yeah. National Lock. Yeah. And Olsen was for Sunstrand. Yeah, Hugo Olsen. Did they meet often at your dad's home, for instance? Oh, well... I'm trying to go on to... There isn't that... There was a Swear Center. It's just business. But they'd meet at Swear Center? Yes. There were members there. Yeah. Were they singers? No, not my father. But they met there. They would be there every once in a while. But on Christmas Eve, you know, at noon when you had Doppa, and when Harold Swenson would be up here, then Mr. Knutson would come, too. Who was he? He was out at Empire, wasn't he? Yeah. Empire Furniture. Yeah, that's right. He was out on Kitchewaulke. And I don't remember if any of the other men would come, but my mother would always have Doppa i Gritan, and that's what they'd have. And they'd sit around the dining room table. Were they talking mostly business then? Of course. Then they could see how much they lost and won. It was always business. Doppa i Gritan, that was the central point then. Then they all laid it out. So, but Harold Swenson, he didn't make it to Doppa i Gritan that year, did he? No, he didn't. No, he didn't. He was there before. He went to some other place. Yeah. May he rest in peace, or pieces. He was probably worried about getting married, too. Yeah, that's right. Well, I'm sure he shot his one. Why did he dress himself in a bridegroom's dress? I don't know. I suppose that's the way he wanted to look. Was he mentally off, then, you think, the last few weeks? I don't know. He was that kind of a man, a perfectionist, in his dress. I don't think he ever had a hair out of place, and he was beautifully dressed always. But wasn't he out of place, then, to be the— Did he really have to dress that nice? I don't know. He was in Rockford. I mean, he could show off to girls and everybody. Well, I suppose he figured— Have a good time. This is the only time I'll get to wear it. I'd better wear it when I put the bullet through my head. Down there, he didn't see a living cultured person in all his— But he belonged to a good crowd down there in Helena. I mean, he was a social, very social person. So they had some culture on their music, and— Oh, sure. They have a nice little country club there at Helena. They had. And so there's activity. There's social life there. He was on the upper— Oh, yeah. —culture, so to speak. But going back now to Rockford, do you remember P.A. Peterson? Sure, his little girl. Did he live far from you, or—? Across the alley. Yeah? So you saw him every day, then? Sure. How was he as a man? Was he— Very friendly. Quiet, but very, very friendly. And I can remember when he used to— after he was married, when he used to come to our house. He always put his hand on my head. I see. Mm-hmm. And he had a big handkerchief, you said? No, he didn't have any. He never used it. He never used it. He went that way, and then that way. With his fingers. Huh? With his fingers, he— Yes! He never used a hankie. That's the best way to do it, my dear. And then the— Yeah. His alpaca coat. Jacket sleeve. Yeah. He used—he had the silk— Silk alpaca, it was called. Mm-hmm. Jackets. Yeah. They were kind of shiny, then. Sure, it was. Real shiny. Had to clean the nose. Did he always do that in public, too? Well, he didn't care. That was why he blew his nose. He was independent. He came from Cherry Valley. That's where he lived as a young boy. And his younger sister and my mother grew up together, and they were very good friends. And they made brooms. And my mother, as a young girl, went out there and helped make brooms with them. From what? I suppose they had whatever they made brooms from. The reeds. The reeds, I suppose. Broom corn? Broom corn, I suppose, yeah. Mm-hmm. So your mother helped them— Oh, sure, that was fun. She was very— Oh, sure. He was just like a big brother to her. I've got a— So you could have had P. A. Peterson as a father, then? Well, I don't know if the genes would have worked out that way or not. I have an ostrich feather fan that P. A. Peterson gave to my mother and took her to the opera in Chicago. Oh, dear. Sounds a little bit suspicious, then. Yeah. And the summer that my father— There were just— I don't think you were born then either, Ed. I think it was just the three boys. And my father went to Sweden, and our mother's sister and her two daughters came out from Chicago, and all the kids had whooping cough at one time, five of them. Well, anyway, my father had told P. A., he said, I want you to rent a buggy or a carriage and bring to Ida and her sister so they can take the children out for a ride on a Sunday, which he did. And my mother didn't know anything about driving a horse, but anyway, they got along, and they got down by the river, and she didn't know how to turn the darn thing around. So she was in the predicament. Maybe had to back up all the way home. I don't know. Yeah. So P. A. Peters, now, he come often to your home and is talking with you? Oh, yes, as a young man. Before he was married, he was there, I guess, practically every Sunday night for supper. He took advantage, then, of your mother's cooking. Well, they were all good friends. He was not married then? No, no. He was a bachelor then up to— Yes, he was quite a bit older when he got married. And he never had any children? No, they adopted. There were three girls, and I used to play with them. They lived across the street from us, and both the parents died from tuberculosis. And Petersons took the two older girls, and someone else took the younger girl. But they're all gone now. So P. A. Peterson came and talked to your father. What were you then? Oh, maybe I was sitting in the stairway listening. Who knows? Well, it was airy-dairy. Airy-dairy, sure. Did he talk Swedish, then, most of the time? No, P. A. didn't talk that much Swedish. No, he had a very soft, quiet voice. I see. Did he talk with a bro, though? Could you understand? Well, I suppose to a degree. There must have been, you know. But he never, he wasn't that kind of... So he was very soft in his... Yes, yes. And he taught Sunday school at Trinity Lutheran Church for many, many years. Oh, he belonged to Trinity? Oh, yes. Why didn't he go to First Lutheran? Well, I guess after he got married, his wife didn't want to go there. She made the arrangement, you mean. Yeah. She was a businesswoman, too. She was not Swedish? Yes, her maiden name was Anderson. She came from Marinette, Wisconsin. And she had her maiden sister live with her, with them all the time. And she was more like a man. And she was a chauffeur and did all the heavy work around there. I see. And they lived at the house where the P. A. Peterson home is? Well, then they moved from 7th Street. See, we lived on 6th Street and they lived on 7th Street, just across the alley. So when he married, he moved then? No, no, no, no, no. They lived on 7th Street for quite a few years, yes. We used to have a store on East 8th and 3rd Street, would that be? Yeah, called Hess Brothers. Now it's the Mercury Garage there. And he bought that store and gave to his wife as a Christmas present. And she ran that store for many, many years. So he was a wealthy man then? Oh, yes. Quite early? Oh, yes. But why did he diversify so many? I mean, there's a headache to have one business. Well, I think he found out, well, just like anything, you don't want to put all your eggs in one basket. Was he able to check out every place where he invested money, you think? I don't know. I suppose he did. He worked a lot. I mean, he wasn't a lazy person. He had two furniture factories. But the boys took care of those. So he didn't have to worry about it then? No. But why did he have two? Well, they were three boys. Did you fabricate the same thing or manufacture the same thing? No. No, they were a little different. One was truly one thing and one some other type of a thing that, oh, come under. Well, at that time Rockford was on the upgrade. There were so many things... To do and so many interests and people were diversified as to what they were going into. And I think that J.P., as they called him, was a very intelligent person and he could see... Who? He? Your father. Oh. He could see what was going on. But in the history of Rockford, that one time everything was popping, so to speak. There was a demand for a lot of different things. Furniture was the big demand, of course. The National Lock Company, they could furnish things. Set all the hardware. Yes, that's right. And from that stemmed... Amrock. Amrock, it came out of that. And how about the ornamental woodland? Wasn't he in that? Ornamental brass? Brass. There was also a... Yeah, that was over on 9th Street. Well, Sun Strand was diversified. So there was still a market there for several people. Oh, yeah. To get into that. In fact, one of the Sun Strand... I don't know if it was David or Oscar, but I can remember one of them came up because my father was interested in Sun Strand, too, one Saturday. And I remember I opened the door to let the man in. And I think I sat on the front stairway then, too, so I could listen. You wanted to know what was going on. I wanted to know what was going on. But it was good, though, when you became a board director later on. Well, no, no, no. No, but I was interested in knowing about things, what's going on. Put two and two together. I believe that you are one of the best board directors in Rockford. Oh, come on. You learned it from the beginning. Nobody started so early in life. Of course, then they'd always have a funny story to tell. First sitting under the table and then under the stairs when you got too big for the table. Well, when I say under the table, that means I wasn't born. Well, I don't think you meant that. I think you said that. And you have been able to retain all those different stories, though. Yeah, it comes back. That's why I said this afternoon you better get a hold of her because she knows the background. Yeah, she certainly does. And I used to love to sit and talk with my mother about the olden days, you know. And I thought they had to be admired the way they came over and got themselves going. Your mother, now, did she complain about the big household having meat on the table and food on the table? No. Because there must have been a hard act on her so many times. She hired girls lots of times. So she had it easy. And then an aunt of my mother, oh, she didn't have it easy. No, I mean she didn't have to do the dishes or wash or anything like that. No, but on Thursdays, the boys and I had to do the dishes. You know how much I... Oh, that was when the yard was off. Yeah, and on Sundays. See, that's what I said. I mean, she never did the dishes. And he and our brother Ray got a quarter a week and I got a dime a week. Why? Well, that was for helping. They were not as good then as... No, they were older. They needed more. Did they do the 15 cents worth more, though? Oh, I suppose. And... Discuss that, yeah. And, well, they maybe had to do a little work outside. I've heard all the shenanigans that these boys pulled at Mitz told about. But anyway, every Sunday evening, our father would pay the three of us off and we had to tell him what we had been doing. And I think I could tell it backwards and forwards. I made my bed, I did this, I did that, and I did this. And I'd get my dime, and he knew how many dimes from the fall until next June when we'd go to the lake. He knew how many dimes I had in my bank, and that was to go to the bank. Did you put in the security bank? I put it in the First National Bank. One year, he and I had put in enough so we got a camera for nothing. Boy, that was a big deal. You had prices the way you were back then. Oh, that was a big deal, yeah. That was Third National then. Yeah, it was called Third National then. How much did you have to have in there then? Oh, I don't remember. I still got the bank at home, though. Do you still have the camera, too? No! No, for all of them. No, no. That would have been a lot of money, wouldn't it? Yeah, it would be. Oh, I don't even know if it took good pictures or not. So how old were you then, 14, 15? Oh, no, I was younger than that. And they gave cameras away as an incentive. Oh, yes. You didn't lose any money in the bank account in Rockport? No. During the Depression? Uh-uh. Your bank was... Yeah. Stayed open? Yeah.