 Detta är kassett två, sida ett. Fortsättning med Conrad Reinell, Minneapolis, Iowa. Kassett två, sida ett. I meetings you know, exams you need in the soccer-stien. In the soccer-stien, ja. Boy him and I got to be good gun buddies you ever did saw. He picked me off, he embarrassed me you see. He did that in the way, but I called for it I guess. Boy he put me to do everything and even walked with him you know. Away from there you know, he always called on me. You got the ticket and you got Fritidsbeteget och Utvandlingsbeteget. And the whole thing from the pastor. And the way you went to the United States. You went on Drottningholm? Yeah, well I went on, I don't know which one. Kungsholm I think was the first one. Direct to New York? Direct to New York from Göteborg. You saw the Statue of Liberty. How about Ellis Island at that time? We went through there. Do you remember anything specifically about it? Oh yeah, I remember how we came in you know. They got up to say. What did they do to you? Did they ask you questions? Well the quota, every country had a quota in those days. I don't know if they implied it anymore or not. But there were probably 25-30 ships landing in the harbor. On the night before 1st of May. 1st of May when the quota was opened up again. For the month of May or probably 2-3 months. So you came in then? Yeah, I got on the American soil. But I got probably 7 o'clock or 8 o'clock in the morning on May the 1st. Viva was one of the first ships to unload. They took the island away. I couldn't tell which one it was. But they came in from all over the world. And then you went to the harbor? Yeah, so they unloaded the Viva up early. So they knew it. I think they got us out of bed at 3-4 o'clock in the morning. To get all things together. Our papers ready to get something to eat. Before we left the ship. So I don't remember what time it was. But they picked us up off the ship. And those were the fairies. Couple hundred on each one of them. And hauled us over. We got into the island and they were pretty slick. But it was just like coming in a prison. That's how it was. A lot of people. No, it was cages. Just like rooms. But the iron bars. The lock on the door. And all along when we went down. About three or four wide. And we were all mixed up. Now we try to keep together. If we wanted to give us a bus. Or seven. We kept together. Because we wanted to go out the same way. And on as long as we could. Well, anyway. We got split up in there. And of course there was something wrong with somebody. They shoved them in one of those pens. There were doctors standing in the law. One examined your muscles. And one examined to see what the sex you were. Look in your eyes. Look in your ears. Try your ears. Look in your head if you're having any lies. And all these things. Ask a few questions. And there was a guy sitting. Another guy sitting. They had big things. Had numbers on them. Some of them had the great north. Some had the Sioux line. Some had the Chicago. New York. Illinois Central. New York Central. And they put us in one of these pens. They had the same number. They locked us up in there. And they went in this awfully long. They got a bunch. Fairly old. But they were full. And then they hauled us over to the Chi. To Big River Yard. This is where it was. And they put us on to different Chi's. The pens were numbered. Well, we got split up there. And some of them went down to the south. From New York. They went down to Carolina. And down to the southeast. Some of them went to Canada. Some of them went to Washington. State of Washington. Well, we got... I don't know how it was now. But we all met. In Chicago. The next day. All of you together? Well, our bunch. Your seven guys? Yeah, we got together in Chicago. The next morning. And they hauled us. I remember how it was. We had a... They put us in old railroad cars. They had one axle on each end of them. Old passenger cars. They looked like they were painted yellow. Wicked things. They thought it was 100 years old. And they looked dentsy. And there were wooden seats in there. Screws on the floor. And we didn't... You know, that day. They hauled us out as fast as they could. They was going towards Newtown? No, they were going towards Chicago. From Chicago? Yeah, to Chicago. Oh, I see. We were in New York and we were going to Chicago. That was the first leg. And I remember... Anyway, we got into one of these down cars. And somebody, I don't know when they got the whole school drive. Somebody had a monkey in his. But those seats, you see, was all hard. Like pears in the church. And they had a... Just for one person, they had it almost on each side. And they said, you're going to sleep here. But we'd stay in here all day and all night. We're going to get plenty of tired boys. So we had somebody... Got a whole lot of this school drive. And they'd be unscrewed. And we'd all go and sleep. And pile them up at the end of the car. At a level car. And then we lay down on the floor. And had a suitcase. Nobody had any trunks or anything in there. Some of them came with trunks. But they were in the baggage car somewhere. And we had a suitcase. And we slept on the floor that night. How about the conductor? Well, there probably was one. They never asked for tickets. They just let the cattle train. Because nobody could speak anything? No, nobody could speak any English. They were probably the Swedes. And when we got on... We had to go through the thing we could buy. A sack. They had a couple of oranges and a banana. And they had some bread. And I think it had some medwurst or something. Some dried meat. Corn. Something like that. Enough to sustain you for what they expect. They cost a couple of dollars. But you're supposed to have $20. And we left New York. $20 we had to have. And they checked out the asylum? They checked out that we got off. That we had the money. So we wouldn't get in trouble after leaving New York. So they checked out before you left New York that you had $20? Yeah, that's right. At the railroad station? At the railroad station. I don't know if it was the island they did. Or ASCII when you had it. And everybody had it? They never checked you exactly. Because it would take them a long time. Everybody would get the money. Parker would probably sign you for it. So you never spoke Swedish at any time at Ellis Island? Or anybody that translated? Yeah, they could talk all kinds of languages. They could? Yeah, they knew which ship they came from. They could talk Italian and everything. But they didn't have any trouble. They didn't have to talk. Because they knew what to do with you. They put you where they wanted you to be. It was the whole thing in a nutshell. I remember the next morning. It was about daylight. And it was probably five o'clock. We were going over the mountains. We had all the windows open. It was a different house. We had all the windows open on these cars. So it was a lot of noise. And I looked out. And we got up and looked at the sun. And by the way, they had two or three Indians ahead of that train. And there were two or three pushers. And they were really chugging. And you could hardly see the Indians up in front. And there was the worst trailer. The first trailer I got beyond that train. I could go over that there like any mountains. And I got away with five or six Indians. Pushing and pulling you up. And that's the truth. I have an idea. They probably hadn't been greased for six years. And the laughter was just better than anything. And it was dirty too. Oh, you had the soot coming out. We looked like we were firing the bullets ourselves. So you couldn't wash up them for what? No, we didn't wash up for two days. Three. And we got the little bit. The sun and the night. You didn't stop in Chicago, did you? I skipped it, yeah. We all got together there, you know. Not all of us, but most of us. And some of us knew from the ship. And we had to change trains there, see. And to different levels. Because they all unloaded. Went back to New York. And I remember we went there two or three of us. You're gonna see Chicago. We went outside. Two or three of us, you know. In Chicago. And boy, there was some... There was guards. I guess they didn't have uniforms. I don't think. And we weren't supposed to leave. Go out in the street. And boy, boy, did they grab us and get us back in. They were cussing us in some language. I don't know. And I asked another guy inside. He said, you can't do that. I got someone to nab you out there. He said, you got to stay here. We're responsible for you. See, they thought they were gonna catch us. They said we couldn't talk back. And they knocked us in the head. Kidnappers. That's what it was. Oh yeah, they watched us. Well, we quit. We quit. And from then on, I don't remember. The first night they took us way up through Buffalo. That railroad that we were on. Whatever it was. They went up through... We were in Canada. We went to Pontiac. And we went to Detroit. Because they didn't let us out. And there was somebody in the bunch. That had been here before. Something like that. They could read the report. Because we were in Buffalo. And you got enough to eat and drink? Well, we had this sack. And then when we left out to Chicago. Then we got on more of these trains. They were better cars and everything. And then we got up on Saturday night. We got to Duluth. In the afternoon. And we were walking down. We didn't know what to do. We were just fooling around there. And then they said down the street, close by the water. People didn't do Duluth. That's right down on the water there. And there was a side street. And they said, come in. We speak Swedish. Oh, that's sweet down there. So we went down there. And they could see. We had two suitcases. And there was numbers. And they didn't see that we were immigrants. We couldn't talk. So we talked Swedish. And they were used. Much as selling clothes. Of course they couldn't sell us anything. But anyway. We said, talking about something. Is there any Swedish place we can sleep? It was on River Island. And they said, no. Is there any Swedish place we can sleep? We asked them about something sweet. We thought about it on our mind. Get a job. It's exactly what was on our mind probably. So they would help us out. They said, out there. There's a bus going out there. So. We got on that bus the next morning. I remember we had five dollars apiece left. Because we were playing little cards. Little poker. Little this and that. On the train. That was the fifth day. So we had five dollars apiece. Him and I. And so we had enough lodging. But I can't for the life of me. I forgot where in the heck we slept that night. I think we probably slept in the alley. I don't know. Because we probably wouldn't let the last dollar go. We had to eat. Now we were on the ground. Nobody looked after us. We were all dunga and a little happy. There was a bus. Rattling and spitting. We got on the thing. And it was a grab of those big bulls laying in the road. They're supposed to be grabbing the road. We got on the thing. And we got out to. To a clockay that night. And I still don't remember where we slept that night either. But anyway. Monday morning. We went down. It was going to be a hundred and four yards. And. So we. I think it was the first stop. We went down to the paper mill. And lo and behold. There was a guy down there. A foreman. On the worst of what they call the wood room. Where the wood comes off the river. Where they cut it up. And bark it. There was a foreman in there. So he took a look at it. He said. Do you want to work? He said. You know how to work? Can you work? He killed us. But he's Swedish. So he said. Oh you're ready to go. He said yep. Swedish. Come to work tonight at 6.30 o'clock. He said. Both of you. One at night shift. And I got a week over there at 6 o'clock. But there was a heck of a room. Well. I don't know if you see that. Then we found. He asked if we got any place to stay. Yeah that's how it was. Oh we didn't see. Well I said. That we would like to stay. So. We got in. Found that place that night. So we had a place. The next morning. After we worked the night over the night. Well this boy and I we stayed at the same time. Same yard. My bunny. Well he got. Well. One of us. He needed a place in another department. The guy we stayed with. And he had two three children. And he could talk Swedish. And. His wife could talk Swedish to him. But. The man came to Sweden. And the girl was Swedish. But anyway. The other boys stayed with me. Against me. For about. A month or two. I don't know. I thought it wasn't that long. And he got in the room. He was working in the finishing room. And he took my buddy. And put him in the finishing room. It was clean actually. To load out the finished paper. See. So he got the same money. But it was cleaner see. And he was a little older. The other boy. Well anyway whatever the reason was. He. Took him out of there. And. The wood was coming in on conveyors see. And there was a fork in the conveyors see. And we had to sew up all the wood that came in see. We had to judge the length see. There was supposed to be a certain length. That could get into a certain machine see. And those certain machines were down in the basement. They go down in there. Made different kind of paper of it see. And there. And if it was. Any barns. Any bark on it see. But most of it was bark. They came right out of there. When they went through a big. Like a big churn see. Probably had a. Two, three carloads and that then big thing. I never seen such a big electric motor in my life. That pulling that thing. But they were slippery you know. They came out of the wet you know. They had a rubber. Ape. And. What I stood out of. I was. Standing on the side of the lever. We could stop it. We could stop that particular conveyor see. And there was somebody. So I guess I was. The main one on that there. But anyway I had. At least one dozen. Or more against me. When I was standing on there see. Because they quit see. It was so sloppy. And you couldn't sit down. You couldn't do a dog gone thing. As long as that thing you had to stay in. Period. Take care of the wood see. Well they. No it knew. Or something could happen you know. Pieces got in the machine. Or some machine broke down. Or the belt was slipping or something. So we could probably stop for a minute or so. But they was going all the time. Coming in the river. And they were about. A meter long I guess. Something like that. Well anyway. I stood on there. And I was getting pretty good at it you know. And he knew. The boss knew. He was watching what was going on. And that's the side of me. It was a big. They called it the hog. You know what that is? Yeah the hog that machine. There was a far over in the corner there. Behind me there. Big wheel. With knives on it see. They had the 300 horsepower motor. And it was a. It was a big. Two stories. Big steel cast iron and steel wheels see. And there were knives. Inserted into it see. Just like a cutter. Like a silage cutter. You know what a silage is. Something the same order see. Like the wood was coming in in the angle see. And those knives came across here see. And cut that off. It's like a slice of meat. That's the way it looks see. So there was the hog. That's what they called it. It was a mean one. And there was a slope right down there. And that machine could take 24 inches piece. Anyway. There was a Norwegian standing in that job. And I watched him. Watched him and got a coin to wear. And all he had was a pair of pants and a pair of shoes. And he walked like nobody business see. And so it. No fussing over this. What's so damn important you know. I didn't think Michael that old room couldn't work without him playing. But anyway. So here I stand in this job. And saw that wood you know. Here come the boss he says. He's coming he said. You want another yard he said. You like it here? Like I said it's okay. I think we. Either nine or twelve dollars a week. So it was good pay then? A week. Oh it was a week. Yeah but at that time it was pretty good. We paid a dollar a day for a room. And it was high. They soaked us. Took it around. You had no choice then. No not right there. Yeah. They all. What do you call them? All Norsemen they said. Norsemen or something like that. He said he's quitting he said. You want his yard over there? Oh I said boss I can't handle that yet. Hell you can't. The way he was he was a big guy like that. He wasn't listening to me. He was twisting his ass. And he was like he was the one guy. You know these wild ones you know. Yeah he quit. Okay I said you try this. If you want you can have it. Okay I said I'll take it. And boy do it. There was guys in there that had been in that room for ten years. And they were they were there looking for that yard. Because that was ten cents more an hour. And I had a chance to be here to change the knives every night see. For the next shift. See tomorrow see. And the boss was always doing that. And so I worked with him. See changed him and I changed him. And he always gave me an hour. See. And he comes up with the knives and had everything ready. When the whistle blew you see. He was ready. He had it in the car. Took a man almost to lift one of them. I got that thing you see. And heck I was making money. An extra hour. And ten cents more an hour. But heck I was making more than my board of room. You see extra as I had before. But those guys you see. I had to take the wood from the barking machines there. It was a conveyor for me. There were five six barking machines. The machine took the bark off the wood. They hold them around and it was nice to take off. And there was about six of them I think in there. I wasn't used to it. Because I had first judged that the piece was below twenty four inches before I put it down in this machine. Because it was going down half a storey you see. And they came in to cast down and deal with it. Especially little them got in first you see. They got stuck in there. You know. A meter long piece of wood. Twenty four inches. You know. There's a lot of weight in that see. The good lord couldn't hardly get them back out again. I put a couple down in there you see. And they're stuck. And those guys you know. Also even if that didn't happen. They were going to work me see. They were wizards see. And all these six guys started feeding in their machines see. As fast as they could see. And they were going to get you. Used to get me see. Because I had to get you see. We had a pickaxe see. Very sharp. The pickaxe that I had see. And I had to kind of work it. So you know for instance if I had three seven inch pieces or something like that. I had to keep that whole fuller see. To get the capacity of the machine see. If I had six or five or six pounds inch pieces one by one you see. But heck there was no capacity at all in the days of old times. I had to have three pieces in those seven inches. Or four. You know it was hot. It was hot you know. It would give me a lot. It was hot damn. And I was sitting in there. And I was red in my face. And I was cussing in Swedish. And I was in bad trouble see. I didn't know what to do see. Well you were offered this job though. You saw this guy. His shoes and sweaty all day. Were you not afraid to take it though? I was afraid when I said. I wanted it. It was kind. At first I didn't know he would get more money. But I thought it was a little you had to get used to. More interesting. And he didn't have to go study either. We had to fill up some big tanks you see. They were creeping the wood. They came out of the machine differently. So the guy ahead of you know. Did he want the job or did he was replaced by you or not? Where did he go? I don't know where he's gone. He left the country. He left? Yeah he said he's going to quit. He left town. I don't know where he was going. So what happened? Did you really keep up with the... Yeah well they I was telling you they were loading me up just six feet high around there see. And I went down to try to straighten the thing up you see. The wood was coming and I couldn't get it out of the way. So I said here comes the boss and pat me. He said had I worked on you you said? He knew what they were doing. The other guy said you should forgive me twice as much. They knew I couldn't handle it. Were they Swedes? No they were Finlanders. Oh. So they saw the chance. Here we have one from Sweden. And they said this guy here down here we're going to have some fun with him see. And the Finlanders and the Polanders. That's most in that room. In the shift that was down there. I said you see that button over there? He said no. Go and stop the whole works. I didn't know that button was there but if something like this happens I'll just get over this. Stop the whole works. Stop the whole damn room. So they called the guys. Probably thought I didn't know about that. See they were going to have some fun with me. But I got straightened up. And so I told you son of a gun. I'm going to get in with you some day when I have a chance. So I got in in three or four days. And we just sat down. And we couldn't talk to each other. In that room there was too much noise. The Finlanders they've been there ten years and they couldn't even talk English. They couldn't even they talked Polish and English. Four or five different languages in that room. They were using different language. There was a good thing there was noise there because you couldn't understand them at all. That's right. In that machine out of the room. There was a damn noise there. I caught them in the ears. That made it terrific. Imagine cutting that thing in a slice like on the end. It sounds like dangerous. They were down far and there was a kind of a shield. See I was standing up higher. They came down and there was a shield over where they were going in the machine. So they couldn't go up. I was a little higher. I got hit sometimes. With a little chip. These little ones. But so well then I found out if I had a piece that I was doubting about. It was about 23 or 24 inches. I put the big end down first. So they didn't get stuck. Then I could pull it back up. That day I found that out. What happened after I got it stuck. In a piece like that I had to take it up. And tore it off on the side. And pull it back out again. And put it on the side. I heard some guys come and split it. So they went down. It was too big. Well anyway I found out that if you fed that machine there. If you had I'd say about four or five pieces. There was about 22 inches or something like that. 23 inches that it went in. They said you could feed them in. There was a long belt. That belt was slick. That slightly slowed down. The machine was cutting it. And they was made that fast. They came off the knives and then flew back against the back of the machine. They split up by itself. You see what I mean? They busted up because they was cut. You know how the wood was cut this way. And you see when they fell down they broke up by itself. By hitting the back end so fast. If the machine slowed down a little bit then the force wasn't so great and it went out of the machine probably in big pieces like this. Instead of supposed to come out like broken matches or something like that. Wooden matches. They're supposed to be the ultimate idea of cutting it up. Before they went into the cooker. And they went to the other machines where they were cut down further. So I was supposed to get back in pieces and break up pretty good. Well anyway, it slowed down. That force was eliminated. And they went up to the next machine and it overloaded that. And they poked it up. But that machine was the two men on that. So at night, especially after ten o'clock, eleven, no boss anybody come on. They just went down and laid it to the side. And they didn't pay attention to it. They thought it would run fine. It should come right. And they went to sleep. At midnight something like that. Those guys. I said, I'm gonna get you. He said, I just picked out four or five pieces. Twenty three inch pieces. He laid them to the side. Sidan 2. And cassette 2. Continue with Conrad Reinell. Med Diablo's Iowa. We got them off. And they got to sleep and go to one on each side of that machine. I picked them up and fed them one after the other. And they slowed down the machine. And the pieces came up to the next machine where those guys were sleeping. And they couldn't go through because they were two bigger pieces. And the gunwood was coming over them. They couldn't see by the head of those guys before they slowed down before they woke up. Then they got even. And I had to stop to clean that machine. I had to stop my machine. How long did you stay on this machine, Arl? How long did you stay on this machine? Well, I went about a year and a half I guess altogether. See, I got discussed. My buddy, he was gonna go back home. He was just in there the same money. And he sent back money back. Well, I don't know if he sent someone back home. But anyway, he was saving his money. So he went back to Sweden. He had about five years. He said, I'm gonna be the man. I'm gonna back home. And he wanted to buy himself a truck. They were high priced and they were very scarce those days. So he stayed I guess at the same place where we were boarding. But I was working a night shift. And I got the sewer line up there. There were two or three railroads going through that town too anyway. So I went over around Superior area, Wisconsin, and fooled around. I wanted to get out of it because I couldn't learn the English language, you see. Because he could learn because he was it was quiet, see. Where the paper came out, you know. You could talk to each other but we couldn't talk to each other, see. You never got a chance to say anything? No, I couldn't. At home they wanted to learn the kids and to talk Swedish. So the small kids, you see, they were all Swedish, you know. And it wasn't Swedish but I got it with noise. So you stayed with the Swedish family then? No, no, no. I broke away. Broke away? I quit. Like I said I went on the railroad when I got off work about 6 o'clock in the morning, you know. The first train, you know, came through there, see. I jumped down it, you know. Stopped down the line trying to find a milk plant, see. That's what I had in my mind to do, see. So you went to Wisconsin then? Yeah, well, yeah. Yeah, I went to Wisconsin, bitch. I got what I did. And there was a fine little place over there, see. And I wasn't going to have them. Well, they didn't... Any of them talked Swedish in there. And they hadn't... They had changed hands. I don't know. There was five, six guys in there. They were selling milk. They were bottling milk there and they would make it churning, butter. And I used to do a good job, you know, so flunky there, see. Used to get used to it, hey. Because, you see, I had two strikes against me, you see. Because the machinery and things, you see, were different in Swedish, you see, than it is English. I had to get to learning all these things. I wanted to get in the plant, see. And beside that, we had the metric system over there, see. And I had all these degrees, you know. Pastelizing temperatures, you know. And the medicine, see. I had nothing in... metric system in my head. I didn't know anything about the... about the... In the system of the feet. It gives me something like that, see. So I wanted to get in there. I told the boys that. Oh, I said, you'd be handy, I don't know. And he was just a farmer, a man, you know. Three, four girls. In the office there. And a couple of butter makers there. So I was in there. I didn't expect anything. And... It was a lot of fun, you know. They come and ask me questions. I know a few Swedish words, you know. They wanted me to come over one time and taste the milk, see. And when they were pastelizing and neutralizing and fixing up the butter, they come over to me. Smaka, smaka, smaka, see. And they wanted me to come over there. And they wanted me to come over there, you know. And when they're making the butter, they come over and smaka. It's gone funny, you know. They come and ask me these questions. So... And I couldn't explain it in English anyway, you see. I used to... That is, even at the moment, I didn't pay attention. But that thing was just about ready to fold up that plant. And boy, it wouldn't take that two weeks. And I wonder what they did. Because they were... I knew all these things in my head what was supposed to be done. But I couldn't tell them. So I could have helped them out. So you could see that there was some problem there? I could see there was a problem if they'd been there a week, see. And I was out washing cans and they got the cream in and milk came in, you know. I done a little testing, a little testing with milk, you know. And cream and stuff like that. But... So I got the head back. And I got up one morning. I didn't know. Nobody told me back then. I was closed up, see. So there I was landing. You know where South Superior is? It was a streetcar coming from Superior out to South Superior. So I said, what the heck am I going to do now? And I was living in a house where I was living. Me and a Finlander, Swedish Finlander. We rented a room together from an old Swedish lady there. And he worked night and I worked night. We used the same bed. So you needed to continue through, you know. And so I still stayed there for a few days. I went downtown, I was now deluding to the employment offices. And they just came down to IED. I had to go out to milk cows on the farm or go up to Minnesota and fire a donkey up in the woods. You know what a donkey is to have them there. They go around. They turn and they load the cows. They have the cranes. They pick up the logs and load them and they haul them down to the mills. Anyway, there was two of them. But I had to go out in the woods, you see. Right up there and I thought, damn it. There was almost twice as much money. Get up and get that. But I knew how to do that. I was an engineer. And when I was in the service I was firing and... You were in college school, right? Yeah, that's right. And we were in... The three of us, when we got looked out, when we come out, you know, we were together most of the time. But I got to hear all those recommendations. The captain. But I said, boys, you deserve it. Because he he was so down in particular. And all the guys like that, you see. We knew about the fire. We went much cold because we didn't have the cold. We were firing with wood and peat moss and stuff like that in our daily life. But we knew that if we had clean smoke, we had a clean fire and that was economical and it was like another beast. Cold wood or whatever it was. And I said, boys, look over there. She had a ship coming over there. All right, we can see him already. See that black smoke? That guy was ten miles away. You couldn't see him, could you? No. But you could see he's black smoke. Yeah, you probably could. That's what I wanted to get out of. I don't want no black smoke out of these chimneys. No matter where you are. When you fire on land, when you fire... We were not on the big ships. We were on the small ships. We were doing most of the coast work. So you went up to the woods then to run this donkey then? Yeah, no, I didn't go to the woods. Oh, you didn't go to the woods? No, I said, you can't even get a business up there because, well, I don't know, I had a reason. I wanted to learn the language and then go back to the milk business. That's what I had in my head. You went to the woods then? I went out to milk cows. I went out on a farm out there. It was right close to town. They're probably, oh, I don't know, probably half a mile from the main town of South Superior, see? And there was an old man and his wife, and they probably had a high hand probably before I got there. But anyway, they had a son and he was enlisted in the Navy in the way he was, see? He was kind of a wild one. He was the only son, only child I think, but they didn't get along. He didn't get along with his dad so he enlisted. They had a big farm, an awful big farm, but there was not an acre except the potato paths but they got to plow it up. They were a lot of level land and they'd probably have been there for years. I don't know, but anyway, they had a big, they had these cows, about sixty cows and the old man died, see? And they called the man and their son back from the Navy and came home. And he had been home a few days before I got there. That's why they advertised for somebody to have milk machines. They didn't have milk machines. So we three of us, we milked twenty cows morning and night, see? No farming to do so we were just laying around there, you know, dabbled around, see? That'll be cut up some hay. We put up hundreds of tons of hay. But we had a lot of fun anyway. And my job was to take that, we had no blind man, you know, take all down the milk to town. We shipped to Minneapolis, coming and passing the train, you know, about seven, thirty, eight o'clock in the morning with the train going through. And it was my job to have that milk down there for that train, the old black moja. And he had a he had a women's he had a women's twenty cows a piece and you know, they're number four hundred things milk, you know. By hand? Yeah, milk by hand. Well, I never told you but my dad, you see, when the World War came on, he went out and bought the people rationing and he said everybody didn't get enough wet. But we got a cart, six hectare I think it was a month for each person in the family, something like that. And and by having a farm by having a farm, we call it a farm or have any ground that you could work yourself, you would classify it as a farm and you get twice as much on your cart. So dad went out and bought fourteen acres, see, and we called the farmer, see, and we got twice as much of everything that was on the cart, see, and we were, well at that time I think we were used to nine, we were nine, probably six or seven. Why was it like they had a farm, more than the city people? Because they raised it, see. They were producers, see. So they were penalized then the people? Yeah, people were, yeah, see, you worked on anything else in town but if you were a farmer, see, you'd get twice as much, see. And that's exactly what we needed. Period. So you were used then to milk by hand? Yeah, yeah. I think we had a couple of cows, you know, I think we had four cows, see, so I and my brother, my younger brother, milked most of the time while I was home, see, even if I was younger. But then, anyway, I knew how to milk cows. So, but then he had his dad, he was a horse man, see, he had two teams of broncos, western broncos, see, I don't know if they ever had been broke or not. No, they weren't broke, but anyway, they probably had a saddle on them, but they didn't. But anyway, we used to milk morning and night and put up hay, you see, he said, by the way, there was two broncos. Team broncos, you know about the horses? Yeah, I know a little bit about them. You want to wake them, he said? He said, I don't know, see, he'd been gone for a long time, he didn't know, he'd probably never seen any broncos before I saw them, see. All right, let's try them, see. So we got the dad harness, the old man probably, well, he had plenty of harness, he was a horse man, he had several teams in the round thing. We fixed up a thing, you know, we had a lumber wagon, big wheels on it. We nailed down, you know, and the bolts that we nailed that down and chained that down so it wouldn't come out and then we bolted it down. We got a wide board about that wide and clear, it was like a spring, you know. Oh, boy, one inch board, I think it was, double. We got them harnessed up, got them hooked up, he was sitting on the back, you know, and I was sitting, I was driving. Boy, boy, they must have passed about 60 acres, now they're sparing the board, me let them go around, I tell you. We had more darn fun with this damn thing. And he was sitting in the back there and he was laughing. So you broke them? We broke those stunt teams, you know, and he sold them. Yeah, because I don't know if they got from anything, but yeah, we sold them, because we didn't need them in the farming. We had another couple of teams, we took one team in the morning, go out and cut the grass. Yeah, but how about the hay harvest? Yeah, we hauled in the hay. Then we were better, you know, on that thing. We had slings, you know, how they had the slings, you know, and then load, you load up probably two feet of hay on the wagon seat and you put the sling on top of that, and they had a ring and put the end of it, you see. So you can take and lift up the hay, you see, and that sling. Into the barn? Yeah, into the barn, you hoist it up, see. We had three or four of them, you see, on each wagon. We got up high, you see. It was loose hay these days, you see. So we better, who could load the biggest load, the tallest load, and get it into the barn. The point of that is we had a big time, you see. But he was, he took turns about, you see, to load one, was taking it, and they would have raked up in the rain in the window, you know. Raked up, you see, and one was on the wagon, you know, spreading it out. He said, there was a trick, you see, how to spread it out, so you could go up high. And all the way, you see, we went into the spare, you know, spent the winnings, you know. So you only used hay then, no corn or silage or anything like that? For the day? Silage? No, no, no, they didn't have silage. And I wasn't there in the winter. Yeah, he probably had it, but we never put up in it while I was there. So he only bought hay, he bought the hay then? No, no, we cut the hay. And then hauled it into the barn, see, and fed it to the cows in the winter. You had horses then, or you? Oh, yeah, we had horses, yeah. We had horses in the afternoon, and we cut, I cut it most of the time, you know, and we had plenty of horse power. We thought it was too bronco, you know. And the dairy cows now, were they outside in the wintertime too, or? No, no, I wasn't there in the wintertime, see. They were all there past, see. I was there summer. I was there about six months, you see, and I had to go on the horse, you know, go out and round up the cows right in the four o'clock in the morning, you know, and the cows rounded up, you see, and they had a few horses around there, and I had to stop at some restaurants, you know, butcher shops, you know, pick up bones and waste, you know, things like that in the morning, you know. There was a kind of a lot I remember. I took a different horse. I had no blind horse most of the time. She was tame, you know, and you see, she didn't move, you know, if you went home in the blinds, you know. I stopped. It was a barber shop. It was right on the river track. The track was far from here to the wall. There was a two-three train. There was a kind of a joint over there, a junction or something. A lot of trains came in. Anyway, I had a different horse one morning on one team, you know, and I used to put the, or probably tied them up, I don't know, but in a way, I didn't do that that morning. I had a different horse or something, you know, and I just had the lines laying on the wagon, and I went into a place for some reason about seven o'clock, seven to ten in the morning. And here comes that dog going double. And an old train coming through, you see. Double head steaming. And the horse, he wasn't used to it, see. I'd never thought of it, you know, I had that young wild horse, you know. And I used to come through there, you know, you know how, there were long trains, you know, those hypercars, you know, they had 150 cars, I think, because they were always going downhill, you know, they always had to need the brakes on them, you know, because it would come from the mountains. Here that horse took off for home. I wasn't out of sight. And he took off, I think, before the train got to, because they were making awful noise. I think with the horse running away, and you stayed there six months, you said? Something like that. There was up in May. Well, when the first I quit, things went down, I could see that, you see, the cars dried up. It was hard to get a job before. The cars dried up, but I mean it was hard to get another job, you think? Well, no. What happened? We got a snow storm. I don't know what time it was, but the first snow, snow storm, it was up to that fall. There was probably no wind by then, I think it was. And they're coming in, and it got cold, you know, and that much more than the cows, you know, laid up in milk and everything. So I figured here, I was not hired for any length of time, but I saw the handwriting on the wall. They couldn't afford to have me over the winter. So I just, well, a few days before that, I guess I had, I made my mind up. I had a paper. Horse Dailman. You know, made in Wisconsin. That's a daily paper, an old, daily paper. Nothing but dairy business in it, on the producing end of it, see. About cows, you know, raising them. And I think there was a monthly, I don't remember. But I got far enough that I could read by that time the paper. And I saw an ad in there, and I wrote down answers that were down in Illinois. And I got close by Galesburg. Well, this here, you know, by Galesburg. Well, anyway, I got out there and there was a seed company. They wanted somebody, you know, to talk to, you know, like somebody that wanted to start a business, you see. There was a guy, there was a social-minded, you know, a big guy that he was in the seed company. So I I just was not the one that stayed with them. They was just more or less of a fake, you know. He he wanted somebody to do it, and I could do that, but they didn't have any money and they didn't have any money either, see. So there was not much to it. But anyway, he gave me a job that summer, that winter. And in the agronomy room, you see, we were testing all the corn. And boy, I learned more than that. I had never seen any other corn by that time, see. And I came here from the harvest, see, down over there. And I worked in the agronomy room and my wife's brother happened to be in that agronomy room, see. And he was the main one in there. And we raised the corn, you see. He tested it, see. Big table, like this. But they used wider desks and long tables, see. You know how to do that? Well, I received it. That was all it was meant, you know. Fine limestone there, you know. And then we had a cloth, linen cloths. And they had to boil for one hour. Boiled. We put that on top of the boil every day. And then we put some lime. And then we took the corn came in. It had already been sorted in a way, you know, right out in the field. Because when they pick seed corn, they just take the big ears, see. And if they see any alcohol, there's a mark on them. The kernels is off-colored or something like that. They don't take them, see. Or if the ear is crooked. Or if the ear is not filled out good. Or if the stalk is felled down. You don't pick anything off. They had several things, you know. I didn't do much of that because I couldn't tell. They're good and for bad because I've never seen any corn before. The first corn you've ever seen. See, because they didn't raise it. Minnesota didn't raise any corn. They were on the farm. And they didn't raise it in Sweden. Well, anyway, I've done the heck of a lot. And I really enjoyed that. And it was warm and they had to keep the rooms there, you know, 90 degrees in the night and day, see. And I knew that because I couldn't or couldn't now determine what kind of disease an ear corn has got. But they have some root rot, stalk rot, scutellum rot, diplodia was one of them. And they had five, six diseases, see. That is... Yeah, when you read them. But what we did, how we tell, we... There were cases in here, half a bussel, I think, in a case. And there were certain lengths and sort of widths. But they did put down the ears. So I think we had 15 in the bottom. See, they were fixed out, see. So they were tied down closer. And then we put another layer on top, see. And they went with the first layer, see, that was number one ear right there, see. And there'd be 15 here, see. And that for the first layer. The second layer in there would be 16. And there'd be 30 over here, see. We didn't mark it, see, but we knew that that's the way it came out. And there was some other numbers, see. So then we took we took there in the hand, left hand, and we took out 15 corners. We kept on turning the ears. We took out 15 corners all over and all sides, over that particular ear, see. And we put that on a... We have a... No, we put that right down on that cloth that had been boiled, see. On top of that. See, but we put down in the order there. We think we put down... It was here. I think we put down all. Probably 15 out of the number, not what we did. But anyway, we had six or seven, at least. And we put them in place by that ear, see. And then we took that ear and laid that down in another box like we were taking out, see. So the first thing we put in the box was number one, see. They were never marked, but the we put down the same way, see, from one to 15 and 16 to 30. See, and they marked the box. So we laid that right down on that cloth. That was on top of the lime. And then we had another cloth when we got the whole table full, see. We put on top of that. On top of the the cums. And of course, then we sprinkled with water, lukewarm water, see. About 80, 90 degrees. Like rainwater, take the place of rainwater, see. That on the top. See, see. In about two days, you know, they start sprouting, see. 90 degrees, see. Ideal for corn, see. Start sprouting now, see. And then we rewatched them. But we didn't do anything before we had they get up to a week old, see. They really wouldn't be ready. And by that time, you see, the top shape was up this high, see. The sprouts lifted it up, see. And they were ready to leave, see. And then you went in and examined the roots in that little plant out of each cumb, see. And that's what you determined whether that is that we had at number one was good enough to go out for seed corn, see. See. Anything that had disease, any trouble with it he threw them away, see. Those ears. And well, they fell, you know, but they didn't go out for seed corn. So this was an interesting job you had. Yeah, yeah. I learned something there too. You liked that too, then? How long did you stay? Well, it was just one winter. And there was the one around Gersberg, you said? Yeah, well, what else? Knoxville? No, there was... No, they were far away. Well, I'm not going to give you that. But it's around there... It was back in that neighborhood, but then away that's where I met my wife, see. Her brother was this agronomist, see. Is she of Swedish background? Oh, yeah, see, yeah. Yeah, yeah, you see her. She was right in the farm. And she's born in... She's born in Henderson County. Henderson? Oh, Henderson. Oh, sure. That's not to get to Gersberg. Yeah, so... But then I got... I didn't stay there. I got a job as a pioneer in a creamer company in Gersberg. It was a big company at that time. And they sent me out. Well, the first thing I do is go out in a truck. So, picking up cream. Because I went back in that business. This is where I got down, you see. From Wisconsin. So, I got in there and... And I... I hit it out. And I hit it out every week. A different day in the week. And I think Saturday, probably, I didn't go in there. But I went to a place, my wife's home, you see. So, I got that cream, you see. And, well, either way, I was in there not very long. And I got to work in the plant. That's where I wanted to see. So, the superintendent, they had there, I think they had eight big jobs in there. It was a pretty big place at that time. They were at... Have you been to Gettysburg? Well, you know, they were down by the other tracks. And I forgot to say... Seminary Avenue? Yeah, I forgot. Well, anyway, I got in there, you know, and Carl Lawson, he was superintendent there. And I was getting along pretty good with the language by that time. You see, I mean, I was with people, you know. I was reading a lot. And I was writing to my wife, you see. She was writing in English. And... How did we do it? No, I was writing in English. And she corrected. So, your wife is born here? Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's born here, or whatever. But she also speaks Swedish? Yeah, she was raised from Swedish people. She knows Swedish, yeah. Most of them are gone. So I got that job in there, you know. That I had talked with the superintendent there, you know. I was on the intake the first day. Tasting the queen. She was going to check me out, you see, because I was really going on my back. I had, you see, I had four or five plants in the whole country. You know, they learned over there. I wasn't going to let that go out the window, see. So you were determined to learn Fahrenheit and the Greek? Sure, that's right, see. And the starter, they were making starter too. They were doing that over there, see. And you never find that in very many places. It gives me, because they were all doing some Swedes over there, see. They were running that plant. They were owned by a bunch of Swedes to begin with, you see. And they were all starter makers. And in those days, that was the trick. Because you'd get them cream, you know, from the farmers. And some of them have certain weed, you know. And they have certain flavor. And you mix that all together, see. And you get a heck of a taste in butter, see. So they, you know, you have to. How could you avoid this taste? You used to take it out of, you couldn't taste all the cream from every farm? Well, you could taste what it was. You could grate it, see. Put it in different, put it in different bunches, see. I know, but I mean, you picked up cream from every farm. Did you taste it? No, no, no. Yeah, I did. But it didn't grate it. It had to be decent. If it had a little off flavor, you could doctor that up, see. But if it had onion or something like that, I used to pick it up. If I caught it, see. Because that's a hard thing. But I didn't do that. But that was my job, see. I would haul it in. But when it came in on the revolution, what I mean. And when you come in with the load, you see, they put it on the corral, see. And put it in, you see, with the numbers on the cans and things, you see. They guys in the plant, they're tasting. And they sorted it out which way it was going to go, see. The first was second, the third was great butter.