 This is cassette two, this continuation with Mrs. Edward Carlson, Omaha, Nebraska. Cassette two, side one. So he eventually got a job then? Oh yeah. And what was that then, the first? Oh, he worked in a grocery store. I think he worked on the farm in Malmo, Nebraska for a while for an uncle, but that didn't last too long. Then he came back to Omaha and worked in a grocery store and all the ladies liked him so well. He'd talk them into buying all these groceries. He was a big success as a grocery man. Then he got into the Jerby Commission Company and went on from there to bigger and better things. Gretchen, his daughter, would be the one for you to talk to about him. She's out of town right now though. So she is the nearest? She's the only one in that family left. So how did he get into this business now that was going to be a million dollar venture? Well, Jerby Commission Company. He became a partner with Jerby Commission Company. How did he become a partner? Did he have collateral? My mother loaned him some money, a small amount. I mean it seems small now, but it was a lot of money then, like $225 or something like that to become a partner in this company. But still no ice cream? No. So how long did he work there until it started to take off? It was just a gradual process. I don't know how that he was always, in my eyes, he was always very prosperous because they had automobiles long before we had automobiles. So it was a gradual process. During the Depression, how did they hit his family? Was he affected by the Depression? The Depression? No, he survived during the Depression. It was tough, but he survived. He was a shrewd businessman and very had a magnanimous personality. Everybody just loved him. He'd just make you melt. He was just a charming person. Did he employ a lot of people later on? Oh yes, yeah. It was like a factory then? Oh, I can't tell you all the details about it. It was a creamery for a while. They bought butter and eggs and then they were in turkeys and cold storage. And then his sons came into the business and then they started with frozen foods. And then just went on from there to be very, very successful until Campbell soon bought them out. That was after he died. So, was he still living when the TV dinners came in? Oh yeah. He was? I think so. He still owned the business then? He and his sons, uh-huh. So they really took off? Yeah. Is there a book written about him? I had a copy of that book someplace. The Swanson Story. The Swanson Story. That would be helpful for you to read. Yes. Yeah, I heard a lot of stories about him. I haven't seen a condensed. It's very interesting, huh? Yeah. So he had a big territory on a nationwide level? Oh yes, yeah. And it was right here in Omaha? Right here in Omaha. Was he also a Covenanter? No. They belonged to the Kunz Memorial Lutheran Church. He was first in our church, wasn't he? And his wife was a beautiful lady too. I was very fond. Was she English background? No, she was German background. But just a lovely, beautiful person. She was my ideal. She was always very good to me. And this one, the daughter or granddaughter? Gretchen, the daughter. She's the real daughter, yeah? Uh-huh. Gretchen was born quite a while after the two boys. I think they were in – the boys were in high school when Gretchen was born. So she's – is it seven or nine years younger than I am? When we were young, we were together a lot. We always had Swedish dinner at my parents' home. And Uncle Carl and all the family were there. We always spent Christmas Eve together and had a wonderful time. And then we were at their house for Christmas dinner. But when the children grew older and got married, then we weren't together so much. And they had a different social life than we did too. Your father's name was? My father's name was Oscar Julius Lundgren. And he was from? He was from Moutala. And your mother's name was? My mother's name was Hannah Swanson Lundgren. And she was from Schiphol? She was from Schiphol, uh-huh. Did they go back to Sweden for this? My mother went back to Sweden before she was married. They were not married until rather late in life. I think they were in their thirties when they were married. So she went home then for a few months? She went home, I don't know for how long, but for a short visit. How many sisters and brothers did you have? I had just one brother. Howard Lundgren. He can tell you a lot more than I can, if he were home. He's out of town too. So how about this Swanson, how that became a successful visit? Did he go back to Sweden for a visit? Yes, yes. He did? Uh-huh. He went back at least once, maybe more than that. And I know all his children, his sons, both his sons and daughter have been back there several times. Gretchen was just back there this summer. Did he keep his Swedish, despite of his young age coming here? Did he keep his Swedish? Yes, or did he forget about the... The language? Yes, the language. I think he remembered it a little bit less than my parents, but because he was, you know, a man of the world and he was out associating with big businessmen and everything. And then he married a German lady to her. Uh-huh, uh-huh. So there was no Swedish spoken in the home then? No, no, none at all. But the children, they've been interested in the Swedish background. They always were interested in celebrating Christmas with the Swedish food. My mother used to make Swedish rye bread and coffee bread and bring to them and they'd have brown beans and herring and lutefisk and all that stuff. They loved that. They carried on that tradition. Because Uncle Carl was so fond of that and they really made a big, big celebration out of Christmas Eve and the Swedish food. So he became a successful businessman within 15, 20 years or more than that? Oh, I don't want to say how many years because, you know, I was just a youngster and as long as I can remember, I thought he was a great success. I mean, to us, they were almost like God because, you know, whenever they said, get ready, we're going to come and take you for a ride, well, that was a big, wonderful event in my life, you know. So you had a car then quite early? Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. What kind of car? Oh, every kind of, the nicest cars available. As I recall in my childhood mind, I thought they were wonderful. My aunt had an electric car, I remember that when I was five years old. My aunt had an electric car and when I'd get out of kindergarten and get around the corner where I could see down the street and if I saw her electric car parked in front of our house, I was so excited I would run all the way home. But it's strange they had electric cars so early. I mean? It's quite strange to think they had electric cars that early. Uh-huh, yeah. I was five years old at the time, so, and I'm 73 now. So that's how long ago it was. It was a good old time. Yep. So Omaha, downtown for instance, there was a booming place ten years ago with a radio station and a lot of commercial companies. Oh, I think so, yeah. And big hotels. Oh, yeah. Traveling sales, because this was like a hub. Yes, you're right. I think so. For the rest of the West. It was comparable or even larger than Kansas City, but then Kansas City all of a sudden, I don't know what year that was, but after the Depression I guess, around Depression time, Kansas City took off and was a lot more progressive than Omaha. Yeah, and then the big slaughterhouse, of course, down in 25th. Oh, yeah. South Omaha. That was a big thing around here. The bushiest place there. It was the world's largest meat packing area. Now it's all done out where the cattle are. So there's nothing in Omaha anymore then? No. Completely? They sell some hogs and cattle here. Yes, but they don't process them or? They don't process them, no. They process them out of the little towns. So that's all the past. Omaha stockyards. Do you correspond with your cousins in the... Christmas time is about all. How about your children? Are they interested in the background of Sweden? I think our son is more interested than our daughter. Yeah, he had a... when we were there 4th of July, he had a big map and he wanted to know right where everybody lived. So, and he marked them, whose name it was and where they came from and circled it. He married a girl whose father was born in Sweden too. And they live in Omaha? They live in St. Louis. St. Louis. That said ship Juno? Juno. Juno coming through the Yutter Canal. And when we were there... An old postcard. An old one that I'd seen when I was a child. He said that's the boat that he used to get on and go down to the next town. It was the very same boat, it said Juno 1875 on it. Came through the Lachlan River. So you saw the same boat that... Yeah, came through there. And he had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... He had a... Comic Con Checkpoint Station From there on that day we left the marshандer boat at 11 o'clock in the morning and we put the torch light on the boat probably keeping before we put the arrow there. And that night's ship, thelashan, navigated straight through Utah. And what... And what's the name of the little city that went through in there? Perhaps we can find it. small, small apartment there. So he came with them because of harsh. Yeah, he came with his parents though. He had an older brother and sister here and the whole family. Came to Omaha. Came back, came to Omaha. What kind of work did he get into? Oh, he worked the foundry, first of all, in Omaha. And then in later years he was a carpenter or a cabinet maker. Very good cabinet maker. He was a wonderful, sweet, sweet father. Very humble, but happy, pleasant, musical. Yeah. He made our grandfather the clock you have to see before you leave. I see. So he was handy then. Oh yeah. Both mechanically and with the. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. End of interview.