 This is cassette two, this is side one, the continuation with Einar Bergström, Omar, Nebraska, October 2nd, 1987, cassette two, side one. Yeah, we continue now with the Church. Okay, yes. Why is it that the Lutheran Church has adopted the Catholic ideas, or the Catholic being more liberal? Well, don't you think from the very beginning, though, we really were a lot like the Catholics from the very beginning? I feel we were. The Swedes shook it off, though, in the 1950s. I know it. Oh, well, yes, with Martin Luther. Yes. But, you know, I cannot understand why it has happened, but little by little by little, we do the only thing that we don't do, we don't do the incense, you know? But otherwise, honest to goodness, we do everything the same. And the Catholics do very much like us. We went to a funeral here not long ago, and it was very much like ours, honest to goodness. The preaching and the singing and the talking and everything is like ours. The weddings are a little bit longer than ours, because they have the high mass, if you want to. But the Catholics have gone to the low mass. We went to a wedding in the Catholic Church in the afternoon, where it never used to be. It always used to be in the morning, before whatever they call it. So, I don't know. It is very, very much the same. Isn't it more required, though, from the people in the Catholic Church, the parents have to sign, the kids have to be brought up in the Catholic religion, and so on? Oh, yeah. The Lutherans don't have that. No, that is too bad, in a way, though. Yeah, because... It's a contradiction. Right. I don't think so. Well, now, Teddy's kids have gone to CCD classes all these years now, and Joel, the oldest 14-year-old, he is going now for his pre-confirmation. So, and that's neat. All these years. So, of course, we have Sunday school, which they don't have. I don't think they do, because the kids never go to Sunday school. They go to CCD classes, but... Are they confirmed? Well, they are confirmed. Same thing. Same thing. And Joel will be confirmed now, you see, then, when, after the CCD classes are finished, when he is 15 years old. And, where ours, they are 13, I think, or 14 in our church. Do you think they will be better educated in religion than... No, I want to tell you why. Why I think that. So, then, my Teddy is very much like her father. She should have been... She should have been confirmed at the Immanuel. At Zion. Or Zion. Uh-huh. Or you stayed with the Zionites. Yes, because the Immanuel and Zion merged. That's correct. Right. And so, Ted and I were married in the Zion. You know, it really was funny for years there. The Zionites never really took the Immanuel. You know what I mean? There was always a... An opposition. Oh, yes, yes. And the Zion, we always felt, were the big, real riches. And we were the poor, coming from way down there, you know. And what a nice church we had. But that wasn't really so, because we had a lot of rich people, if you want to call it that. But it was always something there. But now it's gone, of course, you see. Why shouldn't it be, after all these years? So that burned, and then we built the Augustana Lutheran Church, where we are now. We just love it there, you know. It's very nice. And you know what's so neat there? I skipped something there in between time. Oh, about sending the kids to Sunday school and everything. So much that Teddy became very into religion. That's the oldest one now. Yes, knew everything about the church, knew everything about religion. Because my husband is a, what should I say, a student of the religious everything. He studies very much the religions of the world. He is into that type thing. He said, just a darling, I wish you'd meet him, he's a darling man. But anyway, so when she, when Joel started CCD, they asked her, the Catholic Church asked her, would you teach a CCD class? Free. They didn't pay at that time. Now they got to make so much money, they pay them. And she said, sure. And I just have to laugh when she came home one day and she said to Ted, my husband, I'm teaching CCD, Dad, and I'm teaching them all that they don't know about the religion, because I know much more than they do. I thought that was so cute. So she's going to now teach a year also for the young ones now, so that they will learn a lot about the religion that the Catholics don't know. Do you get a law to say that? Well, you see, the Catholics really don't know much about the Bible. You know that, you realize that. Yes, because they were kept away from it. For some reason. So now, I think they're getting more and more into it now. But Ted's a law partner, both of them, there were three of them in fact, and three of the other men were Catholics. Because you see, he went to a Catholic, to Creighton Law School, so all our friends are Catholic. And so, we just had our first reunion, if you want to call it that, of our law partners, and we went out for dinner just last month. There were six families, six men and women, and they're all Catholics except us. But you know, we've always had a wonderful time with them. There was never a point, there was never a thing about our religions or anything. But we went to all their weddings and all their funerals and what have you. In what respect has your church changed now, the LCA, since you went with your uncle and auntie to church? They were so strict in those days, though. Oh, yeah. Is it better today than you think it's more liberal? Yes. Oh, oh. Okay, I will tell you something here. This is supposed to be you, isn't it? This is just you. Okay. Now, I can't remember exactly the date, but we got a pastor in our church, at the Augustana Church. Darling man, Bill Youngdahl, related to all the Youngdahls. In Minnesota. Darling man, you know, young. We had a foresight on what was to come. And it was a terrible thing in our church for the oldies, because they were not going to own up to that we were going to grow. We are in a black neighborhood. However, in the last 20 years, the blacks have moved further away, and the whites, young people are moving into the area because there are gorgeous homes there. They have bought these homes and refurbished them. So Bill Youngdahl decided that we were going to get the blacks into our church, which was absolutely the downfall of everything they thought. So they made, we made, during Youngdahl's time, a movie called A Time for Burning. If you ever would have a chance to request that filming of A Time for Burning, made by, what was that man's name in California, came here and filmed it. But our church, I'm sure somebody has the film. Anyway, they filmed it in our church. And it was the beginning of the end, because you see, the oldies did not want the blacks. The oldies did, oh my goodness, and he was with us maybe a year or two or three, I can't remember, and he left. It was so sad because he was a darling, but it was the beginning of a wonderful thing in our congregation. Then we had, but now we got Vic Schoonover, and he is into the poor, the blacks, the rich, you name it, and we do so much for others that it is wonderful. Ted and I go down to the Indian Chicano Center once a week. He is on the Indian Chicano Center board. I go down there and nurse free, have for eight years now, in the evening, to the poor. And they're all Indians and Chicano, well, we don't call them Chicano, they are Mexicans. And just think what a wonderful thing. Our church has blacks that have joined our church. We have, we started a community type thing. It's called, isn't that terrible? I lost my thing. And we have classes there every week, every day. In the summertime, we have all these children come to our church, and we have made it open for everyone and anyone, and it's really neat. But the rest of the churches haven't done this. Did they drop out? A lot of them. Oh, a lot of them. But some of them have stayed, and they have become, they are still very, they don't want to accept many things. How do you think that generation was like that? What made it? You've got me. They had a depression, of course. Oh, yes, I know it, but my goodness. You lived through a depression. I certainly did, yes. And, of course, at the time, but you know, the depression didn't hit a lot of the riches at the time, because look at that darling Gunnar Mossblod, for instance, married Doris. Doris' mother and father were considered wealthy, and had a plumbing thing. And then, of course, Doris went to college, and she met Gunnar over there and everything, and he came over here. But they were wealthy. But then you see, Gunnar is not going to hear this, is he? Oh, okay. So Gunnar's, Doris has brothers, two brothers and a sister. I can't remember, two brothers. No, will never admit. So you see, and here is that Gunnar, is very nice, darling man. We have a lot of respect for him, but Doris has a brother who absolutely, they set themselves away in a church, they will sit in some part of the church, they look down on, it's very hard, because then the young people have come into our church, and they have come in because they like this kind of a thing, to do for others and everything. Then we got a woman pastor. So about seven, eight years ago, eight, ten years ago, we were the first church to admit a woman pastor. And boy, was she something, I'll tell you. And we, of course, she did a lot for our church, changed everything, drove everybody nuts. She was with us seven years and left. Seven years? Then another one came now, so we have another one. But you know, it's a funny thing, a woman pastor, I don't think will ever be accepted. To the point where they will never, now the one we have now, she loves to go out and get a church of her own, but I don't think she ever will. Do you know, though, that the Augustana Church in Minneapolis, where we go drive all the way down from, way out, drive down to the church on Sunday morning, the Augustana Church there, they had a woman pastor for, I don't know, two or three or four years after Pastor Berg left. He was a precious man. Then she was, and I can't remember her name, what a fantastic woman she was. But I don't know why she finally quit. I think she either had a nervous breakdown or she couldn't take it any longer, but she quit. And now the man that's there now was one of our students at the Augustana Church. That's, I can't remember his name either. Terrible. But he is the pastor there now, and he was one of our students or our associate pastors at one time down the line. We've had lots of them. What happened then with the women pastors? Do they freeze them off? Well, she, the one that we had for seven years, went back to Rock Island. It was a long time, those seven years. Yes, oh, and what she didn't do for us, let me tell you. We went through a lot. She was a darling girl and a student of the Bible, let me tell you. We learned a lot. She started that program where they went, my husband went, every week for a year and a half or two to learn all about the Bible, you know, and everything. Wonderful teacher, and we're still doing that. But she went back to Rock Island and working on her doctorate. So she's going to teach. Wonderful, wonderful student, you know, wonderful girl. Now this one here, she's divorced and went to the ministry, and she wants to, but I don't know that she, what will happen. I don't think she'll ever, I have not heard of a church hiring a woman. It's a rough road. Oh, really, really. For the women pastors. We love our church, though. Goodness, we'll do anything there to help, to do anything. We were there yesterday. I was there yesterday. I was ahead of the meeting yesterday for the LCW, ALCW, ELCW, and we made 25 sacks of mixed nuts for the Emanuel Bazaar. Once a year the Emanuel has a bazaar, and we make money for the church, for the hospital and everything and all. And our church does, too. We just had one. We made, I run it, of course, you know. What don't I run? And we made over $2,000 at our Emanuel Augustana fair, and we sold everything from soup to nuts. And the proceeds goes to? Yes, to the church, and they were going, now with that $2,000 that we got, they're going to buy a computer for the office. The church, the hospital here, I run the thrift shop part. So all I do is go out and beg from everybody. You would think I had part Jewish in me, but I don't think I do. They all say I do, and I'm not going to say I don't, but that's okay because we have a lot of Jewish friends, and I just love them. But I hit everybody for everything that they've got to give us so we can make a lot of money. So you are actually going by the Bible to try to give and direct them. Oh, yes. That's the way the church should be though, and the religion. Like the old Swedes now, they kept by themselves most of them. They went to the Sifir eating and sewing. But we went back to Sweden now, and do you know that there was nobody in church? We went to Domskirkan, because I wanted Ted to see my church. It was closed, and nobody there. So then it said something to the effect that you'd have to go back to the back part and see if you could get in. I said to Ted, forget it. We went to the Domskirkan in Uppsala, and that was really neat. I'm telling you, I will never forget it. And there were more people there. It was filled. We got there at 20 minutes to 11, because we walked from our hotel in Uppsala, and there were, I counted, 20 people there, 20 minutes to 11. And Ted said, my gosh, Ina. Are we going to be the only ones here, you know? I kid you not now. Five minutes to 11. People poured in, and I mean poured in. And here were all these preachers coming, you see, in all their costumes and all their everything, and the biggest choir I have ever seen, and they were all young people. And they sang beautifully. The sermons were nice, except that they talked so fast, and I talk so fast. They told me in Norway and Sweden that I should not talk so fast. I speak Swedish. I speak Swedish fast too, but not as fast as the Spanish. I would love to take Spanish. So in third string, I took Latin, and what good has Latin done me? I should have taken Spanish, because I could use it down at the English Conference Center. So you had to take Latin? Latin to go to the nurse's training. Oh, yes. Why? Oh, you got me. But they tell me it was wonderful for us to learn to speak English, for one thing, and for medical things, yes. But how I wish, so Ted bought some tape for us here last year, so we're going to take them in a car, so both of us can sit there maybe and pick up some Spanish, I don't know, because it's really neat, you know, to be able to speak to these people that come in. Instead of standing there saying, where do you hurt? Here or here or here? And then have to get somebody to translate. So I do the translating here for the Swedes. Oh, you do? I've done it ever since the beginning of time. So whenever they get mail here that they don't know, so I translate for them. And the patients, I go on the floor and translate for the patients. I translate for the sisters when a lot of them are here. How about the old timers now when they are ending their lives? Do they like to talk Swedish? Yeah, well, do you know that when my husband's father came to this country, he left Luleå, Haparanda, down there, because of the conscription, I'm sure. And when he came here and married Grandma, my husband says, there will never be a Swedish word spoken in this house. We're learning English. And I, you know, very, I wish... And his parents both were born in Sweden? Yes. So this was the idea then to... To come here and just drop everything, right. But when Ted's mother and father were old, old, old, the mother would come to the house. So my husband learned Swedish from the mother's side of the family. But Grandpa, you know, Ted's father said, I am not speaking one word of Swedish from now on. It's going to be all English in this house. And how wonderful that is when you stop to think of it. Just think of all of the Mexicans coming over here, and I'm just using them as an example because I work with them, that the mama is young, like 25 years old, coming in with three or four children. And the oldest child is translating for me what is wrong with them because the mama can't speak English. Now isn't that a shame? They won't learn then or... No, I don't know what in the heck they're doing. They've got, I don't know, what are they going to do? This is why there's so many poor. They're not going to get a job someplace because they can't speak English. And I stand there and I go nuts, you know, and I will say to the kid, because I have a lot of guts, you see, because when I worked here, I did in-service education, and I was in, like if somebody said to me, boy, I wish you would come and talk to them about such and such because their shoes are not very good. I would go up to them and say, I'm giving you some shoe polish and I'm giving you some shoelaces, and go home and clean up your shoes. So then they would just jokingly say at that time, you better go by Ina because she's an oldie. She's getting senile. They would say it that way. So they would take it, but, you know, it's getting back again now where they will come up to me here and say, oh, Ina, I wish you were here, so that you could come up and talk to some of these people because now they're getting again so that people are doing what they want to do. They are not going to be told anything. And I used to even go up and say, you have a body odor. You've got to do something about it. And if you're washing your underwear and taking your shower every night, that doesn't help, you better go to a doctor because he has a pill they'll give you. And so I think that there was a time there that we were able to get across to our people maybe more. Now it's going away again. Isn't that amazing how that goes? The independence, don't you think so? That's why there are so many divorces. It just really bothers me, you know, how, well, it started with us. A lawyer, partner of Ted's, said to him one day, he came home and told me, don't you feel that you're making enough money so Ina can quit work? And Ted says to me, I said to them, it was not a matter of making money. I said to my Ina, you can work all you want to as far as I'm concerned. I could care less. You love your nursing, you do what you want to do. But you see, they didn't do that in those days. I was the only one of all our friends that worked. And do you know to this day, my friends that we run around with, we have dinner parties, we have our thing, two or three or four or five of them still will say to me, why in the world would you go down to the Indian Chicano Center? You may get, well, AIDS of course, but we put gloves on now, we don't care. But you may get, catch something. I don't care. I'll take care of myself. I have worked all these years in nursing training and everything, nursing, taking care of all these sick people. I never got anything. I did get TB, however, when I was a child in Sweden. Okay. When I was a child in Sweden, evidently sometime a family took care of me when I was little that the old man died of TB. Because I remember as a little child going up to say goodbye to this man who was dead. And he was, do you remember, do they have in Sweden, I can't remember, there was a piece of furniture in the kitchen that had a wooden top to it. And you took that wood top off and it had bedding in it. And then they would pull that thing out and make a bed. Yes. Okay. What did they call that in Swedish? It had a name. I don't know. Now you know what comes to my mind, the cockeroom. I remember the cockeroom, every room in the house had a cockeroom. It was a draught sofa, wasn't it? Draught sofa, yes, that's what it was. Yes. But anyway, I remember that so well. And they put this man when he died on the top of that thing. And I remember as a child having to go up and say goodbye to him. And evidently, now you see, he was living in that house and he had TB. And I got TB at the time. So when I came into nurses, I must not have gotten it though. How did you get it? You didn't kiss him or anything like that. No, but you see, I suppose you just think of the dishes, everything, everything. And so when I came to this country and went to nurses, started nurses training, we all had our mentor. My arm almost fell off. It got ulceration here of the arm. So they said, for God's sakes, don't ever have a mentor test again. Okay. Then they x-rayed my lungs. And to this day and at that time, my lungs are full of scar tissue. So evidently, you see, I got it. But you see, in the meantime, every nurse that went through nurses training with me, there were 19 of us, 20 of us, and we all came in except me with a negative mentor. The day we got out, everybody was positive because in those days, just think of the diseases that we were getting. But you didn't have to go to a sanatorium or anything? No, no, no. No medication? No, no medication. Evidently, it must have cured itself or something or whatever. But there it was because, boy, they looked at my lungs when I got here, you know, at the manual here and said, my gosh, look at that. Look at this. So to this day, and that's what I'm going to do today, I have to have once a year have my lungs x-rayed to see that I'm okay. But going back to the Indians and the Chicanos, how they come in, and I feel so sorry for... And of course, I will say going back to the church, if you don't have a church foundation, you have nothing. That's important. Yes. My daughter that turned Catholic called me one day after she divorced her first husband and was dating this darling Pat Brady. And she says to me, Mama, I've got to go back to a church. I've got to come back to a church. She didn't belong to a church? No, she quit there for five years when she was married to Gary. And didn't come to our... I don't know what the girl was doing. You don't talk. We would say something now and then, but no. So then she called, Mama, I've got to go. Would you mind if I join the Catholic Church? I said, Dear God, we're very grateful if you will join the Catholic Church. And same thing with Debbie. Work days and nights, work Sundays. What nurse doesn't work Sundays? So she joined the church up there in Rockford and never went. And I would say, Debbie, that's just terrible. So when the baby... Babies were baptized, everything was fine. When the children got older and went to Sunday school, she started them in Sunday school. Now she won't teach, but she substitutes teacher Sunday school. You will not believe this. She is the president of the ALCW in her church up there. But it was purely accidental because nobody wanted it. Everybody's working. All of her friends in that church, there are 300 people in that church, are all working. She's a nurse, so she can work her time. She only works so many days a week. She doesn't have to work, but she works to make a lot of money so she can spend it. You know how kids are. And so she works 3 to 11 or nights. So if you can imagine, she makes $150 a day, 3 to 11, working 3 to 11. But then you see, she can be there at meetings in church, and she's running that church. They're going to have a bazaar now, and they're copying me having to sell to make money. Having a thrift shop, people bringing junk in there to sell, and toys and all that type of thing. That brings in people. Collectibles, antiques, to make money for that church. But I just have to laugh, because that Debbie, she didn't go to church all the way through training or through anything. Now she's so active in that church, she even runs the pastor, practically almost. But you know, you've got to have it. You cannot have a basis for anything without a religion. Your generation of women, you are one of the few that kept working while you were working. How do they react now today, for instance, you are still working with auxiliary. Do you have many of those wives now working auxiliary, giving the time? Yes, some, not many. So the point is this about this working. Now you see, I work more than I should in auxiliary. Because you see, what I do, I work for the pharmacy. I work at that pharmacy, and I work at the other pharmacy, they're joint. I do all of the charges for the old people's home, for the Medicaid. Well, it's become so I have 120 patients. That means that I have to sit by the hour, and I mean I put in hours and hours and hours, but I love it. I love it. They can't, my friends can't understand how I can spend so much time doing these things. And of course I work in church. I volunteer there like you wouldn't believe for things. But don't you feel tired, fatigue? No, no, I am so blessed. I think the birth certificate is wrong, and you are right, you are two years younger. Yeah, no. But they all laugh about that still, you know, but I will be 72 years this year. I am the only one of all my friends. But here are people now in their 50s, feeling dead tired. Right, right. We just came back from Minneapolis, bringing up that, where are those, I'm going to have to tell them. The gnats are coming from somewhere, and they are going to have to clean, no I won't walk away. They have to clean up something. There is something in here that is making those gnats, and I am going to tell them. You see, I was at the old hospital, and I helped fix this hospital up. I was in education, in service education, so I oriented all the people to this hospital when we moved here. So I know every nook and cranny here. We were here in hard hats and flashlights, walking around, figuring out everything, so that nobody can tell me a thing about this institution, you see. So... You started... Continuous on next site. Next site. This is cassette two, side two, and a continuation with Ina Beckstrom, Omaha, Nebraska. And it's cassette two, side two. You came here then and went into nursing. Nurses training. Nurses training. My two aunts were nurses, so that's why I got the idea. They encouraged you then? Oh, my, yes. They encouraged me to go. Oh, yes. But I wanted to go. You either want to be a nurse or you don't. And you started in what year? 1936. Graduated in 1939. By that time, some of the old-timers, the very first deaconess, Batilda Svensson, she was still living. Yes. I took care of her. She was old, old lady, and she got sick. And at one time in my nursing there, as a student, I took care of her. And it was very interesting. She was old and didn't know what she was doing. I have to laugh, though. I've got to tell you something about what she did. I was on either 3 to 11 or 9. I can't remember which it was. And I was sitting by the window, and she was sleeping. And she looked at me, and she called me Mrs. Vogelstrom. I never will forget it. Because she looked in the mirror, and she screamed, Mrs. Vogelstrom, calling me. That was the founder. That was the wife of the founder. And, of course, I just laughed and laughed, because naturally I wasn't Mrs. Vogelstrom. I was just probably 18 years old at the time. How old was she then, up in the 80s? Yes. Oh, yes. Yes. And I think she died not long after that. So I can't remember what year she died now, but that was 19, probably 1936, 1937. You were not able then to converse with her? På svenska? Ja. Oh, yes. Sure. I have talked Swedish to everybody. That reminds me. Somebody just asked me to go over to the old people's home and write Swedish for an old man that can't write anymore. Well, I forget everything. That's happened to me all the time. Sure. And lots of people that would come here. But, you know, in those days, there were more Swedes here. And you realize today there's nobody that comes over here. Was it called the Swedish Hospital at that time? Yes, at that time. And then it became, then they dropped that and it became Emanuel Medical Center. You see, that's just the last 10, 15 years. But before that, it was Emanuel, Swedish Emanuel Evangelical, whatever, hospital. So, and how about Miss Vogelstrom, the daughter of the founder? Okay, now she, the daughter of the founder is, if you can imagine now, do you know, you should meet the grandson. The grandson works with me in the pharmacy, Everett Vogelstrom. He's a pharmacist. Yes, he's a pharmacist. His mother, then, was the daughter. And it was so funny because she lived in the same house out here in Omaha for 50 years and he finally, Everett, finally had to put her in the old people's home. She's in the old people's home now. And she just didn't want to go over there, didn't want to go over there. This is Everett and Vogelstrom. This is Everett's mother. Everett is the grandson of old Mr. Vogelstrom, Dr. Vogelstrom. There was Ernst Vogelstrom. He was a druggist. Yeah, Everett, uh-huh, he's here. So he followed in his father's footsteps. Well. Was Ernst, his father, also a pharmacist here? That was Ansgar, wasn't it? Ansgar. Ansgar, I thought it was Ernst. Something like that. Ernst Ansgar. Yeah, I think so. And, uh-huh, and then so, but so Everett is in the pharmacy now, is old Vogelstrom's grandson. And, uh, but he put her in the old people's home, the mother. So that would be the daughter, you see, or the daughter-in-law, wouldn't it? The old lady. Yeah, it would be the old lady. Because, uh, that was... But that was his grandmother. No, it's his mother. Well, his mother. Uh-huh. It's not his mother. Sure. It's just the second. And then he put her in the old, so she's in the old people's home right now. Oh. Mm-hmm. How about, uh, there was also another Vogelstrom there, that was Dickens. Vogel, uh, did you meet her? Yes, um. She was the daughter of Vogelstrom. Yeah. Now, what, yeah, but she, my gosh, she's been gone for a thousand years, it seems like. Yes. But, um, but I was trying to think of the, and then there's another sister, you see, but she lives in Chicago, I think, or something, of the Vogelstroms, too. But that's the end of it. But then all the nurses, you met several of them, like Elfrida Sandberg, she was still living in Chicago. Of course, she ran the, uh, the, where all the, all of us nurses got the, um, equipment for the institution. She ran that department. Was she a deaconess? Yes. No, she was not a deaconess. Only the, uh, uh, uh. She was an RN. Uh-huh. But she was an old-timer here, of course. Sister Olive Cullenberg was the head of the, of the, uh, of the nurses at that time. When you started. When I started, right. But she is also dead now. Sister Ruth Morris, she was the head of the, uh, of the pharmacy at that time. She's dead, too. Isn't that awful? I feel bad. Tina Peterson? Who? Tina Peterson, a time-holder. Tina, yeah, Peterson. Now, where in the world was she? Now, you keep mentioning some of them, more of them, I can tell you. Like Danielson, now. Uh, sister, uh, what was her name, Danielson, she was the head of lab at that time. And, uh. Who was the head of the nursing, uh, department? Was it a deaconess? Yeah, that was sister Olive. It was, or she was a deaconess? Yes. Oh, yes. And, uh. And how did you meet them? Now, were they stern? Oh, no, precious ladies. I will tell you a fun thing about them, though. Uh, I was, as you have noticed, I am impossible, okay, uh, in everything. So, she, um, I was in nurses training, and it was, the first year, we all wore straight hair, and we couldn't wear any lipstick, and we couldn't wear anything that looked at all appealing to anyone, okay, especially patients, of course, men patients. And, uh, so we were real, real dull. So, um, I went down to the corner down here on, on, uh, that would be 30th. There was a beauty parlor there, and I got a permanent, the first permanent. So, I came back, and I was nothing but curls, my whole head here nothing but curls. Well, of course, the nurses went nuts because they figured, okay, Ina broke the, broke the ice here. Uh, let's see what's going to happen. So, I went, came to work next morning, and I took care of a patient down the hall there from, on first floor of the old, of the old hospital. I was in the corner, I'll never forget, I was in the corner. I was giving that patient a bath, and all of a sudden, I heard a knock on the door. And I went, come on in, you know. And she said, come on out here, wherever it was. And it was Sister Ollie. And she said, Ina, you go right home and get, get those curls out of your hair. And I said, Sister Ollie, if I can, it's a permanent. What's a permanent, she said. Well, I said, they sat there and burned, burned my hair all up, and I can't. You go home, she said, and put something in that hair so it will be straight. Well, I went home and tried, of course, but, you know, I couldn't. Well, that was the beginning, anyway, of the, uh, but she laughed about it, and I was not kicked out of training or anything. But you were actually a rebel then. Sure. Starting something new. Oh, I started, yeah, I'm all good. What did they say about that? Oh, they just laughed. Sister Ollie was a very darling lady, and up until that time, the Dickens' did not get married. But one of my teachers was Sister Myrtle... Carlson? No, Peterson, I think she was. Myrtle, she was red-haired. Maybe it was Carlson, but I think it was Sister Myrtle, anyway. And she was my schoolteacher, and do you know, a brilliant lady, she fell in love with a bus driver, no, not a bus driver, we didn't have buses then, a taxi driver, and that was the first sister that got married, left here and got married. So she just left then? Yeah, she left. She went out of the Dickens' altogether. Did you know why you wanted her to stay married? Not in those days, no. So that had to be in the period of 1936 to 1937, 38, 39. So before you came in, not much happened, then, by the dress code? No, no, no. You know, really, everything has happened since then. Isn't that odd when you stop to think of it? All the... everything has changed in that 50 years. So why did it take so long time? Everything was in a slumber, so to speak. Yeah, you got me. The only thing I can think of is, they didn't want it to be changed. Just think of all the poor people, they don't want... But now when you took the chance of permanently being here with the girls... I didn't care. You took an offer of chance. I really did. Did you know that you were going to be a doctor? No. Well, I can't remember that. I was a really... an ornery girl, I guess. How about your aunts, now? Well, they didn't... nobody cared. Really, nobody cared. You didn't live with them at that time? No, no. I lived here. They put me here, and I was here for three years. Do you know, in nurses training at that time, I don't know if I told you that or not, it cost $40 to get in. Oh, you mentioned that. Yeah, and then my aunt came and put the other 50 in. But it was still a lot of money for the nurses. Oh, you tell them. $90 for three years, though, that took care of... But you see, we did all the nursing. They didn't have LPNs or AIDS. We did everything. Who took care of the housekeeping, though? Was it also... Okay, we did that, too, because I'm sure they had somebody over the whole thing as far as floors were concerned. But I remember before we went off duty, we had to clean all the hoppers and all the everything, you know, all the rooms we had to take out the flowers, put them back in again. We did a lot of cleaning. When, after your work was finished after the day, were you able to put on lipstick and perfume and perm for hair? Yeah. Not permanent, but I mean... No, it picks up a little bit, sure. Oh, yeah. They didn't pay any attention to us after that. But, you know, in those days, we really didn't do much. There wasn't... It certainly was not like it is today. Nobody... I think I went through nurses' training with one dress for three years. Nobody really cared about clothes at that time like they do now. There was no... Except maybe there were, and there was rich people, but the ones that were here in nurses' training were here to get an education and what have you. And the pay was very low. $60 a month I got when I got my job here. $60 a month. But do you know that paid for... $25 was all... was our apartment, and it was just a half a block down from the hospital. I rented it with three other nurses. $25 a month, and our phone bill, our phone was $5 a month. So, you know, by the time... Remember, I told you this. The first thing I did was go down to Nagleson's and put $5 down on a fur coat. And it didn't take me too long to pay $5 a month for so many... I don't care. You had it all figured out. I had it all figured out. There is always one thing that I wonder. You know, the hospital profession, especially the nurses, they are doing a tremendous work to keep people healthy and, first of all, happy, if they could be. Why were they always put on with so low wages? Because the doctors made money. Yeah, but in those days they didn't make any more, so to speak, than we did. The doctors made money. No, uh-huh. Because, okay, when I had my first baby, the room I went into was $5 a day. Now, come on, you know, and now it's $180 or what have you. Enough? $5 a day. You just stop to think of it. And Teddy, my first baby, was free in the nursery. And then it gradually got more up. So, now I like it. Let me think now. In 19... just think what it is today to have a cesarean section compared to then. In 1943, I think it was, or 44, 43, I had my second child. And the cesarean section was $200 at the time. So you stop to think the difference. That wasn't very much money. But we didn't make very much, so we had to pay it on time regardless, you know. Now a cesarean section is probably up to $2,000. I don't know. So the gap between the doctors and the nurses was not that great. It's bigger today, then. Oh, right, right. I think so. Oh, my, yes. But, you know, in some... People were more on the same level, so to speak. Oh, yeah. Well, really, they did not make that much, honestly. And I can't remember that they really had that more beautiful homes than the rest of my... like my folks did or anything. No, they didn't. No. But, you know, it's really strange, though, how their money has gone up, up, up by the nurses. Now, my daughter in Minneapolis, however, works 3 to 11 on weekends and makes $150 a day for those hours. Where, just think what it used to be, $8 a day when I was nursing. So it really is a lot of difference. I don't think that... I'm sure that the nurses feel that they're underpaid. I never felt we were very much underpaid because I wanted to be a nurse. I loved it. I could have been on something else. If I didn't like it, I would have gone on something else. So the time we are living now, everybody's underpaid. I mean, just the head nurse. Oh, yeah. That's what... Yeah. Everybody except... They used to say the doctors and the lawyers. But, you know, there's two kinds of lawyers in this world, too. The kind that want to make money and are into it for all they can make, or the kind that are into it, like my husband, just enough to have it nice. Because he never cared whether we made a fortune or not. But a lot of them, they are workaholics, and then they make a lot of money. The chances are they're to be filthy rich if they want to. Oh, yes. We have lots of rich, rich, rich lawyers, friends. How about the technical aspect of it now? When you came in as a nurse and were graduated as a nurse, if you compare it to today, is it easy to be a nurse today in your time? It was easier in my time. Was it a more relaxed feeling? Oh, my, yes. And we didn't know anything. Now, you stop to think. I taught, you know, nursing after I had been here for so many... So the last 14 years of my nursing epitome manual was in in-service education. I did all the orientation, and I did all the orienting of AIDS and teaching LPNs and what have you, Emmanuel's method of giving meds, for instance. I'm going to use that as an example. And they used to say to me, the students at the time, did you ever make a med error, Ina? And I would say, well, hardly. It didn't matter if I did, because in my day, in 1937 to 39, we didn't have penicillin or the sulfas. The sulfas came into being in 1941, I think it was, when we first started, during the war, the beginning of the war, and then we got the penicillin. Until that time, I would give aspirin or soda for high fever, and we would give laxatives, and that's about it. So if I made a mistake, I gave the wrong patient a laxative, and they went to the bathroom all night. So did they die more often than you think? No. Yeah, because there was nothing for them. Like I was just saying, they were just showing me some films a little while ago, and it reminded me so of things. Like, I remember taking care of a cancer patient, and she was just enormously large with cancer of the abdomen, and nothing to be done. So I remember the doctor ordered a hot pack, and it was made out of some kind of oil or something, and we would put that on the patient to make her feel like we were doing something for her. And, you know, I think about those things when I see my friends getting chemo and living longer because of the medications, you know. And just thinking those, the TB, for instance. Everybody had TB. So many people had TB. And now we don't even notice that we have it anymore because other things have come and taken their places. But I remember patients dying from appendectomies because they burst, and they just could not, did not have the medications to cure a terrible infection. Turpentine stoop is what I was trying to think of. We put turpentine hot packs on those cancer patients, and they smelled bad, you know, except I liked turpentine. And the patient felt we were doing something for them. And it was just that way in everything. So the personal care was more involved than the personal care. Oh, yes, we did. And, you know, we give enemas every other day. Now, of course, we don't give enemas anymore because now they have all these medications to give the patient. People don't have to have enemas every other day to clean them out. And we had a very antiquated, difficult Wangenstein suction, for instance. So when a patient had to be suctioned out, we had a Wangenstein, what it was called, so that the water would go from that container to that container for suction, don't you know? And we had to run in so many times a day to change that water from that to put it back into that one so the suction would continue. Just think of it. Was that necessary though? Oh, yes, at that time it was the beginning of something, you see. And in the meantime, now just think, now they have the electric suctions and those things don't have to be done anymore. And then they were in bed much longer? Oh, my gosh, yes. For a long time. Like when I had my first child, I was in bed for 12 days. Now they send them home the next day. Look at the hernia, herniophage, I'll call them what they're supposed to be. In those days, we had them laying flat on their backs for days, like 10 days, let's say, for hernia. Today, they walk out of the operating room, they can't. Or they go home the next day, for sure. That's all hernia. So you see, it really is something. But once now that an infection sets in, I feel badly because with the Medicare and Medicaid, which we did not have in those days, of course, then they have to go. In four days, they have to be gone. So then they have to put them in a home or someplace else where they will be taken care of, which is sad. It has changed a lot, really. You also had a children's department here, a children's home. And we had a lot of cleft palate and hair-lip babies here because Dr. Rung, what was his name? Isn't that terrible? I've forgotten. He was the chief doctor here in Omaha for cleft palates, and he would bring all of his patients here. What was the cost of that? You don't see that anymore. Oh, now and then. Oh, my, yes. Do they still have them? Oh, yeah. We still have them, sure. Oh, they know how to do things, right. He was the beginning anyway, so they were not as wonderfully done as they are today. So now they have plastic surgery. Oh, my, yes. What is the cost of it? They have no idea. It's either hereditary or I don't know. I don't know. But I don't think that they ever figured out what causes it, really, because they do come. They are born now and then, sure. We have a young man in our church that had a cleft palate and hair-lip, and he was never fixed really very well, and he's got to be 30 years old now. So it's taken a long time, and today you don't even know it. We had a baby come in here, and that baby was dismissed after so long, and you would not know, and there was just a line down there that you would know that that baby had had a... Was it more cases? At that time? Well, I don't know if I would say that because they all came here, you know, and we had like a ward for them. So I don't know. Now they do it with plastic surgery and in children's and what have you, you see. So we don't get that like we used to. No. Did people come in for checkups during your time? No. They must never have heard of them? No. They went to the doctor's office or they never went. The week before they died? That's right. That is right. Oh, you know, when you really stop to think about it, when I remember all of a sudden the surgical care came, intensive care, you know, the first thing that we set up in the second... That's the third hospital we set it up for the first time, and then things went to coronary care and everything. Just think what a step that was for these people that they would just die. Okay, when I was probably, let's say, in about 1930, 40, 45, let's say, 1945, I belonged to a group of women that we went out for dinner once a month, and we went to Ross's Steakhouse here. Now at that time we did not have CPR or anything. All we knew is that something was making them quit breathing. So we were at Ross's and there were 25 of us sitting there eating. Well, there was a bunch of people sitting over here and they were drinking a lot, and they were getting noisier and noisier, and there were five men and a woman, I think it was, or four men and two women, I can't remember. And all of a sudden everything got silent throughout the whole big dining room over there, and the one huge man dropped out of his chair, fell on the floor, and he turned blue. And I just said, don't tell anybody I'm a nurse. I don't want to do anything, because I hate emergencies anyway. I used to faint, in fact. So anyway, they could say over the loudspeaker, is there a doctor in the house? And in those days they were smart. They never came because they couldn't do anything anyway. And so nobody said anything. Are you the only one that's going to listen to this? Okay, don't you dare to put this on. But anyway, so pretty soon they said, is there a nurse in the house? And I said to all the girls here, I don't want to go. But, you know, I looked at that man and he was turning bluer and bluer. And it was something in your system. I went over there, you know, and I put my finger, and dear God, I don't know how you do all these things. But I had learned a few things, of course. And I put my fingers down his throat because he'd been drinking, he'd been eating. So it was the common sense that every nurse has to have common sense. If she doesn't have common sense, she better get out. And I put my fingers, and I could feel that there was something in his throat. And my fingers are long, but I could not get at it. So I turned to all those guys standing there, men, and I said, any of you have bigger, two bigger fingers than me? And one of them came forward, and he went in there, and up came a piece of meat about that big. And immediately he started breathing. So what we did at that time, I remember I pushed a little bit because they had taught us how to do that. But I mean, we did not do any of this, of course. And he started breathing, and he lived anyway. But do you know what? The waitress that was waiting on those drunks called the rescue squad. The rescue squad, thank the dear Lord, came and got him, took him to the hospital. And he lived because he was a big businessman in town at that time. And do you know that the women at our table were watching? Because I was so nervous by that time, I could hardly stand it. They paid the girl that called the rescue squad a tip for calling the rescue squad, and not a word was ever said to me, nothing. He would have been dead before you... He would have been dead, oh yeah, yeah. So your reaction went unnoticed. Right, oh yeah. And we even noticed, we looked at all the women that we were with, because we were very close friends. They looked, they still talk about it. They will say when we went to Cashew's the other day, let's hope nothing happens here now. They will all say when we go out, you know. But it's nice to be able to help, and I have been able to do that many years. Excuse me, I'm going to lunch now, so if nobody is coming, it's you. But if Marilyn goes out, go out that exit. All right, all right, thank you. So this one experience you had. Yeah, but you see, today there would be no problem, because everybody goes through, we've been taught this, and we all go out and do our thing, and although, don't you say anything, but I'm not going to do any mouth-to-mouth resuscitation anymore without having... So this one, the part that led on many rescue operations, was this... And you know, we, yeah, right. But you know, and then, in time, we did our CPRs, because when I was working the 14 years, we did, we taught CPR, and we did mouth-to-mouth resuscitation up until all that time. And that, I've been out of nursing now for five years, and in the meantime now, come on now, you know, and here's the gloves now that you're wearing. We never wore gloves. What do they say now about this AIDS? I mean, here is, they say it's a virus. Yeah. If you want the cold, then you kiss somebody. Yeah. Why don't you get AIDS through kissing? Well, see now, they were saying, you know, that there is the worry of getting it through saliva, and I think they decided, didn't they, that that was no good anymore? Wasn't it too much scary? I think they worry more about the blood. It's the blood. Well, it's indefinite. Oh, yeah, yeah, it's the blood thing. Well, why do they push on films and everything from Hollywood? I mean, they still kiss. Yeah, but they're going to quit some of that. Did you realize that? They were saying that over the daily TV things, they're going to quit all that monkey business. They're going to shoot them instead of kissing. Probably, probably. Yeah, it really is a shame. So it has changed tremendously during your time. Oh, my, yes, oh, yes, yes. You have also donated a nice display of medical. Yes, uh-huh. And it was purely accidentally. I told you about that, how I was standing up on top of the deaconess' home, watching them throw all that stuff away. Okay, when we were in the process of leaving the old Emanuel, that's the third hospital now, okay, I was still teaching on the third floor of the deaconess' home. They built me a room about the size of the new room in this hospital. And in my orientation, I had to teach everybody in the whole hospital how to work around that type of a room. It took me three years, okay. They started it, and that took me months, anyway, no, not three years, months, I say three, because they gave us three months here, so it took, let's say, nine months. And so while I was standing looking out the window one day, here came this huge truck, and they had dumped all kinds of stuff in the first hospital. First hospital stood there. That was then the invalid home. Then the second hospital became where we all slept, and they had some places over there like offices, and then they had an eating area over there. I remember some kind of cafe. And then so I was standing looking down, and my gosh, they were throwing all of this, the bed pans, and all the stuff that's made out of that white stuff, but, you know, that's really not a very good thing. They have chips all the time, you see, so it's a good thing we aren't using that thing anymore, those things. Anyway, they were throwing them in this big truck. So I went nuts, of course. I left my teaching, my class, and ran down there and jumped in that truck. You just see all these goofy things I've done all my life, and I rescued all that stuff. You used common sense again. Oh, yeah, sure, and I rescued all that stuff, and there are a few more things, too, that are stuck here somewhere because they didn't have room for it all. Then I got out of that truck and saved it, and then when we moved here then, they came and said, Ina, do you have anything? I said, oh, boy, I sure do. Oh, in fact, I used it in my first classroom in here and had it all sitting on top of everything so that they came and took it all. So, were the back of this enamel or enamelierat? Yeah. You had a tremendous turnover of those utensils. Oh, yeah, and then you see when we used all that, that was fine in its day because that's all we had. Then just think when plastics came. We did not have rubber at that time and everything. All of the connections were rubber. Do you realize that all of our gloves were rubber gloves, and in those days before we left work, we had to stand there and wash all the rubber gloves before we left that we had used during the day, or we would save them up, let's say, for two or three days. Then the next bunch that came on at 3, 8, 11, or 9, they would turn them so that the other side would dry, and then the next day when we came back, if they were dry on both sides, then we would put powder on them and put them into our things and go through the sterilizer. So just think of all the crazy things that we had to do. Plastic cleaning, I suppose. Oh, yeah, and then our catheters and enema, the enema tubings, we had to boil the enema tubings. And I remember the enema tubings having to be boiled here, and in OB, the nipples that the babies, we were using on the baby bottles, had to be boiled on 3rd floor where the OB was. This was in the old hospital now. And all of a sudden we would... OB, what does it stand for? Obstetrics. So then we would go down at 3 o'clock in the morning and have coffee down in the basement of the old hospital. And all of a sudden one of the nurses would say, my gosh, do you smell something? They were burning upstairs, so you would smell over the whole hospital. You would hear that, you would smell the burning of the rubber, either the...