 Side one, combination with Einer Johnson, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Cassette three, side one. And then, you know, well then, then the same people, they up and quit. They had lost half of our, half of our financial resources. And the guy who had been chairman, that I was silly enough to, and he could have, he could have been good. But that I really kind of pushed because he knew the Swedish language well, had a responsible job here with 3M, and you know, was a respectable person, but had absolutely no experience. And he didn't listen for advice? And he never wanted, he never listened. Did he ask you for advice at any time, or? Well, no, not much. And I didn't care about that because I was really, you know, what the hell, you're involved in something that long and had all the burdens of really, of making it a success. You never, you never got terribly much credit for having something successful. But Jesus Christ, if you had a flop, all you'd hear about it, see? But do you think there was like this person, or he saw this, you had a good thing going, and he thought maybe it was easier than it would look like? Everything was running. Everything seemed to do by itself. And they were jealous then. And hell, nothing goes by itself. They didn't know how to apply for a permit, and what the hell, I'm gone all winter. They didn't know how to, even who to see about getting a permit for the park, getting a permit from the police department, getting a license from the health department, the requirements. You've got to live up to the rules and regulations, or you can't sell a thing. They didn't know about getting public liability. None of this stuff. They didn't know where to get a hold of a refrigerated truck. Well, I had to do all of those things when I come back from Florida. Get a friend, a fellow to haul all of our equipment. I had over the years gotten a semi-trailer that we kept it all in. And I had gotten a place where we could store it. I had gotten a guy that hauled the semi-trailer down there for us on Friday afternoon. So on Saturday morning, it was all ready so they could go to work. Put the stuff away Sunday night and Monday morning, and the guy hauled it away again. I'd taken care of it. I suppose really, it was probably my fault as much as anything, I had done so much that they just felt that it just happens by itself. It's really a full-time job. As you can see now. And hell, I've already been in correspondence with people in Sweden, groups. And you see, I have paid so much of this myself, out of my own pocket. I have brought over here. But the museum, for instance, that doesn't belong to Svenskar Nassdorp? No, no. This is separate? That's right. And really, it's my personal money that's brought them all over. All up. Do people say at any time that you're more or less not looking for local talent, or do you believe that you can't get? Well, we do. Oh, no, no, no. We do look for local talent. But frankly, there isn't much local talent. First of all, there's local talent, but it's not the kind of talent that we are looking for. Now, we always have the Twin City Junior Folk Dancers. We always have them. We always have the Twin City Senior Folk Dancers. I started, it'll be 20 years next spring now, Svenskar Nassdorp All Girl Choir. I started that. It was my idea. I started it. I got the director. I got the woman who was really the chairman of what I call the Parents Committee. They've gone over to Sweden four times. Didn't cost Svenskar Nassdorp any money. They don't have the kind of money it takes to do any of these things. I have brought over, I've sent several Lucias from here to Sweden. I brought eight or nine of them from Sweden to here. I have sent over eight, nine, or ten. That's all I reckon. But it's that many. Svenskar Nassdorp, Midsummer Queen, we've probably sent over around 20 anyhow. But Sweden's Midsummer Queens, I've brought seven, eight of those over. And it's never cost these people a penny because they didn't have the money. But you see, it's all done in the, most of it has been done in the name of Svenskar Nassdorp. So to the average person, well, Svenskar Nassdorp, they must have money, they do all of this stuff. Well, that's a bunch of bullshit. They don't have money enough for any of it. I haven't paid for all of it personally, but most of it. But I have gotten contributions from quite a few people who are interested in preserving the connections with the old country. One that comes to mind real quick is probably Carl Berg, who has now gone to Arizona already. I talked to him here ten days ago. He has, oh, I suppose he's contributed a couple thousand bucks. But you know, that doesn't go very far if you said, now last year, believe this or not, we sent, not this year, but last year, we sent. Well then you see, they got so goddamn poor that if they begged any money, it all had to go in the treasury so we could keep going. And they said, well, we're not going to send any girls over there. No, we're not going to spend our money that way. So then it had accumulated, so there was three of them that really, we never say in these contests that you get a trip to Sweden. Never. Because then you're obligated. But we have sent everyone up. No, with the exception of one, and she couldn't go, just couldn't. Three years hand-running, she couldn't go. One year, how was it? She became the Queen of the Lakes, Aquitaine the Queen of the Lakes. So she couldn't go for that reason. How do you choose them then? Are there directors? Oh, we have a, no, I appoint a committee that then we send out, and I do all that. I send out to all the colleges, nursing schools. Well, that's open to the public then. Oh, absolutely, absolutely. You see, and there's another thing. There's got to be a Swedish background though. Oh yeah, oh yes. At least half Swedish, at least half. Or at least, no, at least one parent must be Swedish. He may be, or he or she may be half Swedish. But there's got to be, one of the parents has to have some Swedish stock. So one fellow, one fellow who's really, it was too bad because the guy's very capable. He was able to get himself appointed to becoming a delegate with the, I know it came out afterwards, with a specific purpose of, he had a daughter that was at the right age, but really no Queen material. And he thought that we only sent, only people that had some connection with some Swedish lodge, that that person, that's the kind of people we sent. Well, you see, you cannot belong to an organization like the Aqua Tenuil. We're in high standing there. In fact, I just got a letter Wednesday. I've got to answer soon before I go. So when his daughter wasn't chosen, she wasn't even one of the five finalists, we sent out letters to all the sororities, all the schools, all the universities, colleges. We sent out to nursing schools. Well, you know, there are, so we always have enough with Swedish backgrounds. But I'll tell you, we have had just beautiful girls, really. Well, somewhere in here we've got, and this guy was so mad. Oh, he was just abusive because his daughter didn't win. And I tried to tell him, look, don't you understand when you have a contest of this caliber, when we have the respect of the Aqua Tenuil, we just cannot lower the scope of this thing by just keeping it to member organizations. I said, every, we sent it to every Swedish organization, the application, announcement of the contest, and application blanks. So he says, well, why don't some of these people, I said, don't ask me why the hell they don't. Fix these lines, just why they don't send in a candidate. Christ, I said, I don't handpick these candidates. They come from all over the state. And well, but that was really the only time. But he now has, he now has, oh yeah, it was all fixed, you know, it was all fixed. Well, I made up my mind a long time ago. I've been around enough public things. Christ, you can't be in public office for six years without learning something. The slightest tinge of anything that's wrong, they'll blow it way out of proportion. I learned that as a kid. You know, I was elected when I was 21 years old and I had a lot of experience. And then being so active politically, you just can't do things like that. How do you quench that though, rumors like that? You live it down. Without responding? That's right, because... But if you don't respond, don't they get the feeling that... No, they... You see, if you're around a long time now, these people for an example, these people that wanted to take over, and they did. So they ran, they got rid of half of our money. But that wasn't much of a record to be very proud of. They aren't around no more. The guy that I saw become chairman, one of the people that was very active in Vossa, asked him one time, this lady who was treasurer of one of the Vossa lodges, asked him, gee, why aren't you in the Swiss Dog anymore? No, he said, I've done all I can for the Swiss Dog. What he should have said, I've done all I could to the Swiss Dog. Because he was basically responsible for losing half of our money. But that's not much of a record to be proud of. Now we're getting a little more money, but... You know, Christ, as I say, I started when we didn't have a nickel, and no credit. How about the American Swedish Institute? Where do they sit? Worthless. They... I hate to say... How about the rest of the successors of directors? They never had anybody else. Salin was the only one ever from the Institute. You mean they are not on Svenskenos Dog? Oh yes, oh yeah, sure they are. But hell, they don't... They're entitled to send four delegates. The American Swedish, because of the membership? No, that makes no difference. I don't care if they got 50 members or 5,000. But here's the American Swedish Institute, delegates, Helleneck, Henry Holloway. Here is a tremendous guy. Helleneck is absolutely worthless. Just a troublemaker. But she's a troublemaker no matter what she's in. So that's not... Do they speak on behalf of the Institute then, or on their own? The funny part of it is, nobody speaks on behalf of anybody, of any organization. They really don't. It used to be that, now like this lawyer that I told you about, Peterson, what's the first name? Well anyhow, he always... Him and another guy, there was a correspondent for some Swedish newspapers as a sideline. He was a dental technician really, been dead a long time. Nice fellow. But he's from Stockholm, and he really thought he was something when he was a Stockholmer. But that was all right, what the hell. But they always used to beg. If we made $250 a year, they wanted all of it for the Institute. And for a long time, they got away with that crap. They'd say, well we don't need any money. What's the sense? This is why they could never do anything. They never had any money to do anything with. It takes money to, like the old saying, it takes money to buy whiskey. And so I said, I told him, I made up my mind, by the time I'd been in a couple of years, I said, look, this has gone far enough. We don't have any money to operate on, and we give all we make to the Institute. I'll make you a proposition that we'll rent from you. We'll have our meetings at the Institute, and we'll pay you enough for rent that you've been getting from us. So you're still going to get your $250, but at least we'll be paying our rent. Well, then another guy, William, I don't know if you've heard of Nils William Olsen, he came here. Well, then he of course had to make a showing, so he said, well, we're going to have to double your rent. Well, I said, no, look, we can rent a place for $5 a month to conduct all our business. We're paying you $25. Don't think for a god damn minute that we're going to pay you $50 a month. No way. I don't care how much money you, how much you need money. We just can't afford it. We are not in the business to pay big rent to the Institute and not have any money to do anything else. We're going to have money to do other things. And if we have to meet in somebody's home, by God, for nothing, that's what we're going to do. But we're going to have money to do things. Well, you see, oh, I could go on the rest of the day. That character, I used to, see, I was on the board of the Institute for several years. But any time, they wanted to operate in secret, and that's something I don't believe in. And so when they hired somebody, I always said, well, how much are we paying him? Well, what do you want to know for? Because I'm one of the directors here, and I want to know what the hell is going on. That's what I want to know. You mean, did he get any financial statements at the year's end? Never. You see, well, it was all lumped up. So they had salaries, one lump figure. Never showed that Joe Blow got so much, and Tom and Dick and Harry, they got so much. Oh, no. Salaries, so much money. Well, of course, the only reason that's done is because they don't want to tell you. But you spoke up. And I said, sure. I said, well, nobody else wants to know. I said, I don't give a damn what anybody else wants to know. But I said, we publish a financial statement that shows every penny and to whom it's made. Now, why don't you do that? Oh, we couldn't do that. Can you imagine corporations that do hundreds of millions of dollars? They do it. But you can't. See, their biggest job has always been is to beg enough money to pay their own salaries. That's the extent. What the hell do they do? They don't. Oh, and of course, every time we did something, oh, God, they would just cry because, there's Svenskeren's dog again. God, they're doing this. They're getting all, you know, we used to get publicity until hell wouldn't have it, see? There was a jealousy then. Jealousy. Oh, that's right. Did you have the face-to-face talk with him? Oh, I knew him so well. I knew him too well. And of course, the thing that irked him was that, now, he's very capable. He's a very capable person. But his efforts have always been directed against or only for his particular. He made this statement many times. Well, the Swedes don't need any other organization in the Twin Cities except the American Swedish Institute. Well, of course, that's because he was there paying his salary. Well, here you've got the Warsaw Order, for an example, which has now died down to about seven bodies, I guess it is. Maybe even six. You've got Gustavus Adolphus Society, which is over a hundred years old. So they should just turn over and play dead, you know? All these other organizations. But you see, that was to his interest that no other organization. Oh, he told me point blank. He says, I'm going to do everything I can to ruin Svenskine's dog from within. And this, of course, was really a part of that, unbeknown to me, of that deal where these people... You see, they spent money like drunken sailors, but no publicity did nothing to get people to come to the celebration. It was the poorest attendance we've ever had, the 50th anniversary. When normally speaking, the 50th or 100th anniversary of anything is a time to make money. Did nothing. I personally have always gotten... Well, first of all, there hasn't been a book in the past 40 years that I haven't had the final say as to what goes in. What's in sold half of the ads personally. So... So you're actually controlling more membership than the American Swedish Institute? Well, no, we don't have... I mean... I know, I understand what you mean, but you see... Like an umbrella for... No, I know what you mean. But, well, we don't... Well, let us take it this way now. If the way the statement he made, I understand it because I know the person too. Yeah, sure. But he would like to be Dan Brantley and hold Dan Brantley. Oh, here's what he said many times, and this is what he has done. You've got to give the guy credit. He's very capable, very capable. Sure. Well, but you see, that all became... That all happened after he became director at the Institute because then he had time. See, he had this idea of the Swedish Council of America. He had that idea before, and this is when he did all of his paperwork. He'd shut himself up for days and type his stuff at the Institute at their pay. And he told me, and I remember there was a guy from Sweden here. Well, as I say, I could go on and on the rest of the day, the rest of the week in incidents that... But we've had some real good consul generals here. We've had a couple of piss poor ones that weren't worth their salt. He did very good to come into the consul general office immediately. Well, the funny part of it was he really wasn't... Because that was the kind of people he wanted to be associated with. Yeah, but they saw through him. Now, he never really sat very well. As a matter of fact, when Princess Christina was here, the consul general called in, oh, I suppose about a dozen of us, and Nels William was one of them. Well, I became a... The consul general appointed me as chairman of that group, of that event. And of course, Nels William, God, he was so... Were you ahead of him? Oh, are you kidding? He had no standing with the instituted or with the consul general at all. Well, then you see we had... So then we had a reception for her out at Radisson South. And I knew Kurt Carlson for 40 years. I used him and I used to call on the same stores together. He was selling soap for Procter & Gamble. And so I've known him a long time. And so I think we got the thing for nothing, the room for nothing. But anyhow, so I wanted to make some money for the choir. This was in their first years of... See, they've been... 20 years ago I started that, and it'll be 20 years next spring now. So on April 29th, we're going to have a big dinner sponsored by the choir. Wow, the 20th anniversary. So we... Well then, at that meeting, Nels volunteered. He said, I'd like to be in charge of publicity. Well, he was capable enough. But that dirty bastard... Do you suppose... Here we had this reception for her. Nothing in the paper, not a word about it. Nothing on the radio, nothing on television. Why did he do that? On purpose. Just to set you down? To ruin it. To make it a complete failure. And about two or three days before I stopped, I said, Nels, what the hell are you doing? And he admitted, he said, I did that on purpose. He said, I wanted it to be a failure. Can you imagine? And I could go on and tell you stuff you wouldn't believe. And well, we had quite a few people anyhow. I think we made a couple of thousand bucks for the kids. So that was to get you blamed for not doing the report? No, not particularly. But it was that he didn't want anybody. As long as the Institute couldn't do it, nobody else was going to do it. That was more, more so. Well, then they had the showing of the Moberg film down at the World Theater. Utvandrarna? Yep. The immigrants? The immigrants. So then I remember we had a meeting. The Consul General, Nels and I, and a fellow that worked in the Consulate, just a fine young man. The four of us met down there to kind of look the thing over to see who should do what, you know. And oh, he just ate the Consul General out of something fierce. In fact, if I'd been a Consul General, I'd have slapped him because so uncalled for, because he wanted to be the man that was going to introduce the Queen, or the Princess, to the theater. And well, he wasn't the guy. And oh, I... So that's all the way down. Or are the nationalities the same way you think, or are the Swedes forced? Oh yes. It happens. You hear that, Svensk avund sjuka. That, not anymore. It's human with the... No, no, not anymore than anybody else. But like, you have a tremendous attendance now for Svenskarnas Dagar. It's known all over the United States. And also in Sweden. I know that. I know that, that's right. I know that, back and forth, over this nation. But the Norwegians now, do they have anything similar in the Twin Cities? Well, you know, the poor Norwegians, they, you see, now the last two years, they have... Because sons of Norway is big. The sons of Norway is big. That's right. And you see, this is where Norway, they get their financial support. And I've always found this to be true, that the people that normally, either people or organizations that are normally successful, are successful because of their own efforts. Not because somebody hands them a check and says, do something. Because then the interest is not there. The Danes are just about... I think they folded up, as a matter of fact. The Danes? Danes. I don't think they had anything this year. But the last two years, the chairman of Norway Day has called me and said, are you Swedes going to have your Svenskenestad this year? We always have ours about three weeks before that, see? Well, I said, we're... I hope so. I said, God, I spent a hell of a lot of time arranging for people to be there and, you know, all the stuff that's necessary. So I said, yeah, we're going to have it. Why do you ask? Well, they've been thinking about quitting. So tough, so much hard work. They've never done anything compared to us. They'll get some Lutheran minister from Podunk, you know, what the hell is that, see? Or they get their consul general from Chicago, and that's supposed to be a big deal. So then the guys always said, well, I suppose if you people are going to do it, we'll have to do it too, see? Well, they don't have to, but this shows the extent that they've arrived at, you know, that they're... So there's always frictions. Well, no, no, I can't say we've had frictions. Do they have less interest, you think, in the culture, in the dance? Oh, yeah, no question. Well, they have less interest as far as Norway Day is nothing compared to Svenskenestad. Absolutely nothing. They don't have the attendance, they don't have the type of talent. They don't bring in the kind of people that you have. We always have a half a dozen groups from Sweden. You know, like this year, now, I'll give you a... Well, here, I'll find the program. There were groups we had this year. I've got people already, a half a dozen of them, that are interested in coming next year. People interested in 88 already. And we never pay anything toward their way. We can't afford it. But what we do, we scout around and get them the most reasonable accommodations that we can. Now, with my friend Bob Short gone, I can't rely on the Leamington anymore. But, you know, $4 a night, you know. In this day and age, for hotel accommodations, that's nothing. How about Curtis Carlson? He's a personal friend of yours. Can you, in this connection, employ him in any way? He has. Well, I like Curtis. He doesn't seem to do too much to the Swedes, though. I have spent ten times as much money personally in the past 40 years. He started that Swedish Council of America. Here's what he told me. He says, this is going to be my retirement plan. So he was the only one that's ever gotten paid. And I know, like, the treasurer of the outfit. He's a very close personal friend of mine, and he's told me everything. Why, he says, you know, he said he works cheap, but he said you should see his expense accounts. He's got to buy all of his groceries and everything on his expense account, because he was only getting $5,000 a year. Well, that's peanuts. But he said you should see his expense accounts. They're astronomical. Now, of course, he has quit. See, all along, he said, well, when he was doing this, well, he said, I said, what the hell are you doing? I knew him very well, and we were getting along quite well and very frank with each other. And I said, what the hell are you doing, shutting yourself up here days on end? And I tried to call you, and the girl says, you're busy. You're in conference. I said, bullshit. I said, what the hell are you doing? So he said, I'm writing, getting stuff written down. He says, I'm going to start this Swedish Council of America. That's going to be my retirement plan. He said, I'm going to issue a publish a paper, and I'm going to write different. And he laid it all out. He said, we'll have a Northeast special section covering the New England states. We'll have a Southeast, like Florida in that area. And we'll have the Upper Midwest and the South Central. And we'll have the Northwest and the Southwest separate sections in the paper. So we'll send things of interest to these various sections of the country. And he had it all laid out. So I knew what. Did the Institute retain the traveling costs for setting this up, you think? Well, of course. But he didn't do so much traveling when he worked for the Institute. To set up this 1974 Swedish Council? Yes. You see, that is the Constitution and the bylaws and begging money. People you were sitting there doing the last? People. I've been in Florida. People have called me. Well, two people in particular that lived in, well, two of them lived in Arizona, one in Texas. They called, and then they knew where I was. So they say, and then they would all start out like this. Do you know a Nils William Olsen? I never wanted to badmouth him. I says, yeah, sure, I know him very well. Well, what kind of a character is he? Well, I says, why do you ask? What's the deal? Well, he called me up here long distance and wanted $5,000 or whatever the figure was. Well, I said, who did he beg it for, the Institute or for this new organization? Well, I said, that's no big secret. He's starting something that he's going to be the total beneficiary of. So and he was, listen, I'm the first guy to admit and compliment him. He's sharp. He's smart. Sharp. He's a good talker. And oh, I could tell you stuff. Just that when the king was here 10 years ago, well, he got on somebody's bad list because they put out the, it was all true, but a scandalous sheet. That was sent out? That was sent to, I don't know how many, a lot of people because I got one and just about everybody that I, that, well, I never asked toward the end because what the hell, I didn't care. A lot of people volunteered. They say, did you get that letter about Nels William? Yeah, I got it. Well what do you think about it? Well, I said, God, from what I saw, I think it was mostly true. But probably I'm sure Nels William was madder than hell about it, but a lot of people are mad about the truth. And he never got the true background. It wasn't unsigned. He never find out who the hell did it. Well, it was apparently an outfit in Chicago because, because it was, the name of it was, oh something like this. I don't know exactly, but something like a committee for the preservation of the Chicago Central Committee. They in Chicago, they have a central committee where most of the Swedish organizations send delegates, very similar to the Saskatchewan. So they got the blame then you think? Well, I don't know. That was the, well they said that. Was it mail from Chicago? Oh yeah, oh sure. It came from Chicago, yeah. I never even looked. I'm sure it must have, well it must have been because, well it named, and of course I'd kind of forgotten a lot of it. None of my damn concern, and I had plenty of other things to worry about. But something to the effect that Nels William Olsen had gone there in the fall. Like in the fall of 70, I suppose it was the fall of 75, because it was the fall before the king came in April, and that was 76. And he had gone to, and he had been a guest speaker at the meeting of the Chicago Central Committee, I think that's what it's called. And he had, the thing that really hit me was that he made statements that in Minneapolis there is already a committee of, and I don't remember the exact figure, I think it was 60 he said, that is already organized to handle this 76 visit of the king. And he said one of the, and the only organization that he named as being a member, or taking part in this committee was Fenske and his dog. Well of course I knew that was a damn lie. And in all circumstances, sometimes we come together, and you know before, like about ten days before that meeting in Chicago, the consul general here called me at work, which was fine, and said, say, I'd like to have you have lunch with me or dinner real soon, maybe even today if you can. Well I said, God, you hit me at a bad time because I said we have lost our warehouse manager and several of us have to pitch in. We don't have a new one yet, several of us have to pitch in and try to do the job that he normally does and kind of oversee that it all keeps running smooth. I said I just absolutely cannot have lunch at any time now until we get a new guy, maybe even then for a while not. But I said, is it really important, does it have to be something right away? Yeah God, he says I'd like to see you right away, it has to do with this coming of the king blah blah blah. Well I said, I'm willing to have dinner with you some evening, that I can do because when I'm through work I'm on my own time. And I said normally I could do it anyhow, but not now. Oh yeah that was fine. So I remember the next night or so I had dinner with him at the Minneapolis Club I guess it was because the Consul General, that's a standing membership for the Swedish Consul General to have a membership in the. So we went there and he said, so he started telling me all about it, but not all the truth see because him and Nils were together on this thing because Nils wanted to be the National Director because that would be a paying job. But he didn't really reveal enough so that I knew that Nils had anything to do with it. But he said, I'd like to have you and a fellow by the name of Art Erickson and a fellow by the name of Leonard Ramberg. Well Leonard I knew very well and Art Erickson I knew quite well. Well I said that's all right and he said you will be the three people that will be in complete control of what is to be done pertaining to the King's appearance here. Well I said that's fine I'm sure we can handle that. Well so he said then he said I can quote them that you're representing Svenskron's dog. I said yeah that's all right. Well you see that proved out to be the reason that Nils William mentioned that Svenskron's dog was involved in this committee. But there was no committee. You see that committee that he appointed me to, these three of us, that had nothing to do with Nils William Olsen. But Nils William wanted to be bigger than that. So he went to Chicago and told them a big story about how this was being organized in different places and Minneapolis already has a committee of, and I want to say 60 now that might only have been 50 or maybe 100 but I because that was 10 years ago and I don't remember exactly. But the idea was that he claimed there was a committee and he wanted Chicago to have a committee and he urged them to raise, what the hell was it, 200,000 or 500,000 I don't really remember but a big figure, big money. It was for the bicentennial then. That was, the Chicago Swedes were to raise that money and put it in this national kitty. And who do you suppose was going to control that kitty? Well so of course, but somebody over there, somebody in Chicago, well they knew, apparently knew Nils very well because boy let me tell you that what they said about him, I don't hate anybody that much that say things like that. But knowing as much as I did about the man's background, what he had did, what he has done and what he has tried to do, it was all the truth. What did he do now because he received the letter apparently? Yeah, I guess he did. And I really, I thought well that's just, you know when you're so god damn busy you don't like to just pick on shitty little things. And at first reading of it I thought well there's somebody mad at him and so they're trying to bad mouth him, you know. So and I used to quite well, twice a week to be exact, I used to drive by the institute because I called on a lot of stores, see. And when we lost our warehouse manager, our area manager, and they used to change every two or three years and he asked, he says, God he says, you know the city of Minneapolis like the back of your hand, why don't you come in and help us over this little period. That's what happened, I couldn't go to the luncheon with, just with the consul general, nobody else. And this I thought was rather suspicious too because what the hell, why should just I, you know. Although he said I've already talked to Leonard Ramberg and he said after I talked to you the first time and to Art Erickson, so he says they'd be delighted to work with you and so forth. So I kind of passed it off, I was all right. But then when I saw this crap, I knew they were in cahoots because he mentioned Svenskan, the only organization in Minneapolis, out of this committee or 50, 60 or 100, whatever it was, the only organization he mentioned was Svenskan and Dog. You never talked to them about it? He never talked to me, there was no committee because I remember asking, I remember asking the consul general and I knew him very well, we worked very close together. That is not the case with the present one. The only kind of people he wants to deal with are Kurt Carlson and those kind of people and they don't do anything. When it comes to doing things, Kurt's got a lot of money. When they were here when they had Scandinavia, so they called me and said, look, you had a float in the Aquitaine for so long, you know all about building floats and all that sort of thing. I said, yeah. Well, gosh, we're going to have a parade. I don't know if you remember it, they did, a very successful parade. And I said, can you see to it that you have a parade representing the Swedes? The only one we know that knows anything about floats. Yeah, I said, I can, but I said, God, it takes, that was in April, you know. I said, you know, the weather is bad. I had just come home from Florida. And I don't remember why we came home earlier than, I think like about the first of April. And this was the middle of April, 16th or 17th or something, two weeks, you know. And here the material I've got was all stored away. See, I've got some floats up in Anoka and I store there. So I said, yeah, but I said, God, I said, have you got, I said, these things got to be redecorated every year. And I said, they look just like hell after the colors are faded and the rain has gotten at some of them. And, you know, they just, we can't present anything like that. You're going to have a float, you've got to have it look like something. And I said, I said, the Swedish girls' dog can't afford to do it. And I had just given, I had just given too God damn much money in my, not only time, the time that I do, I don't value it anything because it's something I like to do. But you know, when you honor your own pocket, when I tell you 50,000 grand, it's all of that because I've kept fairly close to it over these years. If I didn't want to do it, I didn't have to. But I enjoyed doing what I've been doing and I didn't mind it. I don't spend any money on liquor, thank God, because I can't stand it. I don't smoke because I used to, but hell, during the war, I quit. I quit when you could buy camels and Chesterfields and Lucky Strikes and all those things for 40 cents a carton. That's when I quit. So it wasn't because of money. But so I said, God, I said, we can't afford to, to, and they had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars. I mean, an immense amount of money. I knew what they'd spent because I had enough good friends on the inside that were, God, that was a treasure. It was a close friend of mine. He just left for Florida the other day. And he told me what the money they had taken in. And I said, I said, it'll cost at least between 1,500 and $2,000 to refurbish that thing. And then I said, I'm going to have to beg people to help and then do it in two weeks. Oh, we haven't got a nickel. We haven't got a nickel. Well, you know, that angered me a little bit because here they had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars but didn't have enough to refurbish a float that they wanted. Well, I thought about it a couple, three days. And then I remember that weekend, then I called a few people and said, look, are you going to have any time to help? I said, they want a float. I guess I'm the only one that's got a float that at least can be redecorated. Well, hell, it cost them five grand to start from scratch. You know, and I didn't have time anyhow. Yeah, they could help. Well, and to make a long story short, it cost me personally $1,750. That you had to... That I had to. Never got a word of thanks for it, nothing. But I've already let them know about $88. I told a couple of people so I know it's got back to the people that were the cause of all of that. People have spent hundreds of thousands of bucks. And so, in fact, just had a meeting. I'm president of the Minnesota American Swedish Council, which is the group that has furnished the money for Scandia. We are on the Enquist project up there. Yeah, well, not Enquist. But she's a little, she's just one of the members. She was in the beginning of that. Yeah, well, yeah. So she was in the beginning with the rest of us. Was there a break then between the American Swedish Institute and the Swedish Council? Well, they don't... Before we start on that one, though, did Nils William call a meeting regarding this? Oh, I should tell you that. What did he do? So one day, well, he didn't do anything really. So one day, what the hell was there he could do? I don't know what he could have done. If I'd been in the same spot, I don't think I could have done anything. There's nothing you can do. So he didn't know what he'd done? Well, he didn't know who had done it. But did he talk to anybody? Oh, yeah, sure. So I used to go by the Institute, as I remember, it was on Tuesdays and Thursdays, to go to some customers that I had. I used to go down Park Avenue. Well, they get from one to the other. So I used to drop in the Institute. I always had something to ask somebody or something. So I came in the back door. They had the front entrance and two back doors, really. One is closer to the parking lot. I guess that's why I went in that door. And there was a kind of an inter-meeting room there, and that entrance led into that. So I just walked in there, you know, always in a hurry. And here sat Nels William at the head of the table. And oh, I suppose there was probably seven, eight people, all told. And they all had a copy of the letter. I recognized it because I had gotten it not very long before. But they didn't ask you, though, if you were? Oh, no, they didn't ask me. What did you say then? I didn't say anything. Oh, I said, I'm sorry I burst in on your meeting. You know, I really was. I didn't intend to break in there, but it was the closest entrance, and that's where I came in. Oh, he says, that's all right. He says, have you? So then Nels, oh, Nels was furious. I could hear it as I walked through from the outer door. Then they had a sliding door that was closed. And as I walked through that little auditorium, the closer I came, I heard him raving and ranting about this letter. Oh, it was scurrilous, there's no question about it. But I think every bit of it was true. They maybe put it on a little heavy, but I mean, oh, it was scandalous. Jesus Christ, they called him every goddamn name in the book. Crook and, oh. And it had to come from Chicago, because you see, they had the minutes of the meeting in the letter. The things that he stated, word for word apparently. I don't know, but. So he didn't blame any from Minneapolis then? I don't know who the hell he blamed. Maybe with the background material on him, though. It was all background material on him. But he's just as well known in Chicago as he was in Minneapolis. Well, you see, and all the information, really. They didn't have to know anything about Minneapolis, really. Because there was nothing. As I remember, the only reference to Minneapolis was the fact that this big committee, and the only organization mentioned as a part of that committee was Swensken & Stock. And if anybody knew about that, it was me. We had never even heard about it. But he didn't confront you personally about it? Oh, hell no, he couldn't. He couldn't. Why, no. He had nothing to confront me about, because it quoted the minutes, and it quoted his speech. And I don't remember it all, but the only thing that really stuck was the fact that this Minneapolis committee was already organized, composed of whatever the number was, 50, 60, or 100, or whatever. And Swensken & Stock is in it. You would think he would have to explain that to you, though. Why did he use that phrase? I never even confronted him, frankly. So he said, say, did you get one of these scurrilous letters? I said, yeah, I got a letter of several pages, and this is true. I said, I've been so busy, I barely glanced at it. I said, why do you ask? He said, this is it. This is what we're having a meeting about. He said, I'm going to sue somebody for liable. So I agreed to him. I said, my God. But here's what I said. I said, I really haven't read it, which was true. I got to that part, beginning, where it mentioned, but I did not get a chance to read their interpretation, which was really the rough part. Oh, they were rough. I read it. Afterwards, I read it. You can depend on it a couple times. He said, I want to sue somebody for liable. I said, Nils, you have my blessing. If there's anything in that letter that isn't true, I'd sure as hell go after whoever sent it. You told him that? Just like so. Because just, and I based that statement on the fact that he had said that Svante Kallistag was involved in this committee, which was already organized, which was a goddamn lie. And the Consul General was in on it. Because you see, he had talked to me. And then the thing that really rung home was the fact that he said, you're willing to represent Svante Kallistag and his dog then. That was the key. Sure, why not? I had no reason not to. So I told him, I said, Nils, I don't have time to sit down and read it with you, because I said, I'm just about late now, but I really came in to do whatever the hell it was. But I said, again, I'll tell you, if there's a lot of stuff in there that's bad and that isn't true, sue the guy that wrote it. Well, I never really knew if there was any name on it that somebody had signed it. At that time, I didn't know. But when I got home, I still had my copy. In fact, I had thrown it away. I'd thrown it in my wastebasket in the den like a day or two before, because I get a lot of mail, and I'm so sick and tired of people who do nothing but, you know. But then I really read it. And I read it word for word several times. And Jesus Christ, they had him nailed to the cross. But there was no signature? No signature. Just the heading was, well, the Committee to Save the Chicago Central Committee, or something like that. I threw it away a long ago. But they knew Nils William. And there's a lot of people in Chicago. During that time, then, when this happened, when he was sitting there reading this letter? Well, I was about 75. Was Dr. Westy Westerbury there then? No. He was the director? No, no. No, no, no. This was before that. He came after? Yeah. Do you think he had a notion that he did it? Oh, I don't think so, because Nils William got him here. Oh, yes. They were friends then, weren't they? Oh, sure. But he turned on poor Westerburg, too. Sure. Oh, there's so much, as I say, we could spend a week. You can't imagine the intrigue. Poor Westerburg. There's a guy caught between a rock and a hard place. His wife was a genuine witch, wore the pants in the family, and Nils William Olsen on the other end. Were you on the executive board then when he was called at the American Witch Institute? When he— When the Westy Westerbury was called? Yes. There was another—there was a doctor. You may know the guy. A Dr. Lindquist. Great big bastard. Six foot six, and he must have weighed 350 pounds. Just an immense man. What was his first name? I don't remember. I don't remember. Was he from Minnesota or Minneapolis? Oh, no. He was Minneapolis. Doctor. A doctor in Minneapolis. And he was on the board? And he was on the board. So I said like this, oh, there was a guy by the name of Gus Johnson. A little guy that then in my estimation did no shit from straight up, you know. And if that's running, well, you'll have to forget that, but a complete nonentity. But he was in Nils William's vest pocket all the time. All Nils had to say was jump, and he'd ask how high, you know. And so him and Gus Johnson and some—I guess maybe Nils. They went to Chicago to interview Westerbury. Then they were crying crocodile tears because they said, we felt so, so bad. That we were so cheap that we had to go in and offer this well-educated man, this great leader, ask him to come to Minneapolis to head the institute and offer him this paltry salary. But they never said what the salary was. But he, after consideration, he finally accepted. Well, I said, that sounds fine. I'm delighted he accepted. If he's as good as you say, that's wonderful for the institute. How much did you offer him? Well, why do you want to know? Well, because I had people that will ask me, which was true. Christ, everybody in Svensk and Odon knew that I was on the executive board, and they always—well, we all—they heard about the new director, blah, blah, blah. Oh yeah, what are they paying him? I said, not that I care, but I said, I want to know. I don't care if he gets $10,000 or $110,000, but I want to know. So this goddamn doctor, he got up and he thought, well, he was a doctor, and he thought he was somebody. And big, loud, booming voice, he said, what are you going to do? Are you going to go to the newspapers with it?