 This is cassette 6, cassette 6, side 1, continuation with Einer Johnson, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Cassette 6, side 1. So Marilyn, now, that was that... Kurt's daughter. Kurt's daughter. Big blow up. Oh, big goddamn billboard, you know, the biggest that you see. He got to be the biggest, though. He's only looking for the biggest and the broadest and the widest and the deepest and the highest. He gave $25 million. And this is fine. I like Kurt. I really do. He's an aggressive person. He gave $25 million to the University of Minnesota. But has he given anything for the Swedes now in Minnesota, for instance, or American Swedes? I don't know about the Institute. I never heard of that. Well, yeah, he gave Shumsken his dog. What the hell was it? $2,500. Well, you see... Yeah, but $2,500 for him in proportion to the... Oh, shit. I mean, this is disgrace. That's one thousandth of a percent. Yeah. Well, you see, what happened was... You know, I was, for 27 years, consecutive years, I was chairman of Shumsken's dog. I got to a point where I just felt I had done just about my share. When I took over, they didn't have a goddamn nickel. They didn't have a nickel's worth of credit. I remember going to the printer with a program book, and it was only about an eight or ten page program book. And I went to the printer with the copy, and he said, well, he said, you know, he said, I've got to have money before I print this. Well, of course, I didn't know that, you know. I really didn't know how...I knew they didn't have any money, but I didn't know that their credit was that bad. Well, I said, what are you going to need? How much money do you have to have for the book? He told me. Well, I said, hell, I said, don't worry about that. I said, I'll guarantee that personally, because, hell, I'd already sold enough ads to more than pay for it personally. We used to have eight or ten pages. Now we've got over a hundred. And I get, in fact, I just got an accounting here a couple weeks ago. I sell about 40 percent of all the ads. I personally sell about 40 percent of all the ads in the book. That's a lot of work. That's a lot of work. That's right. So and then I don't have any time. I've said time and again, I said, Jesus Christ, I said, if I had time, I'd have a 200 page book, because it can be done. No ifs or ands about it. Well, what really happened? As I say, I had enough years. I didn't want to, I would have helped him anyhow, but I just wanted somebody else to take over the chairmanship, because I felt that it just isn't smart. I don't want to continue until I drop over dead, and then they're left in the lurch. So I got a, I talked a fellow into it, a Swede, an immigrant, that has a, oh, no big job, but a responsible job worth 3M. And I said, look, why don't you be chairman for a year or so, get an idea what the hell's going on, or vice chairman a year or two, get an idea what the hell's going on. And then after a couple years, I'd like to have you take over as chairman. I said, I'll help you all I can. Well, he was the kind of a person, as it turned out, that, and I should have really kind of known, but how the hell do you suspect? Several times he'd say, he asked me over, not in a week, but over a couple of years, he'd say, do you know anybody at Svenska Svenska Skarpet? I said, no. I said, I probably know most of them. Do you belong there? I said, no. I said, first of all, I don't have time. That is strictly a social organization. They don't do a goddamn thing to promote anything that's Swedish. The only thing they promote is a couple of parties a year, Christmas time and usually the Saturday before Svenska's dog, they have their summer party. They entertain themselves. They get so goddamn drunk that, oh, hell, that's just a drunken brawl, you know. And a lot of the women, they piss in their pants and everything else. Just a terrible, not all of them. They just don't understand. Christ, they fall off the chairs under the table. It's a hell of a brawl. I've been to a couple of them. And that's usually at the Institute? Always at the Institute. Always. Well, and they brag about it. They were going to collect, what the hell was it, $25,000 to promote Swedish culture. The only goddamn thing they promoted was drunken parties. They never contribute a nickel to anything. Here we've got the only all-girl choir in the United States that's basically Swedish, primarily Swedish songs. And these kids are good. They've been over to Europe, for Christ's sake, for four times. They're going again in 88 now. And if you're going to—and they're the only ones. I've got to tell you about Nils William and that choir. They remind me of that. Because that's a—so they do—he asked me then, well, how did they get that money? How the hell can I get in there? Well, so what do you want to get in there for? Well, it's just I kind of like to rub elbows with these. That's all that I want. He was a climber, period. That's all. But he thought that by using the fact that he was chairman of Svenskern's dog was going to do great things for him. Well, he did get in. This is fine. I have no objection to that. The fact that I don't want to get in doesn't mean that he shouldn't. They're mostly businessmen or upper people? They're all businessmen. Well, yeah. Well, there's some. There's some average wage earners, but mostly—Vibetre Svenskern. Vibetre. Oh, they used to use that term even. They did? Oh, hell yes. You know about—they didn't want the riffraff. We better, sweets. After a few echoes, it's just turn it on, though. Jesus Christ. To a point where our choir will not sing for him anymore. These guys were making grabs. You're drunk enough making grabs at these girls, 16 and 17 and younger. They were— So, this William, he had something to do with the choir, you said. I better remind you about that. Oh, yeah. No, but he wanted to have something to do with it. Well, this brings back what I told you about people that love to rub shoulders with somebody that has a doctorate. Well, there was a—and still, the woman is still a friend of ours. Dolores Myers. You may or may not have heard of her. Yeah, her husband is the singer. No, no. Oh, he's not the same Myers? No. He's a little short guy. No, no, no, no, no, no. Rudy Meyer. No, not Rudy. He's getting a little senile, Rudy is. But a nice enough person. Well, Dolores Myers, very talented. And I always used to say that, well, you know, you heard the old saying that Rome wasn't built in a day. Well, the only reason it wasn't built in a day is because Dolores Myers wasn't the boss on the job, because she could get things done. Very talented. God damn it, she could do anything artistic. But really not too bright when it came to being able to see through people. But that's art. So one day she said to me, gee, she said, when I started that choir—see, they're going to celebrate their 20th birthday now in April, April 29th, at the Institute, because I called up and made reservations for the auditorium before I left. So one day she said—now this, you might know, was a long time ago, probably 15 years ago. Well, at least that. She said, see, she says, you know, wouldn't it be good if the Institute kind of sponsored the choir? Well, I said, why would the Institute want to do that? I said, if they want to start a choir, that's certainly their prerogative. They can do that if they like, but why should they want our choir? Swanskin's Dog has spent the money for that. I said, oh, I said, if the Institute wants them to sing there, that's fine, but if they want a choir, they've got a big enough membership, they can start one of their own. I didn't hear any more about it for several weeks. One Sunday night, the wife and I were going to the Hopkins Theater. There's no theater there anymore. And sometime, we used to go right by Doris Meyer's home, because it was the shortest direct way to go. So I tried calling them before we left to see if they were interested in going to the show, because they did that occasionally. But their line was busy, busy, busy, busy all the time. So I said, well, we've got to go, otherwise we'll never make that show time, which was the second showing on Sunday. So we drove by there, and when we drove by their house, there I saw Nils William Olsen's car, because I knew it very well. And Nils Gronquist, you know who he is? Have you heard of him? No, I've probably heard of his name, but I've never met him. And also Nils Gronquist's car. Well, Nils Gronquist was the director of the choir, because I made up my mind that, and Audrey Lanquist, have you heard of her? Oh, yes. All right. Now Audrey's, now there is the salt of the earth. There is nobody, nobody that devotes the amount of time to Swedish things that that woman does. And I know, because she does a tremendous amount of work for me. I just sent her a letter yesterday. I hear from her at least once every week, and she keeps me posted on everything. So I go by there, and I saw Nils Gronquist's car as well as Nils Olsen's car. So I had no idea what the hell they were meeting there for. So I said, well, we're not going to bother them. I said, Dolores is having them over for dinner, and this is fine. So we went to the show, and when we come back, then after, I don't remember what time, but it was after the second show. So we came the same way back, because that's the best way to go. Their cars were gone. So I said, well, let's just stop in and tell them they missed a good show and blah, blah, blah, you know, both of them, because we were that close. And I thought that Dolores acted a little funny. And I told her, I said, oh, we drove by here on the way to the show, and we're going to stop and ask you if you wanted to go, but your line was busy. I couldn't call you before. And when we got here, I saw you had some of this highbrow company, and kidding her, you know, because I had no idea what the hell they were doing there. Yeah, yeah, yeah, Dr. Olsen was here and Nelson. Oh, say, by the way, she says, Dr. Olsen wants to talk to you. Oh, I'll call him right now. By then I started to get a little bit suspicious that there was something going on because the way she acted, you know, a little flustered. And they couldn't bypass you, of course. Oh, no goddamn way. No, they didn't even entertain the idea of doing it. So anyhow, oh, I says, I'll call him right now, because I knew his number well, and I went over to the phone. Oh, she says, why don't you wait to get home? He may be not even home yet. Well, I was hoarse yet, because he told me, oh, yeah, I've been home quite a while, you know. So I called him when I got home. Oh, say, God, he says, I'm glad you called. He says, I've got to know this answer right now, because our paper goes to press tomorrow, which was all bullshit. Well, what's the big deal? What's the rush, you know? Well, he said, you know, he said, Nelson, who is the director of their choir, and Dolores, who is the chairman of the parent committee, they want the Institute to take over the choir. Well, of course, I was nonplussed, you know. In the first place, it was not their prerogative to do that. None of their goddamn business. Well, I said, Nelson, I said, for Christ's sake, first of all, they have absolutely no right to do that. And I do feel, as chairman of the Sanskrit Ashram, I at least should have been consulted. So they didn't call you to this meeting, then? Hell no. No, no, no, no, no. They thought that by them going along, so I said, well, Nelson, I said, for Christ's sake, with the big membership that you have, you mean to tell me that you can't get enough parents interested to send their kids to a choir for the Institute? Why should you want to steal ours? Why certainly, we had spent several years, four or five years, and a considerable amount of money. Well, I said, look, I said, just forget it. I will do this much if they actually think. Well I said, of course, I told them more than that. I said, you know, just because you've got a couple of weak-minded people that go along with something that you suggest, which is absolutely wrong, I said, don't think that I'm going to go along with it. I said, I suppose you're willing to pay Svenskneller's dog, then, the money that we have spent. Well, no, no, no, but we'll add the prestige of the Institute. Well I said, I'll tell you, we've done fairly well without the prestige of the Institute. We've sent the whole goddamned bunch to Sweden, which was true. By then, they were planning their second trip, as I remember it. And that takes money. You send 40 people. But he expected you to forward the money, of course, and he was going to be the director for it. Well, I just don't know what, that son of a bitch, you know, there isn't a thing that he wouldn't do. He has something going. Anyhow, I said, look, I said, I'm willing to do this for him. If these weak-minded people think that the membership of Svenskneller's dog is so goddamn dumb that they're going to give you the choir, I said, I'll bring it up at the next meeting. The meeting, you see, that was on a Sunday. The next day was, of course, Monday, and a week from that Monday was the monthly Svenskneller's dog meeting. And I said, I will be delighted to bring it up. And I would like to have Dolores Myers there. By then, I was pretty angry at her and Nils Schrankwist for having guts enough to even entertain such an idea. I said, I'll have them both there, and they can present this case as to why Svenskneller's dog should give this choir to the Institute. Well, maybe we can join sponsorship. I said, look, I know you're a joint sponsorship. After a year or so, you want to take over, or you'd threaten them with something. Well, that wasn't the worst of it. So then I thought, Jesus Christ, you suppose that they have talked to Audrey Lankwist about this? So I called her the very next morning. I said, have you heard anything about the choir? And this is her pride and joy, about the choir being given to the Institute. She says, given to the Institute? What are you talking about? And she was just up in the air. Well, I said, you mean you haven't heard anything about it? Oh, of course not. She says, nor would I ever go along with it. If that choir goes to the Institute, they can get a new accompanist. I wouldn't touch it. Well, of course, that was nice to hear. So, because I just, I knew they couldn't get, there wasn't a chance in hell they could get back with us. Well. But he had the deadline with his paper to meet, so he wanted an answer from you. Yeah, because they had a deadline. Oh, yeah, tomorrow. I got it all now. So what did you tell him then? So I said, well, just forget it. But I said, I'll do this. If these people, these two weak-minded people that you talked to are so goddamn dumb that they think that the membership of Svenskine and the Dog are going to give up that choir to anybody. So he expected, and you say yes, and he prints it right in there for the membership to read. Well, of course, I brought it up at the next meeting. Dolores Myers was not there. They had always been there. Nels Gronqvist was not there. So I said, Jesus Christ, you should have heard how everybody got up and, you know, where do they get this idea? And of course, you see, Nels had done enough things to create enough animosity that, you know, when you tell the Vasa Order or people, members of the Vasa Order, that the only organization that the Swedes in Minnesota need is the Institute. Here's an organization that's been around for nearly a hundred years. They don't like that. When Gustavus Adolphus Society, who has been around now, it's over a hundred years. 1886, I believe it was. That's right. When they've been around a hundred years or nearly at that time, they didn't like the idea of the Institute saying that they were the only organization that the Swedes needed. They were insulted, in other words. Insulted. Well, so of course, there's virtually everybody. See, every delegate, the membership of Svenskernesdag is composed of delegates representing various organizations. They're pretty active in their own organization or they wouldn't be a delegate. Well, they're here, an organization which we were pretty proud of. The only thing of its kind in the country, perpetuating song and things like that. So what you have done, you have been able to get all the groups together in Minneapolis? Well, now of course there are less. Yeah, sure. For Svenskernesdag? Yeah. But in Israel, you have never been instrumental in doing things like that? No, he said like this to me one time. You know, he says, I think I ought to be chairman of Svenskernesdag. Well, I said, don't you have enough to do with your present job? I said, whether you believe it or not, this is a hell of a big job. This is damn near a full-time job. And it isn't that I get paid for it. It just costs me a lot of money, which is true. But it was just ideally... Oh, he wanted me. Well, of course, he was never even a delegate or anything else. But... Oh, I'm telling you. He must understand, though, that you are sitting on the top instead of what he is. You're just one of the participants. Well, of course. You see, when he was... When first of all the Consul General didn't make him chairman of that committee to greet Christina, that was a hell of a slap in the face. And then when he didn't get to be one, when he did not get... You see, he was not the director of the Institute in 1976. He was not. But that's why he wanted to be the coordinator, national coordinator. Oh, yeah. I was... Because the Westerberg was in 1976 then. Yeah. Oh, yeah. So he had to be the top. Well, no, no. At the Institute. Yes. But he had nothing to do with it. Well, yeah, we had representatives from various organizations. That is, the three... What's his name? Call it the Troika. Yes. But he was not the leader of Westerberg at that time. Oh, no, no, no. He was... No, no, no. He was... Well, we used the Institute as a meeting place when the king came, you know. And when we were planning the program, the various programs at the auditorium, the Ambrose Auditorium and other places, then Mrs. Westerberg, she wanted a lot to say about what was going to be. And... but, you know, she was the kind of a person that would just could really, really alienate. She said, well, she said, I'm a professional musician. I don't know what the hell... I suppose she could play the piano. But there's nobody that touches, nobody that touches Audrey L'Enquist, from whether it comes to Gibbonuwa up to classical, all by heart. She doesn't even need notes. Outstanding. So she says, well, she was on the committee for programming. So she come into a meeting with Leonard and I and Erickson. Because you see, they didn't, they were so involved with the Institute that they didn't hardly dare say anything, no matter how wrong something was, they just didn't dare. And my concern was with, I didn't give a shit about hiring some professional that no Swede knew. I was more interested in doing something that included a recognized Swede and especially the choir that here was a group, the only group in the country of young Swedes that were perpetuating Swedish song. Now why the hell, and they were good enough to go to Sweden and appear all over and get rave reviews. Why shouldn't they be included? And the dance and the dancers, both the kids and the seniors. And she come in with a program and oh, it was all final. So I says, well, now look, don't say anything about being final. That's what Ramberg and Erickson and I are to decide, which is final. Because what she read was shit. So well, she says, if you're not going to take my recommendation, I said, look, we want your recommendations, but we're going to have to see as to what is going to be the final outcome of your recommendations. And there are other people who have recommendations. So her attitude was a little bit different than her husband's then. He always wanted to wait a little bit before he gave his recommendations. Well, but you see, she was the head of that committee. We did that in deference to him and his position that, all right, so she is somebody. But that doesn't mean that we're going to just take everything that she says. We didn't take everything every other committee person said. Jesus Christ, she stormed out of there. Well, she gets up and hikes out. And that poor bastard got up and walked right out after her. He's scared to death of her, always was. But oh, Christ. So her committee didn't prevail then? Some of the things, sure. Some of the things were good. But she had completely left out the dancers. Oh, that's peasant stuff. They weren't good enough. She wanted to hire all the people that she knew, maybe from the opera or something. Bullshit. They get enough. The king gets enough opera at home. I sat through some of those. I fell asleep in one, I'm ashamed to say. So there was different opinions? Different opinions. Poor bastard, you know, he – I'd say that she put him in his grave. Oh, she was a witch. No, it was a trying time. But, you know, you have – you have – we had a lot of capable people. You would think they would listen to the local people and see, because they are the ones they want to serve. Yeah, but we're the ones that did the work. Oh, what I started to tell you. So the same situation is going to happen again. If you live long enough, things always have a way of – Repeating itself. Repeating itself. Now, Mark, what I tell you, they have now appointed Dr. – Ed Lindell's wife a nice woman. Do you know Ed Lindell? Oh, yes. All right. I know him very, very well. And his wife is a hard worker and just a nice person. And then Dr. – a guy that does all the famous things at the university hospital. Most outstanding doctor they've got. In Minneapolis? Yeah. At the university. No, I don't – Anyhow, I'll think of the name. Not a sweet name at all. Now, somebody told me that he is a sweet, but god damn, where the hell he ever got that name, I can't imagine. And maybe he is and maybe he's not a sweet. It doesn't matter. Capable people. Now, they, those two women, are kind of running things. They don't know shit from straight up about any of these sort of things. About the Swedish – Yeah. At the institute, you mean? No, no. In the community as a whole. But for this 88, they were at the institute at that meeting. It's Curtis Carlson's idea, then, probably, that's pushing them. And Nelson, his daughters. Well, that's all right. Let them do – I know it's nothing but hard work. I've got enough hard work. I don't need any more. So I don't give a shit if they come to me at all. In fact, I hope they don't. But they're not going to come to me to have me do work. So they're going to Robadwors with the queen and the king? Of course. Certainly. And if they go to Sweden, they may get invited to even sleep in the palace. Oh, yeah. And they're a nuisance to them. And that was the end of the interview with Einer Johnson, Minneapolis, Minnesota. And that is January 20, 1987, Seminole, Florida. End of interview.