 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Lamont Tolkien, William Illinois. Cassette two, side one. It's very interesting how these old fellows, Peter Paul and Nils Larsen and Grimma Frank and the names that they had. And of course this is true for the, I went to school with the Andor Orphans Home, at that time they called it the Andor Orphans Home. Well I don't think there were too many, I think there was just the one manager and then they had, I can remember, during Lyndon Johnson was the manager, the first manager I remember. Then there was a man that was mayor for a lifetime, was a man by the name of Gorman, Charles Gorman. And he was an all-around handyman and I don't remember exactly who all the others were, but there weren't too many. And I would think maybe 60, I think was probably a maximum about that time. I think there were probably about 60 children, it was a big number. And they didn't have, like they do now, they didn't have that much help. But everybody did work, I mean all the boys had jobs and the girls, and of course it was a farm, and they had a lot of chore to do. They did a lot of milking, they had a lot of livestock, and all the boys. But I can remember, of course I went to school with quite a number of them in school, in the, let's see, in the class was, Justice Youngberg was one of them, Roy Swadberg. Well there were many, in the confirmation class was quite a number. But to tell you the truth, I can only remember one of all the orphan home children, they all turned out to be real good adults. I can only remember one boy that got into trouble in crime after leaving the orphan's home. But they grew up in that area, did a lot of work. The Edwards River was close by, they would go down there in the wintertime, and there was good ice skaters. Of course they didn't have anything, there was nothing else to do. But on Sundays they would go down to the frozen ice on the Edwards River and skate, and they were some real good skaters from there. They played a lot of baseball, and they were good, played with the Andover Terrible Swedes baseball team, and they were good baseball players. But I can't, I have to say that no doubt it was a healthy, clean cut, good living, because they were on that big farm, and they had a lot of work to do, and they did not get into trouble. And they were all, as far as I can remember, only one boy that turned out in crime. Of all the boys and girls that left the home, they turned out to be real good, top-notch citizens. And they came there when they were how old? They came there, as a general rule, I doubt their ages must have ranged, I think, from about, oh, they could have been three or four, I don't know. I can't remember three or four-year-olds very well, but I do remember six, seven, grade school age and high school age. And I don't think they took them over, oh, maybe 12 years of age. I doubt they took them up to all that. But they stayed on there until the most... No, they stayed on there until they were probably, until somebody adopted them, or until they had a place to go. And I think most of them stayed there until about 17, 18, until they were ages 17 or 18. And they came from Chicago area and all over the country? Yes, but I think at that time they pretty much all were Lutherans, and they were the, they were not, they did not take court cases or anything like that, but they were mostly all, pretty much all of them were really orphans. Some cases, mother and dad were both gone, or the mother was gone, or the father gone. And they, of course, one of the very first ones was Frank Anderson, and that was a very close friend of my dad's. He was in the home, he probably was one of the oldest, and of course he passed away a few years ago. But he was one of the, he was one, must have been, he must have been among one of the first ones that was there, because he was about my dad, he was born about close to my dad, he was born in the 1880s. So I don't, I don't even, I can't remember now just exactly when the home started, because when I remembered it was, it was, there was a building that burned down probably when I was a child, when I was a small child, I think. And they rebuilt it? And they rebuilt it, yes. How big of a farm was it? I think that farm was quite large. I think the farm was 240 acres, or maybe. Did they understand to buy the farm, or somebody donated it? They, to start with, evidently, evidently they must have, they must have bought it. I'm not, I'm not sure how that, I'm really not sure, the financial end of it there. It was a good land. Yes, my uncle worked there for many years, and was the farm manager there for many years, William Wilhulken, yes, Wilhulken was the farm manager. And then he would help, the boys would help him. And he was in charge of the farm. And then there was a manager, but they didn't have, I don't know how they could, I really don't know how they could do it, that how few people could take care of that many boys and girls. They had to act as father and mother, then. Yes. Yes, and they were, they were good, they were good managers. And of course they, they, at one time they had the school out there, there was a school out there at the home. Out there, yes, and they had a building where they had the school out there. But then, evidently, later on they went to the, I remember when I was in, see I went, I went to high school from 1922 to 1926, and they were coming to high school. Then at, in our high school they were, but not, not too many. So you had a high school right in Andover? Yeah, we had a high school in Andover, yes. The grade school was where the Andover Park was now. And of course that, the grade school was there, and then there was, there was no, then the high school, where we had the high school, they tried to build a high school, but they fought the building of the high school. And my dad was on the board trying to get a new high school building. But each time there was opposition on account of the money, the cost to build a high school. So what they did, they run a high school in the, in the, in the Legion Building, which is right, which is an historical site right now, which the Andover Historical Society just bought this year. They, we had classes, we had, in fact, we had chemistry classes and physics classes taught by my uncle, the principal, Nathan Hulkrin, in the Andover Legion Building. That was from 22 to 26, when I was in school. And then above the restaurant, which is still there, the Swanee's Restaurant, we had classes in there. And at one time, before that time, before my time, I remember they had classes over at the, high school was over there where the telephone exchange is now, or the, where the old telephone company used to be, and the Andover operator, the central office. And now it's a grocery store right in the middle of the, of the street, the Andover there. That was a high school building at one time. But the high school classes, the classes were not large. My class was, my class was one of the largest. It had seven, seven people in it, five boys and two girls. And you had to walk in or use a bicycle or? Well, we rode ponies to high school. Yeah, we rode ponies to high school. We had, from our area, I think there were, in those days, if you had a good pony, you were, you had status in a fast pony. And we were 10 ponies, start from the south by the Edwards River. And we, most of us come together. When we go home, we had, we kept our ponies in the church barn. And the, it was a church barn, used to be right along the side of the church, on the north side of the church. It was a covered barn. And it had stalls in it. And the people used to drive their buggies and carriages into the stalls. And they had a, and they had a trough there for, to feed the horse. And it had a place to tie them. Yeah, we would, we would bring in, we would bring in something for the horse to eat during the noon hour. But a lot of times, one time I can recall, we, somebody was riding our horses during recess or the noon hour. Some kids would sneak down, the grade school kids sneak down to ride our ponies. So we, we figured we'd fix them. So what we did, we knew the pony they were riding was a small little Shetland pony. And so we put, we put the stirrup up real tight. And we put something under the saddle. And when the kid got on to ride, the pony bucked him and bucked. And we found out he went through town. He started running away and bucking. And the pony started for home. And so this, from then on, we never had any trouble with people riding our ponies during the noon hour or during the lunch hour. But we would, we would leave them, we would leave the ponies in the church stalls during the day. And sometimes, of course, in the winter and in the bad weather, why, the ponies were well protected from the, because they had a, it was a roof over it and stalls. But and then when we would go home, of course, we all went home at the same time. And it would be kind of interesting to see all 10 of us on ponies, high school kids on ponies riding through town real fast, you know, just like a group of cowboys. And some of them were girls, by the way, too. You had saddles on them? Oh yeah, we had saddles. Yeah, we had saddles on them. But I remember, I remember one time we went around the, that time it was the old Wimmerstedt store up there by the garage up in Andover. Went around that corner. And in those days, it was nothing but mud and country road. And my pony, I was out in the lead, and my pony, due to the rain and slippery roads, my pony slipped and fell, went down on its side. And I could, I was lying on my back, and I could see the horse's hooves from the other riders going over me. But it's rather interesting that not one touched me. And so it happens that as a general rule, the ponies and the horses, they won't step on you. I mean, they made the jump real good. They didn't want, of course, I didn't want to, it's a good thing they didn't. But evidently, the ponies knew that I was there, and they made the leap over me. But it was a rough one to see the horse's hooves right above you when you looked up. It was a close call. It was a close call. But it was the only transportation you had to school. The other one you had to walk. You'd have to walk. And of course, we had, I had about, see, we were living on the farm about three and a half miles away. So I had, that must have been a long walk. But I could go that three and a half miles. My pony was doing it, you know, twice a day, going to school every morning and every day. And my pony would, I could go on a slow gallop all the way from the farm to the church barns without stop. So pretty fast travel. Were you eager to come home in the afternoon or to do the farm show? No, I don't think so. We would like that. Did you take any long ways? We would sometimes, no, we usually, because we were expected home, so we would, but we once in a while, we would go up through town and just in order to, I think we thought maybe we'd scare people by going real fast through town probably, or at least get some spectators to look at, watch us as we went through town real fast with ten ponies in all in one group. It was quite a sight to see. And in those days, I think that, another thing about when the horses was beautiful, I think, is they had so many, when we had parades, I remember we used to have in Andover the Fourth of July parades and things like that. They had beautiful horses and all decked up with beautiful, the harness and they would have the floats all fixed up. I can remember my dad being in a Uncle Sam float and a patriotic float, and it was beautiful to watch, because in those days they didn't have the cars in the floats. It was pretty much all horse and buggy or horse and wagon or horse and a hay rack or something like that all decorated up. But as a young boy, I was thrilled to see the beautiful parades in those days. So did people from Osco and Linn Sandra come in to participate? Oh yes, yes. Then Cambridge and Woodhall, they were, it was a community affair. So Andover was like a central point that you visited? Well, I think in a way it was kind of centrally located for a lot of activities, and they seemed to be quite active. I can remember we had a modern woodman team, and we had, and I still have the axe and the hat with the modern woodman. We were in uniform, and we had a drillmaster, and we were 16 men in the drillmaster, and we would go through all kinds of marching and drills and carry an axe and be in uniform. I thought it was, I was kind of young at that time, probably high school age, where we were, we got 16 together, and we would go to other towns. We would go and march in the parades, and we would also go at night on some doings that they have and march up and down the streets with 16 men in the uniform, and they're called the modern woodman drill team. You were almost like a professional team then. Yeah, well, we practiced a lot, and we did, of course we would go through quite a few maneuvers, and it was all from the community around Andover and Cambridge and Osco and Lynn Center there, the people that participated, and they picked out 16 people to drill. Regarding religion, Andover was the mother church, or the big church. Yes, it was. They were respected by the small communities, like Ona, Sherald, and Cambridge, and Yvonne. So the pastor in Andover, he was a very important man. Oh, yes, I should say. Did you have a lot of respect for him when you were going through school? Oh, yes, very much so. You know, the pastor was considered, he was looked and respected. Was he the guy that you had most respect for, you think, in the community? I think so. I think you had, parental respect was very high. Your parents were respected, and I think you also respected your neighbors. You had a lot of respect and looked up to them. But the pastor was a leader, I think probably more so than any other one in the community. Sundays was always, there wasn't so many things to go to, so you always went to church things. You met people. That's right. Did you have coffee after the service, do you remember that? I don't remember that, no. I don't, I think, I don't, probably, I can't remember. I remember we had very large picnics, Sunday school picnics, which was very, brought in a lot of people. That was held on, usually on the church lawn, with a lot of contests and games, and it was good for the young people. There was no Swedish sport in that church, were you? Oh, yes. Not in Sunday school, for instance, did you? No, no, not in Sunday school, no. No public confirmation? Confirmation, no, but my father, of course, was confirmed in Swedish at that time, and I remember there were Swedish services once in a while, but I don't think in Sunday school, it was always in English, yes. But we had very large Luther leagues, I was president of the Luther league for many, for a number of years, and we had large, in fact, we were so large that we had to go from the Jenny Lynn Chapel, we couldn't hold them all, we had to go into the gymnasium in the school when we had Luther leagues, because we would have, they would even come from the cities here, and they would come from Cambridge and Woodhall, and we had such a large gathering of young people. At that time, you didn't have the educational wing in the church, then? No, we didn't have the educational wing. We had all our Luther league meetings at the young people, and of course, in those days, the Luther league meetings meant the older people came too, because they enjoyed, it was supposed to be Luther league for young people, and the older people would come to listen to the programs. And another thing on the programs, the program was nothing to have at least 12 numbers on the program. I mean, it was not just one speaker, it was a piano solo and a recitation and a reading and a duet and a musical instrument, it was probably sometimes as many as 12, 14 numbers on the program. They kept the public or the visitors' attention? Oh, yes. And they brought in not only the young people, they brought in many of the older people, and then of course, they would have lunch afterward too, a nice big lunch afterward. Was it served at the Genelin Chapel then? Yes, it was served in the basement of the Genelin Chapel. So it was used in the... We used the upper floor for the program, and when the program was over, they'd all go downstairs to the basement for the lunch. How about Nils Larsen and Peter Paul, did they have any respect for the pastor? Yes they did. I don't think... I think Peter Paul was about the only one that went to church. Nils Larsen and Grimma Frank, they would never... They were almost like a hermit. They would... They just almost... I wish now that I would have gotten more, and my dad would know more about their lives. But I just can't... Peter Paul was the only one that would... And as I say, he very seldom got to church on time, but he was a very religious man. The others were not. They were just... They just lived as hermits. So the only time when he got on time to church, was when he died? That's about right. That's right. He's buried in Andover? Yes, he's buried in Andover, and I think they're all buried in the Andover Cemetery there. And the main body of religion in Andover, they were the Lutherans? Yes. Then you had the Methodists. Then the Methodists. Did you have any cooperation with them in any way? Not too much. I think they... I don't think they held joints. I don't remember ever having joint services. They seemed to be very friendly and neighborly, but never... In fact, I think in those days it was more... Lutherans were a little bit more independent. And I know my father, he figured that... I think he would... He had his way. He would like to see us all marry Swedes, and he would like to... Getting outside the Lutheran church, a Catholic, was not good. They were very much... What should I say? Distinctive. Very... They individualized. A very strong Lutheran, very strong in their nationality. Did they stress the Swedishness at all? Oh, yes. In what ways? Swedish. Swedish was good and strong, and you were a nationality that was... You'd think that you were above other nationalities. They felt... I think they were very, in a way, almost clannish. So Catholics, there was no problem with them in Andover? No. No. In fact, we... Nobody anywhere near was Catholic. No, Methodists was the only... And then the Presbyterian, of course. We're not to the Presbyterian. There was... At my time, there was no one around, but at that one time, there is a Presbyterian cemetery there, and evidently, there had been Presbyterians. They were all gone by the time when I... Because there was no church. The only churches we had were the Methodists and the Lutheran. The other families now you were connected with, I mean, in play and going to church, were they stressed in any Swedishness? Yes. It seemed like... Of course, it was pretty much all Swedish, and we would... I remember Sundays, we would always visit with Swedish families. There were so many of these Andersons, Johnsons, and the Petersons, and Nilsons, and so on. You seemed like Sunday was a day for visiting with other families. And I never will forget, we always had... I have pictures of the Peter-Paul picnic. Many times, there was a clearing in the woods. In his home, then? Near his home. It was right outside his home, there was a clearing, and we were there. My uncle had one time put up an old cook stove, and so we would cook and do things on that old cook stove. But many times, when we first came, of course, there were mice and rats in the stove, and it would have to be cleaned out. But it was some lids, you'd just lift up the lids and a mouse would run out of there. But of course, after you once get the fire started, there's no danger, you'd maybe see some mice scouting. But that was in the middle of the woods, and we'd have... Once a year, they'd always have a Peter-Paul picnic, and we would have a picture taken, and the men would play horseshoe, and there were ball games. So he was the main character at that picnic? Oh yes, yeah. He was invited then as a... Yeah, he was invited. But it seemed like they liked to... It was a large... They loved the woods, and it was... The trees all up above, you couldn't even see the sky from where... Back in the woods there, but there would be a clearing enough for horseshoe and things like that. So, like this Peter-Paul now, as you mentioned here. They had no security whatsoever, in other words, they were never married. They had no relation that you know of. No. They took care of them. But like your grandparents now, they were taken care of with the horse by their sons and daughters. Did they live in a certain house on the farm, or how did they make a living? Yeah, my grandparents lived in a house not very far from us, yes. And my Grandpa Bengtsson, they lived only... after we were... my dad married, he lived only from... We're mother's parents, he lived only about two, three blocks, and they would walk... They would walk... Grandma and Grandpa Bengtsson would walk over to our place. And then, of course, we... Then my other grandparents... Excuse me. End of interview with Lamont Hulkreen. It was decided upon to have the interview continued at a later date, but unfortunately Mr. Hulkreen passed away. End of interview.