 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Enoch Wohlgren, Moline de Noy. Cassette two, side one. How did you meet your wife now? Well, I met her in Rockford. In Rockford? Yeah. Was she born in Rockford? No, she was born up around Chicago. Maple Park, I guess it was, where she was born. It's just on this side of Chicago. And she came to Rockford to work? Yeah, she was in Rockford. Well, she got married in Rockford, and then she got a divorce, and that's after I met her. You met her at a dance then in Rockford? Yeah. Yeah, we was to F.S. Hall. That's a Norwegian hall. S.M. and F.S., I think they call it. Sounds like Norway. Yeah. And that was right on 3rd Avenue and 7th Street there. Off of 7th Street. And she was, well, just like they was shooting trap over there in one place. I got over there too, and that's how I met her. Oh. So then when I came down to Moline, I came down here in the spring. Then 22nd day of June, no, 13th day of June, we got married in 1936. So that's how it went. And then you bought this house how many years later? Well, I think I lived here 31 years now. 31 years. Yeah. So this neighborhood was already built up then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I got all good neighbors. They're having parties, neighborhood parties, and block parties, you know. Now, Sunday, we are going to go over to Grenier's over here. The kid is graduating, you know, so they're going to have a graduation party. So we was invited to them, you know. So were they mostly Swedes when you moved in 31 years ago? No. No? I think it's a couple of Larsons or somebody down the street here, but I didn't know them. No, they're all Irish and Catholics around here. Murphy next door, Haney over here, and here is Judy David or Davids, and then the Greniers over there. They're all good neighbors. It's a nice neighborhood. And here you had also the stores, grocery stores nearby at that time. There was a grocery store almost in every other block. Yeah. Well, now we used to be a Giffmans down here, but that one is gone. I usually go to Jules over here. Over there? Yeah, and Eagles. It's too far to walk, so I usually drive down there. You take the car down there? I like to take a walk, too. I'm getting too heavy. Oh, you are not too bad. After my wife died, you know, I lost about 20 pounds. I was down to 178, 179. Now I'm up to 195, 200 again. You eat too good. Oh, yeah. You had too many lady friends. I went downtown and took my blood pressure today, and that was 136 over 76. 138 over 76, I think it was. That's good. That's good for an old man. I said, is that pretty good for an old man? And she said, that is perfect, she said. Of course, I had my checkup last August. I had my blood, and I had my bowel test, and everything, you know, my heart, heart cartogram and everything done, and everything come out perfect, even that cholesterol, you know. I didn't have no cholesterol hardly at all, the doctor said. So evidently, I must be in pretty good shape. So except the appendix you had taken out in Rockville, you'd be all right then? Oh, yeah. Never had any trouble. Well, I did, when I walked down the shop, I got ruptured, you know. I had a rupture operation on my right side. And then, then here two years ago, last Christmas, last December, I woke up one night, and I went to the toilet, and you know, I could urinate at all, just like it just blocked. So then I had to go up to the hospital the next day, and my neighbor took me over, and I called a nurse to take care of my wife, you know. So she come over, so I went up to the emergency, and then I went in for an operation afterwards. But then I took my wife into the hospital for a checkup for three days, and then she went to a nursing home over here, Americana. So then I had my operation, and one night the doctor come in. My daughter-in-law, you know, because my wife had one kid before we got married, and he used to be a policeman out in East Moline for 26 years. So then he got bad legs, and he had taken both off below the knee. So he's down in Quincy in the veterans' home. And she come over there, and she was good. She ate, you know, and she was real good. Nine o'clock that night, the doctor come over, and my doctor come over, and he said, I got bad news for you. He said, your wife died. And here I just had my operation, you know. He opened me up here, my stomach, took it down and get it straightened out. I think maybe they thought I had cancer or something, you know. But everything come out just right. Then she died, but I got out of the hospital so I could go to the funeral. But my daughter-in-law, you know, took care of it. So it was a hard role. It's hard, boy, to lay in the hospital and somebody come and tell you that your wife died. Of course, she was better off, and me too, but it just ain't the idea, you know. The idea is that you lose somebody like that. We was married 47 years. Very close. Yeah. Now this year, we would have celebrated our 50th. So that didn't make any difference that you were Swedish and she was Irish, then? No. We got along good. Compatibility. Nothing at all. Of course, her folks down there in St. Charles, they wanted me to join the Catholic, but I said, no, I ain't going to join nothing. Well, they were on you. Yeah. They wanted me to, you know. But my wife never asked me for nothing. But her sisters and brothers, you know, they wanted me to go to church and have the marriage blessed and all that stuff. And I said, no, I said, you don't have to. I got my religion and she got hers and you got yours. So... Now they're all dead. I had eight brother-in-laws when we got married. They're all gone. All gone. They all lived up around Chicago. How about this? What? I got a nephew down in Florida, and he used to be a contractor up in Rockford, you know. He used to build churches up there. He had two million dollar churches he built up in Rockford. And then he built one in Minnesota, I think. And he had one down south here someplace too he built. So then his wife, she was working in a bank up there as a travel agent, you know. Took care of a travel agency up there. Then she went down to Florida to see her sister, and they built a new mall down there. So she thought that would be a good idea to start a travel agency. And they did. And now he quit his contracting business in Rockford. They are down there now and they are doing real good. They wanted me to go down there, but I haven't been down there yet. I want to go to Sweden first before I go anyplace. So you haven't been out traveling or anything? No. Seemed like I don't care to go out travel. I was going to go up to Rockford and see some of my old buddies up there. I got the one left. He wanted me to come up, but I haven't. And I don't care to drive at night anymore because one of my eyes is getting bad. So how was Rockford on 7th Street and the Snooze Boulevard? The Snooze Boulevard? There were a lot of streets there. Oh, yeah. There was an army there and a free church was there. We used to go between them. We used to have a lot of fun up there. And there were mostly streets on the east side of the river? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Up around 7th Street and Broadway. And all the way... That would be east, wouldn't it? East, yes. West. West on the other side of the river? Yeah, that's on the other side of the river. And you showed the other people around, the Germans. Yeah, yeah. It's a nice town, though, Rockford. Yes. It's a nice town. How about during the Second World War? Were you drafted then? Yeah. You were drafted? Yeah, but I worked down to Deer's and I worked in a warehouse at that time. And I was pushing the line. Did you ever go down and see how they had it at that time? We didn't go down there now because there ain't nothing down to Plowork anymore. But we had to push that line, you know. So they had some disc shafts. They weighed about 150, 120. One I got hurt on was 115 pounds. I was pushing the line and the hook comes loose up in the trolley. And it went down, right down here. Well, it hit here first. Then it slipped down in the elbow. And it pulled out the bones about that far. And I had a heck of a time because I went to the doctor for about a year with it. I worked, but it finally straightened out a little bit. But I can't straighten it out yet. So that was your other arm then? Yeah. The right one? Yeah, that's the other arm. So I got both of them. So did the insurance pay them for a job here? Not so much from the insurance, you know. So you didn't suffer when it happened? No. So how was it not to work at the John Deere? Was it a hectic place? Oh, I liked it. I loved to work down there. Boy, Deere's just a good place to work. So there was good friendship between the workers? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. There was no rivalry or... No, no, no....highs in people? Everything was all right. I got to work on the mills, milling machines, and the damn drills and everything. And finally, I got to train some guys. Like, they want to work on the mills, I trained them. The boss said, Well, you turn in your average earnings, and you show them how to do it. When they got a new guy, you know. So I really liked it down there. Was that piecework you were doing? Yeah. Piecework? Piecework. But when you got older now, the piecework, wasn't it hard to keep up the way you had done 20 years ago? No, no. No, we had our prices, you know. The harder we worked, the more money we made. But I mean, when you got older, up in the 50s, didn't it held back a little bit then? No, no. You could have the same speed? I could have still worked, you know, longer. I retired at 62. But my wife, you know, was so bad, and I had to do everything at home. I had to do everything outside. So I got kind of tired of it. I thought I'd better retire before I hurt myself, you know. So I went down to the office, and I told him, I said, I want to retire. I want to know how much I get. So he told me, and I told him, I said, I'll be done the 29th day of April that year. 1970? 1970, yeah. I hated to... I could have worked another three years, you know, until 65. But it was too much on me, you know, that lifting her all the time. And it kind of got me down a little bit. But I worked. The milling machines, you know, all you do is put the piece in and let it go, and you stand there and wait until it finally... So there was no heavy lifting or anything like that? No. Well, it was heavy lifting, yeah. We had big pipes that weighed 150 pounds, but we always had chain blocks, you know. You didn't have to lift with your back then? No, not too much. It was hard work, though, but you used a chain block when you put it in the fixture, you know. No, I never minded the work at all. All the time I was done. Were you involved with the unions, anything like a union steward? No, I never bothered with any... I helped them. I went to the meetings, you know, and everything, and helped them out, but I never had any job like a steward or... No? I never... I didn't want anything like that. That's too much headache. How about the union meetings now? Did the workers participate in most of the meetings, or did they stay home? Oh, yeah. They went to the meetings? Yeah. We was out Wednesday. To my union, they had a roast beef dinner out of the union hall in East Moline. At UAW? Yeah, UAW on 19th Street over there. We was out there, me and my lady friend, and had a beef dinner, roast beef dinner. Real nice. Three dollars a piece, you know. You can't beat that. So there's the union that puts on that dinner? Yeah. That's the retirees, yeah. Yeah, I like that, too. Then we go to her, because her husband worked for the International. So they got it the third Wednesday in every month, and mine usually have it the first Wednesday in the month. Oh, you cover all the bases then? Yeah. Usually they have chicken dinners, you know. You get a good chicken dinner, three pieces of chicken, and you're everything with it, you know. So all you have to do now is to watch your weight? Yeah, I have to lose weight. You eat too good? Yeah. My lady friend, she called me up, come on over and have lunch with me. Then she have a big dinner, you know. Then sometimes she call up, come on over and have some supper with me. Then I go over there, and then she send home with me. I got two or three dinners out there now I can warm up, you know. I hardly never buy anything, any meat or anything. So you don't have a... there's a lot of widows around. Yeah, she's a pretty good cook. That's where my weight come from, and hers, too. She gained about 20 pounds, too, in the last winter. You know, you can't go no place. I did fall last winter, though, and I fell on my shoulder, and that one is bad, kind of bad. But it's getting better and better. Certain way I bend it, you know, it gets so sore. Yeah, I asked you about the World War II. So you didn't have to be drafted, and you had a deferment? Yeah, they put me in 4F. In 4F, yeah. Yeah, they took x-rays of it, you know. You stayed at the factory all the time then? Oh, yeah, yeah, during the war, yeah. Yeah, I was called twice. I went down to Peoria. Yeah, Peoria twice, but they put me in 4F. I still got them papers here someplace, too. Oh. So what year did you become a citizen, now, after the years in Rockford? That was in 1939, I think, I got my citizenship. You were here in Molina at the time? Yeah, yeah. 1939, it was. Yeah, I got scared then, because one time in Rockford, you know, I took a girl out, and her boyfriend got mad. And he waited for me, you know, when I walked home, because I didn't have no car. So I walked home, and here he jumped me, you know. And, boy, we got to fight. And he had a piece of coal, and he hit me right here, on the eye. See that black? Looked like a coal mark? He hit me there, but I got hold of that piece of coal, and I hit him in the head, you know. So that's the way it went. Then the cops come, and... Who'd they come? Oh, yeah, they had to take us to the hospital, and they sewed him up. He had his head split, and I had mine here. They had already put a couple of clamps in there. But he was kind of drinking, you know, so I guess he didn't know what he was doing. But he got fine. He let me go. Oh, I see. So I was in Rockford. But it didn't affect the citizenship papers, I assume? No, I got scared, you know, when I went over to the city hall here to get my citizen papers. I forgot. Crampton, I think, was the judge's name. So he looked at me, you know, Wally Swanson, the employment agent. He said, I'll go with you. I know he's just over there. As a witness? Yeah. I'll go with you, he says, to see if everything is all right. I don't know. You didn't need any witness or anything, I don't think. But he said, I'll go with you. So he was there. Here, Crampton, he looked at the papers, and he says, I see where you've been kind of a fighter, he says, like that. Oh, boy, I thought I was going to fall down on my shoes. They had their records? They had their records. I never told them nothing, but they had their records. So he seen I got kind of scared, I guess. So he says, well, Mr. Bogren, he says, it's all right. He says, they look like we need them now, he says, because that was just when the war started, you know. We need fighters now, he says, so your papers is granted. I got them. I just looked at them here before you come. Oh. So they got you. Yeah. Yeah, they find out everything, you know, when you get your papers, when you turn in for your citizenship. But I was afraid, boy, I got scared when Wallace once, and he looked at me, and I didn't know what to do. Then he said, well, that's all right, Mr. Bogren, he says. That's what we need nowadays, he looked like, he says, fighters. Now, back in that time, it was easy to get into a fight like the old regard, I suppose. Oh, yeah, in Sweden. I'm Swedish, you know, they really go to town sometimes. But I never had no trouble. That's the only time I had any trouble. I just let him have it after that, you know, so I backed out. There was no war anymore, correct? No, no. So, but we used to go out and dance, and barn dances, out to Roscoe. I think they call the place outside Iraq for their Roscoe. We used to go to them barn dances, and first we used to go down to a hall downtown, Unique Hall, Unique Hall, they call it. They had them square dances, you know, and they had them, well, you changed partners, you know. And then after that, after they closed up, we used to go out to a barn dance, you know. We was young then, I was only about 20, 21, 22 years old. So everything was all right. Then I worked on the first farm I worked on. The neighbors across the street, across the road there, they had two sons. One's name was Gene, and the other one's Harley. And Harley, he was a young guy, but he was big, you know, stout boy. They used to fight between them over there, them guys. And I used to go with Harley sometimes, you know, to street dances over to Port Byron. No, not Byron, Byron, you know. They used to have street dances up there. We used to go out there. I was tired sometimes, and he'd come over and he'd say, Let's go, Ina, let's go and have some fun. So we took off. I had a car, and he had a car. Daddy's probably got mad at him sometimes. One time we was going to go to the street dance down to Byron, and when we come out, he was going to drive. When he come out there to take the car out, all four tires was empty. Let the air out, you know. So then I had to take mine. We went down there. We had a lot of fun, though. So they had a lot of pranks going on with each other. Oh, yeah, them two guys, they was big guys, spot on. Boy, they fought with ranches and everything else. So now when you got the citizenship paper, whom did you vote for then, Roosevelt or...? Oh, yeah, I'm a Democrat. I'm a straight Democrat. Always been a Democrat? Yeah. I think once I voted for somebody, whoever it was, that we know here, but I'm a straight Democrat. So my dad, too, he was a Democrat, I guess, because he told me when he left, he got two parties over there, he says. When the Republicans get in, he says, you better tighten up your belt and sit tight. But when the Democrats get in, he says, you can go ahead and make some money. Oh, I see. So he had that philosophy. He knew what it was all about. He had learned the hard way up in Dakotas? Yeah, North Dakota. Was he a citizen? I don't know. I couldn't tell you. I doubt it. Unless he had to, I don't know. Maybe he had to get the hotel. Yeah, that could be, before he could get the land up there. So he might have been a citizen. I don't know. But he favored the Democrats. Boy, he was a hard worker, that guy. So what do you think now happened with the Republicans and the economy and John Deere and the International Harvester? They folded up. Yeah. Well, the Republicans got in. They destroy everything, you know. We have to get the Democrats in next time to straighten things out. So you think your dad's saying is the right prophecy, that the Democrats will straighten it out? Yeah. I think he was right. No, that's the way they are doing it. They've spent a trillion dollars now already since he got in. Do you think you've been employed during the best years in the United States? I think so. You think it's going to go downhill? Now it's going down, yeah. I made $200 a week when I left, and that's 15, 16 years ago. That was good money. Now they make about, damn, they work hard. If they got a job, they make about $300 or $400 a week. But everything costs much more now, though. Oh, yeah. They got to make it, you know, to get along. So you actually make more than what they do today? Well, according to their prices and everything, you know. It's, I think it's going downhill. You can get a job now if you wanted to. There is a lady over here by the alley, living in that house by the alley. She worked in the office down to plow and planter. She was worrying about it for a long time, that she was going to be laid off. Last Friday was her last day. She got one kid over there that's grown up. She was working in the office then? Yeah. She was working for somebody in the office. Got laid off. How many years has she worked there? I don't know how many years. She's just a young woman. About 30, 35 years old. Kathy Thucker. I feel sorry for her. She's trying to sell the home, you know. She had it up for sale here about a year ago. She couldn't sell it. Now she got to sign up again, I see. So there are tough times ahead. Yeah. I'll show you some pictures. You mentioned something about the tavern. A guy come in there. His name is Artie Stewart. He come in the shop there and he told me, he says, He says, they got a tavern down here. He says, and the guy's wife just took off with another guy and went down to St. Louis. He's desperate. He says, he want to get rid of it right now. So I stopped there after work. Why did he ask you? Well, he didn't want it. He was going to tell me. He's a good friend of ours. He just died here a couple of weeks ago. So he says, so I stopped down there after work. So I asked him how much he wanted for it. So I says, well, he says, you hold it. I said, I'm going to go down and see the tavern cop. You have to go down to the city hall or to the police station, you know. So I went down there and I asked him. His name was Ivor Anderson. And so I asked him, I says, how about that? Can I get the license? I said, I'm going to go down to the police station, and I said, I'm going to go down to the police station to get the license. And he asked me if I had any criminal records or anything, you know. And I said, no, I says. So he says, go ahead and buy it. He says. So I went down there and bought it. And he want to go right away, so I got it right away. My wife quit that place down there and took care of it up there. And it was located on where? Third Avenue and Fourth Street. It was a good location. Yeah. Them guys come in, you know, and they spend a lot of money in there. And we had that for about six years. And then I got tired of it. I had to fill the coalers before I went to work. Sometimes I had to mop the floor and clean up, you know, after we closed up. Sometimes I sat there until closing time after working all day. And you can't have too much help if you want to make some money, you know, you just bought it for extra money. So I started to get sore back, you know, and my back bothered me. So I thought I better get rid of it. So one day I had a refrigeration guy over there, something wrong with the refrigeration. So I said, I said, I believe I'm going to get rid of this place. So he says, how much do you want for it? So he want to, he was a buyer right away. And I didn't ever even thought too much about selling it, you know. So finally I told him the price and he says, well, I'll buy it. So, so he, he paid down 500 on it. And of course I had a lawyer, you know, to take care of it. So then he was going to pay the rest of it the 15th day of November. That was in 1950, 1950, around 1950. So when the time come up 15th day of November, I went down in Tavern because we stayed upstairs. We'll still stay up there until everything got straightened out. That was before we bought this place. So I come down that Saturday morning and I said, you got the money? And he said, no, he says, but you can take a note, can't you? And I said, no, I said, no notes. Didn't any good. I says, if you don't get the money by noon, I says, I'll go take it over again. I'll take it back. So he got on his bicycle and he went out and tried to get some money. So finally he went down to consumers down here and they promised him the money. So then I called a lawyer and the lawyer got in contact with consumers. And he says, we'll give him another couple of three hours, he says, because I think he's going to get the money down there. So he got the money, brought the check up to the lawyer. So then we moved out, bought this place. Was it a good business? Oh, yeah, it was a nice little place. It was a small place, but it was good business. Cassette 2, side 2, inner boogie. So we sold about 11, 12 barrels a week, you know, draft beer. And then it got so that beer got bad, so consumers won't handle it no more. So then we had to change beer, you know. Then we put blads in, you remember blads at that time. And they wanted us to change the beer. They put blads in, you remember blads at that time. They wanted us to take consumers' beer, Burgermeister or whatever they call it. Oh, they have a beer? Oh, yeah, they got it. Consumers? Oh, yeah, they got it. Where they make the beer, over in Warsaw, some place. Was it in Wisconsin? No. You mean over in Poland? I don't know just where it's at, but they got their own. Burgermeister was the one. They must have had some, so much money in it. So the consumers, they have their hands in everything, on one. Oh, yeah. Le Claire Hotel, they own it off. I don't know if they sold it yet or not. No, I don't think so. So then we moved out, and then we looked around. My wife, she was out during the day and looked for some place. We had one out in East Moline on 7th Street, a nice little four-room bungalow, you know. But I couldn't get in for six months. They was building a house, and they wouldn't get out of there before six months. Then my wife, when I come home from work one night, she'd been up here, you know, and seen this place. So I went with her then and looked at it, and we bought it. It was kind of run down, you know, and everything, but $8,500. And we paid cash for it, you know. So we've been up and putting a lot of money into it. But you didn't want to continue with the bar business. There was too much... Yeah. So I got rid of it. So that guy bought it. So were they drinking mostly beer then instead of whiskey? Well, beer and whiskey, yeah. Beer and both whiskey. Yeah, and wine. How about the Swedes now? Are they different than other nationalities? Like the Belgians, they drink a lot of beer. Oh, yeah. They like the beer, but... They don't drink the whiskey. Well, some of them do, but mostly beer. But the Swedes, they drink the whiskey. Yeah, they drink everything. Yeah, we had good business down there. So they come in there and cash the checks then? Oh, yeah. Every Friday? Yeah, every Friday. So there was a weekly check at that time? Yeah. And when you started out down there, did you have an envelope with cash in it, or did you get a check? Where you were paid, do you remember? Oh, that was a check, yeah. A check? Oh, yeah. You never received an envelope with money? No. No, that was all checks. The time was gone. Yeah. We had to go to a certain place. When I first started down there, we went to a certain place and got our check, you know. Had to stand in line sometimes at noon and get it. But then after a while, they changed it, and then they come around in the shop and paid you. Paymaster, they call him. He gives you the check, you know, go from one to another one, paid off. So you didn't have to spend any time in the lunch hour then? No. No. So, but I liked Dears, boy. Dears was good to me, and I sure appreciated from them because they were really good. They've been the backbone for Moline and Quarceres? Yeah. Yeah. John Dears started that. Did you ever go up to, between here and Rockford, what do you call it? Grand Latour? Yeah, Grand D'Huot, yeah. Very good. And he got a monument over there, you know. That's where he started his first plow. That's right. He moved down the river. Yeah.