 Yes, we have September 30th, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Edwin Nestander in Omaha, Nebraska. And he was born 9th of July, 1902, in Leed, South Dakota. Your father, now, he was born Jan O. Nestander. How do you pronounce it in Norwegian? Nestander, just like you would in Swedish. And he came from Norway. He came from Lesche, Norway. And that was in the late 1890s? Yeah, yeah. Prior to that, his uncles had come over and settled in Minnesota, or in Fairfax County. Or, not Fairfax, but Renfro County or something like that. And anyhow, it was pretty close to the town of Fairfax. You know where that is? It's roughly around the... A little west of Minneapolis, I think. Yes, of Renfro. And he worked for them there for a while. And he had another uncle that had come over here and started on working for the railroad when the Northwestern Railroad built the road from back east to Sioux City. And he was with them from Albert Lee, Minnesota, all the way into Sioux City. And then he, of course, was laid off because the railroad was finished there, that far. So he decided then that it was right during the Gold Rush, and it was after the Custer Massacre. And they had that big Gold Rush up there in the Black Hills, in Leed. And so he went there, and he worked for the Holmstek Mine. And I guess he worked long enough to get his pension. And then he left that job, and then he left the job, and he became a commissioner, a street commissioner of the city of Leed. Well, my dad, in the meantime, had decided he wanted to get in on that, so he went up to Leed. But an interesting thing was that when Uncle John came from Sioux City, he bought himself a Sharps rifle. That's one of those old.45-70s, big old Buffalo gun. And he carried it all the way down on the train to Omaha. And then from Omaha, why, then they took the train west on the New Union Pacific, and they went as far as Sidney, Nebraska. Do you know where that's at? I know where it is. Well, that was the closest they could get to the Black Hills. Then they took the stagecoach from there on up to Crawford and Chadron, and on up into the Black Hills from there. But it was all stagecoach. And he carried that, and I finally got it years and years later after he went one time when I was up there to visit him when he was cleaning out the tool shed for a scrap drive during the war effort. I think it was World War II. Yeah, I know it was. World War II. And so here this was laying on top of all that old plow shares and all that old junk that accumulates around those ranches. He was ranching. He was ranching, yeah, outside of Van Tassel, Wyoming. What was his name? His name was John Nastanda Peterson. Peterson. Yeah, well, the way that happened was when he got over here to check in, and the immigration people were writing it up. They didn't care what they put down, I guess. But anyhow, he said his name was John Peter Nastanda. Peterson Nastanda, son of Peter Nastanda. So that's how he got it because he was the son of Peter Nastanda. See, that's the way they got their names. And he kept that name, though, Nastanda Peterson? Well, they added it in the official record, and he just carried it on through. And his kids to this day and grandkids all carry the name Peterson. So he came up there and also during the same time your father was there? Well, he came many years before Dad got there because, you see, that's Dad's uncle. He was my great uncle. And then Dad went to work. I guess Uncle got him a job in the gold mines up there, and he worked there for 20 years, and then they had a strike. And what he was doing, he was gathering the gold off the mercury plates on the condensation apparatus that they had for after they crushed this rock. Why, then, of course, it runs in water, you know. And mercury has an affinity for gold, and they coat the plates with mercury, and any real fine particles coming right close to that would be magnetically attracted, see? And so that's the way they got it. So what was his job then? His job then was to, he had to scrape those plates, take that gold and mercury, and take it up to a little laboratory where they had their, and then he had to distill it. And then when they distilled it, the mercury would vaporize, and they'd cool it on down, and they'd keep the mercury, see? And what was left in the retort... Was the gold. Was the gold. Did he mention at the time about the dangerous job? They said mercury is very bad if you have a sore, for instance. Well, mercury is bad if you get it in your system, yeah. He was never ever... Well, I don't think so. Of course, I didn't know very much about Father. Anyhow, he married my mother, her sister, run a boarding house up there. In Leeds. In Leeds, yeah, and she was working for her sister after she came over, see? And she came alone? I don't know whether she came alone or whether she came with Alma, my aunt, or one of my other two aunts. But I had three aunts and grandma, see? And grandma came over with one of the girls. But Hulda, one of the others, she stayed in Sweden. And she married a fellow there. On Ulan. Yeah, on Ulan. And he was a refugee from the German... Well, he was a German war baby. For World War, see? One. And let's see, where was I? You mentioned your mother started to work for her sister in the boarding house. She worked for my aunt, Emma, in the boarding house. And that's where she met Father, because my dad boarded a room there, see? And so it was... She was married to a Swede by the name of Bloom. Emma was. And he ran this boarding house. And they fed them and all, and all that, see? So eventually, why, he married her. And she had four kids. Bertha, who was the oldest. And then there was Palmer, who was a Lutheran preacher, finally. And Ruth Ingeborg. And me. You're the youngest. I'm the youngest, yeah. So all four of us... Well, Mother died of... Mother died of... Kidney... The kidneys failed on her, or something anyway. And she had kidney trouble, and she died when I was six months old. And my dad tried to keep us for three months, but of course, working at the mine, and then with four kids, it was an impossible job. Of course, one of the girls could have... But they were not old enough to be... Oh, no. My sister was about four and a half years old or five years old when Mother died. You all needed supervision, huh? Yeah, see? And I came to the orphanage then. One of the sisters from the orphanage, or the institution, this Lutheran preacher out here at... Lutheran? No, no, this Lutheran preacher in Leed. Yes. There was a Lutheran church there, Swedish Lutheran church. Yes. And he's the one that contacted them down here at the institution. And I guess he had heard that there was an orphanage connected with it. So they sent one of the sisters, one of the young sisters, up to Rapid City, South Dakota, and picked us kids up. All of you? All four of us. All four? Yeah. And they brought us down here, and like I say, I was the youngest, and it was right after they'd started the orphanage. They'd started the orphanage in 1900, I think, they'd built it. And we were one of the first kids that were there. So they were able to keep even a six-month-old baby there. Well, they did it. The Deaconesses? Yes. I'd never be able to repay them what they did for me or for my brothers and sisters, or any of us kids, for that matter. So up there in Leed, it was impossible for your dad to get a girl to help out because there were sure to come women up there. Oh, yeah, sure. There weren't very many women there because... Because it was too far away from anything else. Well, yeah, and see, and a lot of these guys were single, almost all single men. Most of the women didn't want to, you know, take stagecoaches and go up across country. It was Indian country, so a lot of them were afraid of it, too. So you came away then with your sister and your two brothers and two sisters? No, my one brother and two sisters. Yeah, one brother and two sisters. All together. So you came then to this home, and how long did you stay there? During your school years? I stayed until I was 18 years old. The day I was 18 years old, they released me. At this orphanage home? At the orphanage home. Now, my brothers and sisters didn't stay that long because they were older. So they were adopted then by others? No, no, nobody was adopted. They wouldn't adopt anybody unless the father would consent. So your father didn't want that to happen? We didn't know. We didn't know anything about him. I never heard from him until I was 16 years old. So you had no idea where he was then? No. They didn't tell you? Well, they didn't know. They didn't know. At least they didn't know in the orphanage home. They might have known up at the office in the institution, see, I mean at the hospital. But, because my dad said that he sent money for us kids. And my impression was that he never done anything for us. But he put me straight on that when I was out to visit him. So you saw him then when you were 16? No, when I was 16? I was already working. I went to work when I was 13 years old. At the home or at the institution? No, outside. Outside? Yeah, sure. I drove a delivery wagon for a grocer. And then I went to school during the school year. See, that was just during the summer. In the regular public school? Yeah, until I was 13 years old. How about now when you started school at six or seven? Did you start at the orphanage? I started at the orphanage there, at the public school. No, at the public school, Bama's Park School. And I was five years old. I can remember the day when they took me down. There was a girl there who was one of the kids that came to the orphanage. She was about 15 or 16 years old. And I was five years old. And another little girl whose name was Ellen Swanson. She took us, one in either hand, and walked us down the street, down to the Mammoth Park Public School, and put us in the kindergarten class. Now, I don't remember anything about the kindergarten class, but I can sure remember walking down that hill with her. So did you stay together with your brother and two sisters? Well, no. In the orphanage, as soon as Palmer finished, as my brother finished grade school, they came to him and asked him if he would like to be a preacher, if he would like to take up the ministry. Already at grade school? Yeah, sure. They wanted to be sure that, you know. So then they decided that they would send him to the academy in Wahoo and to the college in Wahoo. So he went to high school in Wahoo, in the academy there. Then he went to the college for a couple of years, preparatory, before going over to Rock Island, Illinois, to the seminary. Augustana. Augustana. And then he was ordained, finally. And then married. And then he married a Florence Westerberg, a Chicago girl. And he took a charge here in Omaha of Salem Lutheran Church. On the South Side? Yeah. So he must have shown some talent. Oh, he was a... Being able to read. Oh, yes. He had a personality, really. He was gifted. Very gifted. How old were you when you understood you had a brother and two sisters? Did they tell you at an early age? Or when did you know that you had two sisters and a brother? Well, they were there with me at the orphanage. So you knew that you all came from the same family? Yeah. My brother was there in the orphanage there until he graduated from grade school. So you always played together and stayed together at the orphanage? Yeah. Yeah. But my sister Ruth Ingeborg, she died when she was four years old there. Oh, I see. She got a hold of something. I don't know. She died in convulsions, and nobody seemed to know what happened. But anyhow, she died. And she's buried out in the forest lawn out here now. And so is my older sister, but she became a registered nurse. They sent her. She worked. We didn't see much of Bertha. Anytime I say sis, it's Bertha because I don't even remember hardly Ruth. Because she left. Well, she died when I was two years old, see. So sis... This is your older sister, right? Yeah, that's Bertha. Bertha, in the meantime, as soon as she is big enough, they brought her over to the sister's home to help with Sister Ida there, who was the cook. And she worked in the kitchen there with Sister Ida and waited on the tables and all that, you know. I don't think she was over 10, 12 years old when she went over there. I know she wasn't. And she stayed there for a number of years, and she said she wanted to be a nurse. So Sister Ida, who was a great friend of hers, saw to it that somebody was contacted at the Emanuel Hospital in Portland, Oregon. And so they sent her there. They gave her the fare and enough, I guess, to get along with, you know, for pen money until she got out there and was registered in, see. And so she stayed there until she got her RN and then worked there for a while after that and then finally came back to Omaha, went to work at the Emanuel Hospital here as a laboratory technician and also as the X-ray operator. And this is in the early days of X-ray, you see. So finally, when the state of Nebraska passed a law that every hospital in the state had to have accreditation, they had to be accredited. In other words, they had to meet certain standards. Anybody, any technician had to have a license or a degree in that. So the hospital came to Sis and asked her if she would go to St. Louis. They would pay her, pay her fare, take care of her down there and see to it she got this training. And I think it was only for about, it would only take her six weeks or something like that. And they wanted her to do that. And she wouldn't do it. She said no, she wouldn't do it. She was stubborn. She didn't want to. I don't know why, but she probably felt that, well, she'd be the oldest one in the class and all this. And it would feel kind of, well, I don't know. Sis was awfully quiet and a lot like the old man was. He was awfully... See, when I left the orphanage home, I had worked at a garage down on 30th Street during the summer. And then one summer I got a job from T.G. Northwall Company. That was a Swedish outfit here. And they sold farm implements. And the president took a shine to me and insisted that I go to school. And he says, no, school's going to start and you've got to go to high school. I had my eighth grade education. And I said, okay, I'd want it to. So he goes up and they had told me that I wasn't going to go to school. So he went up and contacted the... Well, Lindberg, who was the director of the institution, you remember him? You remember hearing him? Yes. P.M. Lindberg. Yes. And he had died just prior to that. And they didn't have a new man appointed yet. And the assistant was in charge, a Reverend Carlson. And he came up, Hype called Carlson, and anyhow, he either went up there or else on the telephone, sold Carlson on the idea that I had to have that education. So Carlson says, fine. So Hype says, well, it's all right. So I got home the orphanage way. I went to school. I started down at Central High School and was there probably less than a week. Carlson left. Carlson, in the meantime, had gone. And because this arrangement was made before school started, see? And then Carlson had left the institution. And so there wasn't any director or any assistant director at all. They had another preacher there that was an assistant pastor, and he probably took care of what work he could. And anyway, why, anyhow, this sister, who was sister superior at the time, she never wanted me to go to school. Why? She says, a big hulking boy like you, you don't need any education. And so she made me quit. She pulled me out of school. And I went down. She says, you go down and get yourself a job. So I went down and I found a job with Hudson Manufacturing Company. And I stayed with them about two, three years. And when I was afteróno, I stayed with them until after I was 18 and released. And then I went down to a boarding house. And I stayedó So you left the Orphanage Steering Company? When I was 18, yeah, oh yeah, I just turned me loose. Yeah, I was on my own. But now this high school, if you had started, had there been a special cost down to the Orphanage, do you think? No, no, no, no cost after all. Just the idea that youó She just didn't believe in education. There was a lot of people that way at that time. Did many of your classmates go to high school? Very few. Very few? Yeah. All of them work? All went to work, most of them. See, that was a very poor neighborhood at that time out there. Was that a Swedish neighborhood then up there? No, no, no. This was a Swedish institution in a mixed-up neighborhood. Oh, I see. Yeah. But did it have earlier been a Swedish neighborhood though? No. No, not particularly? No, not particularly. Why did they settle right there though? I thought there wasó The reason they settled there was because Fogelstrom got the land cheap. Have you read the history onó Yes. It'll tell you in that centennial thing. He got the land cheap, and then they bought more up there later on. They added to it. They bought some residences later after the residence had been built. But there was nothing there when they started but a cornfield. And in 1901, I believe it was, they built the orphanage after they had built the original hospital and the sister's home. Then the orphanage came along. Then the orphanage, yes. There is a drawing at Fontenelle Home. Yeah. I don't know what time period, but you probably know where it is. You have the hospital, you have the orphan's home, and you have theófor old-aged peopleó Yeah. And you have a greenhouse, and you have the director's home, and you have the deaconess' quarters. Yeah. Was that according to what it actually was? Was it like that? Oh, absolutely. They had all those buildings? Well, they built them. They didn't have them all at once. They built one at a time. Is there from about 1910, then, you think, that painting or drawing there at Fontenelle? Oh, I don't know, but I've gotóI think it's in that record. They seemed to have a tremendous layout, and it all materialized then over the years. Well, no, theyó It took a long time for them toó Oh, yes, it took a long time. The first buildings that were built out there wereó The hospital. The hospital itself. And the sistersó Deaconess' homes. Deaconess' homes. Well, as deaconesses stayed at the hospital to start with, they didn't have only maybe half a dozen sisters. And they were also nurses then? They weren't nurses, none of them. They were not? No. They were girls who decided that they wanted to become connected with the Deaconess Association. They wanted to, you know, contribute to society. They didn't want to get married. They were almost like a nunnery then? Oh, yes, almost exactly like a nunnery. So none of them got married then, of the old-time nuns? Well, once in a while, one of them would quit, you know, and then go get married. I know several of them did. As a matter of fact, the sister superior, Sister Annette Flintó Now, she was the one that came out to Rapid City, South Dakota, and picked us kids up, see, and brought us to the orphanage. She was just a new girl there then. But eventually she became sister superior. And when Lindbergh's wife diedó she died prior to himó he married her. Oh, I see. Yeah. So their responsibility was to keep the orphanage home going to them? Oh, yes. The Deaconesses. Oh, yes. They were in charge. Oh, yes, sure. I'll show you some pictures. Did you call them a mother, any of them? No. How were you brought up then? Like any other institution, it's institutionalized. It's regimented. And there were good days and there were bad days. I mean, there were times when we didn't go hungry, but we just didn't get everything that every other kid got. Were they strict? Oh, yes, very, very strict. You couldn't go outside the yard. Now being a little baby, growing up there, six months old, you needed more care, you know, to be carried around. That's right. How did they do that, though? Did they just leave you there? No, no, just like any other home. So they took care of you just like a mother? Well, as good as they could, considering at one time they had 45 kids there, and some other times, why, there'd only be a dozen. Was there many at times? Oh, sure, small ones. All the way from six months or five months or some of them, even just newborn babies that were born in the hospital, see? And then some of them that were going to school, see, eighth grade. Were you many in one room? We were four in our room. But not your sisters and brother, though? You were never together in one room? Oh, yes. Palmer and I slept together, and Oscar and Carl Peterson slept together in the other room. That's the four. The room was big enough for two big double beds, and that's the way we slept. That's the way we lived there. And in the dining room, why, they had two long tables that were as long as from here overó well, it must have been 16 feet long, and all oilcloth covered, see? And kids would just sit around there, see? We all had our own places, and we all had our own numbers. My number was eight. I don't know how they got eight, but maybeó They called you by number, then? No, no, no, no, no, no, no. But then they gave you a number, and that was your place. Number eight was your place. And then you had a box up in the closet upstairs that was on the wall. It was all petitioned off, and it had a number eight on it. That was Eddie Nestander's box for his clothes. When they came back from the laundry, it was my job to put them in there, and then when I wasó after a bath, we changed clothes. Everything was right in that oneó I think they called it a fack. Fack, yeah? Yeah, a fack. It was Swedish, then? Yeah, sure. Did they talk Swedish quite a bit? Oh, sure. I could talk Swedish before I could talk English. There was all Swedish spoken there. Yes, alló That is wható The girls that came over, most of them were immigrants from Sweden, right fresh from the boat, you know. Were some of them nice, though, that kind ofó Oh, wonderful. Some of them, wonderful. And others, of course, you have human nature to contend with even in that sort of an institution. Well, I suppose so many kids, you alwaysó There was always some riskó Oh, yeah, sure. And then it wasó They had to have discipline, and theyó Well, they enforced it. Did they call you by the first name, then, Edvin? Edvin, yes. And then you had to learn to sit still at the table and say your prayers before you start eating. Yes, yes. And it was religiousó Very religious. We hadó We said a blessing and a thank you afterward, and before each meal. What kind of prayer? Well, the first one was, Guði guðvälsingnum áttun ámin. That's all? Very short? Yeah, that one was short. Did you say it in unison? Oh, yeah, everybody in unison. And then when we got through it, it was, Tak guði guðfyrbautn ámin. Then we hadó Of course, we had our catechism lessons, and you had toó You had to learn them. Thursday night was set aside after supper. You couldn't go out and play, even after you had the dishes done. We did the dishes. I'd wash the dishes. Everybody has to do their own dishes. No, no, no, no, no, no. I washed all the dishes, and some of the kidsó Then there was one that took them out of the hot rinse, and the others that wiped them, and another one or twoó Sight two, continuation with Edwin Stander, Omaha, Nebraska, sight two. So, but between eight or six months and up to about five, you didn't have to do anything. Oh, yes, you had to do things. They taught you to do certain chores. Oh, sure, certain chores. You hadóIf you could doóIf it was possible for you. Some, of course, there was crippled kids in there once in a while, too, and they couldn't do it. But we had to especially clean the floors. We had to make our own bed. When I was five years old, we had to make our own bed. And there was two of us that slept in that bed, and one would have to get on one side and one the other, and you'd pull everything back, stretch out your sheets, and then pull the quilts and the sheets together and then put the spread on. And it was done before breakfast in the morning? Oh, absolutely. And you did your ablutions before breakfast. You brushed your teeth, and my toothbrush hung on peg eight. My washcloth hung on peg eight. Soó Were they specific about the cleaning or taking a bath? Oh, absolutely. It was compulsory. Did you take a bath every day? No, no, once a week. Once a week. Yeah. And we had a bathtub, one bathtub for the whole bunch, so you couldn't take it every day. Did they like to take baths? Oh, no, no. They screamed? I never liked to take a bath when I was a kid. It wasn't until I got a shower that I liked to take a bath. But like every otheró But you had to. Nobody could skip it. Oh, that's right. You had to take a bath at the end of the week, and you were right in line, practically. They had a specific time set for you to take a bath, just like they have a specific time set for my wife up there at the Fontanelle home. She has to have a bath every Tuesday morning, and maybe one other day. I don't know. So that'sóit was like in the military then? Uh-huh. Like I said, it was regimented. Very much regimented. They had to be. How did the day start? We would get up in the morning. They would wake us in the morning aboutó probably 5, 36 o'clock. That early? Oh, yeah. Sure. And then you'd have to wash up, put your clothes on, dress, get your bed made, and the room straightened out, and you'd close onó When you were small, did your brother help you in the dress, or did you haveó I don't know. You don't remember that before 5 or 6? No. No. The only thing I remember when I was 5 or 6 is the day I started school, like I told you. Cemented in your memory? Yeah. I remember that because I didn't want to go to that school. And she had to drag me practically all the way down that hill. I never will forget it. So then you had breakfast andó Yeah. We always had breakfast. One of the girlsóone of the older girls in the orphanageó had the job of making the cereal. And they had a big double boiler that was that high. You know, after the pot that went down into the lower pot, like that there, the whole thing was about that high. And she could just barely just see in there, see, when it was on the stove. And there was hot cereal in every meal? Oh, yes. Oatmeal? Oatmeal and cream of wheat. Cream of wheat. Yeah. Or not in cream of wheat in those days. They called it farina. Farina. And then milk? Yeah. We got milk. Oh, yeah. Sure. You didn't have any bread then for breakfast? Oh, yeah. We gotóyou got a piece of bread or two pieces of bread if you wanted it. Yeah. You could eatóyou know, when things were plentiful there, whyóyou got a lot to eat. All you needed. All you wanted. That was never skimped. But then after breakfast, you didn't get anything until lunch? There was no milk and cookies, do you remember? No, no, no. There wasn't anyó In between? No. Well, when we'd come home from school at three o'clock, maybe we might get a cookie or might get a cracker or something. So you were bigger than you were growing. Yeah. Yeah. How aboutódid you have lunch with you at the school then? We'd come home for lunch. It was only two blocks away, see. I see. Yeah. We'd come home for lunch, and usually for lunch, it'd be a soup or a velling or something like that. Oh, velling. It's a Swedish thing. I guess it's gruel you'd call it here. Yeah. I see. And then the big meal was there at night then? Dinner? Yes, more or less, except on Sundays and on Saturdays. It was noontime. Noontime. So what did you do now for activities of play and things like that? Well, we just likeó Did you do that? Oh, yeah. Of course, you had a lot of kids to play with, you know. Did you have any toys? Did they bring youó Oh, yeah. At Christmas, we would getóthen some people would donate toys, you know. Everything was donated. Everything we got was donated. There was people that saw to it that we had a barrel of apples at Christmas time. But you never had any cash, no money? Oh, no. You could never buy anything yourself? Oh, no. Never had any money. I remember when I wasóthis was probably when I was about 14 years old or so. They had moved in another residence and moved it east of the orphans' home. They moved that east and then they remodeled it. They didn't do very much remodeling because it was an ordinary residence and they couldn't. But they put it up on a new basement and fixed it all up. It was nice. And I was assigned to a little tiny room up there on the north side of the building. How old were you then? Well, I wasóI guess I had that room for a couple of years. I was probably 16. I see. You had moved away from locker number 8 then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You were more or less on your own then? Did you have your own room? I had my own room. It was a little bit of a room. It was only room for a single bed and a dresser and a chair. And that was it. And then there was a closet in there. It was a storage room, originally intended as a storage room, I think. Anyway, that was my room. And they had us boys over there. See, they'd movedówait a minute. Yeah, they'd moved all of the boys except oneóthey had one girl over there, one of the older girls. She was across the hall from me on another room. And she was rooming with another girl there. That's right. Anyway, that was called the annex. And thatóI will show you where that is. So how long did you stay there then? You were 16 when you got this room then for yourself? Yeah, until I was 18. And then they released me. Were you still under supervision that you couldn't go out, for instance, in the evening? Oh, no. When I got to be 16, 17 years old, I didn't have to particularly ask for permission. But then I was watched and controlled, and that's naturally. They were responsible for me. But you could go out on town, for instance, andó Oh, no, I couldn'tó You couldn't do that? No, no, no. I couldn't leave the place at night. But, you know, when 16-year-oldsó Not unless I got specialóyeah, if I got special permission to go somewhere, it's just like any other family. You couldn't tomcat around like a lot of people do, you know. Yeah, but how about the other boys? When a bunch of boys come together, there's always someone that's figured out something. Oh, yeah, sure. We had the boys up there, too. Now, you take Lindbergh's kids. He had four or five sons. And then there was the old lander, the assistant pastor, his boy, and my brother and Oscar Peterson and a couple of more. So they all got in cahoots, you know, like any other kids would. But never got in any trouble. What kind of reprimands did they get then if you did somethingó Oh, I got spanked plenty of times. They were spanking you? Oh, sure. I got spanked plenty of times. Sure. So there was a lot at that time, then, too. Did they do any good, though, you think? The whippings? Yeah. No. No, I don't think so. I don't know. Well, I knowóheck, I know there were times when I had to spank my kids, and I did. Oh, it felt terrible afterwards, but then I spanked them. But I don't think the sisters up there ever felt terrible. Oh, the sisters did the spanking? Oh, yes. They didóall of themóthey did. They controlled the operationóI mean, the sister that was in charge of the orphanage. There was no man in charge then? Oh, no. The only man in charge up there was the superintendent or the director. And you never saw him or talked to him or anything? Oh, yeah. You'd see him around there, but then he'd never come over, and he wasn't anybodyó Wasn't it strange to grow up with all the women around? Well, yeah. Did you have respect for them? Oh, yeah. Sure. Some of them I loved. Some of thoseóSister Hulda, for instanceóoh, she was a peach. So she was kind and helpful? Yeah. Lots of them were just wonderful. And then there were some that weren't so wonderful. You know, that's the difference in human nature. Is this thing on? No. How about the vocational training, for instanceówood shop or any kind ofóin the greenhouse, for instance? Yeah. Well, I spent all my summers working in the greenhouse. Was that big greenhouse? Well, it wasn't a big one. It was a regular greenhouse, probably a double-section one. And it was probably 80 feet long, and it had a lean-to greenhouse on the one side. Was that only for flour and ornamental vegetables? No. That was for vegetables, too. You betcha. So you were self-providing then for theó Oh, yes. Sure. Always up there. We had gardenóUs kids worked the garden. We'd pull the weeds, and we had to do the watering, and we had to do the hoeing. In a lot of casesónot all of itóbut then it didn't hurt us. Us boysóthe girls didn't. Who was in charge of that? Didn't you have a nurseryman? Yeah. Sure. There was a man by the name of Bloom. His name was Linus Bloom. He was a brother of the Alfred Bloom that's shown here that gave him the Bloom Hall. That was the wealthy Bloom family? Yeah. And he was the florist, and he was a good one. He was formerly with Mrs. Jocelyn of the Jocelyn Castle. Oh, I see. And I guess they hired him when the old man died. And I guess Mrs. Jocelyn didn't want him anymore or something. Anyway, they hired him, and he had the greenhouse built, and he ran it. He took care of all the lawns. Us kids had to cut the grass. Pushing those lawnmowers, you know. There was no motorizedó No. No. Of course, we didn't need to do it at the orphanage. Us kids trampled the old grass dead, you know. And then in the wintertime, did you shovel snow then? Oh, yes. All the walks had to be shoveled. I didn't have to shovel most of them because we didn't have the time for school, you know. But anyway, I know I had to do the orphans' home, both on the north side and on the west side. See, the orphanage faced west. And I had to do that shoveling. How about homework now for school? Did you have any help when you came back home? The only help you could get, of course, would be one of the older kids that might have had it in school. But not the Dickinesses? Most of them didn't even haveó They didn't have any?óany higher education. A lot of them had the equivalent of elementary school, and that was all. And some of them didn't have any education. I know that. So they were not trained in nursing or anything? Some of them were. That is, there was one or two that were. Sister Botilda, listed there, she got her training through actual practice in the hospital. That's the way most of them got their training. But none of them were registered or licensed or anything like that. Did they stay on, some of them, all their lives up there? Oh, yes, sure. Sure, they have a special plot out in Forest Lawn Cemetery for the sisters out there, and there's another special plot for the old people's residence who didn't haveó Any funds? Any funds, yeah. And that's out there at Forest Lawn. All those sisters buried in a row, you know, for a long, long row. They had a lot of them. So most of the kids that came there, they were either fatherless or motherless, or both parents gone? Yeah, yeah, or else been abandoned. Abandoned. Yeah. But they were never adopted out? Oh, yes, sure. Some of them were. Sure, but theyó You see, at that time, I think the Nebraska law said that an orphanage, in order to adopt any kid out, had to have the written consent of the parents. Well, they didn't even know where my old man was, see? So what happened when you got 16 and you started to question about your father? Well, I'll tell you something. Is this thing turned on? Yeah, it's on. Well, anyway, my brother, when he went to Oahu, as I told youó Palmer. Yeah, when Palmer went there, somehow or another, he got in with somebody who was a piano accordionist, and he started playing the piano accordion. Now, he was musical before, and he had taken finger exercises on the piano a little bit, so he could play a little bit. But he took this piano accordion, and he made itó That was his pin money, and that's the only money he got when he was there. See, the institution couldn't afford to send him any money. They paid his tuition and his room and board, and then he had to work in the kitchen, and also eat tables, you know, like a lot of kids had to do. Well, anyway, he got out of theó He got graduated from Luther College, and that summer, W.O.W. started broadcasting. And, of course, they had toó There wasn't any national network. Every broadcast station had to make up their own programs, and it all was local, see. So they was looking for localó It was in Omaha. Yeah, they was looking for local talent, and, of course, heóMy brother was a preacher, and he was in the limelight, and that is, he was being a preacher, going to be one. And he just loved it. So they invited him up to play. So he played on W.O.W., the piano accordion. What kind of music did he play then? He played classical, and he played religious music, and mostly classical. He was quite a musician, real good. He toured Europe twice with the Augustana Bunch. And, anyhow, he played this on a particular day there. A woman up in Fairfax, South Dakotaó Well, not in South Dakota, but in Minnesotaó Minnesota. Happened to be listening on a crystal set, see. So she could pick it up then? Oh, if you had enough antennae strung out there and a good enough crystal set, you could. And I guess somebody had given her a pretty good crystal set. And on Tuesday, if the air wasnít too crowded. Now, at night, well, you couldnít do that, because they came in just from all over. You just got drowned out, see. But during the day, your reception on AM was pretty good, that far anyway. And if you had a decent signal and enough antennae, you could pick up the program on a crystal set. And she sat there with those headphones on and listened, and she heard this guy playing this piano accordion, and then the announcer announced that it was Palmer Nastander. And she got to wondering, wouldnít that be Nastander? They had heard that the kids were in an orphanage somewhere, and they didnít know. They didnít know where it was. No, no, we thought we were just the only ones on earth, us kids, four kids. We didnít know we had any relatives, outside of my dad and my mother. Well, anyway, she was listening. She wrote it down, and then she sent a letter down to W.O.W., asking about the piano, the accordion player, and Palmer Nastander. And they gave him the letter, see. And he brought it up there to the orphanage. I remember I was out in the kitchen, watching the dishes. I was doing the washing. And he got the letter and read it to me and said, ìThis is signed by Minnie Uredahl.î You know, the lady. Yeah, Uredahl. And he says, ìShe thinks maybe weíre related.î So then he got busy right away, you know, and wrote to her. And she wrote back, and some of the others up there wrote back. And the first thing you know, why, here was a preacher by the name of Nastander, Peter. And he wrote, and a lot of them. And we found out that we had a lot of relatives up there. But thatís how we found out we had any relatives. Did they mention anything about your father then? Well, they didnít know. They wanted to know where he was. We didnít know. See, we didnít have any idea. So he never kept in contact with the people in Minnesota then, after you wereÖ My dad? No. No. Apparently not, because they didnít know where he was. Now, my mother had sisters in Minneapolis. Yes. And, of course, she wrote to them occasionally. And then Emma, her sister, who was running the boarding house there, kept in contact with her sisters up there. But as far as my fatherís side of the family, there wasnít anything known. I didnít even know about my motherís side of the family. I didnít know about my Aunt Alma. Wait a minute. I do too. Iíll take that back. When I was aboutÖ I would imagine I was probably about 12 years old. My Aunt Emma and Uncle Bloom, along with their two kids, they had sold the boarding house up there and the property, and they were moving to Minneapolis. And on the way down, they stopped in Omaha. And she stopped to see us kids. Now, I think that I was the only one there. I think Sis, at that time, was in Portland, Oregon, and Palmer was in school, either in Oahu or in Rock Island. And anyway, why, heÖ Aunt Emma took me down, me and Uncle Bloom took, and Aunt Emma, took me downtown and bought me a whole outfit, a suit, some shoes, new shoes, and a shirt, the whole outfit. And then she told me a lot about my mother. And then I found out also I had an aunt by the name of Alma. And later on, I, of course, met Alma up in Minneapolis because when I got to the point where I could travel a little bit without, you know, any restrictions, I got to Minneapolis, and I visited them up there several times. But your father, now, you were about 16 when you found out about him? Yeah, well, my father cameÖ Did you get in contact with him, or did he try to get in touch with you? No, he wrote. He wrote? Yes, he had the address, he had all the information, but thatís the first time heÖ Why did he wait so long, many years, 16 years? I donít know. He never married. But he stayed in Lied? No, no. No, no. They had that strike, I told you about. But heíd been there 20 years then? He had been there 20 years. And, of course, they struck, and then they wanted him to go back. And after they broke the strike, and then they wanted him to come back, and he got mad. And he says, well, they wanted himÖ Everybody that came back had to take a physical examination. And he says, I took a physical examination when I started. I donít know why I should take another one 20 years later. And he says, he wouldnít go back. So he and another crony by the name of Bob Nylander, they went to Idaho Springs, Colorado. And thatís where Dad was when he wrote us, and when he wrote me. And he wanted to know if he came to Omaha, if I could find him a job. Because things were really tough in Idaho Springs. The mills and the mines there were all shut down. And you couldnít get any work. So that was during the First World War then? Well, I donít remember just exactly when that was. But I know I was still in the orphanage. I was in the First World War then. Yeah, that was probablyÖ Because the First World War was around 1918. 17? 17, 18, yes. And so he came, and he told me what train he was going to be on and what time. And I went down to the depot down there on the streetcar. And you never seen him before? I never seen him before. I didnít know who to look for or what to look for. I never had a picture of him or anything. And I waited, and I saw everybody get off that eastbound train. And I never saw anybody that looked like he should be my father. So after everybody else had gone, about an hour later, I was still sitting there because I thought maybe Iíd gotten the wrong train. And I inquired several times. And they said, ìNo, that was the train that came in from Denver.î And so after I was wandering around that big train depot down there, and here was another guy with a mustache wandering around looking too, see? And finally he saw me, and he saysÖ He came over and he says, ìAre you Edwin?î And I said, ìYes.î And he says, ìI'm your father.î Were you already big and husky at that time? Well, I wasnít too husky, no. I didnít start to really grow until I was about 16. So I was just starting to grow up, I mean get bigger. I was one of the smallest kids in my graduating class in elementary school. But heíd been looking probably at you before then. Oh, yeah. He thought that you wereÖ Yeah, but I was bigger than he was, a lot bigger than he was. Well, you were. Oh, yeah. Sure, Dad wasnít very big. So you were surprised then? Yeah. So what did he say then when you said yes? Well, we sat down and talked, and I donít remember what we talked about. But anyhow, I said, ìLook, let's go.î So we went out and got on the streetcar. I got his suitcase, and we got on the streetcar, and we went on out to the institution and to the orphanage. Now, I was still living in the orphanage, see. I still had that little room in that annex. And he got himself a room down on Ames Avenue, which was fairly close, see. It was within a mile. AndÖ Who opened up the conversation, though? Did he try to explain where he had been during those years? You couldnít get any information out of Dad at all. He was not a talker. He just didnít say anything. He was very quiet. And you asked him a question, and then heíd answer you. But he never volunteered any information to me at all. I started to ask him several times about Mother, and it was a painful subject with him, you know. He took it awful hard, her death. So he didnít want to talk about it? He wouldnít talk about it much. But I got up to see Aunt Alma, you know, her sister. So you could get information that way. I got the information. And Mother had come over here, and Grandma was staying at Aunt Almaís in Minneapolis, see. Now, can you pick me out in this mess? What happened then? Did he stay in this room for how long? Did he want you to come out from the home and work together with him? No, no, no, no, no. You see, I got him a job. You got him a job? I got him a job. How did you do that? I was working for the Omaha Concrete Stone Company. And what I was doing was shoveling sand and loose cement out of boxcars and that kind of stuff and putting it over the side, you know, and in some cases wheeling it in a wheelbarrow, you know, because he was making these concrete blocks. So he wanted a job, and I talked to theó and this was a Swedish outfitó and I talked to Forsberg and asked him if he knew of a job I could get for the old man. And he said, ìYeah, send him down here.î He said, ìI need somebody to help stack blocks out in the yard.î And Dad did that all summer, and he did that all winter. And then in the spring, why, he got ants in his pants and he went on back to Idaho Springs, Colorado, see? He didnít like this climate here. Heíd put in a hot summer, you know, out there carrying concrete blocks. I donít blame him. But he didnít like the winter. Yeah, but itíd been worse if heíd had to shovel that darn sand. That was a lot worse. You did a harder job than he did. Oh, yes, sure. And you were still living at home? Yeah. Did you go together often and talk? Oh, yeah, you know, heíd carry his lunch, and Iíd have a bag or a lunch box. They fixed me a lunch, and weíd sit down in the noon hour and weíd talk. But you couldnít get much out of it. Did he talk Swedish then to you? No, he couldnít talk Swedish. Heíd talk Norsk. He was Norwegian, you know. Oh, sure. But he could understand it. Did you understand Norwegian then? I didnít understand the Norwegian as good as I did Swedish, but he could talk fairly good English.