 I'm sitting together with Ethel Becker and her brother Wilbert Becker in Moline, Illinois. And Ethel Becker was born 1893, 2nd of April in Moline. And Wilbert Becker was born 1901, 16th of December in Moline, Illinois. And is today 17th of April, 1986. And we start now with you, Ms. Becker, you were born in this very hospital, 1893. That's right. And your father, Victor Becker, and his wife, Anna Charlotte Gillesstedt, they both came from Sweden. Yes. Do you know approximately when they came? Let's see, it must have been 18—let's see, now Mother was about 26 or so, 8 when I was born. So it would be in 20—26 from—let's see, how do you do that? So around 1881 then, your mother. Yes. She came with her parents then? No, no, she was only 18 years old when she came. She and her brother, Gillesstedt, the cousin, she—her brother came. They came at the same time. She was 18 years old and I think Gillesstedt was about 16, her brother. Her brother? What was his name? Charles Gillesstedt. Charles Gillesstedt. And they came to Moline? Yes. Do you know the reason why they came here? Yes, just because—well, we have a kind of a long story that tells how the Beckers happened to come, but that wasn't my mother. It was just—when the Swedes got through with their church— Confirmation. Confirmation. Then my mother had an uncle who was working for a durian company who used to come across Europe to try to experiment with plows. And he said—he'd write a hit. He said, now I'm coming next year to get the young people ready. So he came back and had about 10 or 12 young people with him. From Sweden? And my mother and her brother were—and then they came to this country. And amongst that group that came, two of them were my mother's cousins that came, too. And they used to come over and stay with an uncle downtown until they got work. What was his name? Your uncle's name? Stromberg. Stromberg. Stromberg. I see. And then he—and they lived right on 13th Street and 7th Avenue. And my mother made her a home, and then she went out as a maid and hired out as a maid. So he brought over then 10, 12 people with him from Örebro? Yes. That's right. That was your mother's hometown. Yes. From that area. Was he able to give a job then for the boys, for instance, down at Jandviken? Oh, dear, yes. Deer used to be down at the depot and hired them when they got off the train. So it was easy then to get a job. Oh, yes. It was easy to get a job. So that was your mother's uncle? Yes. He had been there many years then and worked for Deer? Several years. Yes, he was older than my mother. So he was an experienced toolmaker? Yes. What was his name? Well, I don't know. Blacksmith. Blacksmith. Yeah. That's right. So he was in the instrumental division, so to speak. Was he selling plows over in Sweden, you think? No, he'd go to experiment with them. In Sweden? Yes, to work on the plow shares. And Russia. He'd go to Russia and Sweden and experiment with the plows. So they picked up ideas then of how to do it. So that's how your mother came over? Yes. So she stayed with them then for a while? Stayed with them, and then went out and worked in places. And she had two or three other aunts, so between them, you know, how they used to go and help them. So there was a lot of Jellerstätts here in the Molina? Yes. But she—yes. And my mother and father adopted or took into—they didn't adopt them—took in four children that were the children of this Charles Jellerstätt, her brother, that came with her. He passed away and had four children, and they couldn't get anybody to keep house for him. He tried, and they were no good. And so he sent to Sweden for his cousin to come, and before she got here, he died. And here were these four children with no parents, and they were going to put them in the odd fellow home. And a man came and talked to my mother and father, and said, is there any way you can keep them together to do that, because if they get into this orphan's home, they'll be separated. And so my mother and father decided then that they'd take them. So I was five years old, and Will wasn't born yet, when the folks took these four cousins. So we were eight children at the end. Then on top of the eight children that we had here, that my mother and father, we took in four older cousins that came later on. For Sweden. And they roomed and boarded with us. They were what you called brotherhood. Yeah, that's right. We was a gang. So those four cousins now of yours, are they any survivors of them? They've just now passed away. The last, the girl, the youngest girl, she was only three years old when we took her, she just passed away. I see. But otherwise, they lived with us until they got married. So you grew up with them? Yeah. Yes. And after you came, you remember them also? Oh, yeah. Yeah. But we had fun. Well, I suppose you were young once. Yeah. But your mother had a lot of work to do. Yes, she did. So she married, how about her father now in Sweden? What kind of work was he doing? Well, my grand, on the Becker side. No, on your mother's side, we take that one first. My mother's side first. No, Gellerstadt. Well, my grandfather was a cabinet maker. Yes. And then he came, my mother and her brother Charles sent for their mother and father and two brothers later on. So my grandfather, Gellerstadt, came to this country and was in this country too. Oh, he did? Oh, yes. And he lived to be 83 years old. What year did he come then? Were you older or you remember when he came? No, I don't. I was too little. My sister remembers this. She was little. You see, I was her, I don't know whether I was, I was just an infant when they came. Oh, I see. So he came there early. In the 90s then? Yes. And, but my sister says she remembers my grandmother Gellerstadt because she would listen to her when she talked. So they both came then to Gellerstadt? My grandfather and my grandfather. They and two boys. So she and her, she sent for them. So the whole family came over then? Yes. Did he start to work here, your grandpa? Oh, yes. Do you remember him? Oh, yes. I remember him slightly. Oh, yes. He lived until about 1910, I think. So I remember him well, but not my grandmother. She passed away. She was not very well when she came. My grandfather used to say that he carried her to the United States because she was so sick that she couldn't, so arthritic, that she couldn't walk. So he said he carried her around on the boat. So what kind of work was he doing then? Cabinet maker. Cabinet maker. And he tried farming out here by Hillsdale. But I know never was there, but Will was at the farm one time. I went there once. Okay, we can talk about it later with him then. So, and your Becker's I know. It's your father's. Yeah, that's quite a story. The Becker's, my uncle that lived next door and my father were brothers. And my uncle next door wanted to be a doctor. So the boys in the Becker family saved their money, and he was ready to go up to Uppsala and matriculate. And so my father went with him up to Uppsala. And when he went to matriculate, they said, what's your work? And he said, smid. And what was your father? A smid. And what are you? A smid. He says, you go home and be a good smid too. So then he was disappointed, couldn't go to college. So they took that money and came to this country, my father and my uncle next door. My uncle, he was the youngest one in the Becker family. So his dream to be educated in Sweden was washed away. That's right. Of course, he was only, I imagine, 18 or 20 years old when he came. I don't know so much of the other, when they came. But my father roomed and boarded in a house right across the street from my mother's aunt. And so that's how they met. And then through the church. What year did he come over then? I'm not real sure. I imagine I have it in the books I have. I've got our history kind of written down. I imagine there it tells. 1890s. A cousin of ours in Sweden has made up kind of the history of the family. And then I might say this about my father as a smid. All the Beckers were very well known for the way they could work with iron. And it is said that my grandfather, my father's father, could smell of a piece of iron and tell how long it had been tempered. So he was able to smell the iron, you said? Yeah, that's what they say. And then my grand, the Beckers way back came from Germany. We've traced them back to one generation in Germany. We don't know why they went over to Sweden, but I think because they were well known as iron workers. So they were skilled workers then coming in from Germany to Sweden. So your grandfather on the Becker side, he was a smid? Yes. So was my great, no, my great, great, my great grandfather was a German. German. And he was also a smid. And then he moved over to Sweden. Did he come over to this country or did he stay? He stayed in the Huxby. No. My father was, on the Becker side, my father was the only one since him and his brother. And his brother had come over. What happened after your uncle, the other Becker that came with? He was just like my father, he worked down at the shop. At John Deere? At John Deere. And he lived much longer than my father did. He lived until he retired. And he lived next door then? He lived next door. And they had four children, no three was it? Alfield and Rubin and Thurston, well four children. For three boys and one girl. And their son was the one that helped start Strombach Becker Manufacturing Company. Oh I see. So they were companions then, Strombach and Becker. Strombach and Becker. Yes. But that wasn't the Strombach that my mother was related to. They were different? Yes, it's a different Strombach family. They were not related? So you said the one that started the Strombach and Becker? He was the son of your uncle? Of my uncle. Is anyone in that family still living? No, they're just gone. Except the grandchildren, they are still living. They're down in, the one granddaughter, she would be granddaughter, she's down in Texas and the other is in Arizona. So your father and mother then, they married in, are you the oldest child? Yeah, no I wasn't, my sister was older. And my other brother was older, but he died when he was 30 years old. So they married sometime in the 1890s or your parents, 1890s? Yes. Well my parents were married before 1890. It was about 1886 I think that my parents were married. And they built this house then almost? My sister was eight months old when they moved in. To this house? To this house. And he continued to work for John Deere? Oh yes. All his life? All his life. But then one day he got pneumonia and he died at 52 years old. You remember that then? Yes, I do. Oh yes, that was just before I graduated from high school. Our plan was, my sister went to college for two years, then she was going to start to teach and help me through college. But then my father passed away and so mother was left alone, no support except for us teaching. And then what we had, the rumors and borders. She still took in the rumors? Oh yes, they were here quite a while. But she had a tremendous number of children to take care of there. We all did our jobs. Eight children, and then rumors and borders and her husband. There was never any fussing or squalling between us. We just accepted them, they were just as much as our own. So she was a stern lady then? You bet she was. Well not stern in a way that, but we obeyed. That's what my mother said. But you know how kids are, they're running around all over and outside. She was able to, she had no help. No help except, we had girl cousins that came from Sweden that would go out and work and come home here and make their, come here on Thursday afternoons and Sundays, bring their boyfriends along. So for Christmas we always were, for Lutfisk in the evening, we were usually about 24, 25 people. So. Then she had three cows in a barn down there and milked. My mother did. Three cows? Yeah. So you had to milk them or? She milked the cows. She milked the cows? No, none of it, she wouldn't let us learn how. Why didn't she do that, I mean to help you out? No she said she didn't want us to be doing that kind of, we were teaching and of course to start with we were just in school. But the three cows, now that takes a little bit doing it to get hay for the winter time and how did she manage to get that? Built a great big barn in the backyard to keep the cows. But they didn't have a land to plant anything on? No. So she bought then everything for the cows? That's right. Because three cows, that's not easy, they got to have water. I might say, the reason we got cows. So you remember that? Yeah, I remember a little of that. No, my mother broke her arm in 1910 and then we had to sell the cows. But she had an income from that. Frances almost went to college on the milk money. Is that right? So she sold milk then or the butter? She sold the milk? The milk, it was good home grown milk with cream. It was the good fat stuff. But she wouldn't let you then help out? No, no. To do the milking? But my job from the time I was quite little was to keep the lamps clean. Oh lamps? The lamps. I see, there was kerosene? Kerosene lamps. That was your job? And then of course as we got older we had all kinds of jobs in the house. But her beginning, she was not from a farm in Sweden though? My mother was, my grandfather Gellerstedt, he did farming a little bit. Oh he did? Yes. So she had learned then to milk in Sweden? So mother had a little bit of knowledge about farm. She knew how to milk. And she didn't remarry? No. She just kept the family together. And then the four cousins of yours. They were just about, Hattie and I, she was three and I was five. Then the next boy was about eight I guess, seven or eight. And then we had one brother, my brother was that age. And the oldest girl, she was the same age as my sister. Then Kenny Lill came afterwards. So that was really a group of people to feed. How was she able to get food on the table every day? Because everybody was screaming for her. We all did our jobs. What did you have now for breakfast when you got older? Gröt. And that was the beginning of the day? Oh yes, and we had lots of milk. Kavregryskröt? Fried mush mostly. What was that? Fried mush. We had fried mush too. And then you had to wait until, you didn't get anything between breakfast and lunch? No I don't think so. Of course we had good homemade bread too. She did all the baking? And mother did all, she baked rye bread every week twice. And sweet rolls, a great big, I don't know how many dozen, three or four dozen biscuits every week. But we never, oh it was a shame if people had bought bread. Never did that? No we didn't do that. Did you have to bake them? Oh not until I got quite a bit older. And more after mother was gone. She did all the cooking before that really. Although she taught us to do something, do everything too. We had to do our share. So baking, did she make the wrong cake or the loaf? We made the white bread, wheat bread, it was white bread, individual rolls. And then rye bread was in big loaves that we cut up. And when we came home from school I remember so well, we always had to come in, change our clothes, then we sat down at the kitchen table, it was a big round table, and had rye bread with molasses on it. And then milk? And milk. You never drank coffee? Oh yes, we were raised on coffee. So you started early with that? Yeah, we saw plenty of that. Because you couldn't drink too much milk though, because she needed some to sell? Well we had all the milk we wanted. We had lots of rice pudding with milk. Head cheese? Kalbshülte? Yes, head kalbshülte. So she did all that kind of preparation herself, that she bought in the butcher shop? Oh yes, we had a butcher shop at the end of our alley. But in those days we had to buy meat every day because you didn't have a refrigerator. And then you had the icebox out on the porch? Yeah. How often did they fill in that ice? Twice a week? Oh, almost every day, or every other day. In the summer? They'd come by and cut the ice and come in and fill the box. And it was a chunk then, about 15, 20 pounds, or maybe 25 pounds. We had a cart that would hang in the window. So he knew exactly when to do it. When we wanted ice. But the washing now must have been a big chore for her. Yes, it was. Toward the last, we had a washing machine that we ran by hand. We ran it back and forth. But before that it was a scrubbing board? Oh yes. She did it all in the basement then, the washing? No, on the back porch. Back porch? Or in the kitchen. The basement was just a cellar in those days. Later we had it cemented. I see. And then she'd hang it out on the... On the line. On the line to dry it off. Did she have a regular schedule? Wash on Monday and iron? Yes, very regular as a rule. Unless the weather hindered. She couldn't do a big wash on rainy days. Because then we didn't have space to hang it in the house. And she did every week then, washing? Oh yes. She couldn't save up because so many children and so many in the house. She didn't do any washing for the border store? Oh yes. Well, she did. Yes. There wasn't any other way for them to have their clothes washed. Well, I thought they could take it downtown to the Chinese laundry or anything. There wasn't any Chinese laundry in those early days. No? No. I didn't remember of any laundry. No, there was no laundry. No? They all did it at home? Yes. Yes, I forgot to ask you now. You said at lunchtime you had dry bread with molasses on it and a glass of milk or coffee maybe. And then in the evening you ate big meal then? Meat and potatoes. But we had a lot. My mother had lived on a farm in Sweden. She knew. And then too, my mother worked at a family in Davenport before she was married. And she learned an awful lot about feeding. And so we had lots of vegetables. Now my aunt next door, she came over from Sweden and got married the day after she got here. So she never worked here. So she didn't know about vegetables. So they didn't have vegetables the way we did. The kids across the street, we had another family, those kids always used to say, they eat grass. I see. So there was a difference. But we ate lots of vegetables. Did you eat them raw like we do now? No, they were cooked. Everything was cooked? That was before the days of salads. They didn't have salads. So she had learned that from the American family over in Davenport. And she learned to read there. That was always kind of... She worked in a family where they had a little girl that was just at school age, just beginning school. And this little girl, Aunt Annie, the little girl called her Annie, they read together at night from her books. So that little girl really taught my mother how to read. And she used to say, don't say this and that, this and that. So she picked up a lot of language there. And then my aunt next door, my mother, the way they used to take the newspaper and they get together in the morning and read the newspaper together. And that's the way my aunt next door learned to read English. My mother taught her. It took more time for her to learn, I suppose, than your mother. Well, she just had the four children. Of course, Paul was about his age, a little bit older. And did they have any Swedish-American newspapers? Do you remember that? Oh, yes. Svenska Amerikalen? Yes. That was... They had to get together and read that all the time. So she just came across that and they read it together. News from Sweden. Yeah. What church did they join now, your parents? Well, my mother and father, of course, when they came over, it was the Lutheran Church. And my mother, when she stepped off the train down here on 13th Street in Moline and saw this beautiful big church, it was just new, the First Lutheran. So that was wonderful. But then my mother was converted by meeting together with the other housemaids in the neighborhood. There were hired girls in every house that lived up on third story. And one of those girls invited my mother. She says, come over to my room some evening and then we have coffee. They'd call it a coffee pittad. We'll put pittad on the stove after a while. And my mother said they'd get together and they'd talk boyfriends and so on, you know, young girls. She was just 20 years old and 21 and so on. But then she says, before they parted, the girls pulled out of their apron pockets a Bible and they sat down and then they had their devotions and they all knelt around the bed and prayed. And that was new to my mother. And she thought, well, I've got my Swedish Bible too. So she brought her Bible along too. And as a result, she was converted there in Davenport, just meeting with these girls and with the church. And they used to go over to Rock Island. So my mother was baptized in the Mississippi River. Well, she became a Baptist. She became a Baptist. And then my father, living down there right across the alley from the Baptist church, he became a Baptist. So they met at the Baptist church. So he was also baptized in Mississippi River? Yes. Although he never told about it, so I don't know much about it. But my mother, and when they were baptized, they had to ride back in a horse and carriage to Davenport to change their clothes. But it was done in the summer though? Oh, yes. It was done in the summer. And by the way, this furniture originally belonged to a Baptist minister. His wife got so homesick for Sweden that she went back to Sweden. And then my father bought this when he got married. Oh, I see. We've got it covered up. It's a tea over on that side, this chair. So that- It goes back a long, long time. A hundred years. So she couldn't cut it, as we say in this new country. She had to go back to Sweden. Yeah. And they didn't come back. What was the name of that minister? Do you remember? I can't remember it. So that Baptist church was located in Rock Island then? Yes. And that's the first Swedish Baptist church in the world. 1852. In the United States. The mother belonged to that church. Now my father was here in Moline and joined on this side. Then when my mother got married, she came here to Moline Church. So were they married in the First Lutheran Church? No. They were married when my mother brought her mother and father and the two brothers from Sweden. They established a little home down here on 13th Street and about 4th Avenue. Well right behind, right about where Connie's lunchroom is downtown. And they were married at home in that little house. Of the Lutheran minister? Yes. No, no, they were married by a Baptist minister. The Baptist minister of the Moline Church. But your mother was converted? Peterson his name was. When she was working over in Davenport you said? His name was Peterson. So there were quite a few Swedish young people here then at the time? Oh, they had a big crowd of young people. So the maids now working over in Davenport and Rock Island and Moline. Side 2, continuation with Ethel Becker, Moline, Illinois. So they were able then to go to the service on Sunday? Oh yes, the evening service. There's one reason they had the evening service. They'd work Sunday morning and it was Sunday dinner and then they had Sunday evening free. And there was mostly maids and house domestic help. There was a lot of young people. So what did your mother say about the house work? Was it hard for her to do that when she was young? She never complained about it. She didn't complain? No. So she was well groomed and to take care of her own house? Yes. And of course got the new house too. My mother and father had an apartment over on 12th Avenue and 12th Street. So my sister was born over there in that house. So he was able then to build a new house only after a few years? Your father? My father, well of course, he didn't build the house. No, but I mean he had to pay for it. So you were born here, Mrs. Becker, 1893. That was right during the Depression in the United States. That's right. That was a big depression. It was a bad year. That's right. So did they say anything about that? They were harsh? My mother said, no, you could go to the store with a dollar and get enough food to keep you for a whole week. So you could get food and so on. And they had gotten kind of used to it. Men used to be laid off at the shop every summer for a couple of months, I suppose it was for inventory and so on. So they were used to saving for rainy day. What did your dad do then during the summer? Did he go out to work for farmers? No, he never worked for a farmer. They just fixed up things around the home and fixed whatever needed help, work then. So fishing? Fishing. So he liked fishing? Oh, yes. They used to go across the Mississippi River to a little town, Gilbertville, I think they used to call it. And that was someplace across the river from Moline. That was in the wintertime? No, that was in the summertime. In the summertime, they took the boat over? They used to go out fishing. So he brought home fish then so you could— Oh, yes. We had fish a lot. And you know, in those days, potatoes and some meat were enough to make a good meal. My mother was a good cook. She knew what to prepare it. And I remember how she used to—we'd have for supper, we didn't have many different things. But for example, we'd have a big bowl of vegetables of some kind and then maybe some meat of some kind. You had a lot of soups? I don't remember that we had an awful lot of soup. I think we had stew an awful lot. But we had, as I remember it, we had a variety in our meals, too. So like your neighbor said, you ate grass. Yes, that's right. Did you have a big garden then of various things? No, we didn't have much of a— She bought them from the store? Yes. And the farmers used to come in and sell it. Even the milk, they used to sell milk sometimes. But of course we didn't buy that except before we had cows. I remember when we used to go out and buy milk from a milkman. So you were very small then when you ate tomatoes, for instance. Tomatoes? Tomatoes. Do you remember— In the early days we didn't have so much tomato than tomatoes. It was more beans, green beans, as I remember it. Because it was going to take a few more years before you ate them raw. Yes, that's right. They were not common then, too. But we had lettuce quite early and we had cabbage, a lot of cabbage. I remember that. And your mother cut it up and— And boiled it with a piece of pork. It was good in the wintertime, wasn't it? So she had to sell her then, the cabbage. The heads, I mean, saved for the wintertime. I remember that. And we used to buy potatoes in bulk by the barrel. And apples we used to have. And I remember my mother—we used to have a box of crackers like they used to be. And we'd buy a whole big box like a crate, like an orange crate, full of crackers. And that used to—we had a place where we kept that. We could go and eat crackers whenever we wanted to. We could have some lunch on. Oh, I see. What's your tidbits in between the— In between meals. No cookies. No cookies. No cookies. No, we didn't have cookies as kids at all. Ginger snaps we had. And I think we used to buy ginger snaps by the— Pepper cocker? Yeah, pepper cocker. By the case, too. Did your mother bake them for Christmas, for instance, pepper cocker? No, she didn't. It was bread, white bread and rye bread. What did she prepare now for the Christmas season? She bought a big slab of meat or pork or— No, we always had duppegruta. For Jula's supper. Do you know what duppegruta is? That was on Christmas Eve. That was a Christmas Eve meal. And then supper on Christmas Eve, that was lutefisk. How did you duppegruta? Did you went over to the stove or did she put it right on the— We were in the kitchen. In the kitchen. And we'd go to the stove. No, she'd lift the kettle over to the stove sometimes. On the table? Yeah. And then you dipped the bread in there. Was there a special bread she baked at that time? No, it was just the rye bread. Just the rye bread. How about the Christmas tree? Did your dad make one? That we had to use the kuna. In the top? It stood on the floor about five feet high. It was not— Oh, I see. Like a cantaloupe. So your dad had made one then? Well, the one we got, we got with the Jellerstedt children. We had one that Papa made out of wood, but the arms went out and the cantaloupe, they were just straight. But this one that we got from the Jellerstedts had wire, so they curved. And everybody admired our tree because it was graceful looking. So you didn't have a real Christmas tree then? You had this— Oh, no. Not until we were fully grown and together then we got the— Christmas tree. Christmas tree. And you had live candles in it? Oh, yes. Big candles. Eleven candles it had. Eleven candles? Mm-hmm. Why was it eleven? Was there a special reason? That had something to do with the apostles, I guess. Eleven disciples. They didn't count Judas. I think that was what it was. And we used to dance around the Christmas tree, all 24 of us that were here. Did you do the— These cousins all used to come here with their boyfriends and girlfriends for Christmas. So we were 24, 25 people here for Christmas Eve. For Lutfusk too, they all came for supper. They'd get free. So we'd have kind of a late meal that day. We kids had a hard time to wait for the tree when we could get our presents. So you got the presents on Christmas Eve? Oh, yes. And of course, these cousins, these uncles and cousins that came grown up from Sweden that roomed and boarded here, they would have presents for us too. So we really had a big Christmas. A lot of presents then. And they were wrapped up in— Newspaper. Oh, newspaper. Oh, yes. There was no fancy paper. They were just wrapped. And you didn't have the Santa Claus coming with them? No. After we got Will, then we did. I see. So he was more— And he's got a story about the— Oh, yes. That came about later on then. Did she make any special food for Christmas? Now, Ryske's pudding was there, lutefisk, robot pig's feet. Well, we probably had— Head cheese? Oh, yes. Head cheese we had. And they luted their own fisken. And rice. And rice. Oh, yes. Ryske's gröt. Ryske's gröt. Gröt we had for dessert with the fish. And when you sat down at the table, was the prayer read in Swedish? Swedish. Do you remember? Yes and no. We still use the same one. Which one? Yes and no. Words for go. We'll sing the good and what we for, eat and drink for good's word, so for we might. Yes and no, I guess it was. So they would use that. And who read that? The father? All together. All together. So you learned to speak Swedish then, the whole family? We used Swedish pretty well all the time until my father died. When we'd talk at the table, we used to speak in Swedish quite a bit. It was hard for the Jellerstedt children because they had not been brought up quite as much on Swedish as we had. So did your parents stress the Swedish anything at any time that you should learn Swedish? We had the ABC book, a little book that if we'd read the ABCs and a little Swedish stories in them, we'd find some money in the book. But I think that was when we were quite small. So you could look for money every day or once a week or how often? I think just once in a while. But you had to read it? Oh yeah. Did mother read with you or father? Oh yes, we used to, even these uncles that had come from Sweden and roomed aboard here, they'd kind of join the circle. We'd sit in a big circle. In that was the sitting room. This room, the living room, it was only for a dress-up time. We had big doors that closed between there and we could come in here and sit in the good furniture and read our Sunday school lesson. Are you ready to leave, Rose? So the people that came from Sweden then, in other words, they could hardly speak any English and so you had to speak Swedish? We taught them English an awful lot, oh yes. And Frances tells about when she took my, I had one uncle that came from Sweden and then three boy cousins, young men. She was to take them over to see a cousin of ours that lived away from here. Her name was Becker too, before she got married. Frances says she must have said something awfully crazy because she thought that the men would die laughing at her when she doesn't know yet what it was she said. So she was a couple of years older than you? Four years. Four years. And after high school then you continued on, your sister became a teacher. And so did you. Did you go to college or teachers? I went to teach right as soon as I finished high school. You see, I was supposed to go to college. Frances was going to help me. Well then my father died and I knew that there was no way of us taking money. So I, in those days you could go right from high school and teach country school. Did you have to take a test then or? Oh yeah, you had to take a test. The county superintendent would take a test and you'd get, and then you'd have to go out and see these farmers and try to get a job. And I didn't get a job and the summer was going and, but I had a job down at Deere and Company. When my father died, my mother was told by Deere and Company and I, if we can give a job to any of the children, we'll do that. And so I, when I finished high school, I went down and applied, addressing the furrow, the Deere paper. Oh, I see. And so I had a job. You did it by hand? We did it by hand, wrote the addresses. Sixty cents a thousand. Sixty cents a thousand? By hand? By hand. There was no union scale? No, that's right. You could have had a... Well I had just taken, when I finished, was in high school my last year, I took a course in writing, this new muscular movement, and I could, was real good at it. And I made more money than the girls that had been working in the department all right along, because I could write so fast and so plain. And I didn't know anything about killing a job. I didn't know how to write. They'd rather kill you, I mean if you were the... Didn't you get the writer's cramp? No, the other girls used to have to... How many could you do then a day? I don't remember, but I used to make up, I made between twenty and twenty-five dollars a week. So you must have been a fast writer. I was. One day I felt somebody looking at me, and here was one of the head men of Duran Company watching me. He says, I had to come down and see how you did this. I got scared to death when I saw him, and now here's where I get fired. So how long did you work with that? Just this summer. This summer. And then when school started, I cried myself to sleep the first day. And then a week went by, and that weekend a girl, a friend of mine, who had a school out just on the other side of the airport. Somehow, we don't know what scared her or what happened, but she came home after school on that Monday night, and she said, I can't do it. And so her father came over and told my mother that I could have the job if I wanted it. So the next day I got up early and I went down to the courthouse. I didn't go down to Duran Company at all. Did he offer you to continue at Duran Company? She gave up the job. So she hadn't gone through the – she said, you can have it. And I didn't, but I went down to the county superintendent, and when I walked in the door, he says, what are you doing here? She says, I just sent a director up to your house to give you a job. And I swung on my heel and started down on the door, and he yelled, come back here. He says, do you think you can teach that school? I was as skinny as a rail. I was so little and thin. How old were you then? Eighteen. Eighteen. And he says, do you think you can teach that school when Edith failed? And I said, I'm going to teach. And how many students were there in – I had 28. In one room? In one room. And there was – That was a big for a country school. And you never had one class in front of you at any time before? No. What were you thinking? I mean, this is really – Well, I just did it the way I had been taught. We had good teachers up here at Lincoln School. So Lincoln School where you were – Well, we went – – alma mater. That school was built the same time as our house. That's why my father bought these lots. Close to the school. So there was an empty – All around pasture. The cows would graze right outside there. So you got the school then, 28 kids. I stayed there two years. Did anybody tell you what to do now when you faced the kids there? The only thing I had I could ask my sister questions. She had taught two years already. What did she tell you? She used to tell me about the reports that I had to make out. That was really all. I don't know. I just learned it right along. But 28 children, they were different grades. How did you go about – I mean, to teach one grade after another. Did they have to sit and listen then and do their own homework or study? We didn't give homework in those days. No? No, there was no homework. We did it all there at school. Right in the – You see, now you take the – for example, the eighth or seventh grade kids, they had to wait while I taught the other girls' classes too. We used to have a bench right in front of the teacher's desk. And then whatever class was going to come in to recite, they'd come up and sit on that little bench. And then you'd read the lesson or talk over the lesson together. And then they'd go back to their seats when another couple of kids came and sat down. What were they doing then down in their seats when they were waiting for this to go on? They were reading their books, their history and preparing their language or their arithmetic. Now, one of the hard things of the school where I went, there were no records had been left the year before. I had to take what the kids said. If they told me they were in seventh grade, they had gotten to such and such books, I just had to take their word for it. What happened with the records? Did they teach you? I don't know what had happened to the records. I left records, but before me, there were none. And what year was this? 1911. 1911. And that was in – what school was it now? It was just across from the airport. And you – It was in the Orian Ruin? No, it wasn't as far as Orian. No? No, it was this side of Coal Valley. It's very far. You can see – You can see the – From the airport. On the east side of the airport. The south side. The south side. Yeah, the south side of the airport. There was a – there's a road that goes up. They don't use it anymore. It's just that – that was what they called the new road. It had just been cut through there. So how did you mess together out there? Did you have a car or – No, we walked. All the way? Oh, yes, we walked. Every morning? Oh, no. No, I roomed out there. You roomed out there? I roomed out there through the week. It was just weekends I'd come home. I see. So you roomed with the family then? But they tell about the – Sunday, my first week that I was going to go out there, I was to go out on Sunday. I had been out there and talked to the director. They said I could – I said I'd have to have a week off to quit my job at Dern Company. And so that week I waited. And on Sunday when I was going to go out, it was just raining like cats and dogs. And the only way for me to get out there was to call the livery stable and get a horse and buggy and a fellow to drive me out. So you came out in style. Yeah. You probably gave a lot of respect to them, to the new teachers. Well, they all thought – here, they all thought it was my boyfriend. I didn't have any boyfriends. But all week long, Frances got to thinking about it, sending me out with a young man that they didn't know from Adam in a horse and buggy. So she tried to call out. Cranes had the family had a telephone. They had two telephones. And she couldn't get through. So she – they went all week long before they knew that I'd gotten out there okay. But I got there okay. It was almost like emigrating. It was what? It was almost like when the people emigrated from Sweden. They took a long time before they got the news back. That's right. Yeah. A whole week. Yeah. But I had a nice place to stay. A wonderful family where I lived when I was in the country. And the parents to their children, they were – Yeah, they had – Support. Yeah, they had – how many kids did they have? Alma, Alice. Clarence. Everett. Clarence and Everett. And Sonny. Six children. Were they in the same school that you taught? Yeah. I see. We became fast friends. How were you able not to keep in your head, you know, everything straight for so many different grades? Well, they were all straight. You had to be a jack of all trades. I mean, high school teacher and a – Had to make the – sweep the floors and – And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a good teacher. And you had to be a jack of all trades, I mean, high school teacher and a – Had to make the – sweep the floors and make the fire and – Yeah, but the kids helped you with the – Well, Mrs. Crane used to send me – One of the big boys down once in a while. But most of the time, I learned how I'd – I would do my book work as soon as the kids went home. Then while – then I would – as it was getting kind of dusk, I'd let the fire go down and I'd clean the stove out and lay a fire – Ready for next morning. For the next morning. And all I had to do when I came there in the morning was to light a match. And then you had the pail of water and the dipper in it? Oh, yeah. They still used the dipper at that time? Oh, yes. They still used – In the yard and you picked up the water. But the kids could do that, though, bring in water. Oh, yeah. They used to do that. But I never had the kids do the sweeping for me. Well you couldn't necessarily do that. Well, I could, I suppose, but they had to go home and help with the chores. And they had been in all day. It was from 9 o'clock until 4 in those days. It was a long day to keep them busy. But you never had any problem with the respect and – No, I didn't. I had wonderful kids. So how long did you continue out in that school? Two years. Two years. Then I went to a school in South Rock Island where I only had four grades. Was it easier? We were two teachers. Was it easier? Was that easier for you? Oh, yes. I only had four different classes. So there was a strain, then, a mental strain on you to have so many grades and so many kids? Yes, but it was fun. It wasn't like it is now. Would it work today, you think, with the system? Well, there's so many things to get them into trouble. Yeah, I'd hate to teach now. You have to be a pal to the kids. Of course, we were that too in those days. But the parents were supportive of what you were doing? Yes, very supportive. But the trouble was they didn't pay you much to be a teacher? Thirty dollars a month. And I paid ten dollars a room. So if you compare that with what you get from Jan Dier, twenty-five dollars a month, you made more money at the Dier then? Oh, much more. I made as much money down here in a week as I made out there in a month. You had twenty-five dollars a week? At Jan Dier? At Jan Dier. I was making twenty-five dollars. Why did you quit at Jan Dier, then? Because I wanted to teach. All my life, from the day I started school in first grade, I said, I'm going to be a teacher. Well, when you came home with twenty-five dollars, I'm sure your mother was wondering more than once, why did you go to teaching and only bringing home twenty dollars a month? Well, we didn't think so much of the money. I didn't teach for the money. It wouldn't have meant so much to survive to have a few dollars extra. Because you had to help your mother to pay, to help her to survive, I suppose, for your teaching. Did you have to pay something? Of course. You see, these four men cousins and an uncle, they paid room and board. And I imagine they paid pretty good. Oh, I see. So she couldn't... So that really helped my mother keep going. So you could keep your money, whatever you made. I think whatever she made on that, I think she kept the house going with food and so on. And then you continue on in the Moline school system and finally you came in to be a superintendent or a principal in East Moline. Principal in eighth grade. In East Moline. In an eighth grade school. East Moline. We had from kindergarten through eighth grade. And there was a school over in East Moline? Yeah, John Deere. Oh, John Deere. What year was that? 1914 to 1953, was it? Were you continuing in one school or two? I started out at Lincoln School in East Moline. And then in 1929, they had built up the John Deere School to be an eighth grade building. Then I was transferred over there. So when did you become a principal then for the... You know, that's a shame. I think it was 19... I'm not real sure what year it was. I'd been really doing the principal duties without being paid for them. And that year, we had a new superintendent and he decided to pay me for it. So my work didn't change that much, except that I had to have charge of the other teachers. This kind of unusual though with a woman principal. They always had a man. So you were a receptionist? Oh no, in those days, there used to be a woman. We were in school quite a while teaching before they got men principals. They had lady principals. Oh, they had ladies. When we were kids, we always had Miss Moore up here. So you served the school system all your life then? Yeah. You became a teacher and that was a profession you... That's what I wanted to do. Has it been easy? To be teaching for so many years or you got a habit in doing it? No. We, let's see, what year was it? 1929. 1999. The sixth, seventh, and eighth grades were departmentalized. So we each taught one subject. I taught geography and then another teacher taught mathematics, another teacher taught literature. And we were four teachers. No, just three to start with. But we each had a subject and we teachers would go the rounds. So I would teach three or at least three or four different classes in geography the same day. And then maybe on the side teach spelling and reading and some of those subjects. And when the students now came together, did they have a study hour or later on they got homework? They started with the homework schedule. Well, of course, if kids didn't finish their work when the work that was supposed to be done for the next week, they'd have to take it home. But most of the kids had time in school to finish it. So they, oh, I would say, really it's hard for me to say just what year they started carrying, giving homework. But I never assigned homework. It was just if they didn't finish in school what they were supposed to do there. So they never had any home assignment. Then they'd have to take it home. So when they came home, then the students, they were free. Yeah. Until the next day. But kids most of the time in those days had little jobs. I remember when I was in the grades, I used to wash and wipe dishes for a woman who had a boarding house over here. Maybe we'd get a quarter, but that helped. So you have taught thousands of students then in East Moline? Yes. For many years. I don't know how many years it was that a kid couldn't get through East Moline schools without coming to either Francis or me. We signed all the diplomas, eighth grade diplomas, for I don't know how many years it was.