 Right on the arsenal here, I continued the writing then to the old country, which he had kept up for many years. And I started to write to his two sisters that you see here. Both of them were living then. This one in Småland, and this one up near Stockholm. Hagersten. Hagersten is where she lives, and the other one goes down in the old homestead in Kalmarland. So I continued to write to both of them, and they just seemed so happy to get letters, you know, from somebody from their brother's family, because otherwise the correspondence would have been... Do you write in Swedish too? Fairly well, yes. But I have to copy a little bit from the letters I get back from them. I'm not... I can't spell some of the big words. But then what you learned, Otto? Well I learned it from speaking it, and then I have a book from Augustana too, a dictionary that helps me out a little bit too. But these two ladies, when they write back, and of course only the one is living now, they cannot write a word of English, because they were brought up in the old generation. But my cousins, I have some cousins by the name of Wahlberg Kullegård. Does that sound like a Swedish name? Now they live... There's Fogelfors, see? They live in Bryggsgatan 30, Fogelfors, Sweden. And that's where your father came from? That's where my father came from, yes. And then I mentioned some of his brother's children over there too. See there's the old name, Moritz Bum, Eilind Franzén, and Arthur, that was another brother of my father's, and his wife. And Henry, which is on this picture here, was one of my father's brothers, and his daughter's name is Gerd Simmerström, or something like that. You know it better than I do. The reason I have this letter, the cousin wrote to me when the aunt died. Anna. When Anna passed away, yeah. And she wrote to me then to let me know, as a cousin of hers, of Anna's death. And I thought you might just want to scan that over just a little bit, I'm not going to bore you with a lot of letters, but that's what she wrote. And then I swore at her afterwards, I answered. Well, can you read it for me? Well, you saw it when you received it there in the mail. Well, you're going to... It said, Dear cousins, we honour cousins in Sweden for Medalla, Medalla, I can't pronounce it, Medalla, that Anna Elisabeth Bum Kalmar has passed away, passed away, I guess you'd pronounce that, at Högsby Hospital, on February 24, 1985. Is that pretty good? She was buried on Friday, March 1st. So that... A memorial. A memorial should be able to... To take place. To take place. I can't read all of that. To convey your views to us. Yes. As soon as possible. Yes. In other words... Yeah, I'm sitting together with Roy Gustafsson and his wife Barbara in Moline, Illinois. And Roy was born 1922, 26th of May, in Moline, we have today, 25th of April, 1986. You were born in Moline. Yeah. Daddy came to this country in 1910. That's correct. Many years before you were born. Yes. Can you tell me a little bit about his beginning in Sweden, where he came from? He came from Fogelfors. He came from Fogelfors in the Småland area of Sweden, and he was confirmed in the Fogelfors Kyrka. And he was the only one out of his family of several sisters and brothers to immigrate to the United States. The only one? The only one that left home. He never went back. He never went back. And he arrived here in 1910 at the age of 18, and shortly after he took a job at the Deren Mancer Works in Moline, part of the John Deere organization. And he maintained that job and stayed there for some 47 years, retiring in 1957, or I believe 1957. Did he come from a farm? No. His father was in the door business. He made garage doors and windows and things for homes and buildings. And that's what his father did in the old country, and my dad helped him somewhat before leaving home. And I guess the day he left Sweden to come here, his sisters and everybody were there, and they all cried when he left the old country because they thought they would never see him again, which they never did. However, on his 80th birthday here in Moline, many years later, we put through a telephone call for him to Sweden so he could talk to one of his sisters in Småland by direct telephone line. And she just could not believe that it was his voice, the first time she had heard from him in some 60 years. And she kept asking him if he please couldn't come over, come home one more time. And that was quite an interesting little conversation between the two, not having seen each other in all those years. But as it turned out, he never went back, and my mother did not either. She came over on the Lusitania ship, which was later sunk in the early part of World War I, as I recall. And after that, she was afraid to take any type of boat trips, and she was deathly afraid of airplanes, so she would not do any flying. So as a result, neither one of them went back to the old country anymore. So your dad, now when he came, did he tell you about coming to Ellis Island in New York? He didn't talk too much about coming there as much as my mother did. She has a better story on that. So your dad, he doesn't remember too well about the travel over when he came on the boat. Well, yes, he remembered it, but he was tremendously lonesome when he first got here, not having any friends in the New York area. And he finally settled for a short time in Rockford, Illinois, where he had an uncle and an aunt. Who paid for his travel over? Did he do it himself, or did somebody send him money? That I don't know how he was financed for that trip here. I don't know just how that was done, whether his parents loaned him some money or how he got that. That's a very good question, too, but I can't answer that. I don't know how he did that. He came to Rockford, then? He came to Rockford for a while and stayed with the Seabirds, who was an uncle of his, and also was a Seabird. On his mother's side? That would be on his mother's side, yes. And then from there, he only stayed there a short time. He arrived here in Moline at the railroad station in 1910, and he walked into the railroad station and looked around and didn't know anybody. But there was a man sitting there in the station that was watching for other Swedish people to come in at times, you know, and thinking he might know somebody from home who noticed that my father couldn't speak well. So he greeted him in Swedish in the station there and told him where he could stay for a few nights, which was the YMCA in Moline. My father only had his suitcase with his personal belongings with him and couldn't speak any English at that time. So this man turned out to be—his name was Alrik Norby, and they met and later worked together for many years in the same shop at Deer's. In later years, Mr. Norby went back to Sweden. He never married, but he went back to Sweden where he died there in his later years. But they were very good friends over the years because he helped my father get started here in Moline, find a place to stay and so forth. And it was just a coincidence? Just a coincidence in the train station, yes. So he boarded them with somebody? Yes, my father boarded down on Fourth Avenue in Moline in those years. Many of the homes were boarding houses where you could get your washing and one meal a day and so forth. And that's where he boarded along with many other people in those days who had no place to live. So they provided one meal a day? Usually one meal a day for them, and then the lady that ran the boarding house did the laundry for them, too. The breakfast and lunch, they picked up by themselves then somewhere? Yes, that's right. But the evening meal was served at the boarding house? That's correct, yeah. That's right. So you don't know the reason he came to Moline? You heard some rumors about good, plenty of work or anything like that? Yes, I think that was the reason that he knew that quite a few of the Swedish people were settling in this area and some of them were working for Deere already. And in later years, many more came, as you know. So that, therefore, I think that's why he came here, to find a steady job. So he went on to Deere, Mansur. Mansur? Yeah, Mansur. What kind, what line were they in? Well they were building planters, corn planters, and disc harrows, farm equipment. And he took a job there at a bench assembling, putting parts together, which in those days consisted of most of the type of work they did there. And he worked quite steady there until the war came in 1917, and then he was drafted into the American Army and served over in France for about a year, returned to the United States here, and got his job back again. With the exception of the Depression, he worked steadily during the Depression in 1929 through 1932 or 1933. He was out of work for three years. And then finally they called him back like for three days a week again to get started, just to give him something to go on. So we, I was about seven years old during the time of the Depression, and I can recall a little bit of a tough time my mother and father had in those years where he had no job and was trying to buy a home and so forth at that time. He had a lot of jobs though, worked on the farm. During the Depression he had a friend up in Clinton, Iowa who had a huge farm there, and he went to work for him on the farm, picked corn by hand and done the field work and so forth there, and then would commute home on weekends to see us and my mother and my sister and I. And then during the week he would go back to the farm again and work. And stay there. Well he worked for the highway to pay the taxes for the house. I understand that, they could do that. Well you see they lost their home at one time and the landlord told them if they would keep up the principle on the home he would let them stay. At that time they were paving 7th Street here in Moline and below the hill also with horses and the old slip type construction equipment. So they offered all these people like my father and others a job of that type in order to help pay their taxes on the house. So my dad did that. Who had the loan and the mortgage? What bank? Well that was one of the banks in Moline and I really don't know. The landlord had the mortgage. His name was John Weckl, he just lived a block away from them. He came over and told my folks one day, he saw that our children were small yet, and he had a heart enough to tell my dad and mother that if they could keep up the principle and so forth why he would let them stay otherwise he would have to move them out, you know. So that's how we were able to stay in our house and he was able to buy the house back again. So the city helped them to work on the city crew? Yeah it was a city project, yes. And it was a daily job then to? That was a daily job to work on the highway and cut the banks down and so forth and smooth out the road and then they put the concrete in by hand too I guess. In those days they didn't have these popular trucks. Were house owners preferred then to help the house owners to keep their? To keep their homes, yes. Otherwise you see, you know, if you... So did they take one house away from? No, he let the house go back one time where he lived. And the landlord told him that if he would take this work or if he could find work somewhere he suggested this job to him where then he could refinance the house and buy it back again. You understand that? That's what he did. But there were some families that lost their houses? Yes, there were some families in our neighborhood who... Had to walk away? Had to leave, yes. In those years, yeah. They'd go, this is what they paid you, you know. That's right. They just lost everything. They let the house go back, some of them, yes. Whatever they had in the house they lost. And they had to relocate in a rented house somewhere in Rock Island or another town here in order to exist. Was there plenty of houses or apartments for rent during the Depression, you think? I mean, after they were evicted, could they get out easily and into another one? Yes, they could. Because they would also be careful to get somewhere they couldn't pay, of course. That's true too, but they had to take very cheap housing because they didn't have money and the landlord knew that. He took a chance on them that maybe they couldn't pay their rent either, you see. So they had to give up a nicer home for a poorer quality home in most cases. I only know of one or two cases in the neighborhood that did that. But that's the way that went. Now, of course, being only seven or eight years old in the Depression, I can't remember too much of the financial end of it, you know. You see more than the outside a little bit of it. So your mother, she came in 1912? She came here in 1912 at the age of 16. Did she come to anybody on Gloria? They had to have a sponsor, I think, in those days. Yes, each one had to have a sponsor in those days and they had to be responsible for them until they got their citizenship papers. So if you did not have a sponsor in this country, you could not come here. Much different than the immigration laws today. So anyway, she came here at the age of 16, landed in Ellis Island in New York. She said she can still remember going into that huge building there with nationalities of several different nationalities in the same group. And she noticed out on the street there that they had these open air market there with the various vegetables and fruits for sale on the street outside of the Ellis Island facility. So she seen these big, what really were tomatoes, she thought they was an apple. And she bought one of them and bit into it and she didn't like it because it didn't taste like an apple. So that's the first time she got fooled on what a tomato was in this country. It was the first time? Yes. Then she stayed with, from there, she stayed with a cousin in Chicago. She went on down to Chicago. How she got there, I don't know, but she went by train or something and got in Chicago, stayed with a cousin there a short time to get situated. And then from there she came to Davenport, Iowa, where she took a job as a cook and part-time housekeeper for a family in Davenport who owned a chain of theaters in this area. And when the man of that household passed away, his boys were still rather small and my mother helped to raise them too in their own home. And she met my father in about 1916 or 17. He went off to the World War, but when he came back they were married in 1919 in Davenport. How did they meet? At a dance or a lunch? No, my father was working part-time at a theater in Davenport as a sort of, just done a little janitor work and stuff there in those days. He was very young yet and not too much education, you know how they go. So he was doing that and I guess she met him at that theater somehow or other and that's how they started to go together. So then they wrote to each other during the war while he was overseas and she stayed here in Davenport. And when he returned from the war, then they were married in 1919. And then they moved over to Moline here a few years later, where they lived the rest of their lives in Moline. So your mother quit working then once you got married? Yes, she did. That's true. Not until after you were born, not until you were born. I think they were still at Greenbonds. Yes, I was born in 1922, so from that time on though she didn't work. Now she did take a job much later and that was during World War II when I went to service and I was overseas. And she took a job then at Deere here, where we were making war equipment. She worked there almost five years. In the factory? In the factory. She was working with spare parts and so forth, you know, that they were shipping out. And of course my father was still employed there too, making war materials while I was gone because she missed me so much at home that my dad thought it would be better if she took a job and got out of the house a little bit. So she did work for five years there at Deere, but that was her last job. But her and my father used to fish a lot here. They loved to go out and fish in the canals and places around here. In Mississippi or? No, they didn't fish there. They fished up in the Annapin Canal and around Geneseo area and the wing dam out here at Milan. They used to fish there a lot with some other Swedish people who were neighbors. And they used the fish dam for eating? Oh yes, yes. You know, the water was more clean I think in those days than it is now. But they never fished much in Rock River. It was usually in the canals. They liked to fish for crappies and striped bass and sunfish and things like that. So they went with another couple by the name of Johnsons who were also from the old country. And they used to go out and spend a lot of Sundays afternoons and Saturdays fishing. And they'd take us with when we were small too, my sister and I. Did they have a boat or? No, they just fished off of the bank with poles, you know. And then Mr. Johnson and my father, they would go out at night and set out these little poles along the bank there with crawfish on them, you know, and catch them catfish and stuff and go out and stay all night out by the riverbank. Oh, I see. Well, my Mrs. Jordan used to go during the day. And then my mother and fish. Oh yeah, there were a couple of bunnies, I'll tell you. That was fun. How did they transport themselves out there? Did they walk? No, no, they had a car. They had a car? Oh yes, they had a. Your mother could drive them? Yes, my mother drove and my dad too. They both drove and they had a 1926 Chevrolet, 1929 Chevrolet, those were old cars. Flat tires all the time fixing them. The tires were very poor condition those days. It took a lot of snooze to fix them. A long time. I used to put a little bank in there, you know, and a little brain powder, you know. Fixed on a spot, huh? Yeah. I put it out there for making. So they were interested in sports and fish and. Yes, yes they were. My father had played a little soccer ball in the old country before he come here. Just some, you know. So he joined the Swedish Athletic Club then? No, but he belonged to the, he belonged to the Svea Mankors at one time down here in the, would that be the Svetset Lodge or one of the Swedish lodges? Oddfellows or one of them. But he never belonged to the Vikings. But he did belong to a Swedish lodge where you had to be born over there to join. And he didn't play soccer then with the. No, he didn't play here. No, no. No, that was just in Sweden. That was just in the old country he played. But he took me to many soccer games here back in the 1930s. So he was interested to watch it. Yes, I used to go with him and watch how the, that's where I learned how the soccer game was played, you know, Swedish football. So did you start to play? No, I didn't. I didn't play any football. I played quite a bit of baseball, but that's all. But no soccer? No, I didn't. Well, the game was not popular here amongst the kids in school then. We had the regular American football here. The soccer game was not popular amongst the schools. But it was for those, for the Viking team over here. They came from Sweden. They came from the old country, sure. Like Gors Magnus. Yes, I know those fellas. Yeah. And the Svens, the second generation didn't catch on with the first. No, they didn't. Now it's become part of a sport program. It was through the schools. Through the schools, yes. But in those years it was not popular. We had the regular football and then the baseball, of course. Do you think they, the reason for that that you didn't like it was because there was nothing in the school that promoted it or, I mean, there was a bigger base for it. He was more interested in music. I was more interested in, yeah, I was, yes, I played the trumpet for about 40 years. And I still play a little in the orchestra. Well, you've played longer than that. But anyway, I played through the bands in junior high school and the orchestras there and also through the high school too. So I followed the music game plus the fact that in some sports, like football, I was not big enough. I only weighed 125 pounds and I couldn't play against them big guys. He was much thinner then, you know. But you would have been a good soccer player though. Yes, I might have been all right at that. I don't know. Life between Aldo Peterson and Gustav Mink. Yeah, yeah, that's right. And George Peterson too, do you hear it? Yes. And I remember those names because they used to holler at each other when they were kicking the ball, you know. Sloteta, olle, solle, solle, solle, you know. Did they all speak Swedish? Oh yes, they did. And then, but we went to many of those soccer games. My dad took me because we could walk right over here to the John Deere Athletic Field in Moline here, up by Butterworth Place there, you know, and watch those games on Sunday. And I got a kick out of them too, you know. They played Rockford teams. Rockford had two teams. And they had a Czechoslovakian or Yugoslavian team from Dalzell, Illinois, coal mining country up there in that part of Illinois. So they played quite a few different teams in those years and had a conference, a regular league. And Tony Pearson worked with my father at Deere and Company. He was a welder down there, so Dad knew Tony pretty well. And the Magnuson too, Gus, Gus Magnuson, yeah. And Shorty Eggstrom, maybe you remember that name. He was a little fellow. He was the barber, wasn't he? He might have been a barber. I don't know. He might have been. When he was working at the Men's Shirt Jam, Deere, Men's Shirt, there was no juniors then? No. In the beginning? No. What was your father's opinion about the juniors? Did he talk about it? Was there a need for it? Or did he keep quiet? Before Roosevelt, the workers didn't talk about juniors because they were afraid to lose their job. Go out in the street. What did he say? Well, the first union they got in at that particular plant was called the UEFE, which was United Electrical and Farm Equipment Workers Union. And it became radical on the union side, and they were causing some damage down there when you tried to go to work and so forth. Was that a national union, or was it just a local for the farm? Well, it was a national union, but they picked up the branch of it here and joined the national organization down here, too. How early was that, in the 19... That was, their first unions came in down there about 1940s, I believe, in the 1940s or late 30s, that's right. I've got the John Deere book here, too, that I read. That's after I came up. Yeah, that was the first union they had, and that became quite a radical union. My dad was not really too much favored in unions because they were so radical and they cheated so much on this and that, and so he was not really a strong union man. Yeah, but coming in there early, though, like in the late 30s and 40s, they didn't know they were cheating anybody at that time, though. Don't you think that's something they realized afterwards? Yes, that came later, of course, in the bargaining back and forth between the company and union, that's true. But they caused lockouts and things down at the plant where you couldn't get in to work, and some fellas wanted to go in, and that's the way it was in them days. And the union turned over a few cars trying to come in the gate down here and so forth, and so I guess you had to play it very carefully. So then some of the workers did disassociate with them, they didn't want to be alone. That's true, they did, and then, of course, as time went on and the union got stronger, they changed from the United Equipment, Farm Equipment Union, to the UAW, which they now have yet today. And that became a closed plant type union, everybody has to belong, that is not on salary. But in the state of Iowa, you have the right to work law, that still holds forth there, so you can go in to work, but you are criticized so much by those who pay dues, that you're almost forced to join it. You can't list to work? No. Under those circumstances, I suppose. They make it so rough for you that you almost have to join, but over here in Illinois, the UAW is strictly a closed shop type union. Everybody who is not on salary is automatically a dues-paying member. In some cases in the deer plants, in case two, case plants, some of the salaried are also unionized and have their own union, separate from the shop union. So they have their salary scale from their union, not by the workers? That's correct. They have their own salary scale. Isn't that more fair, though, than what they have here? I mean, here the salaried people, they get anything the workers strives for without any... Yeah, that's true. A lot of the benefits that the workers have gotten through the union, the salaried people have benefited by them. Isn't that instilled a bad feeling, though, between the workers and the management? Well, somewhat it has, yes. It has caused some bad feelings, but Deer and Company in general does not want their offices to form a union. And if you are the first person to suggest a union in the office, you may lose your job. Even today? Even today, yeah. They're very against unions in the salaried ranks. But they're well paid. Yes, because they go with the workers. Sure, the workers pay the dues, but the big shots get the benefits. But isn't it rather late, though, coming in the 1940s to John Deere? Like in DeKalb, there was a steel factory. They were organized in 1950, 1920s. Why didn't they call on here? Well, I don't know. I don't know the history of that or... John Deere was so strong then, in other words, with the... Yes, they were....ball and fist. Yeah, they had good plow business then, you know. John Deere settled here and built the first plows here. Well, didn't he say, if you don't have a union, I'll make it worth your while? And he kept them out, too. The workers didn't buck him. I don't like to talk too much about the union side because there's so many bad things that happened and some good, too. Yeah, ideally. But that's the way you get the history of the way it happened. But I'm really surprised they were so late coming in to John Deere. And also International Harvester, they were not early either. That's true. Minneapolis Moline, they were in 1935, the union. That's what I say, that as far as I know, the unions came in down here in the 30s, sometime in the 30s, the first one, which was that UEFE outfit. Later to be... They finally disbanded that union and got away from it because it was so radical, I guess. So they overdid it in the beginning. Yeah. And they scared the workers away. Yeah. As well as the management. But before the unions, the boss was the boss and he could lay you off, he could fire you. And dad told me the first time he got into here, he only worked a few months and then the work got slow. And the boss came out, his name was Chris Bjerndahl, another Svenska, lived down here. He said, Gunnar, I'm sorry, but he said, I'm going to have to let you go for a while because the work is slow now. But he says, I'm going to tell the employment agent that I want you back when we pick up again. So he says, I like your work. So my dad packed up his things on Friday afternoon after work and he had no job then for a while. And a few months later, he got a call again and the employment man said, Chris Bjerndahl wants you back again. You see, they could do that in them days. There wasn't no seniority basis. If they liked the man, he'd done good work, they took him back and maybe the next guy that didn't do such good work, he was slow to get called back, see? That's the way they did it. It was tough in those days because there was no unemployment or anything to fall back on. If you were laid off, I mean, hey, you had nothing. Yeah, you didn't have any unemployment or any insurance from the company like they have now. But it must have been a good employer, John Deere. Very few moved away from me. That's right. We're still waiting for this call back. Yes, yes, that's true. John Deere is a good... This is side two, the continuation with Roy Gustafson, Moulin de Loi. Side two. When your dad was working in the 20s, were they still laying you off two, three months every summer? Yes, they were. What was the reason for that? Well, because the farmers were hurting too on account of they were not getting money for their crops and their livestock, and so then they didn't buy equipment. So there was no orders. There was no orders, and therefore there was quite a few layoffs every year. Now in 1921, it was a very bad year for the farm industry in this country, as well as the farm equipment industry. And as a result, most of the people at Deere's in the shops here in the Quad Cities were laid off for a year or so at that time. Then it picked up again in 1924 and 1925, and we had good years up to 1929 when the Depression hit in October of 1929 when the stock market crashed here. Then the shops laid off everybody here just about for three years. And your dad, what happened to him then? My dad was laid off during that time too, and that's when he took a job on a farm in Clinton for a while, and then worked also on the hard road, the highway here in Moline in order to maintain his home and so forth. So for three, four years there was no regular job? That's all he had for a job, yes, and many others were in the same situation. There was just no work. In fact, the landlord of my father's house lost $10,000 in one of the Moline banks in those years. That was a lot of money in 1928. Never got it back? No. Lost it. He had a bank, a bank holder in the bank, and they crashed too when the stock market went down. So he lost that much money himself, and yet he maintained four or five houses over there in 24th Avenue that were his. Did people get scared of banks after that? Or did they keep the money at home, you think? Yes, a lot of them did. A lot of them did. I think so. I think some of them buried it under the carpet in the house or in a coffee can in the yard maybe. That's probably the way. They had no interest, but they still had the cash. They knew what they had, and they knew it was there the next day. That's true, yeah. But those were hard years for the people here as far as earning any money. But people stuck together better in those days. They had little social activities going on, and they made the best of it. People were willing to help each other if they could. Did your dad join any large, like Vasa, Viking? Yes, he belonged to the Vasa at one time, and also the Svea Mail Corps. He sang in that for a while, yes. Did you go to any of the meetings? No, I didn't go. I was very, very young at that time, so I didn't go. I don't know how many years he belonged there either. He also belonged to the American Legion after he served in the World War. He was an American Legion member from about 1929 on until 1977 when he died. Do you remember if you were listening to Roosevelt's speeches during the 32, 33? Yes. What did he say then when you left? Did you like him? Yes, in those days, most of the poor people, whether they be immigrants or Americans, were behind Roosevelt quite strongly because of the various programs he came out with, the NRA and the CCC camps and so forth, to try and pick up the government after Hoover had been in prior to that. So they were quite united in this area, in Moline here, behind the Democrats. They had many rallies here in the cities for him and other candidates too on the ticket. He was quite popular in those days. So they were quite well behind him in those days. Did they question all that because he was a banking family man? Yes, he was. You would think the workers, they didn't listen with suspicion to him, what he had to say. Because politicians, you know, they always scream it out. But you never noticed there was any kind of... I didn't in my family because all they talked about, and their neighbors, their Swedish neighbors which we had many of in those years, were all felt the same way. They were Democrats because that was the People's Party more than the Republicans in those days. That was the feeling. And after Hoover's administration, although I don't think he should be blamed for the whole depression, it was not all his fault, he got the blame because he was the president at the time. But then Roosevelt came in with his various programs that he wanted to try to put America back to work again and bring the economy back up. And of course he succeeded in doing it fairly well and people started to go back to work. That made him look good too, you know, at that time. I heard one guy out in Detroit, he said that on the factory walls, there were big posters. And they said that if you want to keep your job, you vote Republican. Because the management was usually Republicans. Like John Deere was probably 100. You never heard about those kind of posters in the factories here? No, I didn't because I was too young at that time. Most of the workers I would say at John Deere were Democratic voters in those days, back in the 30s. Well, the union's still Democrat. The unions here are still... Yes, but I mean the management now at John Deere. No, no, not the management. No, they were Republican. They were Republican. Oh yes, that hasn't changed much. Most of them are still Republican. How about the foreman's now, and the supervisors in Deere? Wouldn't they step away from the workers' platform, join the management? Yes, that has been the policy in most cases, that they would turn Republican too in a landslide situation. To show that they are a little bit different. They're part of the group, yeah. Yeah, that's right. Even the tool makers now at John Deere, they didn't want to join the union, they said, because they were a special group. They belonged to what they called a skilled trade union, which is the International Association of Machinists, the IAM union. Were they organized after the labor? No, yes, they were. They were organized after the labor, that's right. But they have their own independent union along with the UAW, which covers the majority of the workers. But the machinists and tool makers have their own union separate from the UAW. So they have to make up a different agreement than with the management. Yes. And the company has agreed to let them have an individual union. At one time, the plow planter works down here had the IAM, the machinist union, and we all belonged to that, that worked at the plow works. At the other end of Deere and Company was the planter works. We were not merged into one plant yet. This was before 1971. They had the UAW. So then it came up, the company said, we cannot deal with one plant where 600 and some workers belong to the IAM. And then the next year, the UAW contract comes due, then they have more negotiations with a different union. They wanted us to become one union amongst the whole plants. The planter works had more employees at that time than the plow works did, so they won. And we had to join their union and drop the IAM. But the skilled trades in the plow works maintained the IAM union and still have that today. That includes experimental department and your tool makers. At one time, the inspectors were allowed to stay in it too, but then they were pushed over into the UAW with us. So now plow and planter has one union, UAW, with a small group of tool makers, skilled tradesmen who maintain the international machinist union. That's where the union is today. And this is a three-year contract? Yes, we've been working on three-year contracts most of the time with a negotiating clause where the contract can be opened after one year of the three-year contract for negotiations on wages only and things like that. So when the union came in, your dad, he worked the last two years with the union? Yes, he worked many years with the union because they came in, like they say, in either the late 30s or early 40s. He didn't join until it became compulsory? At first, everybody was not required to join. But it came to a point where if you worked alongside of another man and drew the same wages he did and you didn't belong and he paid dues and you didn't, it didn't work so good. He wouldn't talk to you during the lunch hour? Yes, that's right, they wouldn't talk to you, that's true. They might let the air out of your tires on your car outside too once in a while. There was a few radicals that would do that. When were a few homes bombed? It finally came to a point where it was no longer a free choice, it became what they call a closed shop where every worker, blue collar worker, was a union man. So then you have the same, the management before the union, they kicked you off if you talked union. And when the union came in, they kicked the worker off if he didn't become a union man. So the worker, he was between two fighters there. You have to make a choice. Yeah that's true too. You have the phrase now, like the common concern for the human worth. Is it worth anything for the management or vice versa, like the John Deere and all that? You would think they made a lot of money. The company? Yeah. And I'm sure they would work more than they paid, you know, 40, 50 cents an hour in the beginning of 1936. Why wouldn't they pay a little bit more though? Because they got plenty of money left in their treasure chest after the year was up. Well that's right but the... It wasn't even when they told them they had to, so... No they didn't have to, you know. If you don't ask for it, they won't give it to you. People needed a job and of course you had stockholders dissatisfied too that put their money in that company. The worker didn't have it. It was never regulated. The worker had nothing invested in that company so he couldn't ask for too much either, you see. He couldn't afford to invest though. No he couldn't, that's true too, and he was not allowed to because that was strictly stockholders within the company. They wouldn't allow you for instance or your dad to invest, buy stocks every year? No. They do... Not in those years. No they can't, but I mean at that time. At that time you could not, that's correct. Except wages low enough so you couldn't spend more than for milk and... That's right. No honey. I know. My father told me back in the 1920s when he got his washing paid for and his boarding room on 4th Avenue, he was lucky to have 50 cents on Saturday night to see a show or go do something like that, that's all. They lived very closely and he said even many days when he was sick didn't feel good. He went to work anyway because he could not afford to lay off one day out of the five. He only worked five days a week in those days mostly. And then he had to explain why he was home. Well he didn't... The foreman probably asked him why did you stay away. Well that's true too, but in order to make ends meet and get a decent, halfway decent paycheck if you didn't put in the whole five days, your paycheck check was so short that you couldn't make it through the next week. You were behind. You were behind, yeah. You didn't meet. That's right. When your dad, now I explain a few things for you. When you get old, you know, 15, 16, 17, you start to look for work. You went through high school. Well I didn't come out of high school until I was 18. Okay, what did he tell you then? Don't go to this place because... Did he warn you? Yes, he says whatever you do, he says I hope you don't have to work in your day like I have done. He said that? I can remember this more than once. Did he question what he meant? Well I did a little bit because I had never done that kind of work, you know. I could only go by what he told me, but I knew that he was very tired at night when he came home a lot of times from work, you know. And he had gotten cut up on the arms from them disc arrows once in a while and that was very hard work and everything was done with hand tools. So he got a couple of these cords in the hand here and the palm of the hand broken and he wound up with a finger like this where that cord was. That was from squeezing the pliers and tools and twisting wires and tightening bolts in the hand. They were just shortened up. They grew up, you know, from all those years of doing the same thing. Was that piece work he was doing? Yes, that was piece work. Now how does that work? I mean he was in his twenties and thirties, in the height of his working years. He could do the same hundred a day. How would that affect him when he became 47 and 48? Could he still use the same number of getting together? Well, not on all jobs, but by that time the prices had come up a little bit on the jobs too, you see. The piece work rate. So he didn't have to assemble a hundred instead of doing only 80? On some jobs you did, on some jobs you didn't. It was depending on how they were timed by the timers in the shop that came out with the clock and the time board. But you see what they would do, the workers could ask for a retime on that job. Then he would come out again and retime it and sometimes they would get a better price per hundred units per hundred pieces than they had before. That was possible too, but you had to keep moving and keep stocked up and you couldn't waste time. It was strictly time and motion that they timed the jobs on in those days, which they do today too. I know, but if you have a disc carrel with so many pieces, how many men are working on one? Well, on disc carrels sometimes they have a group of four or five men at each station. How can they be united before this timekeeper comes out to have the right pace? I mean, before he lets it over to the next man? Well, those jobs... One guy can slow down a little bit, but how can you get the other three to do the same thing? How can you get one hot squirrel around there who wants to do a test? If you have a group of three or four people working on one part of that disc carrel, they will usually stick together better than one man on a single job. Or a single union and one disc. In a way, yeah, in a way you could say that I guess, but everybody tried to get the best price they could so they didn't have to work so hard. If you could make less units in a day, in an eight-hour day, and still get pretty good wage, that's what they wanted. But what happened there was exactly what you said. You'd have the man on the day shift, he knew how many he could make and he would work steady, then he would usually try to tell the man that came in on the second shift to do his job, now be careful and don't overdo it because then they'll knock the price down on there and everybody else will have to work harder to make what you're doing. But you always had a hot shot once in a while that would come in and maybe only work there a few months during the winter, then he was gone, see? And he just worked himself to death. So when he left, the fellas that had to stay behind him on those same jobs now had to work twice as hard to make what they did before. Well, he was going to make hay while the sun shines. And the timekeeper didn't take that into consideration at all? No, no, in other words, if they saw that one man was making more than the other, then they always went to the weakest spot in the chain and said, how come you can't do this? So and so makes it every night here and he makes ten, twelve, fifteen more units than you do. Well, every man don't have the same capacity in working. One man doesn't. Especially age. That's right. Age makes a difference too, sure. But Dad broke in quite a few men in his later years. The young fellas coming in, they didn't know anything about that work and he had done it for years, you know. So he showed them little tricks and secrets and where you could save motion and not pick up the wrench twice, once, and catch two bolts or tighten up the, split the cotter keys, but don't pick up the same tool again. You want to, every move counted, see. That's the way they, that's the way they worked. And he worked piece, piece work for a number of years with Norby too. We called him the Duke, the Swedish Duke. He wore them pinch glasses and had one of them fancy mustachos, you know. He was a stylish guy. Never married though, but my mother and dad used to have him over every Thanksgiving and every Christmas for lutefisk and all the Swedish foods and he would always bring my mother a bouquet of flowers or a box of candy and he was a real stylish guy. And one time they took him fishing with them out here at the canal. And Ulrich didn't know much about fishing, but he liked to try it. And by golly, he got a bite there on his line and he jerked that pole backwards, you know, real quick, too fast, see. And by golly, the line went up into a big tree up on the bank behind him. And he said, Forbaskime, I'm fishing in the trees for birds. That's the way he went. End of sentence. So he was an assembler? He was an assembler, too. And him and my father got along fine. They worked together good, you know. From the old country and that. I can remember many days when, you know, they ate their lunch at the machines there and at their workbench in the shop each day. And in the wintertime, during the time my mother used to make both kinds of sylta, you know, kalva sylta and press sylta. And many days, my dad and Ulrich, they'd sit down there and eat them sylta sandwiches every day, you know. You like sylta? I'll bet you do, too. I bet the Swedes really fly in those days. Am I off of here now? No. I wanted to ask you something. Cut me off. You are, when you're not here, did you start before World War II to work at John Deere? No, I did not. You did not? No. You went into the service and then you came back? I started at John Deere in 1964 and prior to that... Oh, 64? Yes. Your dad was retired then? My dad was already retired when I started there, yes. What did he say, you know, when the Union came in? He had to start a new work day then. A new system and everything, he has to be careful not to do too many, you know, because then you lose the peace, the work agreement and everything. Was that bothering him? Do you remember he mentions anything about that? Because he worked for many, many years, day after day after day, no Union, nothing, you know, and... You had to punch a car, you had to look out for a timekeeper and have your eyes all over. Did that bother him at first? Yes, it did a little bit. It was a little change for him and many others too, I suppose. He must have got himself. But you had the individuals within the Union that would take your side if in a dispute with the foreman, don't you see, and the company. No, but that took a few years before that happened. Well, before they became really strong in that, yes. But you had some representation eventually, where before, without the Union, the boss could tell you to go home, you were gone, you had no recourse. You had nobody to go to and say, well, how come I got laid off, or I want my job. You couldn't do that, you were done. So there was a good feeling opposite the one that was bad? Yes, I would say so too, generally, generally speaking, yeah. You got a certain amount of radicalism in every organization, as you know. But in general, I think it turned out all right after they had a few bad years of Union problems and lockouts and walkouts and things like that. Those things happened in these farm equipment plants here, as well as the auto industry in Detroit. Ford had—you know, they had thugs and pickets and everything out there in the 30s too at the Ford plant. General Motors has had their problems too. But you seem to be very interested in the Union angle. I notice you're asking me a lot of questions. Well, it's interesting to find out, you know, what happened from one generation to another. And the fact is probably that a lot of immigrants that came, they didn't want their children to follow in their same footsteps, because they remember the hard, tough years. That's right. The security on the junkers was very bad when you started, I guess. There was no fence or no security. That's right. No drinking water. They had to drink water out of a barrel in the shop. So there was a lot of difficulties with the rain. So the Union brought in safety and cleanliness. Yes, they did. They did. And the mechanization came along too with it, you know. We had more modern tools to work with. We had the forklift trucks to move material with, where men used to—the boss used to come out and take ten fellows off of the job and have them push in a cart of steel out of the sand in back of the plant, into the plant like a bunch of horses. You know, that's the way they had to do it in those days. And later on, that got better too, but you know, at the same time, your government here passed laws in favor of the unions too. In fact, Roosevelt signed— He was the first one. He signed the Union laws and so forth. And as years went on, legislation came through from the government, giving the unions a little more power here and there. But it seems to me, though, that the average public—I mean, if you say, the common man that doesn't work in a factory or somewhere else, they always favor the management side. So, you know, there were bad laws passed, you know, during the 30s. Why didn't they understand that it was a good thing if the workers could get more money to buy and spend for the whole community? Well, it was a good thing to a point, but beyond that, when the unions started to go too heavy and ask for days off and pay with that, with the days off, paid for days they didn't work, and if they'd show up 40 hours a week, they were given a free day later. All these things added to the company costs and, in turn, affected the price of the products that were sold. So, when it got to a point where the price of the product was high and they wouldn't sell as well, then the income to the company was no good, but the union was still drawing pretty good wages. You see, the pendulum went too much one way. But why wouldn't the management have seen that? Well, they did. They did, but you see, when business... Even if they stopped? They did, to a point. But when business was good in the farm equipment industry and other industries, they just couldn't stop long enough to have union trouble. They gave them most of what the union asked for. Because they wanted income. They wanted income, and they were making big profits, you see. If they didn't care, we'll pay for it in the long run. That's right. But now, with the economy bad and the farmer not buying and the farmer's crops, he's not paid fair for them, apparently, in what they say. The problem there is that now the company has to come back and take away some of these things that the union took. So the union now is struggling basically for job security. And how can you write job security into a contract from the union side? You can't guarantee a man a job that you won't lay him off. If the business isn't there, you have to let him go. But the union wants to have a signed contract. This man comes into work, he's got a steady job. He can't be laid off. The company can't negotiate that way. But they've made the union take lesser wage now. They've made them take cut in wages. They have cut some of the benefits that the union has gotten, too, in order to sustain their profits within the company. Because as you know, if the stockholders are not paid, they're going to take their money out of that company and invest it where they can make a profit. So they might be like Minneapolis Moline, and the stockholders just sell it and forget about the workers that's left. Yeah, well, of course, Minneapolis Moline, they moved from here to Minneapolis. And they sold out a few months later. I think they sold out to the White Motor Company or somebody like that. So when you told your father that you were ready to start for John Deere, what did he say? Well, I wasn't ready to start for John Deere, but I'll tell you what he did. When I got out of high school in 1940, he talked to his boss about giving me some sort of a job down there so I could have a little income. I bought a car, first car I ever had, and so forth. So I got in there in 1940 in the fall. Well, then in the spring, I got laid off. You see, there was layoffs every year. With no seniority to speak of, I was one of the first ones to get laid off. And so I had a taste of it then, but I never worked piecework. I worked day rate, day work, what they call, see? I was hauling stock to the pieceworkers, keep them stocked up and so forth. That's what they had me doing. But you know, it paid pretty well for that time. Were you strong enough to do it all? Oh, yeah. It wasn't that heavy of work. A lot of the stuff wasn't that heavy, smaller pieces and stuff, you know. But I had to keep several pieceworkers stocked up at all times so they wouldn't lose their money. I was on a clock, you know, working by the clock. And I worked by the hour. So I worked there just a few months, and then I got laid off there. And then I got in down at the old Moline Wagon Works, and I worked there for a short time. I ran a machine there for a while. I got laid off there. Then I got in at the Rock Island Arsenal in 1942, I think it was, early 1942. I got a job over there. I ran a machine there, too, that made the little springs for rifles, recoil springs that go in the rifles. And from there, I was drafted into the service. You were drafted? They took some of the people off the arsenal, too, and put them in, yeah. So I was drafted from there into the service, and I went into the service then in early 1943, into the Army. And I put in almost three years in the service. So I came back in 1946, and then for a couple of years there, I didn't do much work. I just played a few orchestra jobs, and then we were not married yet. So you were interested in music in high school, then? Oh, yeah. Even before that? Yeah, I think so, pretty much, yeah. And so I just made a little money doing that, and I was living home yet. I wasn't married, you know. Did you travel around then to other cities? Yes, I traveled around to some other cities, but I played mostly around here in the Quad Cities three nights a week. Dance bands? Dance music, that's right. And then I took a job in 1948 at a little electroplating shop in Moline, where they did electroplating. That's where they plate silver and chromium on metal. I don't know what you call that in Sweden. Electroplating is called here. Nickel. Nickel plating. Yeah, a couple of old Swedish fellows said, you know, you're a silversmith. Not exactly, but that's what they called it. So I worked there then for about 15 years. I worked seven years in the plant there doing the work, and then I went out on the road selling jobs for them for about eight years. Well then in 1962, I left them, or 1963 I guess it was, and in 1964 I got in at Deere's, and I stayed there for 20 years, where I retired. How did you come in at Deere's though? Well, I had a friend there that was a good friend of mine in the office, and he got me a job. So I put in the last 20 years of my working life at Deere, at Plow Planner Works. And what was your position then? Well, I had different jobs there. I was a scheduler for a while, scheduled jobs, and then I worked in the warehouse for a while, and I worked in the tool cribs. I worked all over, and of course when the years were bad, we'd get transferred to another plant sometimes in East Moline at the harvester works. Had to go out there one summer for three months, and then when Plow Planner got busy in the fall back here again, see, that's the way they did it. Did you discuss with your dad your way of doing your day's work with his? Well I did, but it was very hard for him to understand what we were doing. He had been out of the plant then for almost ten years, eight to ten years, and he didn't care no more what was going on, you know. Well he said, I know they do things different now than we did. He says they've got pneumatic drills and things to work with, and you didn't have to work with all the hand tools like they did and push the material in a two-wheel cart across the wooden floors like they did and so forth. It was a lot easier, it made a lot easier as they got more organized, you know. He couldn't understand a lot of that. No. It went too fast, and it was a short time. So when your son now, the oldest one, when he wanted to go to John Deere, did you recommend him to go to John Deere, or did he ask for your opinion about it? Well, I told him that if he could get into John Deere, and if he could stay, you know, and get his 90-day period in, which is a probation period, that he was pretty certain of having a steady job, that he wouldn't have to worry about layoffs, and that the benefits at this time that he started in 1977 were excellent, both medical and other things too. He had a vision, dental, complete doctor, and so forth. They still have that, and I carry that as a retired employee yet, and she's covered by it too, you see. It's a beautiful plant. All company paid. There was a different setup then. Different setup by that time. And all that is thanks to the unions. Well, I can't say all of it is. They have pushed it a lot. I say that they have done some good in that direction. You wouldn't have it without the union, no. I don't think they would have come out with that good a plant. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Well, then our two older boys were smaller, and they had braces. Dears paid nothing. By the time the third boy came up, of course he was a late arrival, but when he had to have his braces, Dears paid half of it. Now they pay it all. So I mean, things have progressed, and the union, I will say, probably got it for him. So safety and hospitalization has been the biggest gains then? Yes. That amounts to several extra dollars an hour in wages, as far as the company is concerned, over and above the standard wage that they pay for the work being done. In other words, for example, if a man is making $13 an hour, and you figure in the medical world, the most they can possibly last, $20 an hour. Right. Now there is just so much money in that little pocket there for the doctors, so they may not even see it. Yeah, it ain't every day you get a full dollar, man. Yeah. They  ordered an exact check. No the answer's not by the  Ministers, it's by the formularies. Oh. I mean, if it's by your system for every 15 minutes an hour it will be the double, so its going to book full forces. I mean, you go and you see you mix it with the faculty and the people and just store it back up. You ignore it and they fix it. If you have to put $20 an hour on top of it, it's worth killing for it.