 We have 5th of October, 1987. We begin with Mrs. Dorothy Nimrod in Omaha, Nebraska. She was born 16th of June, 1916, in Omaha. Your parents now, Alvin Anderson and Esther Bergstrom, they both came from Sweden. Yes. If we start with your father now, he came from Värmland. Right. Josefors. That's correct. And what did he tell about his background there? Well, he– Do you know anything about it? Not too much. There were five children in the family, and when it came time to– Well, while he was growing up, he worked in the lumber mill, like that. And then when it came time for service, he served one year in the Army, and then he wanted to go overseas because there was a grand rush for the wonderful field in America, you know. So then he came over to this country. And it was in 1980? Yes. Do you know if he had any sisters and brothers over here? Yes, yes, yes. He had one sister– No, two sisters and one brother here. Were they in Nebraska? In Omaha. In Omaha. And they had arrived here earlier than before? Yes. Yes. Charlie Holm was one of his– No, that was his brother-in-law, but that was one of his sisters. Did he write to one of them and ask for– Yes, right. They asked if he wouldn't like to come, and they, I think, sponsored him a little bit so that he could come. Did they send a ticket to him? Yes, I think so. So he was not married when he left then? No, no. He did not– Had never met my mother. So how about the traveling over here? Did he say anything about that, traveling with somebody or– No, he came alone, and it took them two weeks on a boat, and the voyage was quite rough, I guess. But he said he always wanted to see what was beyond the other side of the horizon, so he was excited about coming. And I don't remember too much about– He came by train from New York, but he came directly to Omaha. He didn't mention anything about Ellis Island? Yes, a little bit. Let's see. My mother talked about that more than he did, but he passed through all right. And then they asked where he was going, and he got on his way to Omaha. So I think it took three or four days to come from New York to Omaha. So he came and stayed there for a while with the relationship? Yes, right. What kind of work were they doing? Well, his brother-in-law, my uncle, was in the contracting business, so he helped with that for a while. And then he branched off and started to do tile-sitting. And he did that almost the rest of his life. Oh, before he started that, though, he was a conductor on a streetcar. Because when I was a baby, I have a picture of him in a uniform as a conductor on a streetcar. But from that, then he went to tile-sitting. And he was with that most of his life after that. So a conductor on a streetcar, that was a pretty good job? No, probably paid a little better than he was assistant in the contracting business. So he did that. The hours were very bad. He had to go three o'clock in the morning sometimes and come home late at night. And so I think they decided that they didn't want him to do that all his life. And your mother, now? She came from Amersburg, your daughter, now? Yes. And she had a sister here who wrote to her and asked her to come. Did she send a ticket to her? I think so. I think so. Because they weren't making much money. I remember having, after I'd been to Sweden, one time I said, how could you leave that beautiful country? And she said, well, you could hardly get enough to eat. Well, she said it wasn't too hard to decide to go. So I'm sure they had difficult times at home. Did she come from a large family? Yes, there were, I think, six children. And she was the second one to come. And then she had a younger brother who came. And then she had a younger sister who came. And then two of them stayed, I think, over there. And she met my father. They belonged to an organization called... where they don't drink. What was that called? O.G.T.? Yes. The Temperance? Yes, Temperance League. There was a larger... Yes, there was a chapter here. And that's how they met. And they started dating and they were married then. Was that a Swedish chapter? Well, I believe so. I believe so. It seems to me most of their friends were in that. So they met there then. Was there... Well, you had no idea where it was located? No, it was probably down... They rented the space? Yes, I think. Probably down in the area of the old Swedish Auditorium. I don't know if you've heard of that. That was down on Chicago Street or someplace down there. Did the Swedes live around that area too? Some of them did, yes. And until industry moved in. And then I think they moved further west. Your mother, now, she told you a little bit more about the traveling over in Ellis Island? Yes, she caught... I was going to say measles, but I don't think it was measles. They probably wouldn't have let her in. But there was an epidemic on the boat. And they said that if they weren't able to be on their feet when they reached Ellis Island, they would have to turn around and go home. And so she said they were in bed most of the time on the way. And then she was with some girlfriend. And when they got near the shore, then they made an effort to go up on deck. And they were allowed to stay. But that took also a couple of weeks on the trip. So she remembered Ellis Island. Yes, right. Examination and medical inspection. Right, yeah. Did they say anything about the hardship of leaving Ellis Island and come on your own on the train? Because there was nobody traveling with them. No. I think she remembers meeting somebody on the boat that could speak a little English, I think had probably been home visiting from America. And so then they were able to direct her where she should take the train and so forth. And she remembered in Chicago, she got sort of disoriented and didn't know which way to go. And then there was some help there, I think, in some sort of an office of some kind. There were many trains leaving in different directions. That's right, right. And they had no idea. And of course, it all seemed so far away. The expanse is so great in America compared to Sweden. And it was too far and no one could tell them. Right. How did they order food on the train, for instance? Oh, I remember my father saying that he had never seen bananas when he was in Sweden. He thought that was the most delicious thing he ever tasted. So he bought– Oh, they were quite reasonable, I guess. He bought a whole bagful and he ate them all at once. And he never was able to eat a banana after that. He got sick. So they really just pointed, I think, to what they wanted to eat if they saw it. They didn't say anything about anybody offering boxes of chocolate or something first? No. Passing it around and then come back and charge money for it? No, I don't remember hearing that. So when they both came down to Omaha, did she stay also with– She stayed with her sister? Yes, she stayed with her sister. Was she married and her sister at the time? Yes, her sister was married and had a child, I think. And she was working for someone. How long did they stay in their respective homes before they started to look for a job? Immediately or– Well, I think almost immediately. I can't remember exactly. My father, of course, started helping his brother-in-law quite readily. And my mother, I think, went to work before she could really master the language. But she worked for the Brandeis family here in Omaha, and they were very understanding and very kind. And they just put up with it, you know. And I think she got $2 a week or something. In the boarding room. In the boarding room, right. At the time of the tornado– Now, let's see. That was 1913. She was still single. And she remembers being– seeing a picture in the paper after that tornado of one of her hats. It was out in somebody's yard. And she has identified that building. It's no longer now, but she did identify that to me as where she lived at that time. So it was around 33rd and California Street. So there was a bad tornado? Yes. The houses went down? Yes, right. People killed? Yeah, it was quite serious. I think probably one of Omaha's worst. And then she was almost ready to go back home. But she stayed. How did– Did she tell you anything about the language barrier? You know, that must be hard to– Yes, right. Yes. Was she a cook or cleaning or– Yes, she did everything in the house. And this family now, who were they? They were Americans? Yes, they were Americans. And they had a department store downtown. Wealthy people. Yes, right. And she especially remembers that they had poodle dogs, the little white dogs. And she had to bathe those. And she had never seen that kind of dog before, but she learned how to do it. She said when they'd go on a trip, why she would have to take care of them and feed them and so forth. Were there children in the family? Yes, I believe there were, but I don't remember how many. But that was also part of her duties. Did she mention anything about it was easy to work in an American kitchen or home? Oh, she never really enjoyed it, she said. She was anxious to get away from it. But she said that they were kind to her. And since she had a sister here, she said she could always take her weekends there and so forth if she got any time off. So that did help. Was she the only one working in the house then? I believe, no, they had two maids, that's right. And I don't remember just what her duties were. I think they shared them. And did she continue to work there until she met your father? Yes, right. And then she quit working after she was married. And they met in 1911? Oh, yeah, around. They were married in 15. So I don't know. They probably went together a year or so before they were. So when they were married then, did they marry in what church or who? Yeah, they were married at the Salem Lutheran Church. It's on the south side. It's on the south side. And they're having their 100th anniversary this year. And I was baptized in that church. So this is the church you grew up in then? No, I didn't. We moved then after that when I was quite small. We moved– they bought a new home in the north part of Omaha. And it was over near Tech– High School. And I can remember we moved there when I was kindergarten. So that was five years old. And my father was setting tile in this beautiful school building that I later went to school. But anyway, I couldn't say technical very well. I had quite a time. But it was Technical High School. And just recently, we had our 50th reunion at that high school. And I went back, and I saw all this tile work in the swimming pool and the restrooms. It still looked perfect. So I said– I was real pleased that we'd had some reminiscence of that. So it was well done? Yes, I think so. He worked there several years, I think. So he learned that trade here? Yes. And he bought the house in 1920s? Yes. Early 1920s. And my mother lived– Well, my father died in 68, and she lived there until 1980. 1980, I guess it was. She lived there– Yes, right. Up in the 90s. She died when she was 90. And when she married your dad, then she didn't work after that? No. That was the custom at that time. That's right. And I think it's a good custom. Especially if they're children. So she stayed in the home. She was a wonderful housekeeper, and she cooked three meals a day, and we were all healthy. I don't remember ever going to a doctor. When you were growing up, your sister, she was about the same age? She was three years younger. Three years younger. So you had to be the babysitter. That's right. I was the babysitter. But I lost her– She and her husband and three children were killed in an accident in 1964. She had six children at that time, but they had five of them with her, and they were going to visit the one who was married. And the car blew a tire, and they hit one of the culverts. So she and her husband and three youngsters were killed, so I had no children, brothers and sisters left. There are three of my– a niece and two nephews are still living, and two of the nephews live quite close by. When you were growing up, did they talk any Swedish? No. The only– Well, they didn't talk amongst themselves or to us children. But if my uncles and aunts would come over, you know, they didn't want us to hear or understand everything that they were saying. And so then they would speak Swedish. And I was always nosy, I guess, and I would sit in a corner and listen, and I was amazed how much of the Swedish I learned, because that really was the only opportunity. When I came to Sweden, I could carry on conversation, and it was only from that background. So you were able to understand them at first? Right. I never really told them that. But you didn't converse with them back in Sweden? No, I didn't. How about the church now? You moved. You said– Did you transfer to another church? Yes, we did. We went to Zion Lutheran then, and it's Augustana now. And probably Pauline has told you that too, right? So you went to Sunday school and confirmation classes. Those classes, were they conducted in Swedish? No, mine weren't. The Old Emanuel Church had them in Swedish, I think, and that was the– Zion was the offshoot of the Old Emanuel Church. So, no, they didn't. We had all ours in English. And the servants, they were also in Swedish? Yes. Once in a while, we would have one. We didn't have one every Sunday, but for some of the old folks, we'd have maybe once a month or something. And did you attend church regularly then in your family? Yes. Yes, we did. It was the Sunday– That's right. In fact, it was morning and evening then. They don't do that so much anymore. For two sermons a day? Yes, we had morning and evening. Ten o'clock or earlier, eight? We had Sunday school at nine, and let's say 9.30, and church at 11. And then we had services about 7.30 in the evening also. And I practiced that all my life. I mean, we had choir. Why, I would go back, the choir would sing in the evening, and we'd have choir rehearsal during the week. But the pastor didn't preach the same sermon in the evening, though? No, no. No, no. It was usually– They called it Vesper service. Oh, singing? Singing, yes. Right. Hymns and– And he had some great music. That's right. And the festivals now, Christmas, was that celebrated according to a Swedish– Yes, very much so. Yuletid. Yes, right. And we had– We walked to church. We didn't have a car in those days. We'd walk to church 5.30 in the morning for Yuletid. And then Christmas Eve, of course, we always had our family gathering and all the typical Swedish foods. But your mother prepared them. Yes, right. Lutfisk and sylt. I can remember them even preparing the lutfisk in the basement for weeks ahead and the smell and all that. You could see the water. Yeah. So did they talk often about their birthplaces in Sweden, where they came from? Oh, usually only when they got letters or something. And I can remember very distinctly when my mother's father died. And I was about 10 or 12 years old then, and how sad she was that she hadn't been back to see him. But her mother had died when she was in her teens. Oh, before she– Yes, before she came here. So that was one, probably, reason that she left, too. And she had one younger sister who still lives in California, the only one she has left. And she said that she really missed my mother when she left because she had been taking care of the family then. Did they get together often, the sisters, your mother's sisters? Yes. Here in town, I think probably we always got together for birthdays. No matter whose birthday it was, we celebrated. And so I think it would be at least once a month and then always for the holidays, Easter and Christmas. Were they able to come over for 11 o'clock coffee? Oh, yes, sometimes, yes. Maybe more often, maybe for 4 o'clock coffee. Oh, yes, yes. Otro tener, alfajores, y otro. Yes, right. And she always had cookies on hand. Everybody always remarked about– there never was a time that she wasn't able to– and if anybody came, she would not think of having them leave without giving them a cup of coffee. And it was home-baked. And that was home-baked bread and home-baked spritz and kringlar and so forth. Yeah. Did she– You know, Dalna, they are very high on priority with the culture and all the things. Yes, yes. Well, your mother is a way to save on things. Yes. Be careful not to throw anything away. That's right, yeah. Overly so, probably, but no, she was very frugal and made a little bit go a long way. And she sewed for us girls, and she made our clothes, and we were always well-dressed, I think. What did she bring with her when she came? A little trunk, you mean. Yes, what was in it? Oh, my. Her Bible, I remember, was in there. And– Oh, many of those sort of things. That didn't come with her, but the weavings. And they did so much of that. She didn't weave anything, obviously. Little rugs. No, she didn't have– She didn't get a spindle and so forth, but she always got something from relatives over there. So it's like I didn't learn to crochet because my mother and my mother always crocheted, so I decided I didn't need that. You needed socks and mittens to wear. Yes, she always knitted our mittens for winter. I remember that. And she crocheted so much, tablecloths and bedspreads. She always saw the time. Yes, right. Never an idle moment. Did they belong to any organizations outside the church, now, your parents– My father belonged to the Vikings. The Vikings. But my mother didn't go. She thought she ought to stay home with the children. But he always– Or Oddfellows for a while. I don't think he kept that up, but he was with the Oddfellow organization. That's different than the Vikings, isn't it? Yes. But then he was with the Vikings quite a bit. How about the Temperance? Did they continue to– I don't remember in my lifetime, so I suppose they quit. You never went to any meetings? No, no, no. In fact, it probably died out. I don't remember exactly the history of it, but I know the– Gutempla. That's what it was. It just came to me now, right? Did they go to any dances? Well, not where you were born, though. No. They used to– Of course, they did have dances with that organization. I remember that. When I was real little, I think we did go to the big affairs, you know, when they would have one. I can see the dancing the polka and that sort of thing. If I go back to Christmas now, do you know how long before Christmas they took in the Christmas tree? Was it– Oh, we would have it– A couple of weeks before Christmas, I think we would set it up. We didn't wait till Christmas Eve like many people did. We always set it up early and then had it up the following week. Yes. Until they– If they got too dry, then we'd have to take it out. I had an aunt that always wanted to keep it until the twelfth day of Christmas, you know, so she would keep it longer than we would. But when I was real little, we had the candles that we– Light candles. Yes, that we clipped on the tree. I still have those holders. I wouldn't dare put them on a tree now, but– Were they lit? Christmas Eve, we did light them. All the time? Right, and then, of course, you had to be right there. You didn't leave the room. But it was a good smell, you know, with the evergreen. Was it a short-needle type? Yes, most of the time, I think. We didn't have the– What kind of ornaments? And then we would make ornaments out of– We'd wrap candy and fringe the edges, I remember, and then sort of cornucopias that we would roll and put popcorn and so forth in, and then we'd dance out the Christmas tree at the– When it was thrown out. When it was thrown out, we'd sing. Did you invite some friends there? Yes, the relatives usually came. Du er i julien, så– Or, if the year is to come, påska. So those were exciting times. Did the mother learn to teach you– She taught me prayers. I learned both table prayer and bedtime prayers from her. The table prayer, you know, sitting over a meal. Yes. Gud som har morning kjær, se til mig som liten er. Just the one when you went to bed? Went to bed. That was fun. All right, how was the one? Jesu namn til borde vi gå. Did he say thank you for the dinner, too? I don't remember us doing that. Some areas– I think Don, my husband's family, did that, but we didn't do that. Who said the prayer, your father or all of you? We usually said it together. And it was a custom kept all this long, as you remember? Yes, right. And then for Christmas, ja, how about Santa Claus, did he– Oh, yes, my father dressed as Santa Claus. I was almost, I think, nine years old before I realized it was my father. He always had to go to the grocery store or something, and I would get so provoked with him because he never was there. But he would have a costume. One of my– My aunt had made a regular costume, and he had a pillow in his tummy, and he ho-ho-hoed and so forth. And he would pass out some of the gifts before he would leave. And we really enjoyed that part. This time with your relation, come over to– Yes, sure. There was a Christmas Eve you got the Christmas presents. Right. How about in the morning? Did you get anything to stock? Once in a– Yeah, we'd have a little stocking or something with probably fruit and nuts and candy and that sort of thing. We didn't usually– We didn't have– We didn't get a lot. My father made many things. He made us tables and chairs and high chairs for the dolls and then cradles and all that sort of thing. I know once in a while we'd make a mistake and go in the basement before Christmas, and we probably knew about it beforehand, but we were surprised anyway. That's right. Did– How about your friends now? Did they also have a stocking with gifts in the– Christmas morning? You mean like school friends? Yes. I suppose– I think so many of them opened their gifts in the morning. I mean, if they weren't Swedish– If they weren't Swedish background. So that was a little difficult to understand, but we liked the way we did it, so we continued it. Did you have non-Swedish playmates? Oh, yes. Yes, I lived in a mixed neighborhood. Who were they? The Germans? I had Germans and an Irish. I had a very dear friend. She's still my friend. She's Scotch-Irish. And I had a Jewish friend that I liked very well. Of course, she didn't have any Santa Claus, so I always felt sorry for her. What did she say then? Well, she thought– She wished she were a Christian. Because we had such fun, you know. But then she'd have holidays that we didn't have, so I made up for it. Did she receive gifts similar to yours then? Well, most of the– I think so often, their holidays come around our time, and they, of course, have seven, eight days in a row where they get gifts, you know. So they could– Every day? Yes, and they get one each day or something. So then we had to be a little jealous, you know. So it worked out pretty well. Yeah. So how about their food now? It was completely different than your home then. But, you know, children didn't go eat at one another's homes like they do now, I think. Well, they didn't. Oh, I don't believe so. At least I didn't– Oh, I would go stay overnight with people once in a while when I was a little bit older. But I can't remember it being too different. Of course, we had sort of, I suppose, started to eat some American foods, too, you know. And then when you got older, in 14, 15, you started to date boys or look at boys. Did your mother ever talk with you then? Try to communicate with you? She tried. I think we got a book or something. I always went to the library. No, but I mean, they were always scared. You know, the Swedes were going home with Italians and Polish. Oh, yes. They want you to stay with the Swedish. And there was a unison group, so you got to stay with the– Yeah, they would prefer it. They didn't say I had to– Did they go about that way, though, that Swedes married Swedes in your time? Well, quite a bit so, I think. There were quite a few of them, so– I'm trying to think. Yes, of my very closest friends, I think they probably did meet and marry there, in Scandinavian people. And we go back a long way now. I forget how long it is, but– Your husband, he was born in Staten Island. So he came then to Omaha to work, or how did you meet? Yes. He went to college here in Omaha. And he came to our church and sang in the choir, and that's where we met. And we were in the choir together. So he came out of the Mamre Lund Lutheran Church. That's right. Real Swedish. Yes, right. So his parents now– Were they living right in Staten or outside the farmers? They farmed in Staten until Don was about 10 or 12 years old, and then they moved to Red Oak, Iowa. And in Red Oak, his father became an accountant for the– Let's see, for the county or the state? A state auditor. He was an accountant for the state auditor, and he'd go around to different counties and audit the books, you know, see if the books were in order, if people kept their accounts right in the county offices. And so then he was in Red Oak, and he had those jobs. And he would sometimes be three or four months in a county checking the books, but he'd usually come home weekends then. And when we were married, he would sometimes do the accounting in Kousablufs, in Pottawatomie County. Then he would stay with us at our home and commute to Kousablufs in the morning and come back at night, so that was nice. Was he politically active, though? How did he get that job? Well, it was a political recommendation, and he never really seemed like a politician to me, but it was a political assignment. I mean, it had to be. Was he previously a farmer then? Yes. Was he born in Sweden? No, he wasn't. He was born here? Yes, he was born here, but his parents were born. And their name was Nimrod? Yes, and I think he took the name when he went into the service because of all the Gustafsons and so forth. I think it was Gustafson. We have never been sure because we haven't found that record. But they say there are letters that he wrote back from Stanton in Vesterås or someplace where he was living, and they say they still have the letters over there. So I haven't seen those. I'll have to look next time I go. I guess, but... And they spell the same way in Swedish? Uh-huh. It's from the Bible. You know, he took it. Nimrod. Yeah, from Genesis. The interview continues next site. Next site. This is side two, this continuation with Dorothy Nimrod, Omaha, Nebraska, side two. So your father-in-law's parents, they became farmers then? Right. Did they come to anybody in Stanton, or were they the only family that came? The only... Unless it would have been friends, I'm not sure, but there was not family. But they were farmers all their life then. That's right, right. And then their son, did he go to college? Yes, he went two years. Your father-in-law? Like your father-in-law? Yes, he went to Luther College. He went two years. Right. So he learned at college. That's right. Was he a Republican? Yes. They were all Republicans? All Republicans. I don't know why, but they were– They stayed– Yeah, I guess so. They hung together. So that was his job, then your father-in-law's job all his life. That's right. To be a county auditor. Auditor, right. And then your husband, he also went to college. Yes. What kind of profession did he– Well, he did accounting also, and he worked for two or three different– He worked for the Keri Salt Company when I met him. Then he went to Conservative National Bank, and he worked there for several years while we were married. And then he went to Seal Test Ice Cream, and he worked for them until they closed their operation here in Omaha, and they gave him severance pay and so forth. But it was so difficult, I think, for him, because they did it rather suddenly. At least I blame it on that. They did it suddenly, and about three or four weeks later, he had a heart attack. And so he couldn't look for work then for a while. In fact, he had a heart attack the day he found another job, and then we couldn't have him take it because it took him six months to recuperate. But then he went to work for Brandeis Distribution Center, and they're located on 108th on the interstate. And he was an office manager for them until he died, and that was about 10 years, 11 years. So he was what they call CPA then? Right. Public accountant. Right. So he went to work for the family– Yes, that's what's so strange, right. Of course, there weren't very many in that family left. So when you met Donald Limroth, what did your mother say then? She was happy to have you met? I think she was satisfied with Don. His ancestry came from the same area she was from also? Yes, sure. West Vermont? Yes, right. So that made it interesting, and they always got along well. His parents and your parents, were they together often? We did after we got– We would have little picnics and parties and so forth. Did they talk Swedish to him? No, I don't remember them ever doing that. Not often in Stanton either? No, not in Stanton either. I don't know why. They just– Don's mother, I think, was confirmed in Swedish, and his father too. I wouldn't be surprised, but I never heard them speak Swedish. Oh, they could, you know, say a word now and then, but I mean, they didn't carry on conversation. And my children are very upset with us because we never talked it, you know. They just can't understand why we didn't teach them the language. And I said, well, we didn't have that much money in those days. I never thought they'd ever get to Sweden, you know. But my daughter and I went a few years ago, and I was able to interpret, so she really enjoyed it. So your parents never came back to Sweden again? No, no, no. Did they talk about going back? Oh, occasionally, yeah, occasionally, but they never seemed to get it together. My dad was in work that didn't give you automatically two weeks' vacation, you know. They didn't do that in those days, and probably if they had, they would have gone. But he would have had to take time off work. And there was valuable time in the summer too, he would have. I remember him contributing to a fund so his brother in Chicago could go back and visit his dad. I never could understand that, but I guess that didn't cost as much as for him to go. Was he unmarried then, his brother? Yes, I suppose he was at that– No, he– I can't remember. I can't remember. But anyhow, I thought that was kind of strange. During the Depression, now, you remember– Yes, because you were old enough to start working then. I sure was. How did that affect your family? Well, my father didn't have any work. And I was going to high school, and I was able to get a job on the switchboard at Methodist Hospital. And I could go there after work and work on the weekends. And sometimes that $30 a month was the only income we had, it seemed like, you know. And that was for at least a year or so. And then he started to get some little jobs once in a while. But it was a very sad time. And I didn't mind working. That didn't hurt me. But I thought it was so terrible that a man who wanted to work couldn't find work. So I do remember it. But they remembered you without a job, right? Yes, I remember that, right. I don't think we ever got to the point where he had to have welfare or anything. I don't believe they ever asked for it. So– And I think probably the relatives would get together. If somebody was out of something, they would buy a whole bunch of things and share. And they raised garden, I remember, in the summer. And they had garden and raised potatoes and vegetables. So we managed. They were not talking about that time to go out on the farm or try to– No, no, they never did. Your father was not interested in that. No, he didn't seem to be. But he came from a farming background. Yeah, that's probably why he didn't really want to. He thought it was not the thing he wanted to do, so– So they still had their house then during the– Yes, right. They were able to keep that. They had to– They had to– What do you– Second mortgage. Second mortgage. I remember that. But I can also remember the day that was– All the mortgages were paid off. We really did celebrate then. They must have– So they– A big happiness. Yes, right. They did enjoy that. Your sister, though, how did she– She went to school. Did she– Two years younger, you said? Or three? Three. What different upbringing did she have now compared to yours? Was that about the same? Well, it wasn't a whole lot different, I don't think. She didn't go to work till she finished high school, but she did go to work then. So the depression didn't affect her? Not as much, I don't think. Unless she felt it, I don't know. But it seemed to me things were getting a little better as she came along. Because I know she didn't want to go to school. She came along because I know she didn't work when she went to high school like I did. And I'm sure she would have if she'd had to. You went to high school then? Yes, I finished high school. And then I was fortunate because of the experience at the Methodist Hospital. I was the first one in my graduation class to get a job. And I worked for Travelers Insurance Company then for 13 years. And so I said that all worked out for the best. Having had that experience, very few girls in my class could get a job for a long time in 1934. It was the height of the depression. Did any of them move away from Omaha to California, for instance? My friends? Yes, many of them, I think. They did? I think some even moved to Chicago. I can't think that it was better. With their family or alone? No, I think they probably went on their own. So the older ones, the parents, they stayed on? And some of the people came back. I mean, they went to try other fields. Yes, many went to California. And many of them stayed there. I can't think of any other special area they might have gone to. Oh, some went to Colorado, I think, because that always seemed to be appealing, the ski country. But no one went south to Texas, for instance? I didn't have any friends who did. I don't think they had opened up there. There was too much open ranchland. That's right, that's right, that's right. Your father-in-law and your– How about your husband? Was he also a Stanish Republican? Yes, sure, sure. How about your father? He was, too. Republican? And I am. How did they get this idea? I mean, he was a working man, though. He was not a capitalist or any businessman. No. But he always went along with Hoover and so forth. I remember that. What kind of papers did they read? Did they have a Swedish-American press? Yes, they did have that. Sense-chemical attributes. Yes, right, that's one. And both your parents read that? Right. Did you read it? Oh, I tried to, yes. And my cousin that's in Sweden now sends me this one twice a week, and he's an editor for that. And so he said, that's for me to keep up on it. And I said, the only words I really know real well are the ones that are computerized and they have an uh on the end of them or something, you know, but I like the jokes. So you are able then to read? Yes, I can read and speak better than I can write. I mean, writing is sort of an effort, but I do that to my mother's brother sometimes. So there's the two sisters that were left in Sweden then on your mother's side. And there's their children. Yes, that's right. So one of them is an editor for Dala Bygd. Yes, right. That's Chef Docteur or whatever you call it. Chef Docteur, yeah. Or Örjus. Oh, his name is Örjus? Mm-hmm. So there's Rolf Örjus. Right. In Borlänge. Borlänge, uh-huh. You see the one that's also in- In Parliament, yeah. In Riksdag. Mm-hmm. What kind of affiliation is that? Democrat or moderate? No, what is it? The Socialist Party. What is that? Social Democrat. Yes, that's what it is. So they became Social Democrats over in Sweden. Yeah, right. And I remember them having arguments with him when he came to visit. But they weren't convinced anyway. Who? My father and my mother. So he visited when they were living? Yes, right. Before he was married, he came. So they discussed politics? Oh, yes, I can remember that. So what did your father say then? Well, I don't know what his arguments were, but he was pretty good at arguing with him. And of course, you couldn't- Rolf was of the younger generation, so he upheld his part, you know. But he's a very interesting young man. So he sends you the Swedish paper? Mm-hmm. He wants me to come back so I can do it even better, you know, and it goes pretty well when I'm there. So what did your mother say now when you married Donald Nimrod? She was happy then that- Yes, right. He had no trouble to getting into your family? No, no. We just got along very well. And the same religion, Lutheran? That's right, that's right, that's right. Do you think it's easier for a family, when you start a family, that the religion is the same? Oh, I'm sure it must be. I'm sure it's different. Otherwise, it's a hurdle to- Yes, because one of my children has married an Italian Catholic, and it makes it harder for her. Did you have any, what do you call, discussions about that? Well, we talked about it, but after all, I said, if you're in love, you can't argue it anyway, you know. And he's been very good to me, and he's a wonderful father to the little girl. And he lets me take her to the Lutheran Church, and my daughter still can belong to the Lutheran Church, so I really don't have any problem with it. But if that happened in your time, when you got married to a Catholic, it would have been worse. Yes, I think so. Because at that time, it was completely impossible. That's right, that's right. It just really made it difficult. I don't know why, but it was a different time. So at that time, when they married, when you married, there was no discussion about it. I mean, you couldn't even talk about it. No, no, we just didn't bring one home, that's all. But today is easier, though. I think so. You can be more open. I think so. I don't know why we are. But, no. But does it still sit in there? Oh, you wish, yeah, you wish that they would still be the same. Because I know how much easier it was for us. Because you didn't have to discuss that. That's right. No, it was just a subject. Yeah, we just didn't have to worry about it at all. Has your church now changed over the years since your father and mother went together? Oh, yes, I think so. Well, of course, we have so many more outsiders. We call them– they're not all Swedes anymore. In fact, maybe not even half of them are Swedish anymore. So they have to cater to another group. Sure, sure. How do you take that, though? Is it that they're backwards? I think I've grown up with it. I think I can live with it. I can live with it. Have you questioned it sometime, though, that– Well, it would be kind of nice, but then you know it can't always be that way. And we don't have immigrants coming anymore, you know. There's no new blood coming in. No, no. So it has to intermingle. And the people now, they're all born here. That's right. Have a different idea. That's right. Of what it is. But as long as they have the same belief, why, then, I'm satisfied if they don't go away from that. And regarding the Catholics, they have also made a lot of changes. Yes, right. Yes. Probably more than the Lutherans. I believe so. I believe so. And more is to come. That's right. That's right. Even if the Pope doesn't like it. The priests seem to want to get married now. There are some inner problems. That's right. And so you have been a member of Emmanuel, then, or the Augustana, all the way from... No, when my children were born, we didn't have a car, and Augustana is across town. You know, it's one near the part of town. So we belong to the little Bethel Lutheran Church up here. It's a branch also. It was also a Swedish church. Yes, right. It started with Swedish people, so it's just a branch. How big a church is that? Well, we have about 500 members. 500? And it's all mixed up, then, with all... Yes, right. From the inner cities and from all over. And they come from all over the city to be members. They're not just the neighborhood church anymore, like it used to be. When I grew up, it was a neighborhood church, you know. Are you affiliated with different organizations, then, LCW and... Yes, I'm president of LCW, and I just went as a delegate to the new women of the ELCA. I was in Grand Island for that. So you've been active. Yes. Was your mother also active? Not quite so much. She was a member, of course, but she never had any office. And, of course, I worked after my husband's been gone 10 years, and I kept working until last year. And they said, you can't work after you're 70 at the university. I worked as secretary in the math and computer science at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. And they said, you really shouldn't work any longer. So then I left. Well, then they add... The church people say, you can do this, and now you can do that, you see. So... But I enjoy it, and so far I've been able to do it. I get tired, but then everybody does. When you married, what year was that? 1943. 1943. That was during the war. Right. Did you continue to work then? Because there was a hardship to find... Right, right. Yes, I... I worked... I kept working at Travelers, and then after my husband came home... He was drafted into the service? Yes, right. He was gone 40 months, so that was a long time. And I did some Red Cross nursing aid and so forth while he was gone. And then your daughters, now they... They also continued to work when they married. Yes. I have one that's... Well, two of them have divorced since they got married, so they're still working, of course. But I have one that's a stewardess, and she works for United, and she's been with them about... What is it? 18 years now, I guess. But she's provided many wonderful trips for me. Once a year, I get a free pass, and so I've been to... In the United States? Yes, and then I get the discount on others, so I've been to Sweden a couple times. I've been to Africa, and I've been to Europe and London, and I've been to Hawaii four times. So you have to keep healthy. I do, right. And it's just really been a wonderful thing for me. I always thought I wanted to be a stewardess when I was growing up, but then you had to be a nurse, you know, and there were so many nurses, they said, don't be a nurse. So I never was able to be a stewardess. So when she came along, she said, Mother, I'm scared to tell you what I want to be, and I said, oh, that's marvelous. I always wanted to be that. So she's been happy in that. She lives in California. And then I have a daughter that's a dietician, and she lives in Topeka, Kansas. And then my youngest daughter lives in my house. We build a house over on 40th and Arbor Street, and they were looking for one, and when my mother died, she was with me at that time. She died in 82. Then I thought, well, I don't need this big house. I don't need the big yard. I don't need the snow shoveling, and I don't need all that. So I asked them if they'd like to, and so they're renting from me, and I only live 10 blocks away, so I get to see the grandchild and see the house and so forth, so it's worked out very well. And none of them married a Swedish background? No. No. There are no more Swedes left now? No. No. No Swedes. No Nimrods. Well, Don has a young brother, not a young brother. He was younger than he– Red Oak, and he has a son, so there will be some Nimrods along the way. They are all from Red Oak, then? Yes, right. And have you belonged to any organization or belonged to any Swedish– No, just recently, since I quit working, I've belonged to the Swedish Sewing Society that meets. Sewing Society? Yes, I said, I thought we were going to do lots of sewing, but they don't do so much of it anymore, but they used to have big affairs, and they– When was that started? Oh, I think they've had it for 40 years or something. And this is an organization, you keep records and everything? Well, we have a meeting– Well, there are about 25 of us, I think, now. And it used to be quite large, and they would have bazaars, and it was a part of the– I was going to say Vikings in Chicago, but it wasn't Vikings. What part of that– And it's broken off since then, or they've disbanded, I guess, in Chicago. I remember they used to make money and send to the headquarters. I can't think what that is. That's too bad. I should know. Because they made me vice president last year of that. But it was not an outfit of the Vikings? Switzerland? No, I don't believe so. American daughters? No, that doesn't sound right. I wonder if it could be– I'll bet it's Svea. That's a newer organization. Oh, that's a newer one? So this is about 40 years old. Yeah, I think so. So what do you do then? You joined there as a member? Yeah, it's mostly a social club. We pay a little dues, and we have meetings, and we eat. How about the sewing now? We sew if we want to. We haven't been doing it for anybody lately. It was not started during the war, for instance, for some war effects? Not to my knowledge. It seems to me it was started before then, because some relatives belonged to it then. And I never was able to be active, because it meant in the daytime, and I always worked. And– But Martha Holm and so forth– And they're all in Swedes? They were all– They're all Swedish background, yeah. I don't think there's anybody in that group that isn't Swedish. So they have to be Swedish? I think that's sort of a requirement. I don't know if it's in writing or what, but that has been my understanding of it. And it's called a Swedish sewing club? Sewing Society. Yeah, let's– I'll have to– That is interesting. Do you know of Mildred Golden with the mortuary here in town? Have you heard of her? No. Oh, she's in that. Katherine Orton. I was trying to think of some people you might have heard of. Do you meet once a month? Once a month? In member's homes? Yes. Yes. Your husband didn't belong to the Noonday Club or your father? No, no, they didn't. I think Don was approached one time, but he worked in such a job he couldn't get away. You have long lunches and so forth, so I think maybe that he wasn't able to affiliate with that. But I know of the Noonday Club. So when did you visit Sweden? That was when your mother was still living. Yes, right, the first time. I was looking up what year it was here. 1972, October. And your husband went to– Yes, right. So your mother planned it for you, too, that what did you see and look for? Yes, right. Yeah, like a wish list. Yes, right. You had to bring back– And her– where she was confirmed and so forth. So what did you see now or find over there? You went to– Well, we went to the Riksdagen, of course. And he is your cousin then? Yes. I don't think I have a picture of him, but– And they knew about your mother leaving Sweden in 1910? We visited the garden, the– Millesgården. And then we were in– That's Rolf's wife, and that's his mother and father. So when you brought back this photo album, what did your mother say then? Oh, she thought that was wonderful. She wished she could have gotten it. She didn't? But I said, well, wouldn't you like to go? And she said no, but we did get her to go on a plane to California after that. She thought if I could go to Sweden and back and be safe, well, then I suppose it was all right. She didn't care to go back to see her little sister? No, no. She just– I don't know if she was afraid or she just didn't– Her health was good. I don't see why she couldn't have. She said she didn't really have fond memories of Sweden. She left when she was young and she had to work hard, she said. But I said, well, it's such a beautiful country that I didn't see how you could leave. Then my daughter and I, the stewardess and I, went in 1982. We visited and my husband and my mother were both gone then. So you were able to converse with the people then? Yes, I was. I was really surprised. Your cousin, now earlier, was he able to speak English? Oh, yes. He does very well. He did? He writes very well, too, in Swedish. His father is still living, and he's my mother's brother. There was one brother and one sister left in Sweden? And the mother's– And they live on the family place then? Yes, it's in Borlänge. So you saw Dalarna then. How about your father's– Yes, I went up there on the train. We took the train from Stockholm to– Arby– to– Yes, it was– I guess Arby, because it's a train station. I have a cousin there. We went to the cemetery and saw the graves. She has some children that we conversed with. They can speak English, but they don't really want to. But they can, and they can understand when we talk. So we had a good time. So your father, he died before your mother? Yes. He died shortly after my sister was killed and so forth. That was pretty hard on him. So did they travel much there? Oh, well, before my sister and I were married, we had a new Ford my dad and I bought together. So we drove to California then to visit one of my aunts with some cousins. We drove cross-country, and they really enjoyed that. My mother was a little afraid in the mountains because the roads were pretty narrow in those days, you know, 1930s. But– But the car was– The car was fine, and we got back and forth real well. So we left there. Good old Fords, yeah. We stayed in motels along the way, so that was fun. Then that following year, my sister was married, and we didn't travel as a family then. So here in Omaha now, what year did he become a citizen? Your parents. He was a citizen before they were married. So I think she automatically became one when they were married. I believe that's the way it was. So he probably was a citizen shortly after he came, probably 1910 or so. And then after they met, then were married, then she automatically– I think that's the way they said she didn't have to go through the tests and preparation that you do when you're– So she automatically became citizen. And then I was born, I was automatically a citizen. You became an American instantly. That's right. Was it easy for your father not to find a job through his relation? Were they helpful to him? Yes, I don't think he had any problems. He wanted to be independent, of course. He didn't want to just work for them. I mean, that wasn't– Did he belong to a union later on? Yes, he did. He was a union man. A union man and a Republican. Did they go together, though? It seemed to with the people he was with. They don't sound like it, do they? But no, he had no problem with that. So there were more Republicans at that time in Omaha than yesterday? At least in our area of friendship and so forth. We were all– So the Swedes were almost all Republicans? I think there were one or two every once in a while that just wanted to be different, became Democrats. I don't think they did it because they knew it was any better or worse, but they wanted to be different. Were any of your family actively involved with politics? No, I don't recall anybody. Under the school board or– No. I can't think of anybody. I can't think of anybody who was. Were there any Swedish mayors in Omaha that you know of? I don't think so. I can't think of any. There were two weak foundations. Right. Yeah. There were other strong areas, like Italian and Irish and so forth, that were more– They were dominated. Dominated. That's right. They just were– Swedes were almost inclined to be bashful, you know, and take the back seat and so forth, even though they had very definite ideas. They probably didn't want to voice them too much. So– They had to sit back and let the others run it. That's right. And complain if they don't like it, you know. And vote for the right one. But the votes– They used to laugh. They said, if you had the name Olsen, you could get elected, you know. And they said one time they voted, they didn't know who that Olsen was. And it was a black fellow from– Didn't have any background or anything, and they really laughed when they found out they had elected this fellow. Olsen. It was an Olsen. They didn't know that they were electing– And, of course, the Swedes did not grow up with black people, so they really were not very kind. I used to be embarrassed sometimes, because I had black children in my school, and two or three friends, you know. And they used to– Smart thing, aren't they? They were distinguished. Yes, right, right. They did, you know. That's right.