 This is cassette two, this continuation with Ethel Becker, Moline, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. Do you have a figure or a number of how many students you have had through your fingers over the years? Well, I have one boy that was my pupil in 1929 who comes and sees me whenever he—he lives in California now—he comes and sees me every time he comes here, writes all the time. He is a playwright and so I used to ask him why he traveled all over the world. He says, oh, he gets materials for pictures. Then he said, at that time he wrote one play to introduce the Oldsmobile car every year. Then they would give that play in Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco and so on. He said, would you come up and see it in Chicago? I said, I sure would. And so one year, Francis and the kindergarten teacher and I went up and saw the play. We saw it from out in the audience in the afternoon and then in the evening backstage. So he was a native East Moliner. What was his name? Max Hodge. Max Hodge. So he is an Italian now, I suppose. Practically. They won't let him make pictures without a lot of the shooting and so forth, so he turns down their contract. He used to make stories like Walton's Mountain, that type he used to write. So he remembers his old teacher. And then I get from a girl who was my—I started in fourth grade out in East Williams. She was in my fourth grade in 1928. Oh, before that. And she lives in California, so I hear from her every year, too. So how many thousands of students do you think you have handled over the years? Oh, dear. I don't know how many. Must be a lot of them. I had 54 in my room one time. Fifty-four? So they didn't give you small classes in those days. The classes usually used to average around 30, 35. It was not easy. No. You had to be on your toes all the time. But you never felt tired after all this training to have so many kids, you know, like a beehive all the time? Well, I don't know. You're a part of it. You just get going in it. So did you—during the vacation, or I wouldn't call it vacation, but the break in the summer, what did you do then? Get a job to start with. Most of the time we went out as housemaids. We had friends down on 12th Avenue that always would hire one of us, either Francis or me. They had four children, and we helped with the housework and the cooking. The housework? Oh, yeah. And there were other places that we got the same thing. So you never took a vacation for a week or so and went on to Florida? It used to be three months. Three months. But you didn't take a week off then just to relax and go to the beach or somewhere or anything like that? Oh, no. Nobody did that? Only we did—in 1925, then we started—my mother and Wilbur Lee. I don't know who arranged it, going fishing. And from then on, we used to take time out to go up north fishing. So he had the car then so he could take you along? Well, it was our car, the family car. So your mother bought the car then? We all did. Our money used to just go in one box. Communal togetherness? Yeah. Where did you go fishing, you said? La Porte, Minnesota. His story is fishing. We had a 1918 Oakland automobile, second-hand one, touring car. Did you all drive it? I did finally. And your sister? And my sister finally learned to drive, too. But that was only used for certain occasions, then, when you— Oh, no. After we got a car, we used it all the time, didn't we? Yeah. So I— We all got a car. So during the Depression, now, that hit in 1929-30, how did that affect your teaching? Did you see it coming? Did you have to go down on your pay scale or—? We did. In East Moline, we never had to go down on our pay scale. Mr. Hoffman was a good financier. He knew how to handle money. And East Moline was the only one of the schools around here all had to take cuts or go without their pay for a month or so on. I don't know what they called it, paper money of some sort, one year they had to take. But we taught in East Moline, and we never took a cut in our—we were good through the Depression, that— I see. That Depression. Were John Deere factory out there at that time in East Moline with the harvester work? Were they what? John Deere, did they have factories out in East Moline at that time? Oh, yes, but not as many as they had later on. But they were beginning, though, to come in. Oh, yes. So, it was strange they didn't have to take a pay cut. In other words, they could— We never did. I never took a pay cut. Oh. So, that was— No. So, during the Depression, was it hard to get what you needed for the school? No, it wasn't. My mother had a little hard time when we had to use stamps for buying to keep track of what you could buy and what you couldn't without stamps. But otherwise, we didn't suffer much then. We had stamps. Yeah, we had stamps that you had to have stamps to buy gasoline or stamps to buy— But they were doing the war then. You're talking about the wartime now. It was the wartime. Oh, yeah, that was the war. Talking about the Depression. That's right. I remember that. No, we never had stamps. Oh. And you were not without any work in school? No, we weren't. The East Moline schools were good. They were good, yeah. They kept me. You kept us, too. How about during the summer then? Did you get a job then during the Depression, too, to work for people in homes? Oh, yes. That was easy to do. You could easily get a job. How long did you continue with this working in families during the summertime? Well, we used to usually get a week before school started. But most of the time it was for friends that we were working. Helping out. Yeah, it was helping out, and we were paid for that. You see, we didn't get any money unless we earned the money when we were teaching. From the first of June until the end of September, we never had a penny coming in. We were paid for the nine months, only the nine months. And so those summer months, we had to either save or hit it and so on to have for the beginning of school. We needed car fare or gasoline to get to school. So you had to manage the money well. Yeah, we did. We had to manage it. Did you cut it in a bank, or how did you? No, I think we kept it at home most of the time. You didn't trust the banks after the Depression? No. Were there some of your neighbors that lost their houses during the Depression for closures? No, I can't think of anybody. Because this neighborhood, they were all, they were back in the 1890s and 1900s, the houses were paid for them. Yeah. They were just the newer neighborhoods that came into trouble with paying off loans and so on. So how about your neighbors? Now you live on 11th Avenue. 13th Avenue. 13th Avenue and 11th Street or 10th Street. 10th and 11th. You are not too far away from the Belgian 7th Street. That's right. So how was that looking then when you were growing up here? Was a lot of Belgians over there on 7th? Of course, over towards. It was wild country beyond 9th Street pretty much. Oh, I see. That was a deer property and a good deal of it there. Their experimental farm. Deer had an experimental farm on the other side of 9th. But of course, this grew up awfully fast, so it's really an old neighborhood. It was like a town right away then. But then 7th Street, there a Belgian came in. The Belgian people came in on 7th Street? Yeah. And they settled there? That's right. Did you have any connection with them? No. They were a completely different side of town? The boys did. Will did. The Belgian town. But you never had any Belgian friends or neighbors? No, it was a good neighborhood. But they didn't come over here to settle though. They were mostly Swedes here. Yes. Mostly Swedes. Yes, it was. They stuck together. My sister couldn't talk a word of English when she started school. But then we learned fast. My father told her he didn't want her to learn the broken Swedish and saying this and that. He wanted her to talk like the teachers talk. So when you were growing up now then, you had to learn English then? We had to what? Did you learn English from your sister then? Yes. By the time I got to school, I knew English. Both English and Swedish? Yes. But in school you had no use for Swedish? No. You didn't talk to your friends in the neighborhood or in the school yard in Swedish or anything? No, we didn't. You didn't want to do that? No. My sister Frances, she had a lot of cute little stories. She was four years older and she had these experiences of learning English. She tells about how she was playing with the kids in the neighborhood and the girl that was cleaning out the room, she needed a broom. So she said to Frances, go and ask your mother for a broom. Var det, Francese. En broom. She kept saying different ways to sweep with. Frances couldn't understand. She said, oh inquisitive. And Frances thought, inquisitive. And then she went herself and got a broom. And Frances connected the word inquisitive with room, encrust. So next time she went to the store, she went to buy a broom, she said, I want an inquisitive. But she said they didn't understand me. I had to go and point to them. So you called it kvastetom? Soapvast? Yeah, encrust. So like your parents, did they use a lot of Swedish expressions? Like lagisstol for instance. Oh yes. They didn't say spisen. Their mother used to use it. But toward the last years, then we used English all together. Because you brought in English all the time then. Yeah, but just for fun we used to say things in Swedish. But while my father was living, we used Swedish pretty much when we sat around the table. We were 14 of us around the table all the time. And my father was a great storyteller and he'd tell these stories in Swedish. I don't imagine you will remember that so much. He was small in the high chair. But my father would tell stories, I think maybe to keep us kids, our attention, keep us quiet during the meal. So you were listening then when he was telling stories? Yes, he used to tell stories. Do you remember any of them? I can't really, but now I've tried to think of some of them if I could remember them, but I don't. But one trick he used to do, he'd tell the same story, but he'd change it a little bit. And I remember how I used to sit and listen to see which part of the story he was going to change. Oh, I see. I knew the story, but I paid attention to see which part was going to be changed. So he was playing a trick on you. So there must have been a house full of motion all the time. So you met there, that was the big dining room you said? Yeah, that. Well, when we were so many of us, the dining room was where my bedroom is. We rebuilt the house. When Will got married, we rebuilt the house. We raised our roof four feet and made a full story upstairs and then made this into a parlor or a living room. And that's our dining room, but that used to be our living room. And this was just parlor. I remember about the parlor, if I read my Sunday school lesson, I could go in and sit in the parlor and read it. Oh, I see. But you couldn't do any playing in here? Oh, no. No? No, I never jumped and played on it for sure. So when they get visitors, for instance, then they came into the parlor? And the— The Christmas, then we always were in the parlor, on the tree. Oh, I was always in there. How was your mother? She had a lot of friends in the neighborhood, like her sister-in-law over there. Did they come over for coffee? Oh, yes. In the forenoon or afternoon? Before I can remember it, but my mother said they'd hang a dishrag in the window, and the coffee's hot. Oh, I see. And if they'd see, some of the neighbors would see the dishrag in the window, then they'd come and get coffee. So they didn't have any telephone at that time, then? No, oh, no. It was only visual signs. A sign for the ice man and a sign for the coffee. That's right. So did they have—she took a break then in the morning before lunch or in the afternoon? No, I think they would just have coffee. Coffee in the forenoon? In the morning. In the morning. And I don't know, but I don't remember. Well, when we came home from school in the afternoon, I remember how we kids would—because we wouldn't get supper until six, seven o'clock. The shops kept working until six and six-thirty. But then you could have the cracker box to feed yourself a little. Yeah, we could get crackers out of that. But you couldn't eat too many, though, I mean, to stuff yourself with— Oh, no. Most of the time, we'd have one slice of bread and a glass of milk. Mother never stopped us from bringing a friend in either if we had some kids with us, we'd drag them in, too. They were always welcome. We remember quite well how Marjorie Vealy lived just down here. She was in the same room as Hattie, my cousin. So Hattie used to bring her home. I just remember how she, with her long skinny legs, used to sit at the table and eat bread. That was fun for her. Vealy, was that all the car people? Yeah, the car people. They lived right down here, 11th Street. So you were in their house many times, too, then? Well, not so many times. No, that was just hired help, and the hired help didn't care to take care of us. But Marjorie would stop here on her way home with us. So she got the habit to stop here, and the visit there paid off. The church was a central point, I suppose, for the family. Oh, yes, it was. Both your parents were religious, active in the church. Yes, and I was an organist for about 50 years, and I was Sunday school superintendent for I don't know how many years. I haven't figured that out. I taught Sunday school first, then I was superintendent. So you started in Sunday school, then? Oh, yes. Of course, they didn't start as children the way they do now. They start when they're born. But some of our kids that are a year old, they had their year of attendance in Sunday school. But we started when we were about six years old. Five or six, I think. Was it in Swedish? Oh, yes. In Swedish? Our textbook was in Swedish. And finally, we got a little textbook that had Swedish on one side and English on the other side. But that was, oh, I don't know what year it was. About 1920, I think. Near 1920 when we started to have English in church. So the Baptist Church, now the Swedish one, was founded over in Rock Island in 1852. What year did they move over to this side then, to Moline? Well, we were not a daughter church. The members that lived here in East Moline and Moline organized a sister church. Yes. And that church was downtown? Yeah, that's right. On 13th Street and 6th Avenue. 6th Avenue. So that was the church you went down to. You walked then from here? Oh, yes. And I used to walk out to school on the other side of the airport, carry ten library books with me. They let me take ten books from the library. How did you get over Rock River then? Was there a bridge there? Oh, the same bridge that they have now. Oh, there was a bridge at that place when I was only two years old. I remember when our folks went on a vacation one summer. There was a wooden bridge then? We camped in a tent. And I can remember the bridge across the river. I must have been only about three years old. My father took me out in the rowboat in the evening when the sun was going down. He used to get me to sing. I used to sing quite a bit. And he got me to sing, and I think it was the old folks' songs, like Old Black Joe and so on. And when I finished singing, somebody clapped, and there was a crowd up on the bridge had been listening to me. Of course, I was willing to sing again when they clapped for me. You had an audience? I just remember that. And I remember we had a swing, I think a rope swing that went out across the water a little bit. So that's way, way back. Yeah. Yeah, that's a long time ago. So your dad, he took you out then on the different things like that? Oh, yes. And I remember how we used to have what we would call hack parties. Two or three families, we'd hire a horse and buggy and a hack that had seats. So he held several people, and we'd go out nutting. But that was before we got the geller jet children. We didn't do that so much. But after that, when we had, they were small. We used to on Sunday afternoons go walking. We put Wilb in the carriage and wheel him along, my mother and father and all us kids would go on a long walk. There was no sidewalks though at that time? Oh, yes, there were wooden sidewalks. Up here in this area too? Yeah. Wooden sidewalks? Wooden sidewalks. So they had them downtown, but did they have them also up here? They had sidewalks where there was like up to the school and so on. You see, having school there, they kept the things like that going. And how about the streetcar? Did they come up here on the- Oh, no, we never had streetcar service. We've got it better now than they used to have. Oh, you never had the streetcar service? The nearest was up on 18th Avenue. Do you remember the year you got the electric light? Now because you clean the lamps, you said you must remember. Oh, yes, I remember that. Gas lights came in between the kerosene. It was first the kerosene lamps, then we got gas lights. They had a mantle that if you shook it too hard or not bumped it, it would break. Then we got the electricity. So that was around 19- I can't remember the year at all. 1910? Oh, we had electrified in 1910, I think. It was about that time, I think, that we got them. And when they built this house now, did they have any water drawn in then from the city? No, there was wells for every house. Any what? City water. No, I remember a little bit when the city water, but we had a pump for our two houses. Right in between the two houses. And all the neighbors used to come and get, oh, that was good water. So every house then had their own well, if they could? Yeah, they had their own well. So to get the water off the washing, they had to be pumped up then? We had both cistern water and well water, hard water. We had a cistern at the corner of the house over there, a hole in the ground, where the rainwater used to gather. And that was pumped into the kitchen. We'd prime the pump with water and pump the water up, because that was soft water. The well water was too hard. Good for washing. So your mother now, what kind of soap was she using for washing? I think feldsnaphtha is what I remember way back. It was the bar of soap? Yeah, feldsnaphtha. There was no liquid or alcohol? Oh, no. But for boiling the clothes, they used to boil them, we'd shave the soap and put that in the boiler to melt. And then everything was ironed and starched? Yeah, washed and ironed, everything. With those old irons, they had heat on the stove. And the cooking stove, was it coal? I remember when we got the gas stove. It was a convenience. And then you had the outhouse? That's right. There was every house? Every house, uh-huh. We had ours in connection with the shed, so ours didn't ever get turned over at Halloween. Well that was the game they had. I better ask him about that. He might remember some of the overturned ones. So there was a bad habit the children had. So they turned outhouses around. Did you have any chickens? Oh yes, we had chickens too. We got those during the food rationing. You had to buy barley, all kinds of grain, in order to get a sack of wheat flour. My mother broke out and she got sick from all the grains. So Mrs. Crane, the lady I used to room with when I taught, she said, I'll fit you out with chickens and you can feed the chickens the barley and the flour that you have to buy in order to get wheat flour. So then she gave us some chickens. Will's got an interesting story about that too. So you had your own eggs then and you'd go out there and gather eggs? Yeah. Did your father belong to the council of the Baptist Church here? No. No, he was not involved with the trustees? No, he wasn't. Will was at one time when he grew up, but my father was not. Did you belong to the ladies' groups like ladies' aid? Oh yes. I still mostly belonged to the mission circle. So then you went into the church sometimes and did some sewing? We used to just about live in the church. But you always had some activities going on to help others? Well, with the young people, we worked a lot with the young people. Did you travel around to other churches like Galesburg? Oh yes, we had a— D.C.? Western Illinois, they still do. Then you met other— So we had lots of friends down in Galesburg and Keewanee and Monmouth. So your uncles are now across the street there or across the— They belong to the Free Evangelical. You know, the Free Evangelical used to be over here on the corner. And they sent the children there, and so they grew up in that church. Oh, I see. But you— But mother had gotten started in the—and my father in the Baptist church when they were young. But you stayed very close together. Oh yes. You twice did different religious beliefs. That's right. That made no difference. So all the people now living in this house, and then you have the neighbors, a big group of people. And they seem to be very happy and congenial about being together. Playing croquet. Did you—you didn't belong to any other Swedish organization in Kwasiwies, like Voss or Viking or Switzer or Brotherhood of any kind? What kind of insurance did your parents have now when they first came out? Well, that was one of the sad things about it. My father—just before my father died, the company that my mother and father were insured in went broke. What company was that? It was then— I can't remember the name of it. But they were—then they were supposed to be taken over by another company. And that was—my father was not well enough. They wouldn't accept him. So he had no insurance then? He had none at all. And how were they able to pay the hospital bill then, the doctors? I don't know. They didn't have hospital bills. And the doctor—was the doctor Art? No, Dr. Sloan. Sloan. Oh, he was the old family doctor. Wilbert was named after Sloan. His name was Wilbert Sloan. Wilbert Sloan. He didn't tell me that. He said Wilbert Edward. It's a Sloan. No, just Sloan's first name was Wilbert. I see. So he came to the hospital, the doctor, when you were— Oh, yes. And the women used to run out and catch him on his horse and buggy when he was on his way to the hospital and carry their babies out and let us—ask him about— Take a look at him. Because you know with this hospital, there were so many people, you must have had some experience with sickness and— Oh, yes. My mother was known for when anyone—when the women in the neighbor—something wrong with the children, they'd call for my mother. Oh, she was like a doctor. Well, no, she wasn't even a practical nurse. No, but I mean, she had common sense to know what— She just did that. She was just good for that. Did she deliver babies too, maybe? No, no. Only if the baby wasn't feeling well, she'd— She knew the remedy. If they were not looking good enough to go out and play and so on. She knew how to take care of that. This is cassette two, side two, a continuation with Ethel and Wilbert Becker, Moline de la Neuve. Cassette two, side two. I asked the question here about Halweg. Well I don't know what you—Halweg's Houston, those are the houses down there on the 4th and 5th Avenue, below the hills, between—well, I think it was toward 3rd and 4th Street. I suppose it meant halfway to Rock Island. I think that's what it meant, but that's what they used to—Halweg's Houston. They had that expression years ago. Yes, a halfway house. But they referred to that district, and I think they meant halfway to Rock Island, but that's all I know about it. So it was down 4th, 5th Avenue and 5th Street, is that it? 4th Street? 4th Avenue. 4th Avenue. Between about around 3rd and 4th, 6th Streets and through there. Down around Irving School. I see, so that was the Halweg's Houston. Or Erickson School it is. Well Wilbert Becker, now I want to ask you here. You were born 1901, 16th of December in Moline, and we have heard now what your sister told me about—told us about the family and the house was built there. Now I want to ask you about your life a little bit here. You were born 1901, and you hardly remember your father. No, I was nine years old when he passed away, and I have faint memories of him, but I knew that I missed him very much, but we hadn't had all that much time together as in my memory's time. So you had one older brother? Yes. You remember Carl? Oh yes, I remember Carl. He also died— Young. Young. What happened? Was he in an accident or—? Well, he became sick, and he worked at Augustana Book and Searn for a while, and finally we noticed that he was becoming withdrawn, and he finally died in the hospital. But my memories mostly start with the late grade school days and my high school days. I went three years in my high school, and then I quit school and was gone for a while. I drove a grocery truck for the Lawson John Swanson grocery store, and I finally went back and finished the last school with a lot of difficulty, but I did graduate in 1923. From high school? Yes, from high school. And I went for a brief time to an automobile school, but I was glad I went to that school because it was—but I didn't continue in the automotive business. I started working in the shops. And that was Moline Plow? That was—I started out at the John Deere Wagon Works, and I left there. I worked at Minneapolis Moline, and I kind of bounced around from one job to the other. However, I stayed on the jobs quite a while. I don't know why I moved around so much, but I wanted the experience, I guess. I worked in many of the job shops around here, and that's where I got my experience. As a toolmaker? Yes. So you came in long before the Union started in the United States? Oh, yes. The Wagon Works was—at that—when I was there, they was fighting the unions very much. They was very much against the unions. Was it in the 1920s? No, the year, I don't—I can't say. During the Depression? What's that? During the Depression? Yeah, during the Depression. And— Why were they fighting the union, you think? Because in other places, like Chicago and DeKalb, was it— Well, John Deere fought the unions, I think, stronger than most places. They were anti-union, but when they finally gave up, they really gave up, and then the unions had their own way from then on. It's very strange how they gave up. They quit the fight, and the unions got just about everything they wanted. The older people now that worked at—a lot of Swedes worked at John Deere. Yeah. Were they afraid to join the union, you think, when they first started, because they were afraid to get a job? Well, the workers just hadn't got in there yet, the union officials. I guess they had a hard time getting a foothold in there when they finally—when it finally came up to the voting time, where then the union went in. They needed the unions at that time. The conditions in John Deere shops, at least at the wagon works, was not good. It was—the wagon works before the union was run completely by a bunch of foremen that had their own way with each individual man. The men seemed to feel as though they owed the job to the foreman. And there was no benefits of any kind, no overtime. The best you could do in the shop—if you worked on a Sunday on an emergency or something, the boss might give you the—you can punch the clock out and we'll pay you an hour or so extra. That was the extent of it. And then—and the conditions in the shop were dirty. There were no drinking fountains and the toilets were dirty. What did you eat at lunch, for instance? You ate it on your bench. You'd find a bucket and manage to get some hot water with a chunk of hot iron in it to wash your hands, have your own bar of soap. And you'd eat your sandwich right there in the shop. Did you eat in a big bunch or did you eat in small— Oh, we did in little groups. In a group. And like the toolmakers all kind of gathered together and they would eat. And production workers would be in their groups, you know. And I can tell you that the toilets were so dirty, if I had to go to the toilet, I would come home rather than go in down there. I hiked up the hill many times. Yeah, but could you leave the job, though? I would report and say that I was going home. And then I'd come back. Did you say that you had to go to the toilet? Yeah, yeah. And they granted permission for you to leave? Yeah. Why didn't they clean the toilets then? They just wouldn't allow the money. And then when the unions did come in, then they went overboard the other way. Then it went—the pendulum went completely the other way. Then they built new toilets and they painted them up and they set rules and regulations that we never used to pay any attention to. Were they outside toilets or were they inside the plumbing? The early ones, when I would go home, they were outside. But then they built them inside. Well, why should they be dirty? They just didn't have the janitors to do it. They didn't spend the money for that. It's hard to imagine it today. The foreman and the management, they didn't care. They didn't care. They didn't care at all. But it changed then. And that was good. That was good. And this continued on during the whole 20s and up in the 30s? Yeah. Until the unions started to come in. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Because there was— I can tell you a story how little I knew about the union. One day I was doing something out here in the backyard and a man, total stranger, came up to me and wanted to talk to me. He said he wanted me to start a credit union down at the wagon works and would I work a little bit among the men down there and see if I could get anyone interested in a credit union. So I—and he explained the thing. I didn't know what a credit union was either. But he told me it was a place you could borrow money and put your money in and save, very simple rules. You could borrow for less interest. Yeah. And so I went down there and I mentioned it to some of my workers that, do they know anything about a credit union. So I'd explain it and pretty soon I got called into the superintendent's office. He told me straight off that I was discharged. He fired me right there. Well, did you say the reason why or anything? Well, and I told him, I says, you're going to be sorry. I says, you sure you want to go through with this? And we argued a little bit. He says, you—he told me, he says, you're guilty of union activities. How did he get the news about that? I suppose some of the other fellas that I had been talking to went and squealed. So I says, wouldn't you want an explanation of what I was doing? No, he had had enough. So then I told him, I'll bring a man in here. So I got a hold of this fella that had contacted me and I took him down there and he explained I got my job back and they formed a credit union. Yeah, because the credit union didn't have anything to do with union activities. Nothing with the labor unions at all. But the word union, it bothered them. So the way I got started at the wagon works was kind of a strange thing. I had worked at the farm hall assembling tractors down there. And then a brother-in-law of mine that was interested in me said that I should learn something. I was making pretty good money at the farm hall. So he asked me if I wouldn't go down to Harrington Seabrook. That's what now is Eagle Signal Corporation. Wanted me to come down there. He was in the office down there and said I should go down there and learn something. So I thought it was a good idea too. I finally went to the official of Harrington Seabrook and he wanted me, he told me I could go to work there. So I went to work. And I don't remember the hourly wage, but I was getting good wages at the farm hall. And I asked him if he thought he'd pay me to quit that farm hall job to come there and he finally said yes. So I went to work there at 35 cents an hour. And finally they went down to three days a week. And I couldn't stand that because by that time I was married. So I went out to the lumber yard, John Deere Lumber Yard. I had worked there during summertime and going to school. So I went down there and got a job piling lumber. And boy I hadn't been there for too many days. The superintendent of the wagon works came down there and saw me and he knew me from before. He said he was sorry they were going to lay me off. He had to lay off two men. So I started hiking down towards Moline and he came along in his car and picked me up. Is he going to drop me off at 15th Street? He says, you better come down to wagon works. Maybe I got a job for you. And I went down there and I took the job as an oiler, dirtiest, dangerous job you could find. What did you do oiling the? Oiling the line shafts. Oh, the overhead. Overhead stuff. Climbing in along the pulleys and the belts, you know. And it has to be done when it's running? Oh yes, yeah. All day long. But while I was on that job I would get done about three o'clock in the afternoon. I would go down in the tool room and kind of keep my eyes open and get acquainted with the fellas down there and even help them a little bit. So then my boy came along and I figured now's no time to be climbing around. So I asked the superintendent, I said, I'll stay on it for one more year and then you got to find something else or else I'm gone. So he says, all right. In a year's time he sent me into the tool room and that's when I started. They didn't have an apprentice program but I just went in there and had to start doing the work. And pretty soon they started hiring apprentices. So I got started training apprentices. And that was a grand experience. I had four apprentices and I had to produce with them apprentices. They couldn't play around like they do nowadays. And they went through their four years and then it was kind of the unwritten rule that when you served your time you'd go out someplace else and work and then come back after a while. These guys all went over to the arsenal and I thought, oh boy, we had no machinery like they had on the arsenal. I figured that they wouldn't last long over there. Q They were more advanced on the arsenal? A What's that? Q They were more advanced over at the arsenal? A Oh my goodness. We were, we would have been nothing but a junk shop down there. Q You had more rough stuff down there. A Yeah, yeah. The shavings was three inches thick on the floor. No housekeeping at all down there. But anyhow, they went over to the arsenal and they had been over there for, oh, probably three or four months. And a guy by the name of Bombeck was the head of the program over there. And he came over to the wagon works and talked to the superintendent and they called me into the office and I thought I was going to get called on the carpet. So he says, I understand you trained them apprentices that came over to us. And I says, I did the best I could with what we got. He says, well, if you got any more apprentices like that, send them over. He said they were the best ones he ever had. So I got a little courage then and figured, well, I can do just as well with some more of them, you know. So they, I trained apprentices down there one after the other. And I never had an apprenticeship myself. Q That is strange. A Yeah. Q If we go back a little bit now with this oiling business, explain a little bit for me how you did this. Was it running oil or was it grease? A It was both grease and oil. And they have what they call a loose and a tight pulley. And that, when you're not running a machine on the floor, you can shift that belt over to the loose pulley and then that machine down there is idle. But that loose pulley used to wear out pretty quick because it run constantly, you know. So you'd have to have an oil cup up there and you'd fill that oil or the grease cup and screw it in once a day or maybe twice, depending on the speed. Some of them you had to get two and three times a day. Then you had a long oil can with a long spout and there was a twelve-inch wide board hung from the ceiling. And you'd walk along that and squirt oil in each individual. There was bearings all along because these shafts were, some of them, a half a block long. Q How long do they last if there was a bearing there? A Oh, those bearings lasted a long time as they were oiled at all. Q Was it roller bearings? A They were roller bearings with a reservoir. So you had a kind of a schedule where you didn't have roller bearings, there were sleeve bearings on those you had to get daily. The other ones could go two or three weeks even without oil. Q And you were, you had what you call appointment with them regularly? A Yeah, oh that was, I set up a, you kind of made up your own program to, you had to judge how fast, if they, and if they got hot, well you knew you had to watch that one a little bit more often than the others. So it was, Q And there was oil and dust? A Oil and dust and danger. Q Yeah, what was the most dangerous? Now if the belt flapped or, A What's that? Q If the belt broke, what happened then? A Oh, that was dangerous, yeah. Some of the belts were twelve and fourteen inches wide, you know. Q They could throw the leg off. A Oh yeah, yeah, there's been many accidents up on those, but you have to learn to be careful. Q Did you use a step ladder to reach up there? A You had a long step ladder put away on one end of the line, you'd climb up there and get on the board and work your way through. Q You could walk up there? A Yeah, you'd walk on that board. And then you usually had another ladder over here, and where there was not a long rope on you, you'd have one ladder and you'd go and put that up in the oil and then move the ladder and move along and try to keep your program up and not let any of them burn out because then you was in trouble. Q Then you knew you were alive. A Yeah, yeah, that's right. Q So this was the system used now from the early beginning, you know? A That's right. Q They continued all the way up to the late thirties? A Oh yes, yeah. Yeah, they started to have— Q It was an awful long time, though, before they started with the single motor. A With the individual. That came in kind of gradual then. Q Was that a union you think impressed on that? A I think the unions had a big part in getting— Q Individual motors? A Yeah, yeah. Whether they actually specified that they should buy an individual drive on a motor or not, I don't know if that was up to the head engineers or whether they talked it over and it managed to finally come that way. Q So the management, they were reluctant to do anything that would please you to work it? A Yeah, that's right. That's right. But then the pendulum swung the other way and now they'll buy a new machine even when they don't need it sometimes, because it's a tax write-off nowadays. Q That took an awful long time, though, from the beginning and up. A It did. It did. It took a very long time. It was a long, hard—it was a long, hard struggle. Q How about the grinding department? You were never working on it. But I understand they had a lot of problems with lung disease. A Yeah, that's right. There was no— Q Ventilation. A There was no ventilation system. They had small, simple ones, you know, but—and they would tell a man to wear a mask or something like that, but you know that never works out. Q In the summer, you get hot like this. A Yeah, yeah. And the grinding department is dangerous. They got it—they finally came around to where safety is a big thing. I know of an incident where it was the union steward that was pretty tough on the company. He was forcing them to do a lot of things that they didn't—weren't too happy about in the way of safety. So they promoted him to safety engineer. That solved their problem. Q And he was quiet? A Yeah. Q And after that, he didn't say anything? A Yeah, that's right. Then they got along fine with him. That was Bridgstrom. Q Oh, I see. A Yeah. Q But did he play the management role then more or less, you think? A Yeah, then he did. Then he did. Then he went with the management. Q So a foreman, for instance, if they had one that was a good worker and didn't want to lose him, then they made a foreman out of him? A That's right. That was a very common thing. Q And then the workers group lost the contact? A Yeah, that's right. Now it's so long since I've been in the shop, I don't know what the worker relationship is with the foreman anymore, but there was a big change. And the foreman had to be pretty careful the way he acted among the men after it was unionized. But before that, they were the big – Q They were the boss? A They were the kingpin. Yeah. Q But you would think they would be careful, though, with the – because they had friends and neighbors and they're working on that, wouldn't they? A They – Q They didn't care? A They didn't care. Q The management was the – A It was – they were – Q – the boss and they – A They were the ones, yeah. So it was – I went through that big change. And I made the mistake of – personally, I was in the shop at the time when there were no unions, you know, and in the job shops, they were the high-paid ones. So I jumped to a job shop. Most of them were nonunion, but finally even the unions got in there, but they were not so powerful. But I went in the job shops and they were the ones that were paying the best money. And then finally the production shops began to get the big money. So I kind of reversed the thing. Q But you were not afraid to talk union on the job? A Not really. I never belonged to a union. Q You never belonged to a union? A No, no, I never did belong to one. It just so happened that I was in the shops where the union hadn't got strong. And by the time the union was strong, that was at Minneapolis-Moline, then I was a foreman. So I got along fine with the unions. I got along fine with them. Q So the way you see it now, on the sideline, not being a union man, you could see there was a necessity to have unions? A Oh, yes. Q Because there would never have been any change otherwise? A No, it would have been bad. But I will say that they have gone too far. And when they begin to have the union activities with a man's family, where the family got benefits, the kids get dentists, the kids get doctors. In other words, the non-union people are paying for the help that the union people get on their extra benefits, and that's not fair. I'm glad the union people get benefits, but I don't think it should reach outside of the shop. Because we know that the shops are not paying those benefits. It's you and I. Q We have to. A We have to pay that. So a non-union man today is being penalized because of the union. Q And especially the farmers? A Yeah, yeah. They're all paying pretty heavy for the benefits that the union people are getting because they have gone too far. I'm not a non-union man, but I just say that they have gone too far. Q It is hard to keep this happy medium. A That's right. That's right. Q But you would think now, like a big company like John Deere. The John Deere family, of course, have made millions and millions of dollars. It's probably hard to realize how much they have made. Wouldn't they have seen the necessity of an orderly workplace where the worker could feel happy? A You'd think it was pretty much up to the individual manager. He had his budget and he tried to stay by it. Because I noticed such a difference at the wagon works. That was the lowest place in the whole Deere organization. Q What were they actually doing there at the wagon works? A Well, we built wagons, farm wagons. Q Farm wagons? A Yep. And that finally changed into the, what is it, John Deere? No, industrial. John Deere industrial. Yeah, I bet you I'm about the only one around here that knows how to build a wagon, a wagon wheel anyhow, I would say. Q So you built everything from scratch down there, the whole wagon? A Yeah, yeah. Q And assembled it in the... A There was more to a wagon than anyone realizes. Yeah. I understood all that machinery that was required for building a wagon. It was complicated. And then, of course, then the Depression came and you couldn't sell a wagon, but then the superintendent was smart. He was from the South. Then we started building farm trailers, a rubber-tired wagon that they pulled behind tractors and that, and they made money on them. Yeah. It was... Q When the Union came in, what was the first demand, you think? Was it more pay, of course? A More pay, yeah. Q And safety? A And then the next thing was safety. And then cleanliness. Of course, they go hand in hand, you know. But... Q And then vacation? A Then vacations. Q And hospitalization? A Yeah. And then it began to branch out. Beyond hospitalization, it began to go to the guy's family. He could take his family to the doctor and have his kids' teeth fixed. They were completely covered, you know, and that's when they went... That's when they... That's when they drove the companies away. Q But isn't it strange, though, that the management before that time, they wouldn't even discuss any kind of those grievances, I would say, with the vacation and... A No, no. Q And then the next generation of management, they gave in too easy for all this. A Then they gave in. Then they went all the way. Q What went wrong? A I don't know. They just didn't fight them anymore. As a matter of fact, I have said during... In the years, I've always said, when we discuss...