 This is tape number two, page number one, and it continues with the River and Shell, Rockford, Illinois. Tape number two, page one. Well, I'm just going to go back to this picture here. This is a baptism of two of my cousins. And this is Anna Thorson, wife of Andrew. She's holding Uncle Peter's Alice, and this is Uncle Peter's wife, Hilda, and Hazel was baptized. And there's Uncle Nathaniel. This is Uncle Peter and Uncle Nathaniel. My mother is holding my sister. This was taken 1909. And Grandma dies the year after in January, and there I am. And all these cousins, let's see, three of us are alive. All the rest are gone. And everybody else is gone on this picture. So baptizing, that meant you had to have godparents? They were important years ago. They don't talk about them anymore. I mean, when did they go out of existence, so to speak? Well, officially in the church record, there should be a witness. It's the same thing. But years ago, the godparents held some responsibility. Oh, yeah. They had great responsibility. In case something happened with the parents. Yeah, that was the idea. There was so much disease and illness that many times the mother or parents died, and someone should have the responsibility. I suppose they brought that with them from the church in Sweden, but that was done there also. I don't know. When you were growing up, for instance, did you know what your godparents... did they tell you that? No, they never did. They never made much of my godparents. I think my Uncle Peter maybe was the one. He was a mother's brother. I read that in a church book. I looked it up in a church book to see. And the pastor signs the name, of course, signs the whole thing, and the date and all. So you went on into a distinguished office. And there I met my husband. He was a student there. He was a student from Fergus Falls. He had attended the Northwestern Academy at Fergus Falls, which is no more. That was folding up in 19... was it 30s? It must have been. But I think William Chill went to the Academy. I don't think he graduated from high school. So he had two years then at Fergus Falls at the Northwestern, and then the rest of it... at St. Peter and Rock Island. And his twin brethren, he... what one did, the other one did. They always were together. And he had no trouble then to fit into the student body at the Fergus Davis's office at the Meadowfields? No, no. He had a comparable status, so to speak. One of them had a car, and that was a big thing in those days, to have a little old Ford, you know. He could have been at the school, though. Yes, they had... well, there was no dormitory for the boys. They lived in the town, found rooming places. I met Arthur in chemistry class. I happened to look, turn back, and there someone was looking at me. My name was Evelyn. Well, he'd had an Evelyn friend before, I guess. You didn't know him at that time? No. And then he... afterwards I found out he was in my German class and in my speech class, because they didn't have all those subjects up at Northwestern. Because he was a sophomore when he came, and I was a freshman. So they had to get in certain subjects. Well, the boys worked their way through school. I don't know how they did it, but they worked in the summertime selling woolen goods out in South Dakota. So they were on the road then? They were on the road all summer. And then they began to have congregations. When they went to seminary, they got summer work for the different conferences. So Arthur was out in North Dakota near Bismarck one summer, and in Minot one summer. And Anton was in Silver Hill, Alabama one summer, that was the summer of 1929, I guess. They were ordained at Rock Island in 1930, together, both of them. And the father was present at the ordination. And that was quite an event for him to come from Fergus Falls down to Rock Island. But the pastor brought him down, took him with him, drove. You were not married at that time? No, we were married later that month in June, 57, now 57 years ago. And when we came out to our first parish, it was on the western plains of Minnesota, very few trees. And when I get back there now, I wonder how we ever stood it, you know. And it was hard times. It was the beginning of the Depression then. The Depression, in our first parish, people had lost their money in the banks. And though the lady's aide, treasurer, kept her money at home, she didn't dare to bring it to the banks. During the summertime, she hid it in the coal stove. She should have it hidden. So she had a hunch. Yes. Don't trust anybody. There were many, many hobos on the road. We lived about two blocks from the railroad tracks, and there would be people coming to the door asking for food. Where was this now in western Minnesota? At Benson. In Benson? West of Wilmer. In the Ohio County? Yes. No, we were in Swift County. Oh, Swift County, isn't it? You really have traveled up there. Yeah, I've been there. Well, the story of all those churches. How was your husband paid now? Because the Thirties was very, very mean. Well, each congregation paid so much. You got paid in Natura, like food and egg and butter? Yes. Then they'd send home cream after the lady's aide's meeting. But not much cash, though? Not an awful lot, no. He paid his own travel to all these churches. There was no pay for it. So Benson and... And Murdoch, 12 miles. Starbucks? Starbucks, 22 miles. Bethesda, 16 miles. He had to pay for himself? Oh, yes. And also to keep the car? Yes. We were there for nine years, so we drove thousands of miles. During the whole Depression? You were there during the whole Depression? The whole Depression. And the drought, when it was so dry here this winter, and now, it just reminds me of those days in Benson. And it becomes very depressing when the grass is brown under your feet and the trees begin to wither. And that's what happened out there, very much so. The whole, all the trees around Bethesda Church died. Maple trees died during that time. Those churches were, they celebrated their, I believe, let's see, 64 to 30, 34 is what? I suppose it was, I thought it was their 60th anniversary. So we had celebrations, and it was so dry and hot and miserable. And the people were losing their farms up the road, one after the other. Did you, were you affected by this, the dust ball, too, in other words, the blowing top soil? Oh, yes. One day, it became darkest night. It was in May, 5 o'clock in the afternoon. It was just dark and just clouds of dust blew through the town where we lived. And you just, there was no way you could, it blew into every crack and crevice in the house. The bathtub was just black, and you just had to wash up with a wet cloth all the dust that blew. Well, that's the way they all experienced it. So they planted fields, and they were probably blown clean from the... No gardens. We came out to the fall home in the fall, and Mrs. Fall was peeling carrots, parsnips. Oh, I said, what are you doing? Oh, she said, we have to take care of what we have. But there weren't even carrots in the ground, you know. They didn't have, and gardens were important in those days, you know. They were hard times. We had a schoolgirl live with us for four years, or she might not have gotten to go to high school because there were no buses then. One of these Fall children. And now, when you come out there, they're so prosperous. These boys that my husband baptized, they are wealthy farmers and businessmen. So they survived. They survived. But there were a lot of farmers that had to go away from their land. Yes, there were. Where did they move? Did they go west or to the cities? Well, I think they had almost already moved either in or out by the time we came. They used to say, well, there were Larsons all along this road. But now somebody else has taken over. So that happened before we came. You came there in what year? 1930. 1930. Well, the Depression hit before then, also. It was before that. It really was in 1929. And Iowa farmers have already started to move up from Iowa. To Minnesota. To Minnesota. So there were families that had come from Iowa, several of them. But they were already there then. There had been a land boom. And that they could get cheaper land up north or something, I don't know. How did the church survive now? Was it correctional? Well, they... I was always happy to see the treasurer come to the church door with a check. I know one winter, the one church, there was no pay from December to April. The country...one of the country churches. But they were kind. I can't recall that we suffered in any way. We got along with...we were starting out with very little ourselves, you know. But if you compare now today, I mean, you've met a lot of pastors' wives over the years, and you see today...years ago, there was always...the congregation should also have the pastor's wife to work for free. Well, of course. Yeah, but nowadays, they won't do that. No, they're out earning big money. The first Sandi and Benson, the lady that hung up the numbers in church, she was so called janitor. Matilda Stone comes in about nine o'clock, and I said, who's the organist? Oh, she said, haven't they asked you to play yet? They didn't know whether I could play him or not. And I was dumb enough to... To start it? To do. Because I thought there was nobody there. I asked, if there's nobody there to do it, you'll do the best you can. I wasn't trained to be an organist. Well, then after the service, I saw there were some men sitting in the front pew, and they came and asked me if I'd keep on playing. So that was my life as an organist. You were hired immediately. No competition. And I think...I think it was $25 a year or something like that. They actually paid you a little bit. Yeah. That was big money. But... They gave in their offerings at Ladies' Aid, it'd maybe be 10 cents. That was a big thing. Or a quarter. But you had the envelope system up there. They gave every week an envelope? I...that I don't...I really can't say how that was to begin with. I wonder... But that was a gas-free offering then, from the... Well, they must have had some kind of a pledge system to begin with. I really...that's something I haven't thought about. But your husband paying all the travel costs. Well, cheap...the car. But even if it was cheap, I mean, somebody got to pay whatever the cost was. Oh, yes. I don't know if gas was...I suppose it was 25 cents a gallon. I don't know. We have all these old papers. I should look through some of this. I could find out a little bit. So the congregation never bought the car then for your husband during the nine years? Yes. I have to tell you then, we're ready to leave in 1939. We're going to Buffalo. And they're having a farewell party on a Sunday afternoon. All four churches are coming together. And Pastor Jorgensen, a good friend of ours over in the Norwegian church, is the speaker for the afternoon. And he's standing dangling a bunch of keys. And he tells Arthur, he says, go out and see if you can find a car that fits these keys. It was a new Chevrolet they gave us when we left. So they appreciated all his striving that he had done. That's unbelievable. I mean, when you compare it to today... For nine years. Nobody would do it for nine years today. Three services a Sunday. Three services every Sunday? Every Sunday. You didn't go along then? Oh, I went along as long as I could. So you were an organist at the Dahlke churches too? No. I don't think I wasn't. There were better musicians in the other churches. We had trained musicians. If I had known what was happening, I would never have done it that Sunday. And it was a Swedish service of all things. I think there were two parts to the service. And the old koraalbook, if you know that, how that is to handle that. Half and half, huh? So but your husband, he had to write two sermons then? Yes. One English and one Swedish. Did he say anything about the hardship of doing it? I often wondered how... Well, he was called to have two Swedish services a month. That would be... You see, this doesn't work with the young people. They don't know the Swedish. Nobody knew the Swedish, but the older people... There were many people who had come directly from Sweden out there in western Minnesota. At that time? At that time. Not many, but maybe four or five families. Well, you know, that makes a difference. And they've all learned the Swedish. What was I going to say? Yeah, I asked you about the hardship of writing two sermons. Did he say anything about that? Yes. And how does this end? Somehow or another, he never took it up with the congregation, so he quit announcing Swedish services. How he got by with it, I don't know. But I think there may be sense that they needed English services. So there was a smooth transition then? It was very smooth in that place. I know we were in other places where they had a big fight. Well, because the old timers, they wouldn't let go of the Swedish, of course. How about funerals? Was he requested at many funerals to sing or pray the Swedish prayer or when some old timer had died? Funerals, oh yes, that was a big event. You had a service in the home and in the church, of course. Always in the home. Always in the home to begin with. I don't remember, for the first nine years, I think the body was taken to the home for the most part. I can remember going for a service in a home in Buffalo, that would be in 1940. So it must have changed in that while. But there was a bigger town though in Buffalo, so maybe they... No, it was about 1700 or something. It was a county seat. They had a... It's a bit like Starbuck now. Starbuck church is still there and I think it was the smallest church in the Minnesota Senate. It's a small one. And they're still going. There were Norwegian churches on all sides, so why they never got together, I don't know. But we went there. Now, the Sunday that we went to Starbuck, there were four services. And oh, I tell you, I had a hard time to keep awake that Sunday afternoon. And by the time Faith was born in 31, well, if I was going to get to church at all, I'd better follow along and take the children along on Sundays. Pack up the basket then. They didn't have carriers for babies then and bottles and whatever we needed. And we were invited out to dinner in somebody's home by alphabetical order in one of the churches, Bethesda. So that was a big event for whoever. So we really got to the homes that way. So you had a close relationship then with the community? Oh, yes. I used to watch those women finishing, get that meal together because I wasn't, I was just learning to cook on my own. So I learned a lot from those ladies. We had district meetings. It was a big district, the Wilmer district. I think there were 17 parishes or more. And the Wilmer church was the big one? Yeah. The Bethel? Bethel. Bethel, Wilmer. Svea, Kandiyohi, Hector, Litzfield were the presidents. Atwater too? Atwater, yeah. Grove City? Mm-hmm, Grove City. Oh, we had, whenever there was a district meeting, that lasted two days at the time and they had a set subject that they developed, the pastors, and they stayed overnight, many of them. So that was a good thing that went on then, the fellowship with the pastors and the fellowship of the congregation got, the congregation got to know the pastors. Now nobody knows anybody, you know. Was that, you think, the merger with the different citizens in 1962, it was good in one way, maybe, but bad in another. In other words, the pastors don't know each other in California and New England and Colorado. No, no, that was a big change, but it's a good change, I think it is. We can't live like Swedes all our lives. Are the Norwegians getting along with the Swedes now? I mean, if you really think about it. You know, the Swedish think they're a little better and the Norwegians think they're a little better. But, all the more spiritual one or the other. But now, where we have been, the Swedes and the Norwegian churches have already united. They couldn't get pastors, they couldn't keep up the property, like in New London, there's only one church. The Norwegians in Benson's got together by themselves, the two Norwegian churches. The one was Haugri and the other one was Synoda, you know, and they built a big church. I don't know how it's going to go now with Trinity in Benson. I think they'll maybe stay on by themselves. But it was because of necessity, though. Yes. If they'd been wealthy enough, they would have the line. No. Now, I don't know what's happening to all our big old churches, how they're going to keep going. Jonathan came home the other day, I said, our light bill was doubled this month from last month. Instead of 50, it was over 100. And I've been gone three weeks. And he said, well, what about the light bill at church? Guess how much it was. Oh, I said, maybe a thousand. He said, 2,900. Just the light bill? Just the light bill. And they're crying for money the way it is. You were talking about the ice and refrigerators there way back, how we kept things. Well, Arthur and I went to Willmar and we found an old ice box for $3. This is for ice boxes. And that stood us in good use for seven years before we got a refrigerator. Where did you get the ice though? Oh, they delivered the ice. A man drove by with an ice wagon. So they did the off the country also then, the ice men? Well, Benson was a town, you know. So they had ice men in the van? They had, yeah. We had an ice man. He'd hang out the cart and he'd stop and come in with his little ice. And washing machine, we found an old washer for $5. And we thought we'd found a gold mine. Just a tub washer that you pull by hand, you know. So you started out very simply. And rest of the people, I suppose, in the congregation, they were hard off too, I mean. Oh, well, you didn't call it hard up. You didn't. That's just the way it was. But then they got electricity. They put in electric lines. Or the E and what they call it, the electrification. The rural electrification in the 30s. And as that happened at home also, we got electricity. It was 38 or 39. So they changed the whole thing then? Then the washing machine came in and the refrigerator? Yes, uh-huh. That made it easier. But in the wintertime, when your husband had to drive up to Starbuck, you didn't go along with that? Not, well, there were three children by the time we left. No, then I did not go along. Because there was danger for your life, I mean, to go out and be stranded out in the open. We had one grand old couple, the Magnus Andersons, celebrate their 60th, was it their 60th wedding anniversary. And that was something unusual in those days. And they had been married Christmas Eve. So the party, the congregation has a day of Christmas Eve. And we, that's 16 miles to go to Bethesda. And we drove back in, it was the heaviest fog that you ever drove in. You had to pull down the window and look out the side to see where you were on the road. Yeah, that was, I think the icy roads were the worst of any. There was one winter, 36 and 37, there was so much snow. It was so bitterly cold, that was one thing. The house was poorly built anyway that we lived in. You lived in Benson? We lived in the parsonage in Benson. We were warned before we came that this is a cold house, and it was. I don't know, there was only walls and I don't know what. There was no insulation? Oh, no insulation. Tin walls in the kitchen. You had a coal stove? Or wood? No, we had a furnace. So they provided you with heat though? No, you bought your own coal. You never had any heat paid till, maybe our last parish in Minnesota was at Cannon Falls. And I think they did provide something for travel then. And heat in the parsonage. I'm sure they must have. I'm not quite clear on that. You know, you just don't, those things didn't matter so much, you just pay the bill. That was the way it was. That's the way it was. And no use to complain? No. But we never, we have never in the world suffered anything. I have nothing but good thoughts of our former parishes. About nine years though, during the worst time in United States history. Yeah, it was. I mean in modern times. But, you know, I cannot recall that it was bad at all. I know that Effie and Emma, a couple of single women, lived across the street from us, that they had lost all their savings. And they had to just start from scratch again. Beautiful people. Did the bank in Benson? The banks went to Benson. They have gone. Before we came. So people were scared not to have money. They kept them at home then, I suppose. Oh yes, many of them did. I'm sure they did. I don't know if Dad's salary was, putting it all together, I think it was seventeen or eighteen hundred a year. But there was no way to save anything, I mean for the... No, I often wonder if we didn't manage right or what was wrong, because we could never put anything in the bank. And no hospitalization in case of sickness? No. I guess the pension had something. And August was sixty-eight dollars. And the salary from Freedom and Bethesda was a hundred and forty. So that was two hundred a month, I suppose then. I don't know if that doesn't sound right either. Was this 1930? This is 1930, the salary from Bethesda was sixty dollars. But see, maybe some of this is for two months if you have a hundred and thirty-five or something. But I'm sure you had to wait for it though. Yes, you always had to wait. So there were times you had to charge your groceries at the grocery store. We didn't do that much, but we did. It wasn't a good policy. Was there anybody in the... Oh, the organist's salary for Evelyn, the first quarter, was fifteen dollars. So I got that first quarter, so I got... I have to correct that. Fifteen dollars for a quarter? Uh-huh. Uh-huh. It was not as much as you thought it was. Well, I could maybe do a little more study on this. I could give you... I hardly dare to quote figures because of... One big thing was a Christmas offering for the pastor at Christmas. Benson, thirty-five, Bethesda, twenty-five, Freedom, thirty-four. And there was a special gift of two dollars. Christmas offering at Starbuck, ten dollars. So that was special. Some man in the congregation got up and announced that we're taking an offering gift for the pastor. And the church was filled with people then, at that specific Sunday. Was that Sunday before Christmas? Well, no, it would be right then. It was then at... Christmas Day? Christmas Day. Yeah. For Julota. Yeah. We always had Julota in one church, wherever we... whichever turn it was, I had early service. So did they have a Christmas tree in the church? Yes, they always had trees. In the church? In the church, as I remember it. How about the... were there any basements in the church where they had the kitchens where they could have a public supper? No, they were just dugouts, kind of. And there was no... So while we were at that parish, Arthur got the basements dug out in the two or even, I believe in the three of the churches. So they could have some kind of a social hall because they were not made to entertain anybody. So there was nothing for the youth then, or the young people? No, no. Oh, no. That was done through Luther League meetings in the homes. And everybody came. The parents came too. With the young people? With the young people. So Arthur had Ladies Aid, Women's Missionary Society, and Luther League going in the three churches. Were you in charge of Ladies Aid, for instance? No, I wasn't. There was Ladies Aid and Women's Missionary Society. So there were two women's societies. But they didn't expect you to be in charge of it, though? No. Your husband had to be it? Yes. He always had a devotion. So he had all these meetings all week long to go to. And then they had special festivals. They had a Midsummer Festival at Bethesda every year, and in the fall they'd have a fall festival, you know, where they had a special dinner and so on. So they had a Midsummer? They had... What time in the day? In Bethesda, at Bethesda Church, the town is Murdoch, but Bethesda's out in the country. And they had some kind of a festival in somebody's yard. And then you had to get a speaker. Were they maple? No. And then shortly before we left, I got the ladies to say we should have a smirgles board at Benson. Oh, the ladies in Sweden said, we'll never be able to make it the way it should be. But they had it anyway, and I guess they're still doing it. And very elaborate. And Spring Garden did the same thing at Cannon Falls. We started having a Midsummer, we called it the Midsummer Festival of a meal and a program. And now it's a big thing. They come from all over for these, and they decorate. See, people didn't travel back to Sweden in those days like they do now. Now you can get flags and all kinds of memorabilia from Sweden to make it look like something. You mentioned there were some families coming in from Sweden in the 30s, in the Benson area. Do you remember if there were any discussions between the young families coming in now with the old timers still in Benson, with ideas of how the smirgles boards was to look like and this is the way you could... Well, I remember that time when we were going to have the smirgles board, that Otilia Pio comes from Sweden, they go all the way down, they enter from the school of art. But they had it anyway. What was it that was the problem with? Well, she didn't think that we knew how to prepare the food and arrange it on the platters and plates, trays correctly, you know, and prepare the food in the first place. She would have substituted, I think, it's got to be exactly the way it is. Yes, it should be. Well, Otilia Pio, I hear from her daughter up at Lindstrom, Otilia's gone and she was from Småland and Jenny Fall was from Småland and Mrs. Carl Nelson and the Graveland family had come just at the time of the First World War, but some of these others a little later. And I wish so I could talk to those people now, I would ask a lot more questions. The same with my aunts, my Uncle Peter's Hilda, I don't know where she came from in Sweden, or Aunt Mary, Uncle Nathaniel's wife. If I could talk to them now, I would know better and ask a few questions of what it was like when they grew up. See, when you're young, everything is floating along so fast, you don't have time for that. But that makes the interest in life. So there was different opinions then between the old timers and the new, if you're right? Oh, sure. The old timers were in short store, you couldn't tell them anything. Oh, no. Could you present some new ideas that you had, that you thought would be better? You were careful to slide in with them so they were unaware of what was happening. Like my husband did with the Swedish language. You got away with it. He got away, he didn't announce any services. And there was no complaining about it? Not that we heard at the Prasnitz, I'm sure there was. How were people acting now when you were with your husband? Did they show tremendous respect for you? Very much so. They didn't speak up against him in any way? No, they respected the pastor. He dressed in the long clerical, black clerical, and our habit must have been on Sundays, it was so hot out there. And he always had his little elevens, you know. And the pastor was, he was revered as a leader in the community. He was respected. Was he on the board of other organizations in the town? On the school board, for instance, politically involved? Not at Benson. I think he was too busy there because he was going to... So he didn't involve himself with the school? Not there, no. But he was on boards later on in the senate. He was on the board of social ministry, and he was on the board of Gustavus Adolphus College. And he was quite a... he was a church man. He was always building for the church at large. And I meet young people now, always said, Pastor Chell got me to come to Gustavus to school, you know, when we were up there. He'd encourage them, if he saw, and there were... it was unheard of that anyone went to college even in those days, you know. Not too many. They may be... they were rural people. They sent their children to the agricultural schools. They sent them anyplace. So there were many students that came from his time, and it was a thing to do in that, at that time. When they got better incomes, I suppose, or whatever made it, I don't know. So he was influential then, too. And even in my home church where we lived, I lived out there at Scandin Grove, my sister and brothers could have gone to Gustavus if they wanted to. But I don't know why they didn't. So they married the farmers then? Well, they were girls that were not farmers, yeah. But they are members of the church out there, yeah. My brothers both are members of the church. During this whole time, you spent there in Benson and the area around there, were there any politics? Oh, what's there, politics? How about your husband, did he have to be careful then? He was careful, yes. So he had to be diplomatic? Yes, the Farm Labor Organization came to life then, when some Governor Olson was governor of Minnesota, and there was one man especially out in, well, they became, we were of a Republican background as families. And then the Democrats come in and... How about your husband, was he Republican, too? Yes, he always was. But I know when one old veteran died in Bethesda, they had greetings from the Governor, and I think the Governor, I think there was a, his name was Orville Olson or something, that was something, to get a greeting from the Governor for a funeral. So things began to go that direction now, and Minnesota has become such a Democratic state. So Republicans turned then, during the Depression? Yes, they did. And they did even later in Spring Garden, that was all Republican when we first came there, and we were there 14 years, and when we left, then there was another farm movement that came in. And they would vote Democratic, of course. But there was no discussion of during the Ladies Aid meetings? No, I suppose there was around the corners. But they didn't want to have it open, though? No, oh no. He never said anything in the pulpit about the... Well, if he did, he wouldn't repeat it again. You have to be a little careful about those things. I cannot recall if the pastors even sat and talked about those things, with all these district meetings that we have. They didn't want to... But it was an important part of life, politics, whether you like it or not. Yes. But there was a time. Well, but I think for my husband, the church was a consuming thing. He didn't have time to bother with anything else. You know, A.D. Madsen has written the book. This is from the day that our boys were at the seminary. I just read his book here this summer. And there were changes that were happening, that the church was taking their stand on things more out in the community. Although, when you go back to my grandfather, Thorson, however he got to the elected Register of Deeds of Nicollet County, he wrote the Platt Book of Nicollet County, of how it was, and it's still in his handwriting at the courthouse. So the man that... He was politically active then. Yes, he was. He had to be. On the Republican ticket. Yes. I'm sure he must have been Republican, because he never heard of anything else. I had one uncle who was a Democrat, and he didn't sit well with my father, that was for sure. But he had lived in Alabama and moved back to the North. So he had become a Democrat. Yes. He was an outcast in the family. Well I was going to show you one... He quotes John, the Gospel of John, chapter 17, verse 3. I want you to know, my true God, and your son, Jesus Christ, that in the holy book of the gospel of John, chapter 17, verse 3, we have daily brought food for our unworthy souls. For man does not live with bread alone, but by the word that is given of the Son of God. So, I want you to know, my true God, and your son, Jesus Christ, that in the holy book of the gospel of John, chapter 17, verse 3, we have daily brought food for our unworthy souls. And we will be with you all days until the end of the world. Praise be your holy name. Amen. Andrew Thorson. He used to have the church's church service when there was no church priest. In Skandiengro. So the church is not in his house in this old house. In Skandiengro. Where does he write this now that is in the bible? Where does he write this? I don't know. 1880, 1880. Well, I can't tell by... He has written... He has added names as the children are born. And in that way, yes. He was born 1823, 1855. Anna, Nils' daughter. Søren Peter Torko. The 2nd of November, 1856. That's the first son. That's the first son. Hannah Ellen, 1859. Anna was born in 1861. Kristina Elizabeth, 1863. Elna, 1865. I will speak with my hands. Nils Nathaniel, 1868. Anders Samuel, 1865. I will speak with my hands. Kristina Elizabeth died on the 6th of January, 1881. And Elna, on the 20th of August, 1883. Hannah died on the 4th of... Tuberculosis, what do you call that? TB. TB. And... The 2 Annas were born in Sweden. One in Sweden and one in Princeton, Illinois. So they had the 3 Annas. And Anna Hedberg died 1904, the year I was born. I see I can't see so well today. Remember us in mercy and lift our hearts from the earthly to the heavenly because you have promised your true disciples I will be with you all the days of your life until the end of the world. Praised be your holy name. It's a treasure that we have. So the original name was... I forgot that. Torkel Andersson was the original name. See, then the oldest son, Theodor, is named Anders. He is Andersson. Andersson. Well, his father was Torkel Andersson. So the name Andrew has gone from one generation to the other, skipping. So your grandfather's name in Sweden was Torkelsson then? Yes, very likely so. But he changed it to... To Torsel. Torsel. How did that come in? Well, I don't know. Because when he comes over here, in the church book, it's Anders Thorson from Färle. From Färle. Of course, he has come from Junkve before that, but this is when he's married to Anna Nelson, you know. After he's come back from... After he has returned from California, he goes back to Sweden. But Anders Thorson was of a big family. Mother said they were seven, eight children. He had a brother, Nils, and I have his biography here in the correspondence, 1902. Nils Thor... and he calls himself Thorson also. 221. But he was born in Lindfjord? Yes, they were all born in Lindfjord. But he emigrated from Kärlev. Mm-hmm. Kärlev. Mm-hmm. Andrew did. And he had this brother, Nils. Here's his picture. So John went to Pennsylvania, there's another brother. Yeah. But there's no... I don't have a thing, no. It maybe could be found in a book like this, but I don't have very many of them. I have a few of the old ones. I would like to get to a whole bunch of them and just read, because they are biographies. Well, then he had one brother, Per, and he lived at Winthrop, Minnesota. I don't think I ever saw him, but I knew his family well. He had a son, Tarko. The name Andrew and Tarko goes in circles. And he also had a son, Sven, and a daughter, Kjersti, and she married a Reverend Alm. And, well, that's a story by itself. Well, then his sister, Bengta, marries Reverend Nilsson, who was the mother of the second, Mrs. Hedberg. And Mother said there were two or three more sisters. And one went to Boone, Iowa, and Omaha. And I had met one of those granddaughters, and I don't know if she's living or not, but she was related to this big Swanson frozen chicken deal. Oh, I see. She... let's see. Her name, this sister, was Swanson. And she married a man by the name of Lillestorp or something elaborate. But he took his wife's name when he got married, that man. And they're very likely gone now, because this was in the 40s that I met her. Well, it's quite a... this is a family all by itself. Besides, if you take Andrew's wife, Anna, you know, she has her two brothers and... or three brothers, two half-brothers. They call themselves Benson, because Eleanor Anglison, the old mother's mother... Let's see, her husband must have been dinked, and so they're the Bensons. And you... which church do you belong to in Rock Island or Moline? Faith. Faith, uh-huh. Well, there was a Calvary church, Reverend Forrest's was. His wife gets in on this deal. He's a second cousin of mine. Um... let's see. The oldest one now, he went on to... to Torsby? Yes. That's the one we'd like to know a little bit more about now. Yeah. Did you... did he stay in Torsby? He stayed in Torsby most of his life, till he went to Decatur and is buried in Decatur. Let's see. What have you heard now about his... what was the reason he went on there? Did he speculate on them before he went on to Alabama? Like in Nebraska, Minnesota, Iowa? Yeah. He must have gone from Nebraska to Torsby now. So he went to Nebraska first? Yes. Did he buy land there? Yes. He was one of the first settlers in that town, but I... let's see. It's near Concord. Oh, Warsaw? Yeah. That's where it was. Warsaw, Nebraska. Uh-huh. So he bought land there. Mm-hmm. And Justin has told about that, his oldest son that we had... that I had connection with. Did his dad help him out and for funding, or how did he... Oh, I don't know. He just simply took off. He was married to a girl right across the meadow from where he grew up. In Scandi Grove. Emma Hopkinson, yes. And Emma was good enough to chod along wherever he had an idea to go. And he started this colony, this land company, and must have written letters to the Swedish settlements. There aren't many from St. Peter area. I don't know if there were any that went, except his brother Theodore and Reverend Hedberg went from this... Does the Hedberg know... did he knew him before then? Did he knew him? That's his brother-in-law. So there was a brother-in-law. So he was married, so he knew him, then when he went on... Oh, yes, his brother... his sister Anna is Mrs. Hedberg. Yes, so they were married before. And Uncle Hedberg was also an adventurer, you know. He was? He had come from Stockholm, Wisconsin. You may have looked up people there. I think Reverend Hedberg, they went... he was a pastor in Vista twice. The first time was early 1900, so my mother went over there to visit her sister. And was godmother to Manghild Hedberg. So Pastor Hedberg went together then with his brother-in-law. Yes, he helped... Before this land company. Yeah, he helped promote the business. And I don't know how my uncle Sam got in on it. He goes along, but whoever went over to Eau Claire, Wisconsin to get a few Swedes from there, he met the Turnquist family, Naomi, Naomi. They came from Wisconsin, sorry. They came from Eau Claire. If it was a town of Zalpernier there, I don't know. And let's see, I would have to study a little bit more about when some of the children were born. Do you remember if somebody returned and what they did? What did they say about the area down there? Did they like it or was it tough living? Oh yes, they were promoting, sending up pictures. And I had a number of pictures, but I sent it to Friedhoff or one of Friedhoff's nieces. I think I sent it to a niece. Oh, they had a band and they had Fourth of July celebration. It all sounded good. And cousin Dora, theater's oldest. I think Justin is the oldest. But your mother and father was not so old on the idea, no? No, they're not. See, mother is younger than all of these. She's born 1877. And all these others, grandma was over 40 when my mother was born. But she isn't in on all this. Her brothers just stray off and she doesn't get to know them hardly. Except a letter would come now and then from Alabama. Do you know if your parents went down there at any time? No, they never did. They never left Minnesota, so I don't know. They went out to visit Justin and cousin Justin, theater's oldest son, in Cook, South Dakota. That's where there's a man. Joseph. Justin. Justice. Justin. Justin. If he was born, he maybe was born in, I don't know, or if he was born in Nebraska. Well, maybe we can find out. Anyway. Now, he was down there growing up with the... He grew up. He was born, yeah, he was born 1887, so they have gone before that. He no doubt was born in... In Nebraska. In, well, no. In Nebraska. In Nebraska, very likely. Dora was born, let's see, born 1884, so she was the oldest one. She attended Augustana College, and there was a preceptress at Augustana College. Usually in Nebraska or in, was named to Keeper.