 His name was spelled K-J-E-L-L-E-N, but he came to this country and got a job at the Rockford Watch Factory. And the first day, first time he got his pay envelope, in cash of course, it was spelled Frank Shalane S-H-E-L-A-I-N. And he didn't speak too much English. He could understand it a little bit. But they asked him, is that your name? And he said, yes. So that's the way it went on their records, and that's the way they turned it into the city directory. And so from then on, it was spelled S-H-E-L-A-I-N. So to him, that was the most important to get him on, they never mind the spelling. Well, primarily, I imagine, because— Sounds like Frank. It is September 9, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Mr. and Mrs. Richard Shalane, Rockford, Illinois. And Mr. Shalane was born 1903, 5th of July in Rockford. And Mrs. Shalane, also in Rockford, 1905, 15th of July. So if we start now with your parents, Mr. Shalane, your father. He came—do you know when he came from Sweden? No, I don't. But he was between 17 and 18 years of age. And as I say, his first job in Rockford, why he stopped at Rockford might have been the same reason a lot of Swedes stopped in Rockford, because that's as far as the railroad went. The railroad bridge across Rock River wasn't built, and so out of Chicago, the train came out to Rockford, and that was the end of the line. So that was quite a few years ago then? Oh, yes. And there was a station just east of Kishwaukee Street on the northwestern, before you get to—I think that's Fourth Street, just east of Kishwaukee. And that's where the depot was, and that's where everybody got off. And that's why that area around there was primarily Swedish at that time. And as I say, he got a job at the Rockford Watch Factory, which was down on Madison Street, and that's where he started to work in Rockford. Now what else? So you don't know the reason why he left Sweden? Do you have any information here? No, not that I know of. He came over with another young fellow who I don't know who he was, but they both came here, or came to New York. And he tells a story that they saw a fruit stand, and they brought a bag of these great big red apples, he thought, and they bit into one of them, and they were tomatoes. And it was the first tomato he'd ever tasted, and he thought the whole bag was spoiled, so they threw them away. And that's the story that he tells me. They were too soft. Yeah, they were really soft and too mushy, you know. So he was not accustomed to tomatoes in Sweden? No, evidently not. So this guy he came with, now there was no relation or anything? Not that I know of, no. He had a brother, Charlie Shalane, who came over here after he did, how many years after I don't know, but they took up residence in Chicago. And he had two sons, Gilbert and Frank, and that's about all I know of that family. So he got a job then at the— The Rockford Watch Factory, yeah. How long did he stay there? Not too long, I don't think, because as I say, he retired. But he was—I don't know when he retired offhand, I can't tell you. But he was with the Nelson Nutting Company for 60 years. Retired in the early 50s or 40s? Perhaps. So he worked quite a few years then after you started to work? Oh, he was there a long time before I started. I started in 19— But after you started, was he there many years then? He was there—can I take this off a minute? I might as well give you this. Frank Cholaine was born in 1863 and died in 1943 at the age of 80. And he was naturalized on October 30, 1888. He was naturalized as an American citizen on October 30, 1888. Now, Hilda Maria Cholaine was born 1867 and died 1949. And my father and mother were married on June 11, 1887. That's about all I got on him. So he was seventeen when he came? About there. So he came about 1880 then? Sixty-three. Yeah. So he came the same year that the Nelson Nutting Corporation was founded? When it was incorporated, yes. Incorporated? Yes, that's right. So can you tell me that story then with the Nelson Knitting Company, with John Nelson? He came here early, of course, in the 1850s, the old man. Just— It's John Nelson then? John Nelson of the firm of Burson and Nelson, proprietors of the Rockford Knitting Factory, water power across the race near Illinois Central Bridge. Was born in Sweden, April 5, 1830. Came to Chicago in 1852. Moved to Rockford in 1854. Married Christina Bowman, November 4, 1855. She was born in Sweden, May 6, 1834. Have six children, Albert, William, Oscar, Fritschof, John, Franklin, and Anne Catherine. Mr. Nelson is the inventor of the most perfect knitting machine in the world. Is a member of the Rockford Bursonic Lodge 102. Mrs. Nelson is a member of the Lutheran Church. Now of those children, Fritschof Nelson started another knitting factory in Rockford before City Knitting Company. And that goes back many years also. And he was using the same machine as his father? No. Well, it's the same type of machine. It's what they call a reciprocating knitting machine. It doesn't go around circular. Goes back and forth. I'll show you some pictures of it sometime. And Fritsch, now we call him Fritsch, Fritsch Nelson left his father and started this other machine that he had invented or enlarged upon or something or other. It was the same general deal, but he had some patents on something that the Nelson did not have. So he was also mechanically inclined? Oh, yes. Yeah. Well, John Nelson, he's mechanically inclined, but he worked in wood mostly. He was a good carpenter and furniture builder and that sort of thing. But how was he able then to think up this? Well, he dreamt it up, the idea of a Nelson knitting machine. But how to make it all coordinated, how it would work, that was his problem. And that's why he called on William Burson, who was a mechanic. He was not a Swede? No. William Burson, I think, well, I've got his name here, we can tell. I can get it for you. But he was the one that worked out the bugs on the machine to make it work. That's why the Nelson Burson was the first name of the company, because Nelson had the patent, but Burson worked it so it worked. Did this sound like Nelson had the money then to get the patent? Oh, yes. I imagine Nelson had the money. So he had been able then to make a pretty good living then, John Nelson, over the few years? Oh, yes, evidently. What year now did he get this patent? It didn't say anything about that? No, it doesn't say anything about that. But the fact—he moved to Rockford in 1854, and there's a period of time in between there because what I understood my father to say that they started knitting about 1874, 1875, around there. And then there was that period of transition where Frank Brown comes into the picture and some other Rockford people, the Talkats and the Hinchcliffs, other old families that came in interested in it. English families? Yeah, they were—I think they were English, yeah, the Talkats were English. Well, the Talkats came out from a little town north of Durand here, the White Talk at the first, and then there was White Talk at the second, White Talk at the third. And I knew the White Talk at the third, I think I knew. He was alive when I was beginning in there. So there's a period there from the time he came to Rockford, moved to Rockford in 1854, 64, well, there's almost twenty years there. Now what happened in that period I don't know. For when he initiated the idea of building this knitting machine. Because there was not too many—the town was not big then at that time. No, no it wasn't. It was growing up. No, I don't know what the population was at that time, but I don't know whether this— But he was able to get the equipment and the pieces together on this complicated machine. And his idea was to get one in every home? That's the idea. He wanted for a home. How's it turn out now? It was going to be a little bit bigger than he thought. The idea was for home knitting. So the woman of the house could knit the socks for the family, you know. But when they got it operating, the machine weighed close to 700 pounds. And it was expensive, so they couldn't go to the homes and say, you want one or two of these or that sort of thing. So then they started to build a few of them and started making socks. Now William Burson, he's the other fellow in the deal with Nelson. In the history of Winnebago County, in the directory, William W. Burson of the firm of Burson and Nelson, proprietors of Rockford Knitting Works on Water Power Residence, 1110 Montague Street. So Burson lived in southwest part of Rockford. He was born near Utica, Vanango County, Pennsylvania, September 22, 1832. Came to McDonough County, Illinois in 1842. Lived there one year, 15 years in Fulton County, Illinois, two years in Yates City, Knox County, and came to Rockford in January of 1863. So his association with Nelson started after 1863, so that brings it down to only about nine or ten years there, see, between 1863 and 1874. He was the first to invent a practical grain binder, I never knew that, which gave satisfaction and was continued in use. He with John Nelson, his present partner, perfected the first knitting machine which would finish holes without handwork. Mr. Burson married Emily S. Wilson, October 5, 1856. She was born in New Jersey. They have three children living, Florence Adelaide, born March 8, 1858, Wilson W., May 24, 1864, and Ernest E. Born June 4, 1867, and lost three who died in infancy. That's all it says about William Burson. How do you spell his name? B-U-R-S-O-N. I don't know what the W is for, but his first name around town here was Bill Burson, for the William end of it. So he was even before McCormick then with the grain binder? Well, You're talking about 1860 there. Where was I? In January 1863. He was an inventor, first to invent a practical grain binder. But he came to Rockford in January 1863, but there's no date here as when he invented the binder. So when he went to company with John Nelson, there was this whole business then? Yeah. Knitting machines? Yeah, that's right. That's all that John Nelson had to do with them. Now, This is the hardest part with John Nelson, to think of this complicated machine together. So they continued to produce socks and stockings from this machine. And is this the same model as they have at the museum at Guilford Road? The one that's nickel plated? Yes. Yeah. That's the one. Now there's another machine there. It's one of the first machines. It's not nickel plated because I was in on the nickel plating of that machine when we finished it up. That was the modern Nelson knitting machine. Now there's another old one out there, I think. I don't know whether that was a Nelson machine or if that was the first machine that Fritz Nelson built for Forest City Knitting Company. Were they manufactured in Rockford, both of them? Both of them manufactured in Rockford, yeah. Locally? Yeah. As I say, the Forest City Knitting Company was down on Nelson Boulevard. Now as I said, down the club, you come across the bridge there at Black Hawk Park, and as you're going east, to the right is the entrance to Black Hawk Park along the river. To the left starts Nelson Boulevard, and that goes back there about two or three blocks, and then it turns and goes up a slight incline. And just about in the middle of that is where the Forest City Knitting Company was. So that boulevard was called then from Fritz Nelson's? That was Fritz Nelson's. Boulevard, so to speak. Yeah. John Nelson's. Yeah. That was Fritz Nelson was the head of that. That was John Nelson's son. And they had a machine that, as I say, was a lot like the Nelson machine, but they thought it was better, and so they were in competition with the Nelson Knitting Company. And Fritz Nelson had money in the Nelson Knitting Company, so Fritz Nelson sat on our board of directors. So anything we would do new, he'd go right back and do it, see? We couldn't control what he did, but he took control over any new idea that we had, see? So he was really a businessman then, then? Yeah, old Fritz was, he was smart, there's no doubt about that. And then that went on for a number of years, and finally Fritz died, and his son-in-law, Ed Eisner, took over there. And his son-in-law came from southern Illinois, where he and his brother had the Eisner grocery stores, and they were one of the first chains in this part of the country, in Illinois. I don't know how many they had, but they had enough, so they finally sold out to, oh, Jewel, I think it was. And Ed didn't take much interest in the hosiery, he wasn't a hosiery man at all, he was a grocery man. And so they finally worked out a deal, and we bought the Forest City Knitting Company, because the people who were interested in that were interested in Nelson Knitting Company too. And we had two plants here, we were keeping going, and we took in, we junked the Forest City Knitting Machines and took their name and everything into the Nelson and their customers, and we absorbed the Forest City Knitting Company into the Nelson Knitting Company, which made a good deal. But like Fritz Nelson, do you remember him personally? I remember him personally, but it was when I was first with the company, because he used to come in, come over for the board of directors meeting, that's the only association I had with him. I was introduced to him, but I mean, he didn't call me Sonny Boy or anything like that, you know, because he was a very tight-laced individual. So how did they work now? He was on the board of directors for the Nelson Knitting Company, and then his own, the Forest City. Oh, well, you see— You competed out in the field and the customers. Well, we did, we did. We liked that. Well he couldn't—he didn't—you see, he inherited the stock, John Nelson's stock, in the Nelson Knitting Company. That put him in the driver's seat as far as interest and being able—he could elect him—he had enough stock so he could elect himself a director, see. But we couldn't stop it. Was it good for the company? It wasn't particularly good for the Nelson Knitting Company when we were in competition with them because they would run down the Nelson stock and say, you see, the Nelson knitting machine started at the toe of the sock, and they knit that closed. Now all your socks today, the knit-on circular machines, they start at the top and go down and they, what they call, cast off at the toe, and then that has to be closed with a looping seam right across your toe here. But the Nelson machine started to knit down here and it went up here. Well when it got up to here, it got up so far, but it couldn't put a rib top, what we call a rib top, a one-on-one rib top, it couldn't knit that. It's just a flat knit, what we call a flat knit in hosiery. And so the Nelson Knitting Company had to have circular knitting machines that knit these white tops about so long. And then my father invented a looping machine where you could put the body of the sock on a circular head that had so many points on it, depending on how many stitches were in the circumference of the sock, and the same thing with the top, put that over it. Then you put it in the machine and this machine joined those two together, see? So that made a true rib top on a work sock, on a flat knit work sock. But the Forest City, they just went up to the top and then they had what we call a dummy stitch, a long stitch that they put in the machine and that made a long, so when they stretched that part out, it got narrower. And then they sewed around the top of it, see? So they didn't have to loop on a top. But it didn't look as good as ours, see? But they sewed a lot of them. How about the heel now? The heel? Yeah, was that possible to make the one with the Nelson? Oh yes. The first one that was invented? Oh yeah. They made the heel. Oh yeah. I mean, there was no tube socks then? No, no, this is centuries before the tube sock ever came in. It's because of stretched nylon. Now if you, because I, well I knit the first tube sock in Rockford. A New York salesman came in with a sock that he had gotten in Japan and that was a rayon sock, but it didn't have any heel in it. It was just a toe and straight up. And when you put the sock on, it's stretched socks around the heel here and caused wrinkles through the instep, see? And so this New York salesman, Fred Cooper, he says, can you make this? Well, at that time, we were making athletic socks on a circular Scott and Williams machine, and we were putting stretched nylon on the outside and then plating them on the inside, which is a, plating is a terry stitch, like on a terry stitch towel on the inside. That was cotton, see? And so that gave you a nice soft inside, but it gives you a sock that had, nylon had the stretch of stretched nylon. And there, when you pull it around here, this pulled tight here, but there wasn't any wrinkle here because the nylon took that up, see? It was elastic, I'm assuming. Yeah, elastic. And you could put that sock on anywhere you wanted. If you had the heel back here one time, I put it on around, then your heel would be over here, so it was wearing all the way around, see? So what year did they come in then, in the after the war, Second World War? Oh. See, Second World War was when? In the 40s. Yeah, I would say it's around there. I mean, when nylon came in, now I don't remember just exactly when stretched nylon came in because that was the thing that made it. I think nylon was a war product. Yeah, it was a war product. Yeah, yeah. I think it probably. They only worked. Yeah. If we go back now to John Nelson, how long did he live then? You didn't say when he died. No. But he was out of the company in 1880 when it was incorporated as a new. Yeah, he was. He was not there anymore then. John Nelson? I don't think so. Now, have you been over at the Erlander? Yes. Have they got any records over there? Oh, yeah. They have some. I just can't recall. Well, maybe they could give it to you. When he did die, see? And because I don't know. I vaguely remember it, but as far as dates are concerned. Oh, I can get to that later. Because it was reorganized then in 1880, or incorporated. It was incorporated. Before that, there was no incorporation papers in the State of Illinois. And then there were new faces on the board, new personnel coming on there. Yeah, well, there were people. The Rockford families were investing in it, see? And those were your Talkitz and the Hinchcliffs. And Was there an Emerson there, Richard? Yeah, Ralph Emerson. And then there was all the other Emerson, as Emerson Hinchcliffs, see? But Ralph Emerson. The Nancy family had the major stocks in it, though. Yeah, at that time. They didn't lose the control of it. Well, they evidently did, because when I was at the Nelson Living Company, there was a period there where Waite Talkit came in, and he was president. Now, he didn't know for nothing, but it was money that put him in there. And he had an office there, but that's the only thing that he did. And under Waite Talkit was Tovey Floden, who was the general manager. And when Waite Talkit was there, only a couple of years, I guess. And then he retired, and Tovey Floden went in as president of the company, and I worked under him for many years. So he didn't have any knowledge of the— No, no. He was just a man who was a little bit of a talker. He was a little bit of a talker. And the Talkits, they came—they should be in here. They were often the rent, you said earlier, weren't they? So your father, he arrived in 1880 in Rockport. Yeah. The same year as the incorporated in Nelson Living. That's right. And there was one person then that—I don't know if you remember, but there was a guy named John H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. H. So your father, he arrived in 1880 in the Rockport. Yeah. The same year as the incorporated in Nelson Living. That's right. And there was one person then that your father was going to be acquainted with. What? There was one person there on Nelson Living Company board that your father was going to to be acquainted with the Viterone. Was it Brown that was his name? Atencio Oh, Frank Brown, yeah. Atencio Yeah. Q. Was he with the Gennesi Living Company from the beginning? Atencio He wasn't active with it, but he evidently had some money in it. This is before they were incorporated, because Dad said there was a time there that they called it the F.R. Brown Company. But it was for a short period of time. Q. But then when the incorporation came, it was September 15, 1880. Atencio That was September 15, 1880, because I remember that because I started there September 15, 1926, same date as the incorporation date. Do you see those pictures out there? Q. How did your father meet this F.R. Brown now, with him in the company? Atencio Well, there was a mutual friend of my dad's by the name of Art Tunison. And Art Tunison was Frank Brown's right-hand man at his home on South Third Street. And Art Tunison's job primarily was to take care of Frank Brown's horses and his buggies that he had. And Dad knew Art Tunison from his association with the Lyron Singing Society when Dad was a member, and he was a director there for a number of years of the chorus. And the period of time passed, and automobiles started to come in. And Frank Brown was one of the first persons in Rockford to own a gasoline buggy. And what he bought was a Knox Special, which was one of about two or three automobiles that was being built. But these were two-cylinder motors with the two cylinders opposed, the crankcase in the center. So when you started the car, you cranked it from the side instead of in front, because one piston came in from the front and the other piston came in from the back, see. And they were kind of roughly made. There was no steering wheel on it. It was a tiller bar that worked back and forth. And then there was a lever where you could speed up the thing. And I don't know whether the Knox had a clutch, but a lot of them were belt-driven. And all there was was a belt tightener. And when you pushed the belt tightener down on the belt, that gave you traction so you would go ahead. There was no reverse on them. Well, they had a lot of trouble with the motors. And there were no gas stations or garage pits or any place where you could drive a car. So Art Tunison didn't know what to do. And Dad had built a one-cylinder gasoline engine that he and another fellow, Charlie Carlson, Charlie Carlson built the boat, and Dad built the engine, the shaft, propeller, and that sort of thing, and put it in Charlie Carlson's boat. And so the two families of us had the boat to go up the river on on picnics and that sort of thing. So Dad knew a little bit about gasoline engines. And so this fellow that worked for Frank Brown, Art Tunison, he said, Do you think you could help me? And Dad, Well, he says, I don't know, but I'll look at it. Well, it was—he couldn't see anything the way that motor was in there, and you had to tip the whole hood and everything up front and take out the floorboards to get at the motor. And so they pushed it out under a tree in the backyard of Frank Brown's home, and put a block and tackle up in the tree and hooked it onto the motor and disconnected it and pulled it out. And so Dad worked on it and evidently got it running, because right after that, why, Frank Brown couldn't live without Frank Chalains. And as I say, Dad had just moved into a house on this Nelson Boulevard down by the river, and Frank Brown said, Sell it. Well, to Dad, Frank Brown was right next to God Almighty, you know. He believed so much in him. He was a wealthy man, and he knew this and he knew that. So he said, Sell it and I'll buy you a house. And so Dad, I guess, finally sold it, and Frank Brown went out and bought a house at 422 South 2nd Street that is still standing. And what I understood, that Dad paid for it eventually, but the whole thing and the property and the whole works was $3,800. And I remember as a kid, one night Dad came home from the Nelson Knitting Company where he was working then, and he told my mother, he says, Get me a soup plate. So we were all kids that were sitting around the dining room table there for supper, and she brought him one of those big soup plates we had, about that big around, about that high, you know. And he took out a paper and put it in the soup plate and lit the fire under it. It chokes me up even to talk about it. The only time in my life I ever saw my dad cry. And he sat there. We didn't know what he was doing, see. He sat there and he watched that thing burn up until it came into a crisp and the tears were running off him. And it was the mortgage on the house he was burning because it was paid for. And that was a time when he was paid twice a month. Every two weeks he got a check. And this two-weeks check was about between $150 and $175. So he didn't make over ñ I don't think he made over $300 a month, see, at that time. And there was, what was it, Lee and I and Bessie and Eva. But, of course, they were working part-time. They were older. I don't know whether Lee was working or not, but. Atencio Well, how many children were you in the family? Gilbert Well, there were, it was, my oldest brother, Ernest Chelane, he was born in 1890 and died in 1905, 15 years old. That was a, what they called then, a consumption case, TB now. And now Eva Chelane, my sister, she was born 1891 and died in 1954. And Bessie, she lives in Rochelle, and I haven't got any dope on her at all. She was, she was older than Eva, yeah, she was older than Eva. She worked for a doctor in Rockford, Dr. Hatch, for a long time. But I don't have any dates on her. And then there's Lee Chelane, my brother, who was still living. He was born 1897, and on September 2nd, he was 89 years old. And I have a son. Atencio You were five children then? Gilbert Five children, yeah, yeah. Two boys and two girls, or two boys and three boys and two girls. But as I say, I just, I remember he died in 1905. I was born in 1903, but I remember Ernie's funeral, because it was from our front room there at 422 South 2nd Street. And I remember the, huh? Q It's raining. A It's raining. Q It's going to be hard. Gilbert I remember the old horse-drawn hacks that came over the bridge there to pick up the people. And my mother had a sister, Ada Beckman, who was born 1870 and died 1934. Q So he, but this was not too bad, $300 a month. It was pretty high wages though for that time, wasn't it? Gilbert Well, I guess it was, but I know I remember the first time I remember it, he was getting $75 every two weeks. That would be $150, wouldn't it? $75, $150 a month. And then, see, he invented a lot of stuff on the Nelson knitting machine, improvements on it, see. And, but they evidently raised his pay a little bit for that because he never got too much out of it. Years and years later, the new regime coming in there finally paid him $5,000 over a period of five years, $1,000 a year. But that's the only thing that he got for, because all of his patents that he had were all, of course, assigned to the Nelson Knitting Company because he did it on company time. Q So he had his own workshop then? Gilbert Dad? Q Yes. Gilbert No, he worked at the Nelson Knitting Company. We had Q You mean in the factory, at the knitting factory? Gilbert Oh, yeah. We got Q He was a mechanic then or a chief engineer, chief chief? Gilbert Well, he was, I never called him chief engineer. He was general superintendent, the same as I was, and he did all the, that was our machine shop. Q And it looks like there were quite a few Gilbert Oh, yes. Q employees there, so you had the full crew and all Gilbert Five or six of them. Q How many? Gilbert Oh, let's see. I can tell you by just looking at them. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven. So Oscar Johnson, Joe, I don't know who this guy was, and then Al Stolgren back in the corner, and Benjamin, and I forget the other one over here. Oh, here's Al Stolgren standing over here. Al Stolgren was the superintendent of the machine shop. Q Were most of your Swedes still working there? Gilbert Yeah, in the early days, but being in, you see, I think there were more Swedes in the old plant on Race Street than there were at the Nelson Knitting Company at 909 South Main, because when we moved in in twenty-six, when I started there, and that would be in October of twenty-six about, we had quite a few Italians, and the Italians began to multiply as the Swedes died off, and then we got in a few. They say they're Spanish. I say they're Mexican. Some of those came in, and now they've got a lot of the Mexicans in there. I haven't been in there for, well, I haven't been in there since I left, I don't think, seventy-three, but I hear from the grapevine around what's in there, and they're having a, it was finally, Nelson Knitting Company was sold to fifteen Rockford people who run it for a while, and they didn't get along very good, and so the last I heard it's been taken over by some Texas outfit, and the only reason they bought it is to get a tax reduction on it, you know, a loss or something like that. So how long it's going to be, I don't know. Atencio So when your dad was working then from the early beginning when he came, and up to 1926 when you started, who was the owner then during that time? All Rockford people? Atencio Oh, yeah, they were mostly Rockford. Atencio Yeah, I would say they were Rockford people. Atencio How many were on the board of directors then, ten, fifteen people? Atencio No, there was only five. Atencio Five only? Atencio Yeah. Atencio They were the management of the whole thing? Atencio Yeah, they were the management. Well, see, when Tu Flodin came in there, that's after the World War, let's see, 17, after the Second World War I think it was. He had been before, he had been a teacher in high school. He taught typing, although he never knew how to run a typewriter, but he taught typing. And he came in there after he got back from the war on a veterans' deal, see? Atencio GI Bill. Atencio GI Bill. And it wasn't long before he worked himself up. He was general manager and then president. Atencio Was he an Italian or? Atencio He was a Swede. Atencio A Swede? Atencio TUV, his name was TUV, T-U-V-E. Atencio V-E. Atencio V-E. Atencio Yes. Atencio Pair Flodin. Atencio Flodin. Atencio But he never used the pair. It was the Tu Flodin, see, because he lived up on Cottage, or Cottage Grove Avenue, I guess it was, wasn't it, or up to north. Atencio Over by the P.A. Petersen home? Atencio No, on the west side. Atencio Oh, west side. Atencio Where the streetcar used to go up there. Atencio I don't know. Atencio North street or is it? Atencio It's north of Auburn Street. Atencio There was the well-to-do people that lived up there. Atencio Yeah. Oh, yeah. Cottage Grove. Atencio The corner of Cottage Grove Avenue and some the Cottage Grove was east and west and the north and south was the one that when we turned up there to go across the river, you know, we'd turn off of Harlem Boulevard, come up there and then make a right-hand turn, go across the river. What street is that? Cumberland. Atencio Oh, Cumberland. Atencio Cumberland and Cottage Grove. That's where you had a great big white house up there. He was the son-in-law of a very popular minister. He married Reverend Gordon's daughter. Atencio So he came in there to the— Atencio Yeah. But he never had too much stock in the Nelsons. I don't think. I don't know for sure, but I don't think he had too much stock. But he was a good salesman and he traveled quite a bit for the company. He had some good salesmen on the road for the company. Atencio How many salesmen were there in your father's time, for instance, up to— Atencio Well, there was only—we didn't have—we had, I would say, sales agencies. We had one on the West Coast. We had one in Chicago. Bill Thomas was the head of that. And Fred Cooper was our New York office. We had a New York office that Fred Cooper worked out of and had—I don't know how many he had working for him. But we never—when we got orders, they either mailed them in direct or it came from the New York, Chicago, or San Francisco office. Atencio Who was the chief designer, now, for instance, if we start with the early 1900s, of the socks and the stockings? Who decided how long they were supposed to be? Atencio Oh. Atencio Different colors, for instance. Atencio Well, that was fairly standardized. Atencio In the beginning? Atencio Yeah. Atencio Was it a work sock more than the dress? Atencio All work socks. Atencio No dress? Atencio No dress socks, no. We never made a dress sock. The closest we got to a dress sock was in the later years where we put in Scott and Williams circular machines and made crew socks, you know, white crew socks and that sort of thing. Atencio Was there a different set up of machinery then to make fancy socks? Or why didn't you go into that? Atencio Well, you couldn't—the one reason you couldn't do it on a Nelson machine, any pattern that you put in there had to be in the yarn, see? And so we had a brown sock and we had a blue sock and I had a black sock. And we made one sock with a white foot and then I had the regular brown and white and blue and white work sock top or the leg and then the white top. But that was—and that run from our heaviest sock was style 901. And that sock weighed three pounds to the dozen bundle. Now that's— Atencio It's heavy. Atencio Like they say, the longer you wear them, the harder they get. And if they get too old, you can stand them up in a corner, see? And they'd shrink down, see? Atencio What kind of material was it, in the wool or— Atencio Cotton. Atencio Cotton. Atencio All cotton. Atencio No wool blended in. Atencio No, no. Atencio We didn't wear to work. Atencio No, no. And then, you see, in the early days there was no way of controlling wool as far as shrinkage was concerned. And that was when we went into tube socks for the universities. That was a godsend to the universities because take at Stanford University in California, they'd always used wool athletic socks for their teams. And when we came out, I forget what year it was, but it was a number of years back, with a tube sock, a cotton tube sock. We showed it in Chicago at the Sporting Goods Show. Atencio Who introduced the tube socks? Did you do it or did the public do it? Atencio I did it. Atencio You did it? Atencio Well, I told you, this Fred Cooper came to me and had this tube sock. Or maybe somebody else, but I don't know because we didn't get a patent on it or anything. But he said, can you make this tube sock? Well, that was made on a circular machine with a regular top on it, and then we closed the toe, see, where it cast off. When he drops a sock out of a machine, you call it casting off. And I said, sure, because that machine is controlled with a chain with lugs on it. And all I had to do was go to where the heel was and take out that piece of chain that had the lugs that made the heel, and then it would make a heel, see? So it would make a toe, it would make a, it would start with the top, go down, start knitting a leg, and it would keep on knitting a leg as long as you got so many links in there. And then when it went down to the toe, it would change and make the toe and cast off. So we could make a tube sock any length we wanted. We could make it so it would come up to here if we wanted to. But most of them were what they called 5-8ths. And a 5-8ths, I've got on a 5-8ths sock here. Now, that's a 5-8ths sock. And so I said, sure, I think I can make it. And he was, she was sitting in the office with Toovey, and I said, how long do you want it? Well, just like a regular sock, so far. So I went out in the knitting room, and I told the foreman out there, take out the heel lugs and make me a pair of socks. And this was with the nylon on the outsides and the cotton on the insides. And so I made them, took them into them, and he said, well, can you make me some for the show in Chicago? And I said, sure, how many do you want? He says, well, he said, we want some to give away. He says, about 30 dozen? I says, yeah. And so we made 30 dozen, and then we took it into the sporting goods show, tool show, I said, no, sporting goods show.