 We have 23rd September 1987 and I'm sitting together with John Aldin in Swedesborg, Iowa. My address is really Winfield. He was born the 2nd of December 1901 in Väderstad, Sweden. He came together with his parents to the United States in 1916. So the postal address is Winfield. It's only three months away. Three, four months away. So you're dead now. All your brothers and your sisters, you were born in Väderstad. Yeah, we were all born in the same place. In Väderstad. What was the name of the place? Yes, we were going to Svenska. It's the same as a taxi cab. Years ago, you know, they used torches. Was he the owner of that one or did he work there? It was in the estate. When he was out of the estate, he had the salad and the divided up. He had us four boys in his family. One was over here before dad and the other two lived in Sweden. And somebody heard they wanted the money out of the estate, which they did. And dad bought a place close to Hönninge. He bought a place there and we lived there two years. There was a farm? Yeah, a farm just west of Hönninge. And then he sold that and we moved to town. And he came over here in the fall of 1914. 1914? But your mother and the children stayed there? Yeah, we stayed back two years. A year and a half, I'd say, he left in the fall. We come in 1916 in the spring. So when he left, did he come to his brother over here? He came to his brother. He lived in Chicago at the time. The reason he came over here, he was at a summer resort in Sweden and he met a fellow named Charlotte Johnson, who lived in Montplessin. And that's the reason he told me, he wanted him to come over here and see what it looked like and how he liked it, and so he did. He liked it so well that a year and a half he sent for us and we sold out and came. All the rest of the kids have been back. I'm the only one who hasn't been back. But you never visited the area in Sweden? No, we haven't. Well, I've always laughed over in Sweden, and right now, his cousins, this being three or four over here, came over to visit. You know, they can travel as cheap as we can. So then you have some contact with Sweden, your cousins and the... Yeah, my youngest brother went back twice. And he's going to take another one of his daughters back this year, but he didn't make it. He didn't live long enough. He got a heart attack. And then another brother, he lives only a few miles away here. He is the one that's unmarried. Yeah, he lives right in Oles. Has he been back to Sweden? Yeah, he's back with my brother-in-law and Margaret when they went back. I expect that's been four or five years ago. Five years ago, I think now. So when you were in Sweden, you were confirmed then? Oh yeah, I was confirmed in Väderstad. In Väderstad. And did you start to work there a little bit, or...? Well, I was kind of working for my granddad. He lived in a big place, what he called Wargby. Is that on your mother's side? Yeah. Yeah, my grandmother on my dad's side passed away. Oh gosh, I was just a little bit of it. I can remember it, and that's all. So how was your feeling now when you got a letter from dad over here that you were going to come over and sell it? I didn't want to come. You didn't want to come? No, I was just confirmed. I was getting at the age, you know, when you start having a little fun. Looking for a girl and everything? Yeah, yeah. So you didn't enjoy it too much then to break up? No. Dad wrote and said, you all come or none. That was a decision he had to make. How about your mother now? Did she like to come, or...? Well, yeah. There's no future over there much for boys and a girl, you know. My sister didn't want to come either. The other two boys or three boys didn't care. They were younger then? They were younger. But your sister was older than you then? No, she was younger. I'm the oldest one. So you're the oldest one. So she didn't want to come either? No, she didn't. Well, she was staying kind of with my aunt, and she had a good friend, and she didn't want to come. She didn't want to leave it. Well, I tell you, you're old enough. You're confirmed and got all the schoolmates and confirmation class. The world is getting a little bit bigger now. You start to enjoy life a little bit better. It's very hard to leave, you know. They come and don't know any language. It took me three years before I could, you know... It was hard to learn English out there because everybody was Swede. Well, there was a lot of Swede, but the folks made that when we got together here, that we're going to talk English and forget the Swede. Well, it's kind of hard to do, you know. You didn't know all the words, but in some way or another, that's the way it ended up. Of course, now I talk English all the time. My wife won't understand any Swede. Well, there isn't anybody very much can understand Swede up in Swedesburg anymore. Arnold can do pretty good, I guess. And Dave. And Ferdinand. Yeah, Ferdinand Larsen. He's learned that in the later years. He's been back to Sweden once or twice, but he's picked that up. When he was a kid, he couldn't talk any Swede, but he's picked that up and studied it. And he's picked that up in the later years. He's pretty good. But outside of that, the younger generation, anymore, there was one time, you know, years ago, you know, they even had Sweden school in the summer. Well, then it dropped off to us, right? Yeah, my brother-in-law, of course, he's passed away, both of them, as far as that goes. But the oldest one that married my sister, he could understand and he could talk some Swede, but he could understand it all. But you can get along a whole lot better today in Sweden than you could, say, 50 years ago, because their education is, well, I got cousins who just started school or high school, can talk good English and even write it. We get letters from them and they don't write Swede. Some of them, they write English. In fact, I got two of them, two girls. They're pretty good. And they write good English. When they write Swede anymore, their Swede is a whole lot harder for me to read anymore, because, you know, they don't put the dots over the A and the O. That's different. As modern, you know, you're supposed to know that. They don't put no dots over them. So when your mother then was ready to take off from Sweden, you had to pick Amerikaskista. What did you pick? Did you take anything along that you remember? Oh, yeah, we took—we had a couple big trunks. That's a closing was about all we could take. You didn't bring anything extra that you remember? No, just some pictures. And the family Bible? Yeah, the family Bible. I don't know. There might have been a few trinkets the kids had, some of them. What did people say, now, your neighbors and friends and relations? Did they thought you were crazy to leave so many of you? Well, you know, in Sweden, you know, your neighbors, it's a little bit different than it is here. There wasn't, you know, it's party stuff over there, you know. The higher class or the lower class and the farmers, you know, there was one and then there was the labor, you know. I don't think it's that much anymore. I think they're more evened up now. So there were divisions then? But in them days, you know, it was, well, the hired help and the boss and his boys, they never ate with the labor. Like you go in a dinner, you know, the labor eat in the kitchen and the boss and the boys. His family in the dining room. In the dining room, you might call it here. How about the pastor now? You didn't eat with him at any time, the minister? No. Did you go often to church? You're confirmed now, but did you visit the church often? You mean during the confirmation? Yeah. Oh, you had to go every Sunday. Every Sunday. Oh, yeah. But did you continue to go after you were confirmed? Did you stop going to church then or did you continue? Oh, I got in church here. Oh, yeah, in Sweden. See, I left two weeks after I was confirmed. Two weeks after? Yeah. So you went by train then to Gothenburg? Yeah. It was not easy to leave though during the war time and everything. Were you scared to go out there on the water? No, no. Submarines? Well, you see, that was the first world war started. Yeah, 1914. Yeah, they started in 1914. See, no, we had to, we got out on the North Sea. The Germans and the Englishmen, navies, tangled out there. They called us in to Halifax, England. We laid there for two days. And then they thought it was all cleared. They hadn't seen any warship or anything around. And they let us, took us out and sent us on our way. That night, the fighting started. But it wasn't very close to it. You could hear the cannons, heard the big guns, you could see the flesh. It was just like lightning. You see the flesh and then a little bit you heard a rumble. That's the way it was. But it wasn't anything any closer. We could see it, but everybody was scared. You didn't know, that's when it first started sinking ships with U-boats, you know. And were there a lot of people on Stockholm at that time? Immigrants, were a lot of immigrants leaving from Sweden? Oh yeah, it was loaded. Finland, several families from Finland. Especially one lady, mom got pretty acquainted with her friends. She's from Finland, she had two little girls. Just about, oh, five and, maybe five and six or five and seven, something like that. She went up in northern Minnesota somewhere. I think mom corresponded with her for a few years there till it finally kind of died off or somebody passed away or something. How was the time in Sweden? They said there was shortage of food during the First World War. Did you feel any of that? No, Sweden was doing good. They were making money. Germans come over there and my granddad sold horses. Said I'm going to give a hundred crowns for them. A thousand crowns a round. And he had a lot of them. The farmers did. So he made money then? Oh, they made money. But your grandpa, why didn't he want you to stay? I mean, being the oldest son, you were ready to take over there. Well, he had... He had son of his own? Oh, he had, let's see, oh, five boys. Five boys? That's a big place. That was a great big place. He had a hard man besides his boys. But the way he'd done that, he rented it on a contract many years ago. So much a year. And when that war started, boy, he made money. Things went up, you know, the wheat and the Germans, you know. See, the price didn't make no difference, you know. So you had it pretty good there? No, the Swedes, they was prospering all the way through the, well, both wars. See, Sweden was the only one in, stayed out of the Second World War. Norway got in it while the Germans invaded Norway and Denmark both. So you had a pretty good trip over then from Sweden, from Gothenburg into Halifax and New York. And you remember going through Ellis Island? Oh, yeah, sure, yeah, I'll never forget that. Did you have any experience there you remember especially? Yeah, I did. There was a lot of them, though. There was a lot of tears. I never called that, Ellis Island, I always called Devil's Island myself. People, you know, that just didn't pass, you know, sent them over the side to sit down and wait for more inspection, you know, or stuff. And a lot of them was crying, you know, and kids were running around, and everybody had the time to take care of them. But your mother, now, she also had her hands and foot coming with the... Well, I was the oldest one. I had to take care of a part of them, you know. You had to help out then. You had to be the man in the family. But you didn't have any problem to passing through the examinations or...? No, no, we went right on through. A lot of them, you know, a lot of kids, you know, had lice, you know, in their hair, you know. That's pretty common in the northern countries. And, of course, they don't wash their queen up, some of them, you know. The poor families, that's the only what came, you know. I don't know if some of them got the money even to come or not. But they finally managed to scrape up enough. Of course, the fare in them days wasn't too high. I don't remember just what it was now, but... But there was still enough to hold? Your dad was able then to send money or tickets for you or...? No, we had enough money to come. We had the money for the farm, and he didn't take any money with him. Well, I suppose your grandpa was pretty well off too then. Oh, yeah, he was real well off, as far as that goes. He probably helped out too then, too. No, he didn't. I don't think he helped us any, but we had enough money to come. You don't think your mother was brave enough to ask him for a little bit of support, or...? No, I don't. She never said anyway. So, and did you have to stay at Ellis Island more than one day, or did you...? No, it was... Well, an immigration train that went west was sitting there. Of course, you had to take a ferry off of the island to the station, you know, and that was under supervision. You didn't do no running around. They heard you like a bunch of cattle, and they'd shack your papers and everything, you know. They didn't just tell you to go there and there. They took you there. You weren't no mix-up. Did they put a piece of paper on your coat? I don't remember. You don't remember that? I kind of think we had a name on the coat. And the train number and so on, so... So, how did you fare now with the food? I mean, you had to eat there. Were you able to order coffee and...? What do you mean, here? Yeah, you know, I mean in New York. Well, we got a... they sent a box with us out of New York. On the train? Yeah, they got a box of sandwiches, bananas, apples. That's supposed to last you two days, what was in them boxes. Some of them didn't like it. I don't know how long it's been boxed, as far as that goes. But then we stopped in Chicago. Uncle Hugo lived there, and he came to the train and he got us off. With a lot of talking, I suppose, but he got us off for a day. Was that the first time you saw your farbrother? Your farbrother Hugo? The what? That was your father's brother? Yeah. Your farbrother? Farbrother, yeah. I got you now. Yeah, that's the first time I ever saw him. He was back in Sweden, but I never remembered it. You were too small then. So what kind of work was he doing there in... He was working in Marshall Field. I see. In the store? Yeah, in the store. I don't know what it was in the stocking department somewhere. Did you stay there a day or two, or did you...? We stayed there one day. We got a 24-hour leave off the train, then we had to be on it again. Or a different train. We got a faster train then. You took the train to Burlington? Yeah, to Burlington, and we were supposed to go to Mount Pleasant, but our address was Winfield, and to Winfield we had to go. See, that's how strict they were. They wouldn't let you go any place more than what your address was. And it was a long trip then. You were tired then, I suppose, after sitting on the train for so many hours. Yeah, after that, the emigration train. Boy, you'd go out and side and pick strawberries, and then catch up with it. But it was that slow? Oh, yeah. You could get out and walk. I don't suppose it went over 15 miles an hour. Not all the way. There was only two cities. Yeah, it stopped every place. It did. So were there any more Swedes coming to Burlington and Iowa at that time? Were you the only ones...? Yeah, there was a fellow named George Johnson. He's dead now. He came, I think, two years after we came, and then he had a brother came. And he worked out there east of Switzerland, but he got sick. He died. He hadn't been here over two years, I don't think, when he got sick and died. There was quite a few of them. Probably Arnold told you that. August Danielson. No, you didn't say anything about him. Well, he was a Swede. He worked up here just north of Oles. And he said he had a sweetheart in Sweden. He was going to send for her. Then he told me one day, he said, she ain't going to come over here. She ain't going to come over here. He said, I'm going back and see if I can get her to come over here. And August went back, and I think that's in 1922 when he went back. I'm not sure. Or maybe it's 23, I don't know. But anyway, here about three weeks ago, he went back. He got married. In Sweden. And he never did come back, but three weeks ago, his boy, he had a boy, he came. And his wife, he came. And this boy wanted to see where August had worked. So he finally ended up up at Arnold's. He was the only one who could talk Swedish to him, I guess. I told Arnold here a couple of weeks ago, when I said, I said, you ought to come out. He said, I know all about August. He said, I never thought of you. He said, I should have, but I went trashing with him for all the time he was in that run. I went trashing with him. He used to come over home every once in a while and talk to the folks. But his sweet thoughts, he wouldn't let him go back to the United States then? No, August never came back. Oh, it's been several guys that didn't like it here, went back. There was a fellow named John Nelson, he went back. And he never came back over here. And it's been two or three more that I know of that went back. So when you came then, your father, had he rented a farm then or a place where you could live? We rented a place right north of Sweetsburg. There was a farm? On the farm, the second place on the west side. And how big of a farm, 140, 160, or how many acres? It was just 80, but we rented two other farms, one across the road and one, the place up there at Sweetsburg runs clear up to the cemetery, we rented that. We had three 80s. It was an old station, we didn't have tractors. So when you came, you were old enough to remember what you saw, what did you think about Iowa? You came there in June. I'll tell you right now, when it comes to roads, Sweden had a whole lot better roads than Iowa did. Were they bad here at the time? Huh? Were there bad roads here at the time when you came? It was all mud, even the pavement, this road here, way back in 1920 it was mud. It was? That blacktop and that pavement that goes through Sweetsburg wasn't put in until in the early 30s. So it wasn't that easy then in the rainy season to climb? I started the Mount Pleasant in a car in 1927. I didn't get more than about a mile south of Sweetsburg, I was up in mud. Had to get out of there. So there was really a setback then? In Sweden every road was gravel, you know. Of course you had it handy, you had it close to gravel. Here it's trouble to find stone, I suppose, it's a stone-free country. Not too much sand or gravel, any place to find here, you had to ship it in more or less. So when you came down to your dad, he was happy to see you. I mean he got help in the kitchen and he got you as a hired man or what happened? I was the hired man, that's right. I was the oldest one and I had to be the hired man. So you had to learn that from your father. He told you how to do it, to drive a team of horses and disc and plow and husk horn. The whole operation was different in Sweden. Oh yeah, there was no corn in Sweden. So did you feel at home then after a year or so? Did you have dairy cows or dairy? Oh yeah, when we didn't have a dairy farm, we always had two or three cows, sometimes up to five at a meal. But not a regular dairy. And then you had some beef cattle? Cattle and hogs both. Oh, I see. Fed cattle and raised hogs, you know. So how did you feel at home now? Was it easier to work for Grandpa in Sweden than your dad here in Switzerland? Well, it was about as profitable as any one of us paid us. No, we got spending money, that's about all the first few years. I worked home for five years, then the other boys got big enough, they took over and then I hired out. I worked five years for an uncle to Ferdie Larsson. I see. So you knew Ferdie Larsson then from the beginning, when you came here then, almost? Yeah. And you joined the church then in Switzerland? Oh yeah, joined it right away. And your dad, now, did he... He took part in the farming of course. Was he able to speak English at that time when you came over? Oh yeah, he could talk enough to get along, you know. How were you able to learn, you stayed on the farm for five years. Were you able to pick up any English here and there or mingle with the young people? Oh yeah, I grew up in Switzerland, that's what. Walked the first few years, you know. I used to paddle along, you know, we had a half a mile, you know, we even walked to church. Did the young people congregate there in the evenings in Switzerland? Oh well, they had what they called Luther League, you know. Luther League? Yeah, but every other Thursday night, outside of that, I don't think... Oh well, sometimes they had parties and... But you couldn't belong to the Odd Fellows though, there was a lodge there in Switzburg. Odd Fellows Lodge. Yeah. You didn't belong to that one? No. You couldn't belong to that one, they said, because then you couldn't belong to the church. Because they were against it. So what did the young people do then in the evenings on Saturdays and Sundays for parties? Well... For fun? If you had a way, while you're going to Winfield, go to Pitcher's Show. When you got a little older, you know, there was a train running from Oldstown, there was another track a little further north, what they used to call Wayne. And there was a train running to Winfield, or it came from the west and went to Winfield about, oh, around five o'clock in the afternoon. So you could take that in then? Take that in and walk home. You didn't have a car? No, not until, let's see, 19... 19... 1920, I think, we bought the first car. I'm pretty sure, yeah. And you were able to start driving it then? Oh, yeah. You learned to drive it? And then you could go outside a little bit more, you could take the car to... Well, I went to Switzerland, you know, Winfield, Mount Pleasant mostly. There was no way to run around with the car unnecessarily, you had to have an errand to go there, or a purpose. How about your mother now, did she like it over here at first, or was she homesick? No, I think she liked it fine. No, I don't think anybody was... After he got going, I don't think anybody got homesick, and he just had to adjust to it, you know, that was all there was. And your sister now, she didn't feel too good at first, you said? Oh, she finally snapped out of it, I guess, and she kept writing back and forth for a long time. I think she still does, as far as I go, with that one friend, but she's getting pretty old now. My sister's pretty bad. She's in a nursing home in Winfield. She had a stroke years ago, and then she had trouble with her hands. I don't think she can even write anymore. I see. So, when you started to date girls then, you met... So, when you started to date girls then, did you look for any Swedish girls, or how come you... No, I did. I went a few times with a sister, Arnold Lindane, very nice girl. There was plenty of Swedish girls at that time, wasn't there? No, there wasn't very many Swedish girls. No? Not my age. The Muslim was older and then younger. I see. So, then you met Gerta Paisley? I met several girls. But you were able to speak English then? You had no trouble? Well, yeah. I had learned it. I went crashing in the trash and run, you know. Started picking it up and then studied in the evenings, you know. After you get started, one, so I... But you didn't go to an evening school to learn English, though? Oh, I went to school. To learn English? No, in the wintertime. Oh, you did? In the... In the old, yeah. In the woods? I went two winters. What kind of school was that? Who paid the... Well, that was regular. First, second and third and up to eighth grade, you know. I see. So, they offered English then to all... Well, I had to run from one room to another. And then, I could beat the high school in that. And then, spelling and reading, I had a good undergrad. So, did you have... were there any other Swedish families at that time here in... Oh, yeah. There was a lot of them there. I mean, they came from Sweden then? Yeah, there was a lot of people here from Sweden then, but... There was two Hulkwitz boys, but one of them owned the farm that we started farming on. Randed from him. He was born in... I was... pretty nearly all the old Swedes was born in Sweden. Some of them been here probably 30, 40 years from we came, you know. So, you went together then quite often with the party? Well, yeah. Oh, yeah. And then you were talking about threshing parties, then. Did you have a co-op threshing machine or was somebody else... Well, it was threshing run, you know. He owned the threshing machine and the outfit. I know. A fellow named Fred Hulkwitz had a machine and a separator. And he picked a... he'd run a section, you know, I think it was about 20 farms. And all the people on that farm had to go and help the other one. I see. But you hired all them to follow the whole run? Yeah. Yeah. When you started, you had to finish, you know. They helped you, you had to help them. I see. So there was a big crew then, though. Oh, yeah. It was around 22 men altogether. 22 men? About five guys in a field, pitched on the bundles and about seven or eight wrecks to haul it in. And then throwing it in the threshing machine. And what happened to the straw now that came out from the threshing machine? They were in a big pile. Big pile. Stacked it. Yeah, there's cattle sleeping there around in wintertime. They lay out there by that straw pile, you know. It went way high up. A couple guys get up there and walk and tramp the middle down, you know. Then the side saddle, then you had a perfect stack. If you tramp the middle down, it already saddled. And the side saddle, you know, it just taped itself over. So there was a lot of cooking then for the horsewives, 22 men. Yeah, sometimes you served two meals, I mean two chefs. Breakfast you had at home then? Oh, yeah, I had breakfast at home. But the big dinner was at, the big meal was at the dinner time, I mean noon time. Well, they started off having evening meal too, you know, but in the later years, that soon got too old because it got too late in the evening, you know. They run the machine till 6 o'clock and sometime if you want to get through at the place, you run till about 7, you know, and then if you had to wait on a meal, you never got home till dark. So when you was through in the evening, when you unloaded your last load, you go home. You go home, yeah. So the ladies, they needed some help too then in the kitchen. Oh, yeah. You know, the neighbors and baking pies and chicken and everything. Yeah, you don't eat too much, you know, everybody tried to do their best, you know. They didn't want to have the water on and never skimpy with the food. They had to do their best. So you did that for how many years, you said, 6, 7 years? The what? The threshing. How many years were you doing that? I was in that run 10 years. 10 years. 5 at home and 5 for the guy I worked for. I worked for him for 5 years. Then I moved over there where my boy lives now. Dad bought that place and I rented it from Dad in 1927 when I started farming. Was it easy then to be a farmer, to borrow some money and get started with a few cattle? Well, you didn't have to borrow so much in them days, you know. You could get about 4 horses and a claw and a cultivator and a disc. If you went to these farm sales, you know, you'd pick it up. Quite cheap then. Yeah, I think it cost me about $4,000 to start farming. So how did you fare now in the 1930s when the Depression hit? I went broke. You went broke? Pretty near. Finally weathered it, but boy, when you had a... In 1933, I sent a load of hogs to market. 60 head of hams weighed 230 pounds. $2.25 a hundred. Boy. I don't think it was quite $5 a head. So you didn't even get the money back? Well, I got the money. It didn't cost me anything. Corn wasn't worth anything. That's all to eat, you know. How did you shell the corn now? You didn't have any hammer mill or anything like that. How did you... Oh, you had a big corn sheller. A big corn sheller? The one that run the threshing rig had a corn sheller, too. And it had a big tractor. It shelled a thousand bushels of corn out in about an hour and a half, two hours. But how did you mill it? Huh? How did you mill it so you get the... It was hauled to town. Wagons. All the neighbors come in, about 10, 12 wagons. Load up, and if they had time, if they needed to, they'd come back and get the second load. So you hauled in a loose weight, or did you have it in bags? Did you bag it up, or did you have it in loose weight? I mean, hauling it to the... No, it went into the elevator. She scaled the weight, it went in. How did you transport it? Was it loose weight, or was it in bags? Or sacks? Did you sack it up from the threshing machine or the sheller, or did it come loose in the wagon? It came loose in the wagon. Oh, you had to back up to spot it, you know. It'd run a big stream. It didn't take you more than just a few minutes. You had a 50 bushel in the wagon. You never sacked it up then? Not there. No? No, not till they were... You found out how much you had when it went over the scale and went into the elevator. And then you'd drive up on a couple of logs, and the wagon went up, and everything went out. And just like that. How about the threshing? When the grain you were threshing, there was soybean and oats? Oh, mostly oats. Mostly oats. Did you sack that up when the King... Oh, yeah. You had it up on the machine, half a bushel. And then it had to wait, you know. Then it opened up and dumped it, and it ran in the wagon, and it just kept going. I says, you never used sacks then? Huh? You never used sacks? In Sweden, you use sacks, you know. Yeah, you know what I mean. Yeah. No, no, no, that's a loose in the wagon. Always loose. Yeah, I never seen them sack anything. But you remember home in Sweden when you were threshing, you had to carry those sacks up, empty it out. You never did that here? Uh-uh, no. So that was a complete different operation. Was it easy enough to be a farmer here, you think, than in Sweden? No. No, I expect it's easier here, because one thing, you didn't have them rocks and stuff to go down with. So there were actually no rocks there in the soil? There were no rocks there in the soil? In Sweden? No, here. Oh, no, well, not around here there isn't any. Oh, you can find one once in a while, yeah. But you got them around Waterloo. Oh, there you got them. A lot of rocks. But not here. In Minnesota, got a lot of rocks. What did your dad say now when you came here, you were sitting discussing the farming and everything. Did he compare Sweden with Iowa? No. No. They never talked about the old time in the... No, I don't think we ever talked about the old, maybe sometime, you know, you can see the difference or something like that, but we're sitting discussing the difference. That's a different operation altogether. If you go further north, up in Minnesota, I expect in the, where they don't raise corn, up in north, I have worked up in northern Minnesota where they don't raise no corn. Where they raise oats and wheat and barley and flakes, I worked up in the harvest fields a couple years. And that's more like Sweden there, and it interacts with the steam engine. That was back in 1925, 25 and 26. So when you were finished here, then you went up to Minnesota? Yeah, after trashing here, you can go up there, you know, there you're starting up there. We left here in, oh, I suppose in about the middle of August, first part of August, and they were still cutting oats when we got up in there. The reason we went, we'd get four dollars a day up there, here in Iowa, only about a dollar and a half. Do you mean they pay more up there? Oh, yeah. Why? Oh, they wanted good help. No, the harvest up there, we got four dollars a day of trashing and— And then the food? And the shock and oats, both. And you got the food on there, too? Oh, yeah. I see. So you stayed with the farmer there for a week or so? Yeah, I stayed right there on the farm. Another fellow, me, he was a Dutchman, I was a Swede. And when we started out here, we made it up, through trashing, you know, we was talking, you know, and we wanted to know how we was going to do after trashing. And we got talking about it, and one of the boys says, boy, let's go up to Harvest Fields. I says, all right, I'm game. And we got all talked up, as six of us went. We got up there in the Red River Valley, second day we got up in there, and four of the boys had already had jobs. Me and the fellow I rode with, we had one car. We went into a little town, it was getting dark, we didn't hire out, we brought us something to eat. Went up, and I says, there's no ditches there, you know, and I says, first field, wheat field or oats field you see, I says, pull in. He said, all right, we can find a good shack to sleep on. Pulled in, and six o'clock the next morning, a guy, the mosquitoes got so bad we couldn't stay outside, we had to get back in the Ford. Boy, them mosquitoes up there are terrific. And we got in the Ford, one in the front seat and one in the back seat, went to sleep, and we'd fallen asleep at six o'clock in the morning. A guy opened up the curtain and gave a yell, he said, you guys looking for work? I rubbed her eyes and he says, yeah. He says, come on over. He says, I got a job for you. He was a Dutchman, Max Ray there. We went up there and he says, I says, we got to go in town and get something to eat, and then we'll be out. He told where to go. He says, just a mile and a half on south there. We went back and we was back out there about 7.30 I guess, and he says, see that field out there? I says, yeah. I don't see the end of it, but I can see the field. He says, it's full of bundles. He says, you boys go out there and set them up. I says, not today. Not all of them. I says, that was 80 acres. 80 acres. Lay them flat. Bundle after bundle. I mean, they were pile after pile. I think we worked on it for four days before we got done. How many did you put up there? Six or eight or what? Eight. It's different up there. Here they set two, and then one on each side, and then put them around, and up there they set two and two, and that filled it out. Down here you cap them. Up there they don't cap them. No cap here. You leave them open so you get air. So you were paid $4 a day then? Yep. So you were satisfied, double pay? Yeah, I was satisfied. Couldn't go anyplace either. Oh, you did go in town into Fargo, Moorhead, and Fargo on Saturday night. We worked the first Sunday up there, but I says, no, no more of that. I says, you got to rest one day. I says, that's too much. How about potatoes, Red River Valley? Did they have a lot of potatoes at that time? Yeah, I picked potatoes. But that's the hardest work I ever done. So it didn't pay as good then? You had to give more of your body? Well, see the trouble is you got to carry your empty sacks. And you take, the way you do it, you start out in the morning, lay a belt out, and then lay 20 sacks on that, and then you pick it up and strap it on you. 20 sacks don't seem like very much, but you go and pick potatoes, and that belt, they're pulling in on your belly all the time, boy, it gets you. So they picked it right in the sack? No, they pick it in buckets. I always pick partners, take a row apiece, and then one hold a half-bushel of baskets, whatever it was. And that's the way they measured them. And one hold the sack, and you had to empty both buckets, and then go again, and next time you grabbed the sack off, you see, took turn about taking the sacks, it would be like an equal, you know. So they must have had a bit of a breaking job? The first morning when I got up, I didn't know whether I was going to get out of bed or not, I was that stiff. And that fall I come back home, I couldn't hardly straighten up when I got home, I must have been out of there for a near week. So you were glad to come to Ontario again? You pick 135 bushels of potatoes in a short day, because you never start picking until October, and that's when it's frost. And the potatoes can't freeze or frost, and then you've got to quit early, at four o'clock, so the guy that picked the potatoes up, get them all hauled in. What kind of machinery did they use to get them all around? A digger. A digger? A digger, just like a big scoop. Go down under it, and then you had four horses on it, and that thing shook it, you know, and then the potatoes rolled out back behind it. It's mellow, it's kind of a loom soil there in the river valley, hardly ever find any rocks there, more than a while. It's kind of sandy, is it? Well, it isn't sand, it's a loom, I don't know what you'd call it, it's a light, light soil, but it's... If you compare this soil with the Red River Valley, is it about the same? It's a different soil here, it's heavier here. Oh, yeah, this soil is a whole lot heavier than it is up there in the Red River Valley. It's an alkaline soil, is what it is. You don't need lime up there, but you need lime up there. No, no, you don't need no lime up there. In some places, well, the Koras, that's alkaline, you can't even drink the water there. So, you mastered the Depression anyway, you stayed on the farm? Yeah, I had to stay, I couldn't get off there. You were married then at that time? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I was married and I had my... see, the Depression didn't really hit... If I had it started in 29, but it never really hit until 32 or 33. That's when it was, 33 is what really a tough year. It was bad. How about the Dust Bowl, when it was blowing dirt? Oh, that was in 36. Did you have that there too? Oh, yeah. Yeah, we was about burned up here. It was a bad year. Did anybody of the farmers move away then to California or Minnesota? Well, some went to Minnesota a couple years before that, or that before I even started farming. There was Miller and there was a couple old sonners, some left the Sweet Spring area and went up to Minnesota. Sandburg and Anderson, some went, but they went... well, some of them might have went in that time, but most of them went before. Up around, oh, I forgot the name of the place, Red Winger, right up in there somewhere, it's in Minnesota. Southwestern Minnesota. And there were younger people, like you, for instance? Oh, yeah, they were young when they left. Children of immigrants that had to leave. Did the farmers stay in the family over the years, like you left your farm to your son? Well, not many men ever left after they started. They stayed with it then? Some of them had to quit, but the young generation generally weathered it. Yeah, that 1933 was a bad year. There were some guys, some guys lost their farms, but it wasn't any worse than it is right now. What is the difference now between then and now? Well, the only difference, the big difference is too much credit, too much paper. What too much? In them days, people, they didn't go and borrow a whole lot of money. In fact, you couldn't borrow very much money. You either paid for it or you done without it. That was the difference. If anything happened today, I think the whole doggone country would go broke. Because I don't, too much, that's the worst thing in this country, the credit. These credit cards and all that stuff, you know, people buying stuff and don't realize they're going to have to pay for it. And then when payday comes, they ain't got no money. But now if they are in bad shape, they had to walk away from the farm, so if they are too much in debt, of course. Well, the guys, well, there's a lot of guys who bought land too high here back a few years back when this land got so boom and high, you know. There's some guys, well, Arnold and Dins got a boy that bought some land, gave over $3,000 an acre for it. It's worth a thousand today, maybe, $1,500 to buy us. Well, how can you get the money back then, $3,000 an acre? I mean, if you plow... There ain't no way you can get it out of it now. There's no way? No, no way you can get it out of it. And your trouble today is your taxes. In 1958, when I bought this place, my tax on this place was $225. What do you think it is today? Well, it's probably over $2,000. Huh? $2,000? No, it isn't $2,000, but it's right at $1,400. Well, it's not too far away from it. And you can't... you know, that makes it pretty doggone high on a small place. How do they assess this value now? I mean, if you paid, let's say, $500 an acre, you pay on that amount and... Well, they put the value on it. See, they got this value of this land up during the high time. I mean, a guy on the border for $3,000 an acre, does he pay tax on that amount or do they revalue it? Or devalue it? Well, no, I think if that's what the thing was worth, well, I suppose they assess you accordingly. But they're supposed to take the land again and run over the colonies, see, and they're only supposed to show... I don't know what it is, and they're not supposed to tax you on full value. It's supposed to be... I couldn't tell you just what it is right now. It's just a certain percent. But here a few years ago, years ago, back in the 50s, bought... paid tax on a farm. The whole farm was included. Now they got the land and the building separated, and then they revalue the house. This house, they got valued, tax valuation of $20,000, which is way out of reason. This house here is right at 100 years old. That's way out of reason. And there's nowhere you can refuse or, I mean, tell them to look it over again and reassess it? Well, you can go down there and squawk, you know. But the trouble right now, the schools, the schools, teachers, these hacks, these small games and recreation in the schools, the school tax is way up there, and that's what takes most of the money. I'm not against education, but it could be saved a whole lot on these buses. There are too many activities. Yeah, it's every night. You know, in the summertime when it's vacation time, that school, ball games and that stuff, it's all just the same, and the coaches and what have you, you know, you got to pay them a salary. One person down here's got, I kept track one night or one day, he had four, going four different places with the kids, different grade of kids or girls or boys. One went to Kirkuk, another one to Tumla, another bus to Washington. They run the people down to the ground. So that's a different time then. When did it turn around then in the farming? Well, what happened here then during the Depression? Did you become a Republican or a Democrat? I was a Democrat right then, I'll tell you that. That was during the Hoover times. But there was a lot of Republicans. I'll tell you, I never voted strictly any Democrat or Republican. I voted for the man. But in your consideration, Roosevelt was a good president. Roosevelt. There wasn't very many who voted, the farmers, there wasn't very many who voted Republican ticket, because if you remember or heard about how Roosevelt got in there, Franklin Delwin, he won that with a landslide, and I'll tell you, that's the kind of a man we need today. So he was needed for that time then. Yes, sir, and he went out and told them what had to be done, and he done it. And he put, well, of course he didn't give them a, gosh, they were better than starving. He gave everybody a job on PWA, you know, a dollar a day. But you didn't go on WPA then because you were a farmer. No, I was on the farm, but. But you couldn't, but you were in this seal, seal the corn business though, in other words, the commodities. Well, you know, he got rid of some of the pigs and put a program on, you know, as he slaughtered the pigs and cut the production down, you know. No corn, got the sheep, you know, corn was down 25 cents a bushel. It wasn't hardly worth, well, a lot of people burned it, a few. There was no way to sell it. No, but deal with it, that's about the only thing you could do with it. But it come right back in some way or another, and when it come, it worked up slow, but it stayed. It never dropped back much. You had it, during the Hoover time in 21, the corn was down to 25 cents. That was really before, but it didn't last more than about two months, and it was back up 65, 80 cents. No, of course, the depression, in them days, if you had $10 during the depression, you had plenty of money. Went a long way. Local bread was only 10, 11 cents, you know, as far as that goes. In them days, there wasn't very much bread bought in the stores. Everybody done their own baking. And the payroll was a dollar and a quarter, you know. But it was a hard time, though, too. How about, did you recommend your sons, you had a son and a daughter. Did you recommend it to your son to be a farmer? He had a choice, he had to go to college or farm. He was in the service, he was over in Germany for, he spent most of his two years in service over in Germany. He went to Sweden when he was, just before he had to leave, he went to Sweden. So he met some of your relation then? Yeah, he took pictures of the church and the home place and he met some of the cousins. He was there a couple of days, he could have stayed a week, I guess. He run into one of my cousins that could talk English and she took him around and showed him. So you were not thinking of going back for a visit? The what? You were not thinking of going back to visit? I don't imagine now. My eye's not too good anymore, I can't see too good, I can't see to read a paper. And getting a little bit hard of hearing, too. How old do you think I am? You're 86. Yeah, I will be. 86 in December.