 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Nelia Inquist, Omar Nevreska. Cassette two, side one. I saw a painting of the Emmanuel, in Dikene's home and the hospital, Nazareth, I think, convalescent home, or whatever it was, and it was a home for the old people. And there was a greenhouse, Dikene's... They had a greenhouse and they had Dikene's home. Yeah, and they had a children's orphanage. Were they able to visualize what was going to be a hundred years later? Oh, no. No, I'm sure not. But it was really a... It was a very nice group, you know, and everything went along beautifully. Of course, it's Fuglstrom who started it. He was an unusual man, I guess. And I can't remember him. You don't remember him? No, my mother couldn't remember him. My stepmother, my adopted mother and father were married by him. He married them, Fuglstrom. Because he had the church down on 19th and Cass. It was called the Emmanuel Lutheran Church. And all the Swedes used to go to church, whether they belonged to church or not, because that was a good meeting place. And I think that church must have been started over a hundred years ago, because it must have been. And then across the street from there, there was a boarding house, like they used to call it. And that woman, she took in all the Swedish men and people who came in, gave them room and board, or at least a board, I guess. Then they probably rented a room someplace else, but they'd always come there to eat, have their dinner. I can't remember what her name was, but I remember that's what that was. And then, of course, the church across the street, that would be the meeting place for them after Sunday, on Sundays. So there was a real Swedish area then? Mm-hmm. And they had all the facilities there. They had a children's home. Oh, yes, that was on the 30th, that was down east of here, 36th and Reddick. No, not Reddick. This is Reddick. Oh, what was that name down there? Laramie, Laramie. Oh, not too far from here? No, it isn't too far from here. Just right straight east. The hospital is still standing there, but that wasn't the first one. That wasn't the old one. The old one with two towers on it. You've seen pictures of it, no doubt. Mm-hmm. That was the first one that Dr. Fogelstrom built. But then they had the children's home, orphanage they called it, Swedish. They were children of mother and mother had been lost, had gone, died, or what have you. And there was one sister, Alma, who took care of the children. She was a daughter to Fogelstrom. And they were quite small there, some of them. Oh, yes, little children. And then they had a school for them, too, or did they go to other schools? Well, I really don't know. I think, well, I imagine probably the first grades or so, probably. I really don't remember that. But they had some who were, then they had a, I remember they had one little girl who was crippled and she couldn't move, and so they took care of her. And then they used to have a choir of the little kids, and then they used to sing. Trigger, I can't hear you anymore. So they used Swedish during that complex, too, then, in the hospital. And there were Swedish doctors? Well, I suppose so. I imagine there were some Swedish doctors. When did the Americans start to patronize this hospital? Well, I don't know. I think Reverend Fogelstrom, I think he advertised in the newspapers. So I think the American house became, the doctors became more and more integrated. Was it known as the Swedish hospital? It was known as Swedish Emanuel Hospital, I think, at one time. Because we always called it the Swedish Emanuel. Swedish Emanuel. But I think it was just, after a while, it just became Emanuel Hospital. Now I saw in this painting they also had a greenhouse with a garden and everything, so they were sense-efficient. Oh yes, and that was run by another family by the name of Blum. He was a brother to Alfred Blum, who had a planning mill. They made woodwork to put in homes, and he made millions of dollars. And he came over and married his wife right after they came from Sweden. I guess they both came over from Sweden and they met here and they were married. But they had gone many years ago. But he left one son, and he's passed on. And he had two sons, and they were running this big mill place. But now, finally, people don't buy that kind of wood anymore to put in homes, beautiful doors and all that sort of thing. They don't have that anymore. So naturally they went bankrupt. Did he stay in his family, though, Blum's? I think one son is living in Omaha. That would be the grandson of the founder. But of course they don't know any Swedish at all. So one generation's business didn't all the time follow on to the second and third generation. They had to leave themselves. That's what's happened in some cases. They went out of style, or maybe it was the shortage of wood. Nobody can afford solid wood anymore. You can't. You just can't. I know my sister had some beautiful chairs made. They had wonderful workers, Swedish woodworkers, who made beautiful chairs, just like the French chairs. My sister had some beautiful chairs made by them. But of course you can't get those anymore. They don't make them like that anymore. There was no furniture factory here in Omaha, though. Not that I know of. I don't believe so. But a lot of carpenters. Carpenters. Every Swede they used to... And then of course they also had a place down on 14th and California. It was a building that they had. It was called a Swedish... What was it? A Swedish auditorium. I think it was called a Swedish auditorium. But they used to have Swedish dances. You know, the regular Dala dance. And then they also had... Then they served food. They used to serve dinners down there, as I recall. It was downtown Omaha. Downtown Omaha. And that was mostly... I know they had a chorus, a Swedish chorus. It was called Norden. N-O-R-D-E and Norden. And all those... Mostly all the fellows in that were painters or bricklayers or something like that. Worked with your hands, you know. They didn't belong to the Norden Club? No. Some of them did, but not all of them. Were you allowed not to go to dances like this auditorium? No, not to begin with. No, not when I was going to... No, but after you were confirmed or not. Oh, after I was confirmed. That was a different thing because I was on my own more or less after that. I see. So you were... But before that it was very strict. They were strict? Oh, yes. Very strict. Of course, we always had wine and a little whiskey in the house. We always had that. My father used to come home and he would... He had been out looking over the engineering projects or something. He'd come home, it would be cold weather, and he'd come in and he says... I must have had a little hiccup. It was a little... A little hiccup. A medicinal hiccup, yes. A hiccup. Yes. But they didn't drink excessively, though. It was only for gatherings when they met together. Yes. Family-wise like that. But how about the women, though? They didn't drink years ago. No, not... You never saw them like today? Oh, not like today, no. It was not this time, though. No. It's funny how things change. Now I think the women drink more than the men, and they smoke more than the men. Did you start to smoke? No. Oh, I did once during the war. When you couldn't get any cigarettes, I thought I had to smoke because everybody else was smoking, so I had to smoke, but I gave it up. This started more or less in the 30s, though, with the advertisements about smoking. It was fashionable, the movie industry. Well, I don't know. It seems to me it was more later than that. It was about 1950s, 60s. 50s or 60s. They tell you how... When the TV came in. How dangerous smoking was. And, of course, now everything is... I mean, men don't smoke a great deal now. It's the women that are smoking now. So that's changing habits. Everything changes. Did a lot of the men use snuff, though, years ago? Oh, yes, some of them did. But not people that worked in offices and banks? Oh, no, no. But now some of these young kids are sniffing. Yeah, you can never tell. How about religion? Has there changed, do you think, over the years, like the church you are going to? Well, yes, I think it's changed quite a bit. What is it that... Do you object to something of the changes? I don't know. I guess I'm just sort of a straight-laced Lutheran. But even the Lutheran church, the Augustana church over there, well, they have plays in the church, you know. And I can remember when I was... Well, I was confirmed, and we were going to, you know what Halloween is, a party. We were going to have a Halloween party, and we had it in the neighbor's basement, you know, because they had a big basement. So a few of us went over there and cleaned up the basement and got decorations up and everything, and the pastor of the church heard about that. And he said, I cannot allow the young folks to wear masks, you know. And my dad was kind of... he wasn't a straight-laced Lutheran, but he just thought that was ridiculous, so he called the pastor. And he says, well, if you want to come over and be with the children when they're down there, he says you're perfectly welcome, and you'll find there's nothing going on that's going to hurt them. So he said, Father said, my wife and I are going to be there to chaperone, and we know that they're perfectly good kids and they're not going to do anything. Well, he was terribly upset about it. So he still has a mask on. Yeah, and the same way with going to theaters. It was no good. No, I remember it was a Shakespeare theater, a Shakespeare play, and I was going to confirmation then. And I said to Mother one day, I came home from school, and I said, I'd like to go to see that Shakespeare play. She said, oh, I don't know. I think we have to call Pastor Carlson to find out if you can go. But he wasn't so straight-laced. He said, well, I think it would be all right, but he says as long as she's just going to confirmation, he says, I don't think that she should go. Well, you were going to be confirmed then. Yeah, you see, we went every Saturday morning. We had to go to the church and read the catechesis and recite the whole thing. And I remember I had to, he asked me in Swedish, you know, when I was confirmed, vad är Gud? And all I can remember is, Gud är en ande med alla de högsta möjligheter, or whatever it was, something, with all the greatest powers, with all the powers. And I guess that's all I remember of my confirmation. In Swedish? Uh-huh. So you went through several meetings that you didn't understand what they were talking about, actually? No, all I did was to learn the catechism, and I learned it by heart, the whole thing. So when I was confirmed, I think I had to recite most of the psalms and the whole thing. And now I can't remember hardly anything about it. I do remember one psalm, I think, Jag lyfter minna hendript til gud spärrkus. Do you remember that one? So they must have been harder for a lot of... It was, it was difficult for some of them, who didn't have Swedish. I mean, the parents probably were speaking English, broken English, you know, and these youngsters would have to try to read Swedish. You would think of religion like they were scared away. But then, of course, then right after that, about two years later, then the whole, the church was turned over. I mean, the sermons were all in English after that, because for the youngsters, it wasn't, there wasn't any use of trying to teach them Swedish when they were just little youngsters growing up in an American place where English is supposed to be spoken well. Do you think the pastor influenced the parents to give them Swedish instructions? No, I don't think, I don't think it was... They never pushed the Swedish, you know. I don't think it was the pastors, I think it was the synod, the Augustana Synod. The synod, they came from higher up. Yeah. So they didn't understand that. And of course, the bishop, Swedish bishop, was over here several times. Who was it? Söderblom. Söderblom, yeah, he was here once. There he is. And who else was it, not before him? Oh, Scheele. Scheele, yeah. Scheele was here. I remember my mother and father had to entertain them when they were together at a dinner. Was he received then almost like a pope? Almost like a pope. They looked up to him. Yeah, and he marched into the church with his staff and everything. Oh yes, it was very, very fancy. And religious. But nowadays they don't pay that respect to him anymore, they don't mean to march. Well, I don't think so. I don't think, even in Sweden do they. So your generation has gone through a lot of different changes though. Oh, yes. The one before yours, it was almost the same, more or less. Well, my cousin Anna Swanson, she'll be 94, and she was confirmed in Swedish too. Does she speak Swedish? No, she doesn't speak Swedish. I thought if she comes, they come down about 5 o'clock to have dinner, and then we have dinner. That was an interview.