 I graduated from the University of Minnesota in 1929. I received my degree as a Bachelor of Science Architectural Engineering. So my lifetime was spent in the Army. I was an officer in the Army and I was in the sales management and engineering field during my lifetime. I'm sitting together with Carl E. Nobber Serious in Largo, Florida. He was born in 1905, November 8, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. And we have the 27th of January 1987. Your name, Nobber Serious, I am sure you are aware of it, where it stems from in Sweden. How did you get to know about it and how old were you when you realized that you were a famous chemist in Sweden? It was in high school when they had the picture of Baron John Jacob in our high school chemistry book. And that was my first inkling to the fact that the name was the same. So then I started checking into it little by little and found out very little. But later on in life we made a trip to Sweden and we saw the Bresilius Park in Stockholm and the museum. So your parents never made a fuss over it? They didn't make a big fuss over it, no. Well, they were proud of the name, but no. Well, they used to talk about it, but not... No, it didn't mean as much because... Oh yes, they didn't mean anything then because they were Americans. So your father, now, calling him Bresilius, he was born in the father room in Sweden. And Jöns Jakob Bresilius, now, he was his great-great-grandfather? No, no. My father's grandfather was related to John Jacobs. I think they were cousins. I see. So his father were connected in family. So your family, now, on the father's side, what was he doing in Sweden before he came over here? Well, when he came here, I know he learned the bricklaying trade. What he did in Sweden, I don't know. And his father, you don't know what his grandfather was doing? I'm trying to think. No, it's all over there in the church books. I know we visited that church in Fallrun. But he never mentioned anything about it, or at least he came... No, they didn't... Because he was making a living. Yeah. So what year did he come over then, in the late 1800s? 1902, I think it was. 1902? Yeah. And he came to... Minneapolis. Minneapolis, Minnesota. How about your mother, now, Lilla Hallberg? She came with him at that time. They were already married in Sweden, then? I think they got married here. There was a whole group of them that came over, and they all married. And they got married. They knew each other, then? Yeah. They came from the same family? Yeah. So when they came, then, to Minneapolis, he was a young guy, then? Yeah. He was born in 79, so 1902, that would make him 23. And he settled in... In Minneapolis. Right downtown Minneapolis, or in the... Well, more or less in the center of town. The... The area? Yeah. Seven Corners? Yeah. Yeah, I'd say that's where I was born, 718 20th Avenue, down there, on a dining room table. Is that right? Yeah. That's what they did up there, I guess. Yeah, they had midwives. So you were born in the home? Yeah. You were three children in the family? Right. So at that time, when you were born, then, he was working as a bricklayer in Minneapolis? Laying bricks and building houses for a contractor? Well, he was in business for himself for a while there. So... But he spent his lifetime as a bricklayer. Or brickmason, I should say. But he died when he was 59, so... And you were baptized then, almost immediately after the birth? Yeah. And who baptized you? Dr. Petrie. Dr. Petrie. Augustana Lutheran Church. Oh, so you belonged to that one, then? Yeah. I was confirmed there, too. So were you confirmed in the Swedish language? Mm-hmm. So you talked Swedish all the time, then, when you were growing up? Yeah. In the neighborhood around, were all Swedish? Yeah. Well, it started to become a mixture of everything. The Indians weren't there yet, but they were up north. But they've taken over that area now where I grew up. That's gone into a real slum area now. So they followed the other nationalities? Yeah. But you were growing up then with Italians and Irish? The people next door were German, and then we had Belgian people on the other side, and there were Swedes on the corner. It was a mixture of everything, yes. The Belgian people, do you realize if they were Flemish or Walloons? Or you never thought of... Never thought anything of it. They were Belgian people. Yeah. Did they talk their language, then? Yes. So there were lines drawn between each nationality? Well, we... You played in American, of course, outside? Yeah. And I know the kids next door to me, the German family, they were Catholic, and I used to go to Sunday school with them and help them pump the organ. And they used to go to Sunday school with me at the Lutheran church, so... I see. So you integrated. Yes. But the parents didn't do that kind of thing? Oh, no. No, no. They stayed to themselves. The children did. The parents didn't react to it, that you were going to a Catholic church? No. Or other groups? No. So were you active within the church after confirmation with Luther League? Oh, yes. Yeah. So your parents were active? Well, they weren't active in church, but my sister and I and my brother, you know, being confirmed, well, then we went the Luther League route, and I... When I went to university, then we began to see the different religions, and so you began to look more and more, and you drift away from the mother church, so to say. So I started going to Presbyterian church and the Methodist church, and then in our married life, we belonged to different denominations, depending on the area we lived in. Like today, we belong to the Methodist church in Clearwater. So, but back in the days then when you were born, the parents were Swedes. They just stayed with one church, and there were either Lutherans or Methodists or Calvinists. That's right. But then you started to ask yourself questions when you got older and started to read. So that's a bad road, then, you know, when they start to study. Did you discuss it with your parents, or they didn't pay attention to your... I paid no attention to it, because kids that I went to school with, we'd go to the Jewish synagogue on a Friday night, and we'd go to different churches just exploring to see what was what. So you were really listening, then, to those lectures or preaching and whatever else. So Hitler was right, you know, if you want to conquer, when you get to the youth, you start talking to them. Yeah, but you started as a very young boy, though, being a Lutheran. Oh yes, I was a Lutheran. I didn't know anything else but being a Lutheran. But like your Catholic friends now, in other words, they were started also early. As Catholics. And brought up, and they say if you start early enough, they will stay all their lives in there, without asking any questions. That's for the birds. No, I don't believe that. You wanted more of the sermon. But with your Catholic friends, did you stay with them when they got older so you could discuss religion with them, or you were already out of school then? Well, when I got out of school and I left home, and I moved to Ohio, I had a job in Ohio, so that's all gone. I haven't claimed Minneapolis as home since 1929, because I've lived a little all over. I was in the Army, and so at different times, what brought me into the Army was the Depression there in 1933. I went on duty as a lieutenant building civilian conservation corps camps up in northern Minnesota. That was the greatest thing Roosevelt ever did, was get those kids off the street. Oh, there was the CCC? Yeah. Got the kids off the street, and then I was transferred down to Kansas, and that's when we were married. And we lived in Harry Woodring's home. He was Secretary of War at the time. So my lifetime has been spent between the Army and my civilian pursuit. So when you went into the camp, you hadn't been to the University of Minnesota at that time? I had finished the university. You had finished. How was your father able to support your university schooling? It was expensive for that kind of... He didn't. I did. He worked his way through? Yeah, because what I did, I peddled newspapers, and then what happened was this, that they had the ROTC program at the University of Minnesota, and that paid $33 every three months, and that paid for the tuition. That's what the tuition was at that time, and I lived at home. So you worked your way through? Yeah. I walked back and forth to school. That was a long walk. Yeah. On the cold weather, it was. But you were still a very husky and tall man. Well, I hope so. Good stature, but when you were growing up, you were probably a strong-looking guy. Yeah. Didn't your father ask you to come into the bricklaying trade? I tried it, and... You tried it? Yeah. And failed? Yeah. When I carried that hot of bricks on my shoulder, I said, there's an easier way of making a living than this. Yeah, but how could you complain with the stature you have? I mean, you're a small guy. Yeah, I know, but... You'd be a hard carrier. Yeah. I tried it, but I thought there was a better way of making a living. So what did your father say then when you rebelled? Well, that was up to me. Yeah, but your father usually liked to have his last words in tow. Well, I know, but my mother insisted I go on to school. She was the one? Yeah, she was the one that... How about your father? Did he... He was... Oh, no, he was for it. He was for it? Yeah. As long as I could manage it on my own, which I did. How about your other brother and sister? Were they also going that route? No, neither one of them did. You were the oldest? No, my sister was the oldest. I was in the middle. So they went through high school then only? Yeah. And then got... My brother had one year of college, but... And he decided he wanted to get married, so... He couldn't go to school and support a wife at the same time. It was during the repressions, and it was hard to... Yeah. So was it easy then, the university schooling for you? I mean, you didn't have any... It wasn't easy, no. It was tough. But I managed to make it. And how many... How long did you go then? I went five years to the university. And every summer and also in between you worked? Yeah. Were you able to pay for room and board home, too, or...? No, no. No, that... You supplied that? I supplied that. Those were tough days when we were growing up. I'm sure it was. You were able to... And there was no other work than when you came into the depression, did you...? Well, I had a newspaper route. I delivered morning newspapers. And then you worked in groceries. Well, that wasn't at the university. That was before. That was in high school. So during the depression, when you headed into that one, did it help then if you showed them a university degree on the workplace? Did you pay attention to it at that time, or...? Oh, yes, because I graduated in 29, and the depression didn't hit till 31. And so when the depression hit, I had been working in Ohio for the Insulite Company. And then when the depression hit, of course, they had big layoffs, too. So I had gotten my commission as a reserve officer at the University of Minnesota, the ROTC program, so I went on active duty with the Army, which was a godsend because at that time I was a second lieutenant, and I got $125 a month. So that was big money. So there was big money. Yeah. During that time, though, when you went into ROTC, you didn't see any slackening of the interest of the military after the First World War. Oh, no. They had the National, what do you call it? The League of Nations. They were supposed to ban all wars and all warfare and everything. Well, League of Nations didn't come till 45. Yeah, but didn't have... Yes, there was the United Nations or the... Yeah, well, they... But didn't they have anything after 1917, though? They wouldn't stop all wars and... Nothing much. I don't recall of anything because we had the ROTC program there at the university, and I went into it, I'll be honest to say, not so much from a patriotic angle, but for the money that it would pay me to pay for my tuition. And at that time, Harold Stassen, he was our commandant in the group at the university. Harold was a real smart boy. He became governor and still running for president, I guess, but... He is remembered by that. Yeah, and he's... He never gave up. Well, what he did to work... You see, everybody in those days had to work to get their way through school. He was a Pullman conductor. He used to run every weekend from Minneapolis to Chicago on the Milwaukee Railroad. And what you had in those days, there wasn't... There were very few people who had an education handed to them on a silver platter. They all had to work at something or other. And there were no such things as they give the kids today, you know, giving them the... Oh, what do you call it? The scholarships. They were unheard of. So he chose that route to go to ROTC? Yeah. And he became the... He was the commanding officer. Well, no, at the same time I was in... Yeah. He was in law school, so I was in engineering. Was he a politician then? Oh, yes. He was a born politician. Well, you and he worked together in politics. Oh, I see, later on when you... Well, no, at that time at the university, I knew him then. But could they mix politics and ROTC stuff together, though? No, they were separate. They didn't allow that, but same people... If you're active in one thing, you're active in something else. Whenever there's a chance, they put their foot forward. Right. You never miss a chance. Right. Was he something like Hubert Humphrey, you think? He was a forerunner of Hubert Humphrey, yeah, I would say so. He was a good man. But then you came into the camp, like CCC. Yeah. Was it a low tide, and in other words, there was no work to be had then? No, from 33 to 39, I was on CC duty. There was no way to get a job? Well, the jobs weren't very plentiful, but the Army was a pretty good place to be. In 39, I left the CCs, and I went to work for the U.S. Gypsum Company in Chicago. So you were on CCC for six years? Yeah. That was almost the length of the program then, because there was some opposition against it. Well, what happened was the politicians wanted their sticky finger in the deal. They didn't want the Army running it. The Army ran it. It was fine. But then when the politicians got their sticky fingers in and started playing it that route, it died. It died within a year. That was the best thing they could have ever done. Because the young people. Yeah. We took these kids off the street. Were all the young kids no married? No, no married. They had to be married? No, they had to be single. And poor families too. Yeah, and they got $30 a month. They got $5, and the $25 was sent home to the family. And we used to get these kids from Arkansas that come in no shoes. And they'd wear their shoes home for the weekend and come back barefooted again. How old were those days? So, like Minnesota and all, you had people from other states then. Arkansas, Missouri, and Washington, D.C. And the Minnesota youngsters, they went to other places. So they never had them in the same area where they came from. What was the reason for that? Well, the reason was that the camps were put where the work had to be done. And some camps were under the forestry service, and so they used to take those groups and send them to California and Oregon and Washington. And like I had this camp down in Kansas that was on soil conservation work. And they were mostly Kansas boys. But then the boys from other states that didn't have any camps, they were coming in too. So you had to spread them all over. So you came into CCC in the supervisory capacity then? I was a lieutenant. And it was run like a military camp? Well, there was no military to it except the— you didn't have the military discipline or anything. It was a civilian deal, but it had the army management to it. So you had control over the— Yeah. The U.S. couldn't take off one day and come back any time they wanted? Oh, no. If they went AWOL, they were discharged. They'd get dishonorable discharges. And how long of a time did they spend in this camp? Well, they came in for six months. At a time? At a time. And they could renew, I believe it was, once. So I think they could be in for a—I remember it was one year or two years, but that was all they could stay. And we were teaching them at the time, trades and everything else, so that they could go out and get a job. And we made typists out of some of them, and some of them became blacksmiths and mechanics. And they really got a good education from the government at that time to where they could better themselves. There was something—how about the girls now? There was nothing similar? No, nothing for the girls. They were never in the camp? No. Only young boys? Yeah. And it made men of them? No. Really? That's wonderful. In fact, he was commandant of the best CCC camp, I think, in this country. So he got the— Yes, so he had a wonderful camp there. And to his efforts— Like a machine to chauffeur. Yeah. And to his efforts, he was a wonderful commander. So did you have any free hands, so to speak, then, to do it practical? And you had orders to follow, though. Oh, yeah. How did you get it to be good? In other words— Well, what we had was an educational program of which each camp had an educational advisor. And we would get the local teachers from the high school and nearby places to come out and teach the kids. And so we had a curriculum where we— It wasn't compulsory, but we had every boy in the camp registered for some class or another so that he could better himself. You— Religious speaking, you had a rebellious mind. I'm sure the pastor didn't like your kind of participation and was sure to join. How about politics, though? Did you change your mind from the beginning and over the years when you came into the Depression, for instance? No, I'll say that I've— Well, up there in Minnesota, I had the Farmer Labor Party, but I've more or less been a Republican all my life. Republican? Uh-huh. How did you get the idea? Your father or— Well, it just more or less fell into it. How about FDR now? Roosevelt? You worked during that program? I wasn't a Democrat, but I was a free-speaking American. And we lived in Secretary of War Woodring's home. He was a Democrat under Roosevelt, but that didn't— And I was with—I spent a lot of time with Harry Woodring. In fact, I was with him in Topeka the night of the election when Roosevelt beat Alf Landon. Alf Landon was a Republican candidate. And I'll never forget when Woodring asked me one day how the voting—what the talk was, and I said, well, there's some talk that Landon will carry Kansas. He said he won't do it. He says FDR will take Kansas by 50,000 votes. And he did. And what I found out then was that in those days they had the WPA. And you talk about a political machine with Jim Farley, who was a postmaster general, you know, but he was the campaign manager. They had every block in the country so organized that a WPA worker was canvassing every area, and they knew to a gnat's eyebrow just how the vote was going to go. So they had it all pegged. FDR with Jim Farley had the biggest political machine I have ever seen. So it's all in the strategy of to have it under his command. You know what they say, they always say, you know, it's a private thing that you vote. They never know how people vote. Is that true, though? Well, it's true to this extent. If I want to tell you I'm going to vote the Republican ticket and I go in and vote the Democratic ticket, I don't have to do what I say I'm going to do, but what they—they get people to talk. Just like you're interviewing me right now, and they'd have these WPA workers going up to the door and asking just how they were going to vote, and people would tell them. But if people wanted to lie about it, they would knock these things into a cocked hat. But people are gullible. It's just like they've got these TV— Bowls. Bowls now, you know, they go around and ask people how they're going to vote, and so they tell them, and so they predict at noon, when the polls are going to close at 9 o'clock at night, and they're coming out saying, well, so-and-so's already elected. So American politics is really honest, then. Well— It's honest. This is one side of it, is that you can say it's honest. Yeah. If there's a way of messing it up, the politicians will find it. There's an interesting fact, though, during Roosevelt's term. He had one woman, Frances Perkins. Yeah. She was the labor secretary, and that was one of the most important departments. Yeah. Why do you think he chose a woman? Was that Eleanor's idea, or—? I don't know, but I do know this. Woodring was assistant secretary of war, and George Dern, who was secretary, when he died, and I asked Terry Woodring if he was going to become secretary, and he says, well, Carl, I don't know. He says, I've contributed all I can. He says, these positions are never awarded on merit. They're on who can do them. Side two, continuation with Carl Versilius, Argo Florida. Side two. So you think they are handled, paid off— Sure. —to get him. She stayed the whole term, though, during Roosevelt's presidency. Yes, she did, but that was probably due to Eleanor. She must have been good, though, because it was a hard department to run. Yeah, she was. Did you meet her at any time? No, I did not. So you don't know anything personal about her? No. She must have some command of the situation, though, too. Yeah. Because there must have been rough times during the 30s. Yes. Here is one—you said you have Republican ideas. Do you agree that Roosevelt was a good president, though? I think he started out being a good president, but I think later on he wasn't a well man. If you visit up there, Warm Springs, Georgia, where he spent his last few years and where he died and those conditions around that area there, I think he was a sick man his last few years. It's just like Woodrow Wilson was a sick man. They keep that away from the public. Which is too pressing of a job to be well paid. You're not getting any younger of it. No, you sure are not. Why anybody would want the jobs beyond me? I wouldn't want it. It's a stark place, his place that he stayed. But he had a tremendous wife, though, behind him. Roosevelt? Yeah. Oh, she was the force behind there. I remember on Christmas Day in 1943, I was stationed at Fort Monroe, Virginia, and we went up to Washington, went to church, sat just two rows behind the Roosevelt family in church. There was a couple Secret Service people on the side, but there was no big to-do like there is today. Reagan can't go anyplace without Secret Service people, but everything was wide open and it was more like it should be. But today it's a sad state of affairs. It has gone to a different situation today. Yeah. So they went to church then, and they were Episcopalians. Well, they would go to different churches, but I believe they were Episcopalians. So the beginning of his presidency, there was really a tough time to fill the shoes of Hoover, in other words, to get it going. Oh, there sure was. They gave him an unfair treatment, though they said that he closed the banks. I understand the facts was that there were 5,000 banks closed a week before he was sworn in. So he had to close the rest of it to get an account. That's right. That's right. We had a real mess on our hands, and I think Roosevelt saved the country at that time. So he was able to be clear-headed enough to... Yeah, well, like the banks and like the CC program, which I think was one of the best things for youth, if they had that today, get these kids off the street, get them away from dope. But you don't hear anything about that sort of... Very little, because they say it costs too much money. But they got plenty of money to ship over to Iran and other places. So there's a different... So that depression, in theory, there was no money to be had. In other words, you saw very few dimes and quarters and dollars. There were... I remember in Columbus, Ohio, you'd see these big-buck niggers standing on the street corner selling apples for a nickel, and they'd be spitting on them, you know, and shining them up. How anybody could... That was the day. Oh, boy. It was really something. You know, that was... But today, there doesn't seem to be lack of money. No. Everybody seems to have $100 bills and $20 bills. Why should they work today, go on relief? If they'd cut out this relief, why, they'd... People shouldn't go hungry. I'm not for that, but I do believe that they make it too easy for people to be on relief. Like these, some of these blacks. I know when we were living in Philadelphia, you'd see these black women, they'd borrow each other's kids, they'd go down to the relief office, you know, and bring in a dozen. These are all mine, see? And then the same dozen kids would be with the next black woman. That's a racket. Oh, and how. Well, Elmer Roosevelt brought that about. Yeah. Yeah, they were trying to do good, but it got out of hand. And it's just like these black politicians. I know when we lived in Philadelphia, this colored maid we had, she said every Friday, the local politician came around and tapped her for $2. Every domestic, you know, had to contribute to him. It's a... It's a bad way. After 1939, well, you traveled around then for six years to different camps, and Kansas was one place. Well, we were living in Kansas. I was stationed there. I was running that camp. Yeah. So you stayed there the whole time? Yeah. You didn't have to shift around to other places? No. Were you already married then at the time? Married in 37. 37. How did you meet now? Minneapolis. In Minneapolis? Yeah. And Miss Ekerbaum, she was out there going to school? On vacation. On vacation? Vacation. And I met him, and it didn't take long before we got together. We had our 50th wedding anniversary last 16th. So you married 36? 37. 37. Did it start to look a little bit better then, financially, in the war? Oh, yes. I got a big raise. Yeah, I got a lot of money. As a first lieutenant, I was getting $225 a month, but as a married first lieutenant, I got $280 a month. So she could keep the... Yeah. Buy your fur coat and stuff? No, you couldn't get a bunch of fur coats. Oh, yes, you could get a lot more for your money then. But it was good money, though, even the first payday. Oh, yes. So you had your own car then and traveled? Oh, yes. So how about your father during that time? Did he work? Well, he was quite ill then at that time. So he was working, though, and we got married, yes. And he kept working, but he was sickly. He died in 59. He had a heart attack. So... How was his political outlook? Was he a Democrat or...? Farmer labor. Farmer labor. Yeah. I was a renegade. Did you discuss with your father those things? Not much. No, not much. If we did, we'd argue, so we just kept quiet. You didn't want to start it. Get out of hand. But here you married Miss Ekeboom, though. Yeah. I am sure she didn't come from a Republican family. I don't know just exactly what we were, really, because that is something we didn't discuss at home. You didn't? As far as I was concerned. Now, Eric and his father, that's a different thing. They were all the time... Yes, they were wonderful together. So I don't know, but I've been a Republican all my life. All your life. You didn't go to this Sunday school, though, that Eric went to, Helga Westerlund, Esther Ericson, Esther... No, I tell you, my churchgoing was very, very little, because my parents always used to say, well, you can do what you want to, whichever way you feel. But we had it up to our ears. They had to go to everything in Sweden. So they decided that if we wanted to go to Sunday school, we could go if we didn't. You don't remember Sweden too much, do you? No, I was only five. Five. You know, five years old. About the only thing I remember is the trip on the boat. Yes, you remember. It was that scary, you know. What do you remember from it? Oh, I have vague things that I remember. My grandmother dying, and the funeral, and that sort of thing. But not too much. I have been more or less very quiet all my life. When you came to Rockford, you remember that time, by the way, you went to school there. Oh, yes. I went through the grade school there, and then my parents and the family moved to St. Joe, Missouri, and I finished grade school there. Then I went on to high school, and that was as far as I got, as far as my education was concerned. What I have learned, I have learned the hard way. But in St. Joseph, do you remember anything specific about that? You stayed on there about four years? There was nothing really that special, except I had a boyfriend. Down there? Yeah. So you were old enough. Yeah. His father owned a candy factory, so I thought he was pretty nice. Was he an American? Yeah. Oh, yes. Did he go with any Swedes? No. There weren't too many Swedes down in Missouri. How about your mother? Was she afraid that we were going to marry someone that was not a Swede? Oh, no, never. It was not that serious? No, no. But I don't know. I just, as you're growing up, you don't think of all these things, you know. You live from day to day, and you have a roof over your head. You're very comfortable. You have wonderful parents who are looking out for your welfare. So you really don't have other things to worry about. But going to Sunday school, I did, but I went to different ones. You didn't go to this— I don't know where Carl— There was a socialist high school in Rockford that people went to. Vera Lindgren, Helga and Esther. I don't think that was a Sunday school. Yeah, they went there Sunday mornings. I don't know what Eric was talking about because I never went to a school like that. No, I went to—I had a friend in—I think we were in the fourth grade. And so I used to go to her Sunday school. I was a Methodist, but it was kind of a—this was sort of an iffy thing. Eric, you also went to a Methodist Sunday school, with some friends. So I mean we had no particular church to say that this was our church until I got married. And so we have been church members ever since. And we've been very active in the churches we have belonged to. So you—after school and in Rockford, did you start to work? Oh yes, I worked at the Charles Von Wisey store. I was an assistant buyer in the— So you had business college then? Yes. You went to a year of business college in Rockford? Mm-hmm. And so that's the extent of my education. What did you learn there? Typing and shorthand? Typing and shorthand and mathematics and that sort of thing. Anything that you can be used in business. So you had no trouble to land a job? Oh no, never have. In the 20s? No. The depression? But it was tight. We didn't have much money. And our wages were cut all the time and all the time. So we just had a bare pittance to live on. But living at home, that helped. Did you join any other Swedish organizations in Rockford at the time? Vasa, Viking, Iron? No, no. No, no. The place I worked, we had a kind of a theatrical group. So whatever the Wiseys offered, I participated in. But no specific. Because I was never really interested. So were you working on it, or were all Americans? Mostly Americans, yes. Very few Swedes? Well, I would say maybe... Swedish descent. It was Swedish descent, of course. Did you talk Swedish in your home? Yes, but my father preferred us to speak English. He says, we are now Americans, and we do not speak Swedish. We speak English. But I can read and write in Swedish. Because I remember that as a very small tyke. So I have retained that, and I have a feeling for Sweden, because having been born there, that I am thoroughly American. All my thoughts are for this country, because it is the most wonderful place we can live. So your parents, like your father, he had a special job, a specialized job. Yes, something in the... Blasting and making... When he was a young man, that was his... Then he worked in a furniture factory. In Rathor. Yes, a furniture factory. That was going to be his living. Yes, and he was very good at it. Very well thought of, and never had to worry about a job. They were always after him. What he did, he was wonderful. So he and a few others, they had this company down in St. Joseph. Yes, that's right. For about four... Oh, about four years I met. Four years, 1920. And that didn't go too well, darling? No, it didn't. Then we came back to Rockford. Oh, I just... as I say, it's kind of hard to remember what you did because it was very uneventful. There was nothing particularly outstanding. We just had a normal American life. So you left your boyfriend down in St. Joseph? Yes, I left him. You've never seen him since? No, no. It's been a long, long time. Yes, I remember... Bob, was it? I can't remember his name. It makes no difference. So that was about the nicest thing that happened to me down there. But then when I met my husband, that changed my life completely. Well, when you went on to Kansas, then with him, didn't you think about St. Joseph going by there? Oh, no. I had pictures and things like that. But that boyfriend was... that was way in the past, so many years past, you know. So when you came home from Minneapolis after this vacation, were you alone in Minneapolis at that time? Oh, there were three of us, four of us. You had to train up? Yeah. And then we met a friend of... one of the girls that was with us, her boss, says, when you get up there in Minneapolis, he says, make sure you call so-and-so. It's his nephew. And so this friend of mine called him, and so he asked what we were all doing, and said we had no plans, but we didn't know the city, but we would like to know where a decent place to go and places to stay away from. So he told us that he has a friend from Kansas, which was my husband. So he was home then temporarily? Yeah, his brother had just gotten married, and he was up there for the wedding. So that's how we met. Did you cable your mother then and told her that you found the right one? Well... How did you explain this trip to Minneapolis, not coming back? Well, I'll tell you, I started with a dither. I had met the man of my dreams, you know, so that's the way that worked out. What did she say, though? And my mother, she was so cute. Carl spent his birthday with us in Rockford, and my mother and dad thought he was wonderful. So we went out for the evening, and my mother said, or my father said to her, he says, I bet you a dime that Hilder will marry that man. So when I came in, Dad says, did I win the dime or did Mother? Big stuff, you know. Did you tell them that he was Swedish before they met him? Yes, yes, he knew that. But that didn't make much difference to me. To your parents, though, don't you think they looked out for the Swedish girl? I think they prefer that. I think they prefer that. If you had come home with an Italian or Irish girl... No, no, I know they wouldn't. They wouldn't have bet any dimes. Every time I dated a Norwegian girl, my mother had fits. It was far away enough, though. No, my parents were pretty broad-minded. But of course they had their wishes, and especially for the daughter, they wanted her to find a man that they felt would take care of me, and he certainly has. And Erik, was he married at the time already? Yeah, he was married, too. And he lost his wife. Diabetes. So, you married and you said in 1937. And who married you? We were married in... The wife of Kansas, Judge Rogers. Roy Rogers. Not Roy Rogers. Buddy Rogers. Buddy Rogers, a movie star's father married us. What kind of religion or denomination was that? A judge. We didn't have a church wedding. And then you settled down in Kansas? You moved away from Hartford? Yeah, and we had a son born to us in 1938. And we kept him for seven years, and he died. And then after that, Marion was born. So that's about all I can tell you on that. So what did you bring with you now from Rockford when you came down to him? Did you have a hope chest packed with... Yes, but I didn't take that with me because I wasn't just quite sure how things were going to work out, you know. When you just meet somebody and not know him for too long a time, you don't know just exactly. So I did not bring all that stuff with me. But I did have it. I played it safe, sure. You had to already plan. We still have each other after 50 years. But we had a good marriage. It was a give and take thing. By the time you took more and more towels with you from Rockford and moved into the house. Did you learn from your mother to embroider towels with the monograms? Yes, she taught me, but I did not like to do it. You didn't like to do it? No. I liked to cook better than sewing or embroidering. So you were Swedish cooking then? Yes. So when you have Christmas, it's a real Swedish Christmas? Yes, we do. We still have... We still have lutefisk. Yes, we still do that. We don't care for lutefisk. But you can't buy it down here. Down here. But I mean in the younger years, you would have brought up a lutefisk. Oh, yes. Seven Corners, I'm sure, had a lot of lutefisk. Oh, my mother and dad, they loved it. But I never did like it. So you got away from it then? I didn't like kropkakor and that kind of stuff. I didn't like either. You know what kropkakor... That's for the people from Öland, you know. I don't know where it came from, but it was terrible. Your mother made those too, in Rapport? Kropkakor? Oh, she used to make those things, yes. And I remember as a youngster, I picked the biggest one on the plate. And my dad said, you know, that's kind of a big one. Oh, I can eat it. So he made me eat it too. So there was too much of it? It made me sick, and I haven't eaten one since. Going back now to the stitching and sewing. So your mother taught you that? Oh, yes. You didn't have any... I didn't care. I did a little bit of it. My mother had... In fact, I still have things that she has made that are simply beautiful. I've got a banquet cloth that has been appraised at $2,000 that she had made when she was 79 years old. In Rockford? In Rockford. And the back side was just as beautiful as the front side. Oh, this is quilt? No, a banquet cloth. Oh, banquet cloth. Italian cutwork. I see. And it's perfectly gorgeous. So my mother had made some beautiful things. But I just never... How did she get time to do those things? I mean, the family, the race, and... Well, how these Swedish people did it, I tell you, you have to give them a lot of credit. I think I had two of the best parents that anyone could ever want. And she was busy all the time and had to with four children and come to this country and not have anything. I think my dad had about $10 left after he came into this country. So there wasn't very much to do, so my mother had to work. And she really worked. It was a hard worker all her life. So how she did it, I don't know. She made all our clothes and taken care of four children and we all turned out good. We're not the wealthiest people in the world, but we have a good background. Good values. So your mother, do you think she told you a little bit before moving the whole thing to Kansas, to your new boyfriend here, don't take too much? You know, I'm going to tell you what she told me. She said, I'm going to tell you one thing and that's it. She says, if you have any troubles, don't come home to me, just plan it out yourself, work it out yourself. That was her advice to me. Because the word divorce was not used in the newspaper. Oh, no, no. You never heard of it? Never heard of it. So the one that made the mistake, it was there for life. Yeah. And she said that's the only thing she would tell me, that if you don't come home with your troubles, solve them yourself, the two of you. And that's what we always did. I usually say though, a mother, or especially a grandmother, they know much more than the young people. In other words, they can tell from the beginning, it's going to work and it's not going to work. Intuition. Yes. And there seems to be a lot of truth to that, though. Well, as what mother told me, eight years ago, she said, Hildreth, I never worried about you, you and Eric. I never worried. But she said that she was worried about my younger sister and my younger brother, but they turned out all right, too. Did they ask you about the economic situation? In other words, in that time, 1932, 1937, there wasn't much. The fact is that very few married because they couldn't afford it. Neither one had a job. But here you're coming in now to a pretty good sum of monthly income. Did you tell your parents that you coming in as a wife, you added to his salary? I guess I did. I can't recall. All in America, he said. All in America. Can you do that? We didn't have the income tax and the dollar, all the dollar's worth of stuff. Oh, you didn't have to pay income, but on your side, you were high enough. No, not at that time. I thought it was... 1941 or 1942, I think, the income tax. Someone told me that if you had $4,000 a year, you had to pay income tax. I think that was in the 40s. But in the 30s, income tax was unheard of. So the money you earned, that was yours to keep? Yeah. If I go back now during the Depression, did you have any money in the bank? Not much. In the security bank on Broadway, for instance. My mother and dad lost everything they had there. In the security bank? They were the youngest among Gustafsson and Jansson. Crooked Swedes. Crooked Swedes, yeah. They lost everything. But I didn't have much because I didn't get... Our wages were not like they are nowadays. They're astronomical. My goodness. When I was working, you just didn't get anything. You worked for peanuts. So there wasn't much money, too. But you still didn't complain, though, about what people were doing there? No, no, because I enjoyed what I was doing. My first job in grade school, I worked in the grocery store. Tuesday and Friday afternoons from 3.30 to 6.30. And Saturday from 7 in the morning to 11 at night. I got $2.25 a week. I was going to grade school. You could keep to yourself, though? Yeah, that was my spending money. Did you put it in the bank? Probably recorded. You were taught then to save. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. And don't buy anything until you have the money. That's what Carl and I did. We never bought anything that we couldn't afford. Or we'd wait until... When you had the Farmers' Mechanic Savings Bank, you started an account with a dollar, and boy, you'd go in and deposit a dollar. And you just kept depositing money. You saved. You were taught to save. Now, you didn't lose any money in that bank? No. After that all? No. The money you ran for, that was the best one. Yeah, that was... They got nothing back. Not a thing. Did they lose a lot of money? They didn't lose a house, though? No, they didn't lose a house, but they did lose all their money. What they had, I don't know. Because that is something my parents were very private about. They didn't discuss it at the time? No, no. They never worried us about any... That's why we had no worries. Because they did not include us in anything but good things. Do you think there was a good idea to do it that way for kids to not be aware of it? Yes, I think so. At that time, but not in today's... Not today, I don't think you could. Not today, you couldn't do that. Because I did things with the little bit of money I had that my daughter just almost throws out. What would happen, though? You would think it would be a...