 This is cassette two, side one. Continuation with our release, Waste Bay, Iowa. Cassette two, side one. So the co-op idea was not that widely spread then, in other words. No, no. First co-ops we had were in Mount Pleasant. A lot of people from Swiss were, belonged to that. There was a few co-ops originally. But the main organization under the Swedes and the descendants belonged to them, was the Swedish... Yes, that's right. How about the largest enclosed, like the Oddfellows? Well, yes, we had an Oddfellows Hall right here in Sweden. Well, it could be. But anyhow, that was... They had their own building, and that's where the store was located, on the grounds floor of the Oddfellows Hall. Right on the main street there? But there weren't any Lutherans that belonged. If they did, they got kicked out. Why? That was a rule of the Lutheran Church at that time, no secret societies. No, you did not belong to... In fact, I know one person who joined the Oddfellows, and he got kicked out, and he was just stubborn enough, where he says, all right. So he stayed kicked out. But he did move to another area, and I said, I don't know what... If he rejoined a different church when he got out there, or maybe there wasn't even any Oddfellows out there. But who were the members then, because they're all Swedes in the Swedesburg? No, actually, southwest is where the big end of them came from. The Yankees? Yeah, they're Yankees, if you want to call them that. In the Trenton area, the Trenton area. I don't know how in the world it ever happened to start the Oddfellows all here, but they did. And then finally, they moved that big building to Olds, set it up there. And then the store people built the store building that is there now. But no, that was a no-no to belong to any secret society. So there was an old holdover then from Håkan Olsson, so no drinking or any parties like that? Yeah, probably so. So nobody, all the Swedes, they could belong to it if they belonged to a church? That's right, yeah. Now I don't know if that was true in the whole synod, or if it was just true in our area, I don't know. But I think maybe the whole synod probably frowned on secret societies at that time. But now, of course, we have masons at least. We have several masons that belong to our church, and there's no stigma with that. They're considered good members. But you expect there was no way to in secrecy belong to that club? That's right. No, that's right. You were just kicked out. You had a stamp on you. Yeah. But these Oddfellows now, what were they doing? Was it like a hospitalization society? I don't know. They met once a week on Tuesday nights, I think it was. They'd always have their meeting upstairs. So you remember the time that they met? Oh, yeah. And you had the Swia Insurance Company here in Sweet Springs? Yes, we still have that. And it's still going? Yes, going quite well. I think we organized in 1875. 1875, and it was, well, through the years, what they did, you would insure with them, you would pay a minimal amount, not very much. And then when the end of the year would come, if they had a lot of losses, well, they would assess you according to the value of your property, you'd pay in. If they didn't have any losses, fine, your insurance was real cheap. And they went on that way for quite a number of years until I think it was probably in the early 30s. We had quite a few losses, two or three. The insurance companies? The insurance company, yeah. Had quite a few losses, and they decided that if we had very many more years like that, why, we might not have an insurance company. So then we went to Grinnell Mutual. They are a reinsurance company, and we reinsured with them a lot of our stuff. And that's the way we are right now. We charge so much, of course, comparable to other insurance companies, but probably a little cheaper than a lot of them because we've had so few losses because that's what it's based on, the reinsurance. You pay, if your history is real good through the years, you won't pay as much insurance as if you've been having a lot of losses, and we've been real fortunate. But it's a pretty big company, and we did have a part-time secretary that wrote insurance, but now we have a man, he is full-time with that. Right-handed in the sweet spot? Yes. In fact, he lives in Grandpa Lundin's house, and it's Grandpa Lundin's. He's a relative. I see. And he's a young man. Well, he worked in a bank in Mount Pleasant, and then he also worked in a bank in Winfield, and he was a state tax examiner for a while. But anyhow, my cousin Vincent was the secretary, and he got to a point where he'd just leave and not have it, so he took it over, and he works that out full-time. Of course, he has a little insurance of his own, too, that he writes the company, doesn't have anything to do with, but he makes a nice living at it, and he's doing real well. And you only are for fire and storm? No, fire and wind primarily. But not for car insurance or stuff? Well, no, not Sven Mitchell. Oh, he writes. Or on his own? Yeah, but we write crop insurance, hail. Oh, I see. Hail, fire, and wind. But they could be devastating, too, though, hail insurance for the crop. Well, hail insurance, we are 100% covered. So really, in a way, we're just writing it for Grinnell, but we do get a little commission out of it. So no matter how big the loss, we won't have to take any of it. They take the whole loss. Of course, these big companies like Grinnell, they base their rates on the area you live in. You live in Southern Iowa, you don't pay near as much as you do if you live in Northern Iowa because the hail is more prevalent up there. So it's based on history. Like this year, for instance, did you have any hail damage here? No. It's pretty rare for us to have any hail to mount anything, but every once in a while we do. Does most of the farmers insure over hail? Pretty much. Or the risk is less. Yeah, pretty much. Years ago, when you had the fire insurance, that was the big thing when the fire occurred, of course. Yeah, it was. You didn't have any fire protection here in Sweet Spring, did you? No, no, we didn't have it. We only had fire protection in just the later years when Olds. Well, Olds had fire trucks up there, but they didn't have a whole lot of water. That was for quite a little while. They would help us out if we'd have a fire. They'd come out. But now Olds, in the later years, they have a well, a big well, and a standpipe up there like a water tower, and their water comes down to Sweet Spring. So we get water from Olds. So we got, we can hook right onto the line here, see. So we got all kinds of... So you got good fire protection. Yes, very good, yeah, yeah. But I wonder about, you said it was organized in 1875, this VIA insurance. At that time, you had a lot of prairie fires. When the fire happened out on the land, for instance, on the farm, there was almost a complete loss, then, if something like that. Well, I never heard of a prairie fire here. You didn't know? No, not here. Not here. I know they do out in the Brasket West. But here you were... No. No, there was never any prairie fires that I ever knew or ever heard of. So there was farm then at that time, 1875, so there was no risk on that basis then? Apparently, yeah. Yes. There's one thing that strikes you when you read the minutes and the synod reports and also the detailed reports from the church. They have to give to so much years ago. You had the conference mission. Of course, that was the biggest outlay for the congregation. You had the India mission, the China mission, and Home for the Aged, and the Espion Fund, Augustana Foreign Fund, Deaconess Swedish Institute, Orphan Home in Stanton, and Noxubi Industrial School in McLeod, Mississippi. I never heard of it before. No, I never heard of it. And the building fund out in Colorado Springs and the Jews and the Slav mission. And all of this the congregation supported. There was no reluctance on the other members to support all this. Yes, there actually is. Swedenborg has always been noted for being pretty good givers. Yes, it's an honor. They support their church well, and they support the other institutions that go with it. Of course, now pretty much I think it goes, we give so many dollars to the Iowa Synod, and they spread it out to those various places rather than we giving a little to Madrid and a little bit to Augustana and a little bit here and a little bit there. It goes to a central place, and then they spread it out. You don't think it would work so good today though if you have all those 15 or 20 different... Because you wonder really, do they need it better than we do? Yes, well, and another thing is they, I think they would hate to depend on that too, the recipients. Because, alright, things are good, they get some, but if things are bad, they won't get any. Well, the way it is now, we are, when we make a pledge to the Iowa Synod, we pay it. We pay it. That has to be paid. So that the people that are getting it know they're going to get whatever it is they've been promised. But this was in 1912 now, this list. Because at that time there were still people I suppose struggling on the farm, and they had kids growing up, and they had to get a job for them, sent to school. There was nobody helping you out here though. No, no. So you had to even help the bigger cities to get started. Well, I've always been amazed at those big families that they had, how in the world someone could support them like they did. And then the family members of course had to pay into the church every month. Oh yeah, yeah. They had to pay $2.50, $3.00. And they were assessed, you know, well like for instance a young man would be assessed so much a year. Maybe it was only a dollar, I don't know. Or a young lady. $2.50 I think it was. Yeah. Or a young lady would have to pay less than a young man. But then so much for the family, so much for a bachelor, single man, so much for a maiden lady. So they had that, that was set. You were to pay that. That was all. There was almost 100% participation in the church. I think so, yeah. Nobody had to stay out of it because it was the gathering point and also a support of course, mental support. Well, way back then before the envelope system, it came in 1923 or 1922, you had what you call a rootmaster. Yeah, a rootmaster. So your grandpa, was he a rootmaster then for instance? Well, he probably was and I kind of think my dad was even. Had to walk to every house then? Well, you'd have a certain area, you know, a certain area, these UCs, so and so and so and so. And they must get the badges. Yeah. And if they didn't pay, of course they didn't stay as members then. I don't know if they had any problem with that or not. I never heard. Of course we don't anymore. We don't demand anybody pay anything. But we ask if they support and most of them do support it real well. And this through the envelope system. Do you remember though, I'm sure you do, being five, six years old, there was still Swedish practice in the church then? One of the sermons? Oh yes, yes. I tell you, the first, I think the first time that any English was used was during World War I. It was not patriotic to use any language besides English. So I think maybe a couple of years during the war there, everything was English. But then when the war was over, we went back to Swedish again. Oh, I see. But I think we went back more on a part-time basis. I think maybe from then on we had half of the time we'd have English, half of it Swedish. Well then we got to a point where we had one Sunday, maybe the last Sunday of the month, would be Swedish. And then finally in the yearbook it would come out, this Sunday is going to be Swedish, this one, this one, maybe only four or five through the year, or maybe some special service. Like Christmas morning we'd have Swedish Yule Oath at five o'clock, everything Swedish, and then at six we'd have English Yule Oath. We did that for a number of years. But of course, then it got to a point where, well, you could hardly, the last pastor we had that we could, that could preach Swedish was Westerberg, and he came here in about 1931 or so and left, I think, in about 1939. From then on we didn't have a pastor that could, but we had a member, a former pastor, and that would be Reverend Owen Ebb. He was my uncle, and moved here, retired to Swedensburg. And he, well, in fact, he was born in Sweden, but he was a preacher. And whenever they wanted a Swedish service, well, he could handle it, see, he would do it. So we kept on with that, but then I don't know how many years it's been, oh, we haven't had a Swedish service for ages. I think we had one when we celebrated the, probably about the 90th. I don't think we had any for the 100th year when the church was 100 years old, because nobody had. Pastor Thorén was there and preaching. Pastor Thorén, he didn't know any Swedish. I don't know if he was here. I suppose he had some Swedish blood, but he sure didn't. No, he didn't know any Swedish, no. Yes. Then there was a proclamation by the governor of Iowa, I understand, during the First World War, there was no foreign language. It's possible. It's possible. So they had to stop preaching in Swedish then. That's right, yeah. And no meetings were supposed to be. Yeah, that's my understanding, because I can remember the war, but I don't remember that much, what kind of service we had, because we'd always had Swedish. But that's when the start made the turn to English. So your generation, you had no trouble understanding Swedish? Well, I was perhaps, that's not true of my whole generation, I would say. I think maybe I understand and talk Swedish better than a lot of people, or most people my age, because we had a hired man from the time I was at Tyke until I graduated from high school, and he talked Swedish. He was from Sweden. So he and my dad always talked Swedish. And if he was talking to me, he would talk Swedish to me, but I would generally answer him back in English. And so because of that, I probably know Swedish better than a lot of people my age, who were brought up in a home where the dad and the mother probably talked nothing but English. But there was a lot of Swedish talked in our house because of the Swedish hired man. So your father, he had no problem with Swedish? Oh no, no. He was perfect in both languages, the same way as my mother. Yeah, perfect in both languages. So he didn't have any broner like the rest? No, no. If you learned it, you know, it's different. But if you're, well even you, and you don't have much of an accent, but by listening to you, I can see that you are not a native American, although you talk real well. You talk real well. But now, going to Sunday school, you were confirmed in English? Oh yeah. So the Swedish was out then? Yeah. I think the last class to be confirmed in Swedish would have been about, oh, 19, 18, 19, somewhere in there, maybe it's even before that. Then they did have a while there when those who wanted to could be confirmed in Swedish and the rest of the class was English. And they did that for two or three years. Then finally they dropped Swedish altogether. In fact, there were some of the poor people that were confirmed in Swedish that they could barely speak it, you know, and it was real difficult for them. How were they able to answer the questions? Well, I don't know. But I suppose their folks must have helped them some way. But you know, there were homes where they never spoke any Swedish. There were some people even from Sweden when they came over here. And I wouldn't say there was anybody right here in Swedensburg. But they said, all right, we're in America now. We're not Swedes anymore. We are going to learn to talk English and we are going to talk English in our homes. Let's forget Sweden. And there were people like that. And of course, that generation, it was almost impossible for them to talk any Swedish. Because they reacted against it then, more or less. But the Swedish German, were you able to understand it and get the feel of it? Oh, when I got a little older, probably. Although, you know, you didn't listen too closely. It was hard to get the depth of it. Yeah, I really, I kind of liked the Swedish liturgy. I mean, I can still go through that Swedish liturgy and I like it. You know, the preacher come out and he said, Hylik, hylik, hylik, er en seabaut. You remember that? Yeah. And there were things about Swedish liturgy I liked. Do you think it was more tradition then when the Swedish was spoken in the church? Well, I can, I remember at an annual meeting when there was quite a little fuss about the changing from the English to Swedish. And I remember one of the old Swedes, he said, But, he said, the Swedish language, de hektidik du vet. De hektidik, it was the language alone was majestic or wonderful to him. And it probably wouldn't be if you had been brought up with it all your life. But for you now being born here, it was not that hektidik. No, not really. So there was the gap then between two generations. How about the Persians now? They must have had trouble also writing Swedish sermon and in English. It was double. Yeah, they had to do that. Did some of the Persians you remember have trouble with English? Let's see, well, the last one I remember, and he had a little brogue, but he was a very smart man. And that was Dr. John Eckholm. He was born in Sweden. There was the smiling Persian you met on the street. Yes, yeah, and he went to Augustana later, and I think he was a professor down there. Very, very brilliant man. But he had a little bit of a brogue, but not that much. But he's the last one that I could remember that was born in Sweden. So as a person, he was not like most of the Persians, the stern? Oh, no, no. He was a friendly guy, yeah. I know he used to, he had a boy, what was his name? My little shum, you know, he was called My Little Shum. Well, he called you that? No, no, his boy. Oh, his boy. His boy, yeah. Eskel, Eskel, Eskel My Little Shum, he would say to me. So he liked his boy like the rest of us like our boys. But when the pastors came from Augustana, being pastors, and some of them were younger, I suppose, but the older ones, they had to be like the people, though. I mean, they had to be friendly and associated with the farmers around there. There was no way for them to be stuck up and being hung about. No, that's right. They wouldn't have gone to... No, I don't ever remember any pastor that would fall in that category at all. So they were quite friendly. Oh, yes, oh, yes, yes, that's right. And the grave diggers, you have one right now, I understand, that was born in Sweden. That's right, yeah. And he's still digging graves. He still digs graves, and he's 80 years old. He's a good man. He's a good man for his years. I'd run out of wind before I took the first spade. It's remarkable, though, because I talked to the pastor, and he said that since he came here, six years ago, I believe it is, 87 people have died. Isn't that many? So that means that David Johansen has become... Yeah, he's done practically everyone. Once in a while he's had some help if he wasn't really feeling good. No, of course, he works. He's always worked. He does all the lawn mowing, and he does all the bush trimming. On the church? Yeah, well, he does the hand mowing now. They have somebody mow around the stones for him. I mean, his rider mower, he mows this cemetery, he mows the one up at Olds, and he mows another one out there, what they call the Quaker Cemetery, and a fourth one. So he has a lot of lawn mowing to do in the summertime, but it is on a rider mower. Some of it he has to trim, I suppose. But it looks very well kept, though. Yeah, yeah. It's remarkable. And in his spare time, he paints houses. Of course, right now his wife, who is my cousin, she's in the nursing home out at Winfield and just not happy at all out there. It's Viola. Viola, yeah. And I can see it. None of us would be happy, but she is more so, maybe. And she is terribly unsatisfied, and yet there is no way that... Yeah, if he wanted to sit in the house there 24 hours a day, he probably could take care of her, but he's just isn't the type that would sit in the house. It would kill him off. Yeah, that's right. So hopefully she will get accustomed to it. She's been there maybe a month or so. That's remarkable, all this man that they can keep going like that. Yeah, yeah, that's right. He's doing a good job with it. So there's one of the old timers that you can depend on. He is doing a full day's work, what you call it there. Oh, yeah. Yes. Were you able to detect the dialect of people that came from Sweden? Oh, definitely. You could do that for Skåne, Småland, and Östergötland? Yeah, well, particularly Skåne. The Skåne people have a lot different accent than what the Smålanders do. But now your Östergötland, Västergötland, Småland, they are pretty much the same. But you could hear always the Skåne people. So they were known then? Oh, yes. You knew a Skåne as soon as he started to talk. There aren't so terribly many of them, but there's quite a few Skåne. I mean the ones that came from Sweden, of course their children talk like the rest of us do. And they were farmers around here then? Oh, yeah. How do all the people cooperate now in different things? They all helped out regarding the church, for instance, and other things? Yes. How about politics? Generally speaking, they were Republicans. Generally speaking, they were Republicans. That's not true anymore. We've got an awful lot of Democrats around here. When did that change? Well, it's just been a kind of a gradual process. I'd say more so in the last ten years rather than before then. You come into Crawfordsville here, it says the birthplace of the Republican Party. Was that the Iowa Republican Party or the National? The National Republican Party. There is a little argument there. Ripon, Wisconsin makes the same claim. But Crawfordsville makes the claim, and I don't know which one is right. So that's the National? Yeah, that's the National. And they almost got 100% coverage when they started here. Yeah. Very few Democrats. Yeah, there were a few Democrats. Not very many. At that time when your grandpa came, the Yankees they called them, were they Democrats then, you think? Not necessarily. Not necessarily. There are no Catholics around here? Well, not very many, but there are a few. In fact, we have some people, former Catholics, who belonged to our church. We have a few Lutherans that became Catholics. And of course, a great number of years ago, that would have been almost unthinkable. But now it isn't at all. We think nothing of it. That's fine. We have a great deal of respect for the Catholics. We don't necessarily see eye to eye on a few things, but then that is beside the point. They are our friends. Your grandpa and father, were they active in the Republican circus? Oh. Running for office? Well, not too much. No, I would say not too much. I had an uncle that was more so. He ran for state representative once, but he was defeated. And there were a few that held political offices, but not a great number. Of course, we've had county supervisors in that way. How about you now? Have you been active in the...? Fairly, yes. I was county treasurer for six years. As a Republican? Yes, as a Republican. And then when I quit that, I thought, well, I'd like to take a shot at being state representative. So I ran for that and held that office for four years. I see. So you had support, and that means you had support from very different... Well, yeah, you see, I had most of Louisa County over there, and part of Des Moines County, too. That is when I ran for the state office. So you had to be out campaigning then, and people out in the schoolhouses. Oh, yeah. So what was your slogan then to be elected? Oh, I don't know that I had any particular. I guess nothing special. Then I lost out in the primary when I ran the third time. And I guess part of it was my own fault. I worked hard in Louisa County, and that's where that guy was from. Well, they all turned out for him, and they turned out big. Henry County, which should have been my main support, I got a good support. Only 17% of the people voted. So you see, that didn't make it very good. Why so low? I don't know. Primary, primary, people won't vote in primaries very good. And I didn't really work very hard out in Henry County. I thought, well, I got Henry sewed up, and I did have it sewed up. But I didn't have enough people that got out and voted. Then after I got used to the idea, I was kind of glad. Four years, I had. It was interesting, and I had a good time. So you went to Des Moines then for four years? Four years, yeah. So every representative tried to get something from their area. You tried not to get into Des Moines, the roads and bridges. Yeah, just try to keep everybody happy that you could. But I suppose you had to make deals with other representatives. Oh, yeah, yeah, that's true. You had to go back today and just mind your own. Yeah, that's true in some things, yeah. But Iowa is a pretty stable state, though, in spending and so on. It seems to me they've been easy to control the money. They don't go overboard. Yeah, that's probably true. But they've got problems, too. It takes a lot of money to run it. Boy, it takes a lot of money to run it. Are the big cities like... Well, there are not too many big cities in Iowa, though. You had them in Davenport, of course. Cedar Rapids, well... Are they problems in comparison with the farming communities? Not necessarily, no. You are still favored to get good schools and upkeep of things? Mm-hmm. So... And the Republicans, they have been strong, also having the governor's support. Yeah, all along they had... Harold... What's his name? I can't think of his name. He was a Democrat governor. Harold Hughes. Hughes, yeah. And a good one. A darn good one. He was a good governor for many years. Yeah, and Governor Ray was a very good governor. And I can't say too much for Branstad. He's a younger guy, I suppose. Yeah, he was in the legislature when I was there, and I wasn't very fond of him then. I still am not. How about this draw poll they have for Pat Robertson, if you go up to present time? Yes, I saw that. Wasn't that a tremendous... I think I can... You can say two, say two. So you think the big cities then have the... Well, I say Des Moines, particularly. For some reason or other, they seem to favor somebody like that. You don't believe in going on and on and on? Oh, for heaven's sake. I can't. Well, the press can handle it, or it sounds good to a lot of people. I doubt it. I don't believe so. So what could he do for the farmers in Iowa? I don't know. I wouldn't even hazard a guess who our two candidates are going to be for president. I don't know. But the Democrats, they all insure themselves, too, I understand. They're dropping off in the wind, one after another. Well, if we now tackle the depression years. You were old enough when you started to work. You were out of school. Yes. I got out of high school in 1927, and I didn't go any further. So what kind of work were you looking for then? Well, I got out of school, and like I said, we had a hired man, see? So then we didn't have a hired man anymore. I was the equivalent of that, I guess you might say. So he moved on? Yeah, he got a different job. He worked different places for other farmers. So it was my dad and I that did the farming then. Were you set on being a farmer then? Well, pretty much, pretty much, yeah. I think possibly if there would have been enough money laying around, I might have gone to college. I gave it some thought, but it didn't look like it was much trouble. So I didn't know, oh, mercy, you could go to college cheap then compared to what you can now. And the farming operation at that time when you were old enough to start, they had been almost the same as your grandpa's time. In other words, they had been... In a way, yeah. Not too much changed. No, that's right. We used horses, and we picked corn by hand. By hand, or... Yeah, picked corn by hand. Pusking corn by hand. How many bushels per acre did you harvest in 1925, for instance? Well... Fifty? Then, yeah, fifty or sixty bushels. If you happened to get seventy-five, boy, you were a master farmer. Now if you get seventy-five, you're a crop failure. You had to change things in time. Yeah. So you were going to come into a different era then. Yeah. Did you see anything when you were young you wanted to change and tell your dad about, we do it this way now? No, I can't say that I did. There was nothing that you saw was awkward or done? No, I don't think so. There was only the power that was going to pull the plow and... Yeah, yeah. And then the Depression came in 1930. Yeah. So what happened then? Well, it was actually... Thirty-one, I think, hit us harder than thirty. But then it... Well, there just wasn't much cash then. Were you not able to sell your products? Well, you could sell them, but, boy, you sold them cheap. You know, probably eggs might be as low as a nickel a dozen and hogs were $3 a hundred. And I recall, and that was when things were starting to get a little better, my dad had bought a bunch of cattle up in Washington to feed. Washington County. Washington, Iowa, yeah. Paid five cents a pound for them, five dollars a hundred. And things were getting a little better, and he took them to Chicago then after he'd fed them for six or eight months, whatever it was, and he got 12 cents. He went from $5 a hundred to $12 a hundred. Boy, he thought he was in heaven. That was really something. Well, of course, then the next bunch he bought, he probably had to pay $12 or $15 a hundred. Maybe he only got $12 or $15 for it. That wasn't so good, but that was a one-time deal. It gave him quite a little boost. And, of course, what really helped, and there's no denying it, was when Roosevelt sealed the corn, when you could get 50 cents for your corn instead of a dime. What year was that? In 1932 he was elected, and this was in 1933, I think, when he... So this corn sealing came in in 1933 right after? I think that's right, yeah. So that was a big help. But you were a Republican, and so was your dad. How did you see Roosevelt's ideas? Well, of course, I think there was a lot of Republicans who voted for Roosevelt in 1932. That's how... Because they blamed Hoover for a lot of their troubles. Whether it's right or not, I don't know. I don't think he had anything more to do with it than anybody else. But then there was a lot of Republicans who voted for Roosevelt in 1932. Then when 1936 came, well, some of them had second thoughts, but then he still was able to carry the country, you know. This corn sealing, now, you came into this kind of work. What was that? Well, it was in 1938. They came out from... they had what they called a county committee in charge of all this, and a fellow came out and asked me, he said, would you be interested in sealing corn? I said, oh, I hadn't given it any thought, and he told me what it would be like. So I said, well, I'd let him know, and I talked to my dad about it. He thought, resist, I was married then. And, well, what you did, you'd go to a farm. He said, I've got a crib of corn I want to seal, okay? So you would go, and you measured it up. You took a tape this long, this wide, this deep, and so that would be so many bushels of corn. That's what you would seal it at, and then you had to take a sample of it. We had a probe that you would push into the corn, and you would turn it, and you would get samples of corn, see? Dump it out, and then you'd push in someplace else and get samples of corn. Then you'd bring that sample in to Mount Pleasant, and depending on the moisture in that sample, whether they got the full 50 cents or not. If the corn wasn't quite that good, well, they might dock them a couple cents. But it was just a loan. And, of course, you paid interest on it, too, a low rate of interest. And if you wanted to use it, well, you could buy it back, or if you found somebody that would say, I'll give you 60 cents for your corn, well, you'd sell it to him, you'd pay off your loan, and that would take care of it. But if the corn didn't get up there where you could break even, well, then the government took it, and they had these steel bins all around the country. And the government paid for those storage? Yes, that was owned by them, and it was this corn that they took the corn and that paid off the note. And sometimes it sat in those bins for two, three years, but then it did work its way up to where they come out pretty good on most of it. What happened with the government corn? Who sold out? They had a whole management team then trying to get rid of it? Yeah, that's right. And then when, well, say, corn worked up to 75 cents a bushel, well, then the government was sitting on top of the world. They had this 50-cent corn, take it sell. Did they have enough? They finally got rid of most of it, yeah, at a fair profit. Of course, you had a little trouble with spoilage. That was another thing that I fell air to, was watching the steel bins. No, they always turned over that old. They were standing there for two or three years. Well, you took care of it. If your corn was spoiled, it was always going to spoil on top. That's where the corn, never in the bottom. The spoilage would be at the top. So that's what you had to watch was the top. And if it looked bad on top, well, sometimes they would get a truck and go in there and scoop off the bad corn, or they might take the whole bin and the government ship it out somewhere and take their loss. So that meant that you had to have small test bags, which you'd have to have on every farm, with the farmer's name on. Yeah, yeah. And it depended on you, then, how much the price was going to be. Well, yeah, although most of the corn was top-rated, so. So there was no problem at all. And then they also had what they called resealing. After you'd been there a year, or the better part of a year, if you wanted to, you could reseal it, and they would give you so much. You know, maybe another nickel a bushel if you wanted to keep it another year or something like that. And you could even shell it if you wanted to, and seal it as shell corn. But the farmer, now, he didn't seal the whole bunch of, he got to have some for his father's house. Well, yeah, it would depend. Of course, there was then, and there is now, a lot of farmers that just are strictly grain farmers. They had no use for the corn. They raised it to sell, see. So they would seal it all. And at that time... And then beans, too. It was all hand-husked, I suppose, or... Well, they were starting to use corn pickers then. But it was pretty dry, though. There was not too much moisture in it. Yeah. No, not as a general rule. Yeah, but they were using corn pickers. And then we sealed beans, too. So they started to come in. And there was Henry Ford, and he started with soybeans coming in. They could use it for aromatics, or for automotive. Well, it could be. He could have been one. He started in the 1930s. So they came in around 1930s, and the soybean... Yeah, the first I remember was right around 1930. And like I said, they cut them with a binder and shocked them, hauled them in, thrashed them, just like you did oats. And that was a dusty job. Then they started getting combines. Well, then there was no problem with it. You just leave them out in the field and cut them. Yeah, but with the combines, you had a lot of loss there, though, from dropping out. Not very much. You cut them a little bit earlier, then? No. You cut them low, of course, as low as you can. You'll lose a few. You'll lose a few, but not very many. So the pots stayed close, then? Mm-hmm. Most of the farmers nowadays put their beans in rows rather than drilled solid. There's a few that are drilled solid. And if you put them in rows, there is what they call a bean head that you can put on your tractor that works just like a corn picking head. It follows the old rows right down, and you'll probably lose less beans with them than you do with this sickle. How many years did you work with this corn sealing business? I expect I worked probably five years, something like that. Something like that, I imagine. So you were a state employee or a government employee? This would be federal. Federal? Mm-hmm. Yeah. And you traveled just in Henry County? Yeah. And there was a full-time job there? Well, no, not really. It was pretty much a wintertime job, but taking care of the bins, that you would run into sometime in the summer. So it was a part-time job. It was a part-time job. So you had to make appointments, then to show up one day. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And then the farmer, you had to talk to him a bit about the nature of the corn. Oh, yeah. So it took time, then. How many farms could you manage during the day? Ten? Probably, probably. And, of course, you'd take them the way they come. After you'd be real busy, it's the first part of the season. Everybody wanted it done, you know. But then after, say, got into January, February, well, then there would just be an occasional one. They'd call you and say, well, John Doe has got a crib. Well, you'd go out there and measure it up and seal it, so you'd go and do it and bring it into town. That might be the only one you did for that particular day. So if we take the number of 50 farmers, what were they saying about this program? Were they praising Roast? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. They were real happy, sure. So they said it was a good idea? Oh, yeah. You bet. Well, it saved a lot of farms. It saved a lot of farms. Were there a lot of close-outs, I mean foreclosures during that time? There were some, yeah. There were some. But they were old established farms, though, around this area. Well... Mostly family farms in the traditions of... Yeah, but they were more likely to be a farm that had been purchased lately, you know. And they hadn't got enough paid down, you know, what they couldn't meet their payments. But the old established farms, like your dad's now, and they were safe because you... Seemed to be, yeah. They didn't have anything to worry about. So this program was one of the many hundreds that Roosevelt instituted. How about CCC? That was not popular in this area because it was mostly city youngsters. They had to go to those camps. Yeah, yeah. You remember? Yeah, they had some around here. Did the farmers' boys also go to those camps? Yeah, some of them did. We have a... It was a state park, now it's a county park down at Oakland Mills, which is on the Skunk River. There used to be a powerhouse there and a dam. Well, the dam is still there. And there was a big park there. And they did a lot of work there. They made all kinds of steps, you know. You could go from up to the top of the hill, or to the bottom, and they cleaned it all up. And then they... Well, they did a lot of good. Were they people from this area, or they shipped them in from others? Well, they could be people from this area, yeah. So they stayed at home then? I think you had to stay in the camp. I think you stayed at... yeah, you stayed in the camp. They had a camp, I believe, in Mount Pleasant. I think they had to stay there. And that work continued on then for a few months or a half a year or... Oh, it... Depending on... Yeah, it must have been a year or more. So a lot of people were against that. And they were also shut out after a few years. Do you think it was a good idea to get rid of people? Well, yeah, I think for one thing it helped the kids, but for another thing it did some things that needed to be done. They did a lot of good in these state parks. Still shows, you know, where they put in toilets and they put in picnic buildings and stuff like that. You stayed in your cell? Well, they did some work on farms too. If you had, oh, say, a bad washout or something that you wanted to fix, they would put in a dam there for you to hold the dirt so that it would quit washing. Without cost to the farmer? I think maybe you paid some, but not anything like it would have cost you if you had hired somebody else to come in and do it. So that was a good investment then for the future, so to speak. Yeah. Well, nowadays we have a different system. In other words, people are getting paid, but you don't see too much after what they are doing. That's probably true. What is your philosophy? What is your philosophy about the politics of yesterday and today? People seem to have money now. Yes, they do, but I worry a little bit about a lot of these people that are working in factories and packing plants, they're not getting very good pay. The packing plants are in bad trouble. The packing plants are bad, yeah. They don't pay too much per hour, and it's dangerous work, and it's hard work. But, of course, you can't blame a guy. If that's the only thing you can get, you're going to take it. But it seems like most of your best jobs probably are in services, services of different kinds. And, of course, not everybody is qualified to do that. But working in a factory, and the unions used to be so powerful. Well, a lot of them are non-union now, and even where the unions are in, the management will say, all right, you take it or leave it. We'll give you this and that much, and the poor guys, what else can they do but take it? Of course, we've got an awful lot of foreign competition. That's one of the things. That's one of the things that makes it tough for our people to make a living. Well, you see, the unions, of course, came up during the 30s. And security and protection of the workplace was one of the unions' demands. Now when the unions are getting weaker, I mean, you can see it. Oh, yeah, that's right. The protection towards the worker is getting set aside. You would think they could invent something to make a deal, but they work their butt off instead of cutting their fingers off. No, they apparently don't especially care about management. All they want to do is get as much work out of you as they can possibly get for the least dollars. That's the way it seems. Now I don't know because I'm not familiar with that end of it. But they are in a bad spot now. Yeah. Well, I think anybody who works, say, in a factory where you're working on a line, I don't envy those people at all because I would think that would get terribly monotonous to do the same thing over and over, hour after hour until the end of the day, come back the next day and do the same thing over. To me, there wouldn't be any real incentive there to get your work done because that's bound to be monotonous. So after a while you feel locked in. Yeah. You can't, there's no freedom. No, I imagine time goes pretty slow when you're doing that. In this area now, are there many factory workers going into Mount Pleasant? Oh, there's quite a few. There's quite a few, yeah. Some of the farms beside or keeping two jobs? There are some of them, not so very many. How many acres do you need now to feed a family of, for instance, five? I think 320 acres would be a minimum. Can't have less because you need machinery to work. Yeah, and plus you've got to, I always more or less held that a man who just farms the land and raises grain is not fully employed. So you need to have some livestock or you need to have a part-time job because, well, by 1st of December, easily, you are done with your harvest and you probably got your fall plowing or your chiseling done. So you got December, January, February, March, but you don't have anything to do. So you should be doing something those four months. And in the same way, there are some lulls in the summertime when you don't have too much to do. But, of course, a guy who raises a lot of pigs, for instance, he is busy, he's a little too busy. When he's working in the fields, it's hard to take care of both. But then in order to make it go, that's one of the things that he can make a go with because he can work that when he isn't working in the field. But then you have this darn computer telling you it doesn't pay. Yeah, that's right. Well, of course, hogs have been real good the last year, year and a half, whatever it is. They've been better than cattle. Yes, although cattle haven't been too bad here lately. But what is it now if you go east of Mississippi from here, in Henry County, Illinois, of course, you have all those pig houses. You don't see them on the western side. No, that's right. Why is that? Well, one thing, it's a terrible lot of work. It's a terrible lot of work to have those, we call them A-houses. Because you've got a sow in there with her little pigs. Now, for a while, at least when they have their little ones, you've got to carry feed to them and water to them every day, twice a day. And then you've also got to watch. Sometimes they get ranching and lay on the darn pigs, whereas if you've got them in a confinement, in a farrowing stall, she cannot lay on the pigs because she's in this little narrow thing and the pigs are off to both the sides. That also entails work, but it isn't as bad as out in the field. But, of course, then you've got a lot of money tied up. Those A-houses, that's pretty cheap. So you can afford maybe to spend some extra time. You can afford maybe to lose more pigs. Yeah, they used to have an awful lot of A-houses around here, but you just seldom ever see them. Oh, yes, yes, they had A-houses. The idea was carried over until the Civil War. Oh, yes, yes, but Illinois is just a little bit slower about quitting them, I guess. So you don't see any when you travel? Not very often, huh? Not very often, yeah. Yeah, both my son and my son-in-law raised, in the summertime they raised all their pigs out in the pastures, and you'd have to run a water hose out there, and you had to have your sheds, and you had to, and you probably had a little work with them, but now they just have them right in the sheds year-round. So you had this job then for five, six years, and also being a farmer. And you stayed with that, and you bought your own farm, or did you take over your... I've got 40 acres is all, so I never did own a lot of land. So I owned 40 acres. But you were able to survive on that? Yeah, but I'm not, it wasn't the greatest. So in 1957, then I really quit farming. So I've had a different job, but then not, nobody's particularly interested in that again. You were political in your lifetime? Not necessarily, no. I worked in the store for a couple of years. Oh, here in... in Switzerland? Yeah, and then I worked as a bookkeeper at a garage out in Winfield for around a year or so, and then I didn't have anything special. And so then in the spring, I worked for the assessor, the Henry County assessor, they were revaluing all the land, and I worked at that for two, three months. And then that fall, then I got a chance to... to apply for a job as a state sales and use tax auditor. And I took an examination up in Des Moines, and I passed it. And so I got a job then about 1st of September. And I worked at that for about five years. I wasn't terribly wild about it, but it was a job, and it paid pretty well. And then... then when I quit that, then I ran for Henry County treasurer and got the job. And then I was treasurer for six years, and then when I didn't want to run for that anymore, then I ran for state representative and had that for four years. And since then I haven't done anything in particular. You had to be in Mont Pleasant every day, then? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but it's only 10 miles, so... Oh, but that's easy, too. Yeah. Your generation, did they stay here on this area, or did they move out? My generation pretty much stayed here. But our kids are not. So they are moving out? Well, more so our grandchildren. Our kids, some of the kids stayed, some didn't. But the grandchildren, hardly any are. Do they go to college, then, and come out of the state, so to speak? Quite a few of them, or otherwise they went to maybe a technical school or something like that. But, no, there's hardly any of the young kids that are farming. How about your children? Are they staying on the farms? Yeah. Are the young kids interested in farming nowadays? Not so very, no. Is the publicity against farming...? Well, I think, for one thing, it takes too much money to start up. And the way it's been the last several years, there hasn't been much money in farming. There hasn't been very much. So it doesn't pay them to borrow money to start farming? Well, no, I would... You know, unless you can, like somebody, maybe they can go in with their dad or something like that, that's possible. But to just go in, unless you've got a lot of money of your own, it would be practically an impossibility to start farming. And I noticed in this Sandahl family that moved out west to Nebraska, York and Redshaw and Bassett and there, some of their children came back to this area and married. Yeah, that's right. Was that interesting? That was a woman. Four of them, right? Four daughters, yeah, four daughters. And they came here to settle here? Well, really, the men from here went out there and got them, though. Oh, I see. Yeah, so they didn't come back to Sweetsburne and say, here I am, somebody want me? But all the men that married them, they, of course, they had, the Sandahls had some relation here. Sometimes they'd come here and visit and go back. Well, and maybe a man from here said, well, gee, she was kind of a nice gal. I'll go out and see if she'd be interested in me. So he'd go out and visit, and the first thing you know, they get going back and forth. And then when one daughter married somebody here, well, then another daughter would come to visit, and here was another Swede down here, and she'd say, hey, she's cute, by golly. He might court her and court her out in Nebraska, and that's the way they got here, the four girls. Raised their families here, then. Yeah, that's right. Or their grandfather once set foot. Yeah. And what about reunions? How often do you have them? I understand you have them in Linden. We have a Linden, what we call Linden Lund reunion, yes. We have that every year, and we have it one year in Illinois and one year in Iowa, alternate years. And we run around 75, 80 that come every year. And well, now it seems like here particularly, if we have it in Mount Pleasant, a few of the younger kids like mine, they're not so young anymore, will go. But they won't go take the trouble to go over to Galesburg when we have it over there. And the same way a lot of the Galesburg people, of that younger age, they'll go there, but they won't come if they have it in Mount Pleasant or Burlington. But there's those two states, Illinois and Iowa. Primarily, although we have a few from Wisconsin that come. There's just one family, I think. And then I believe there's one lady from Missouri that comes every year. But it's primarily the people in the Galesburg area and primarily the people in the Swedesburg area. How about the connection now with Sweden? You've been back, I mean you visited Sweden 15 years ago. You have second cousins then? Well, when we went, we went on a tour. We were four of us, my wife and I and a cousin and her husband from Minnesota. We went on a tour, and so we did not see anyone that we knew. We were in about four or five different countries. And you had no correspondence with them? No, none whatsoever. And did they stop, you think, during your father's time or your grandpa complained about that? Yeah, that's true. I don't think, well, I remember when we had this Swedish hired man. He would ride home occasionally, and once in a great while they would ride him. But it sure wasn't very often. It wasn't very often. It seemed like after they come to America, they kind of lost contact. They kind of lost contact. But I have several cousins that have gone over there now the later years and looked up relatives. And found them? Uh-huh, which is a nice thing as far as that's concerned. Do they live in the same area then, Kristalla? Somewhat, somewhat that area, yeah. So you know where they came from, Daniel Kornsson? Yeah. And you certainly have done a lot of work on Henry Conte history here. And you've been a participant in trying to keep the lines open. Yeah, that's something which I kind of enjoy to do. Very nice compilation of records of the old timers. Do you know quite well then what happened when they came here and how they settled and the suffering? Well, unlike Will Rogers, you say all I know is what I read in the papers. All I know is what they told me. And, of course, I wish they would have told me more. But then you... So the old timers didn't talk too much then about the past? No, no. The thing which I kind of wondered about, like I said, there were a lot of Swedish young men that came over here. Some of them stayed and married, some of them just plainly stayed. But almost all of them could play either a harmonica or an accordion. And I don't know why. I doubt that... I can't feature that they would have had lessons over there, but now this Axel Nelson who worked for us, he was good on either one. He had an accordion he'd sit there and play, or he could play the harmonica. And so I just never did know why. Now, David Johansen...