 This is cassette two, side one, to continue with Harold Boston, the walkway is constant. Cassette two, side one. The engineers, I always said that they had iron between their ears. They thought in terms of horsepower and what they called drawbar pull. That was how much of that horsepower could you translate into turning furrows of stuff. They never thought about the man-machine relationship. If a guy had rubber tires on, he had a higher rebound than the old steel wheels, and he got higher shock. Not less shock, but higher because rubber would rebound and pivot them up. Well, I didn't happen to know about that, but they didn't. So at any rate, we now had everybody in the industry using the Boston suspension. Now then, the next plan of attack was to do the same for the truck drivers, of which there was something like 18 million trucks on the road in those days. But you never looked into their business before that time? No. Well, I had it in mind because I had driven that 10-ton pack of truck, you know, with the shock absorbers and the legs, so I had it in mind what I was going to do. So then we developed a suspension for the trucks that would include GMC trucks, Mack trucks, White trucks, Federal trucks, Kenworth trucks, Peterbilt trucks, all the trucks that manufacturers that were operating. I then had my sales rep, Dick Corey, C-O-R-Y, get in touch with the American Trucking Association, and a man by the name of Walter Carey, C-A-R-Y, was chairman. So the American Trucking Association were having an annual meeting at the Hilton Hotel in Chicago, and my sales manager said, you've got to come down and meet Walter Carey. Well, Liz Taylor had just married Hilton's son at that time, and they were occupying the presidential suite. And we were next in line, and they were leaving to go somewhere else. Liz Taylor had her 35 pieces of luggage ready to go, and I came in a little early. I was always being early rather than too late, so I met Liz Taylor in the corridor, and I saw all this luggage and so on, and I said, well, Liz, I see you're leaving, and we're coming. And I said that I wish you'd told me a day before that you were here, because I would have liked to have been able to come up and say hello to you, but now you're ready to go with all that luggage. I said, have a good marriage and good day, and my name is Bostrom, and that was the end of that. So they moved out, and we moved in. That is, the American Trucking Association moved in. I was a guest, and so I was introduced to Walter Carey. Walter Carey said, Bostrom, what makes you think that I would give those damn Teamsters anything? He said, as far as I'm concerned, they could sit on a cement block. He hated the Teamsters with an abiding hatred. Well, I said, I'm not selling comfort to the Teamsters. I'm selling you a profit machine. Well, he said, how do you figure that out? Well, I said, do you think it's the Teamsters Union that's paying every time they take a truck stop every 20 minutes? Because he said, oh, my back aches. I said, you're paying it. Now, I said, if we put a seat on that damn truck that is equal to or better than a Cadillac, you can say to the Teamsters Union in the contract, one stop every four hours, not one stop every 20 minutes. So I said, you're the beneficiary. I'm selling you a profit machine. And I said, all you've got to do is when you order the next 500 Max, whites, or whatever you write, tell your purchasing agent on there, leave off your rubbish on the end of the line, and put on a Bostrom Viking. Well, and we called the truck seat the Viking. Now then, General Motors, they always wanted three sources of supply so they could beat the hell out of every one of the suppliers to get them down to.0007. So I outfoxed General Motors. I said, when you place your order, you specify Viking. Then there's no question about I have to sell to them so they sell to you. I sell to you. It's on your purchase order. It's specified. Bostrom Viking. They have no alternative to pay me, my price, for the seat you're going to get. Well, that worked. That worked. And as a result, I had in my pricing, I had a 20% markup after all costs, and I had another $5 bill in there for what I call contingencies. So what they did was to take off the conventional seat, which cost them around $38, and they put my seat in, which cost them $68. But for $30 difference, they were buying an $8,000 rig. What the hell was that? Especially when they didn't have any coffee stops every 30 minutes. So that went through like a... Then I used sex to sell, and I'll tell you how they did that. The Teamsters, I mean the American Truck Drivers Association, had an annual meeting, usually in Miami, and all the big fleet operators throughout the nation would come to this annual meeting. Well, I took a suite in whatever they were headquartering, the La Fontaine or whatever the big hotel was down there in Miami. In those days, Miami was really a high point. So I took a suite, and I said to Corey, now you get the finest sterling coffee silver set here on the tree. That's the prize. And then we put a bunch of peas in a bottle, and the guy that answers most correctly, he gets that surprise. Then I took some aluminum, and I made a vibrating machine, which I could alter the amplitude and the speed of the vibrations. Then I put two seats on there. One was a Dunlop pillow, soft, when you sat down there like sitting in a barrel of putty. Then I put my Viking suspension next to it. So then I had the control in my hands, so I could control the amplitudes or the frequencies, and then I would look into the audience of those who would come to make out for the tea set, and I'd find a woman who had big boobs. I said, now you sit down on this very soft, and I'll show you what happens. I said, then you take your husband, and you put him on the suspension seat. Well, the rebound of that rubber and the amplitude, her tits would begin to move like this. She'd say, oh, oh, oh, take me off, take me off. Okay, after the boys in the audience had had a little chance to watch the movement, I shut it down. I said, now you go on the suspension. Oh, no, I won't do that. I said, you go on the suspension, let your husband sit on this seat, and I'll show you the difference. Well, I adjusted it for her weight and so on, started her up, persuaded her to go on this one, and she didn't move. The platform moved, he jumped like a goddamn ball. She sat still. There was nothing coming through. Well, that was a telling argument. But all of these guys who represented the big fleets, they had been truck drivers at one time themselves, and truck drivers are notorious for women, the girls. And so the word went out on the old grapevine, go to the bostrom seat, and you'll see something you've never seen before. I saw them move like this. Did you hire this girl to do that? No, no, no, no, I just found somebody in the audience as well built, you know. And that wasn't too hard to find. I'd find one with 42 D-cups, you know. And then when she began to move, they began to move like it was going out of style. But the word went out, you see, go to the bostrom, not only on that silver set, but watch how he demonstrates. Oh, Jesus, guys, they were lining up. How do you use this now in the advertising? No, I didn't do it. You didn't do that? No. Well, you see. At this meeting? Yeah, at the annual meeting. And the word went out that bostrom, you get a seat in your trucks, and when you specify the next 100 max, you're going to buy a 500 max, specify bostrom Viking, because these things kick out every damn bit of the shock and vibration, and it goes here, but up here, no movement, except if you've got big tits and you get on the dumb rubber pillows, you know. And that story went like a wildfire through it. So then we had, oh yeah, then they had an American Trucking Association Foundation. So you could join the foundation, and it cost you $25,000 a year, and then you could put their logo on your advertising. It took full page in a business week or whatever. The logo was their member of the ATA Foundation. So I said to Corey, join the foundation. Now, I'm home sleeping, and at 1 o'clock in the morning, I get a telephone call. Hello? Dick Corey here, talking from Detroit. No, from Washington, D.C. I'm sitting here with Senator Hickenlooper from Iowa, and he was a Lincolnophile, Abraham Lincoln, and a couple of other guys, you mentioned their names. And they want to know, will you make a contribution to procuring Abraham Lincoln's complete overcoat, suit, boots, hat, everything except the shirt. The shirt was destroyed. And then we'll put that in a vacuum glass box at the Ford Theater. They were just rebuilding the Ford Theater. And I said, what the hell do you get me out of bed for a stupid statement like that for? You know damn well that I'm like Carl Sandburg. I'm a Lincolnophile, too. I've been to the San Gabon River. I've been to New Salem. I've been to Springfield. I love Abraham Lincoln. He was one of our greats. He says, of course, the answer is yes. Good night. Bye. Well, anyway, they built the thing. His clothes are all there. And if you look on the east wall, you'll see a little brass plaque. It's a contribution of the Bostrom Manufacturing Company and the American Trucking Association. And there is that little brass plaque on it. Where now? In the Ford Theater. Ford Theater? Yeah. If you get to D.C., you go to the Ford Theater, look at that, and look at the brass plate. You'll get confirmed, but I'm telling you here. Anyway, so that was just another little vignette. Now we've got the whole damn trucking industry and we've got the whole damn farm tractor industry. So we've got 90% of everything. At that time, I don't know what we were doing. Probably we were doing about 38 million sales, something like that. What time was that? The 50s? Wait a minute. This is about probably 1955 or somewhere like that. Okay, now I'm getting thirsty. I'm talking too much. We are very, very successful. We're known worldwide. I've got licensees in Germany. I've got a plant in Northampton, England. Earlier I had a plant in Coventry, England. I had offices in Switzerland. I had a licensee in Germany. I had a licensee in Sweden. I went to Uppsala and met... I forget his name. He was a professor of engineering at Uppsala. They did the independent testing. Belinda Montel and Valvo put not only seats on all the trucks for the driver, but also for the passengers sitting next to it so they were isolated from shock and vibration. I can't remember his name. He was the licensee representing Sweden, etc. Now we are international and booming along. How did you go about this? We'll take it a little bit in detail here. Your brother was how many years younger than you? He was five years older. Older? What did he get into after high school? He had an interest in chemistry. I had no interest in chemistry. I had an interest in literature, history, language, vocabulary, anything that had to do with words. So you went through high school and then through college? No. You went through technical... No. I just went through the school of hard knocks. In 1928, my brother got married to a German woman who was a music teacher up in the Masabi area, Eveless, Minnesota. They married and went to New York. Then he got a job for a chemical firm there analyzing oils that were being shipped in boats from maybe the Persian Gulf or wherever. But he always had it in mind to write. He wanted to be a journalist. So finally he got a job on the Bronx Home News up in the Bronx, New York. He was a night reporter covering social events like the hard carrier's ball and what have you. He had to turn in 13 pages of triple spaced copy a night. He sat and hunted and pecked. So I was carrying on correspondence with him from home. He said, Why don't you come to New York? So I said, I'm coming. I had just finished high school, so I had nothing. I think I had six dollars when I left Milwaukee and I summed my way. Well, I discovered that even in those days there was a certain reluctance to pick up guys on the road because then there would be public that some guy got knocked off, car was stolen, and that was it. So I did a lot of summing before I got an occasional ride. Well, my mother didn't want me to go to New York. She said, you'd never get to through Chicago because the Capone mobsters will get you. I said, Ma, I got six dollars. Who gives a damn about a kid with six dollars? I got my toothbrush, my toothpaste. I'm walking. Summing. Well, I got picked up by a butcher just 10 miles. I had walked outside of Milwaukee and then I got it not from the Capone mobsters, but this guy was trying to pass a funeral cortege. In those days, they didn't have flags up on top. So there they were practically bumper to bumper and he's skating along like hell bent. And here comes the car. He's got no place to go. We had to take to the ditch and we rolled over, but we weren't hurt. And then we got a couple of guys and we righted this thing and it was on a graduated enough slope. So we got a half a dozen guys and we push it up on the road and we went on to Chicago. That was my first experience. Then I began to think about how can I stop these people? Well, in those days, they had the Ford had what they call a 30 by three and a half clincher rim tire with an independent rubber tube. So I went into a junk shop and I said, have you got a tube for a rubber tire? And I had been in the business of being interested in automobiles and stuff. So I said, I want one in rubber blown up, discard something that had a hole in it on the junk pile. So I picked up a red inner tube. Then I went back on the highway. Red inner tube. Stop. This guy's got a flat. He needs help. So I got in the car and he said, geez, a flat. Yeah, it's flat. And he says, well, where do you want to go? I said, where are you going? He said, to Detroit. I said, so am I. Well, he says, what about your car? Well, I said, this is only my Valentine. I said, if I hadn't had that, you'd never stop. Jesus Christ, that left their head out. Here's an original. The guy figured out how to make me stop and I didn't want to. And that was the rubber tire. After that, on to New York. No problem. So that was your most important... That was education on the road. That's how you get educated. Watching out to what has to happen, if you're going to get some results to happen. Well, anyway, I got to New York and there, when I hit the Hoboken Ferry, I had 50 cents left. And I had 55 cents. On the six dollars you got. Yeah. One night I slept behind a billboard and covered myself with newspapers. But it was June, so it was not too bad. I've been upper New York State, the Finger Lakes District. But then it started to rain during the night and that damn paper pulp melted on me. I was picking paper for the next few days and they had the pulp off of me. But anyway, you had to make do. So I slept out again. Then I would go to... they had those Montparnes motels in those days. They had a sign out front, room for rent. Well, they were usually two dollars. So I get a room and then I would say... and I'd see to it I got the room about five o'clock. Figuring that people would eat about 5.30 or so. So I get the room. Then the lady would say, have you had dinner? No. Would you like to eat with us? Well, I don't want to impose. So I get a free meal thrown in for... plus my two bucks, you see. So I made a stretch. So at any rate, then I got to a little town in upper New York State. And there Rio was making automobiles at that time. R-E-O, Rio Company. So there was a bunch of Rio cars going to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. And I... listening... I heard this and I said, hey, do you need another driver? He said, yeah. So I'm the last guy in a line of eight of these cars going from upper New York State to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. It was sort of in the line of march. I'm the last guy in the line. These guys are supposed to hold to 30 miles an hour or less because they're new cars. Well, they want to get to Harrisburg fast because they want to spend the night with the girls. So I'm the last guy and we're going through the Appalachians, you know, and I've never been over these roads before. And I had to make the hairpin turns, you know, without going down there. And I kept up with the bastards. But boy, I tell you, I sweat bullets. Well, we got to Harrisburg and then I got paid. I got another five dollars or something. So then I thought, well, now I got enough money. So I take a bus from Harrisburg to Manhattan. In those days, they had no control. Why don't you help yourself to one of these? See whether the class is in the business yet. I had a good one month before out of Harrisburg for Manhattan. And they had no controls in those days in terms of the number of hours and so on and so forth. So this bus driver, I'm sleeping on the back seat. And he's going down the hill along the Mahangahela River going into Pittsburgh. And he falls asleep. Fortunately, he didn't sleep that way because 500 feet down was the Mahangahela. If we'd have gone that way, I wouldn't be sitting talking to you. He fell asleep in this way. And he scrubbed the side of the mountain here. So I was laying on the back seat, and above me was some of these foldable camp chairs. Well, they came rattling down on me. But I was young and tough, and it didn't bother me. I had a couple of little bruises. But a couple of guys sitting on that wall, they got cut with glass because they scraped out all the glass on that side of the bus against the mountain. And so then they paid our train fare into New York City because we were in this accident. Didn't want anybody sued. Nobody sued in those days. So anyway, then I got into Hoboken on the other side of the Hudson. And there was a nickel to get across to Manhattan Island. So a guy comes up to me, and he sees I'm a greenhorn from the Middle West. Says, Hey, say, but I lost my key for my locker, and I got my watch cogs in there and my clothes. And he says, could you let me have a half? Well, I had the 50 cents, so I gave him the half. I was strictly a bullshit artist. That was a con man, so I lost my 50 cents. Well, I had enough to get from the car ferry onto the subway, which was also a nickel on those. So I went up to 103rd and West End Avenue, which is where my brother lived. And he was then working for this oil company doing analysis. Later on, he joined the Bronx Home News. Later on, before he joined me, he was the labor editor of the New York Post. So he had a good job, but even then, in those days, reporters were only paid around $35 a week. So I would come into New York City, and Bostrom was now doing pretty good. My uncle John had died, and I would come to New York City. And in order to tantalize him, I would take a big roll of bills, and the inside bills were all fives or ones, and the outside bill was a $100 bill. I'd take this goddamned thing out here with the $100 bill and say, Well, Carl, when are you going to join me? He was making $35 a week. He'd look at this damn $100 bill and, gee. Well, anyway, that was a convincer. That's part of the education process. That was a convincer. So then I'd go back to Wisconsin, and we'd write, and I'd tell him about my latest customer and what was going on and so on. And then when John died, I went alone for two years, maybe three. So in 1941, he decided to come and join. I gave him 50% of the corporation. All he brought was his own brotherly honesty. And so he and I went on from there. So his responsibility was all in office then? No, he was in sales, and I was in sales. So we clipped that one together. But he was good in management theory and philosophy. He had read Peter Drucker, who was the right-hand man to Alfred Sloan, head of General Motors at that time. So he's a very good theoretician in terms of management technique. We were one of the first small companies that had what they call operations by charts. We had the same damn charts that they had in General Motors because a man by the name of Heath, who was the head of the ones that made the frames for the automobile industry, A.O. Smith, he retired, and he set up his own charting service, and I was one of his first customers. So that was a training program so that the foreman would know in their plan exactly what cost they had generated and what profit they had generated and what cost they could improve by doing A and C as equally as this department over here. So they were getting an education in accounting, cost accounting, manufacturing accounting. So at any rate, that was Carl's fort. So now he is back here, and we continue our activity. Then it comes 1958, and he gets a stroke, which paralyzed him right down the middle. He was overweight, and he was what I call a bibliophile. A bibliophile is a fellow that's interested in everything that's written, and he would sit up until 1 o'clock in the morning reading about lichens or bugs or animals or accounting or manufacturing accounting or whatever. He was interested in anything that was written in books. So while this is going on, he would go to the icebox and have a beer and a little aquavit, and that would give him a false appetite, then he'd eat. So he was 235 pounds, and he had this stroke. Was he married? Oh, yeah, he had two boys. So anyway, I said, OK, now you've had the stroke, and you're on full time regardless of anything. At that time, he was making $80,000 a year, and so was I. And that was good money in those days. So then for about 12 years, 58, 10 years, he was never on the job. He was full pay. He got his back by going through the physical therapy and so on. Was he able to speak? Yeah, yeah. That was one thing he hadn't lost. He lost everything that had to do with a walk and so on. But then by this physiotherapy, he was able to get secondary nerve junctions, so then he was able to locomote, and then he was able to walk with a cane. So then he came back, then he came to work. That was years thereafter. So then his wife was always wanting to get into society, and she thought the way to get into society is to have the biggest house on the right side of Lake Drive here in Milwaukee. And we may have to delete this because she's still alive. But at any rate, he wanted to sell out. Well, I was not a money manager, or I would have said, OK, Carl, you sell 49% of your share, I'll keep 51%, and I'll keep on. But I agreed to sell out too. So we sold at 10 times earnings the Bostrom Corporation to UOP, Universal Oil Products of Des Plaines, Illinois. Now I was very much attracted to them because the guy who was the chairman of that company was working on the catalytic muffler to take the nitrous oxides and the sulfurics out of the air that was being generated by the internal combustion engine. But here's a guy I can live with. Well, anyway, let's have another round. And what year was that? That was about 19... we'll have to check these dates, but I think that was about... Come on, have another one. Are you all right? I said, why don't you take that engineer from... He had acquired in the meantime that other Morabund operation called... They were the copper miners up there in Houghton and Hancock, Michigan. Well, they had acquired that company. What does every side take in terms of time? 60 minutes. 30 minutes. So you got 60, and this was side two of two. So you got an hour and a half so far. Maybe this will become more than a one-day operation. At any rate, in the meantime, I had developed a company that I called Amalga, which was short for amalgamation. And the reason I was interested in that is that I was interested in conservation. And I could tell that we were leaving the... First we had the Stone Age, then we had the Copper Age, and then the Alloyed Copper, and then we had the Bronze Age. And then they ran out of bronze, and then we were in the Iron Age. Now, what few people realized is that we were entering the age of fibers, and that was called composites. Composites consisted of glass fiber, boron fiber, carbon fiber, anything. Some of these fibers were made as a byproduct of petrochemicals. Some of them were made out of glass, like the glass fibers. We've got endless resources in the Sahara and everywhere else for silica sand. So I said to myself, the future lies in fiber. In fact, I said early on, if I were Andrew Carnegie and alive, I would sell every last share of U.S. steel and come over to Bostrom Composites, because that's the future. At any rate, the big corporation said, Oh, Harold, we can't take a place like Amalia. They're only doing five million sales. We're in a half billion sales. Well, I said, OK, John, if you want to give away the crown jewels, I'll buy them. I could have left that thing out altogether, because what they bought, really, at ten times earnings, was the conventional seeding money, because they had conventional ideas. So at any rate... This was in the 1970s. No, no, we're probably up to about 1969, 68, somewhere in there. So, OK, John Logan had come from Olin Matheson, and he was president of UOP, but he was president only in name, not in deed. He was sitting there, and when I come downtown, at the Splanes to visit, I see John Logan sitting over in the corner looking dour, like a tomb. So I said to the guy who was legal counsel for UOP, I said, What the hell is all this whispering about? What have we got down here that's so mysterious? I go in his office, he closes the door. I said, What the hell is it all about? Well, he says, You know, they're accustomed to quiet down here. I said, Christ, this is quiet like a tomb, like a morgue. Then I go over to see John Logan. John Logan says, Harold, I can't stay here more than about six months, because all I am is a goddamned glorified office boy. I'm not a CEO, I'm not in charge of the executive committee, I'm not in charge of the finance committee. They don't even have a finance committee. But I'm supposed to be responsible for profits. I said, Okay, so what am I supposed to do? Well, he says, I don't know. What do you think you can do? I said, What I can do is this. I'll go and visit every member of the board of directors of UOP. They consisted of the president of the American Medical Manufacturing, they were making medical supplies like Johnson & Johnson. Another guy was the head of the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad. Another guy was the head of something else. But there were about 13 or 14 members. One guy was the chairman of Alice Chalmers. What's his name? Stevenson, Robert Stevenson. So I went to one after the other. I said to them, I've got about 125,000 shares of this UOP stock. And as far as I'm concerned, this is like a house divided against itself, quoting Lincoln. And I said, They can't do anything but fail unless something is done in terms of this guy, Logan, being given the power to execute what he's responsible for, which is profitability of the corporation. So I said, As far as I'm concerned, this is what I'm telling you about. Okay? So every one of them, and they thanked me for the audience and so on. But prior to that, I had said to Pete Venema, who was chairman of UOP, I said, Pete, there's something wrong here. Do I get your authority to do something about it? And I put this in a letter. And he said, Absolutely. He assumed that Calumet and Heckler, which they had acquired, had union problems, and that I was going to ferret out what the hell was wrong with UOP in terms of the union. He never associated it was wrong with management. So after I had seen Stevenson in Milwaukee at what I call the hair shirt club of the Milwaukee club, Bob Stevenson says, Does Venema know what you're doing? I said, Sure he does. Okay, he said, The first thing I've got to do is to talk to Pete. I said, Fine. So lunch was over. I went down the steps outside as fast as I could, went over across the street to the Pfister Hotel, got on the phone, and I said, Pete, this is Harold. I said, I just had a lunch with Bob Stevenson, and he asked me if you knew what I was doing. And I want to tell you what I have been doing, because it may be that you don't know. Yeah, he said, Well, you know, Harold, when we talked about your letter to find out what was wrong, I thought it had to do with the union. Well, I said, I discovered it had to do with management. And I said, You've got the old UOP crowd surrounding you and isolating the guy that you made president, and so he's not responsible for it. He's got to be responsible for it. And therefore, I'm saying that you've got to get together as chairman with your board and empower this guy to head up a finance committee, to be CEO, and be responsible for what he's being paid for. I said, Okay, he said, I hear you. And that was the end of the conversation with Pete Venema. Well, anyway, he got to be CEO, executive committee, and the whole finance committee was created, and so that was fine. So at a later time, I went down to visit John Logan, and he told me about Amalga, who needs it, get lost, and so on. I said, Okay, if you want to get rid of the crown jewels, me. First bid. He turned the project over to a guy by the name of Hanson. Didn't say anything about Harold. He's an owner boy, you know, just gave him the project. Another guy living up on Silver Spring who had a little electronics shop, heard by the grapevine that UOP was interested in divestiture. I didn't bother to go down because I thought it was a lead pipe cinch. This guy bought it for $350,000, and he sold enough fixed assets to retire the $350,000 that I had used to make things, and he got it for nothing. And I was out in the cold. Well, I thought to myself, isn't that a nice way to pay back a debt? I thought, I'll tell you what I think happened. John Logan thought that if he consummated this deal with me, somebody in the corporation would say, Uh-oh, payoff for old scores, you know. And he wasn't going to jeopardize anything, so he just left me out in the cold. Well, I never went back to John Logan. I never said a word to him about it. Furious as I was, I could have cut his head off. But, so this guy, Knaup, got it. It took him seven years to ruin it, practically. He had, amongst other things, to make pipe for the Fluidics division of UOP, which was reverse osmosis to create fresh water out of salt water in the Persian Gulf for the Saudis and so on and so forth. And the pipes leaked, and Fluidics division got sued, and so Fluidics in turn sued Amalga Corporation, and I'm not any part of that now, so that's just when I knew what happened. So, at any rate, I'm retired, and I'm pursuing my old thing, population. And General Draper, Sasakawa Japan, well, his man on earth, his guest when Draper died, and that's another long story that'll take half the afternoon, but we'll fill that in later. We call that the Japanese episode. I'll fill that in. But this John Logan was his name? Yeah, John Logan, L-O-G-A-N. Why did he do this thing with the torch? Well, I'm telling you that I think he was afraid that somebody would say in the organization that John Logan paid Bostrom off by giving him Amalga in exchange for Bostrom having put Logan in the job that he didn't have and couldn't make by himself, and he didn't want that to be publicly aired. I think that was the whole thing. So, the easiest thing is to give it to a guy by the name of Hanson, Hanson gives it to a guy that comes down, and I'm out. I'm out. Well, I don't say anything. I should have gone probably down to UOP, and in my loudest voice I should have said, You son of a bitch, John Logan, you well stunned your agreement with me after what I did for you. But I thought, well... Was he more than an associate to you? Who? Logan? No, he was the president of UOP. Yes, but I... And Van Amal was chairman, and he stayed chairman. Now, they pulled one damn blooper after the other. Logan took a contract for a come-by-chance refinery up there in Newfoundland, and it didn't work, and they were sued for $350 million by whoever it was that was putting the pay-all out to make this refinery up there in Newfoundland. I'm in Greece at this time. The stock... When we came on board, the stock was at 33. The stock went to 105 and split. Now we're back to 52 or 53. Then one misadventure after the other, and the stock is sliding back down to 23, and then it slid down to 10 7 8. Well, at 23, the bankers got in and Signal took over, and they offered to pull in the 10 million shares still outstanding, and so I sold what I had left, which was about 45,000 shares, at 23. The earlier part of it, I sold it out at 102. So I mean I didn't get burnt altogether, but I got burnt. Did you get to Signal, though, before the banks usually all happened? Well, yeah, I knew what was happening. I was in an insider's position. No, I was like Baski. In fact, Baski asked me to join him in 1974. I'll tell you about that some other time. But at any rate, I got out, and I formed my own little company called MIP Sciences, and I worked for four years, Ruth, male, to make prosthetics. In Rochester? In Rochester, yeah. What had happened was that my man in chief of research had had a carcinoma, and they'd excavated a big hole in this side of his nose. So we came back from Mayo. He had a polyvinyl chloride cap to cover the hole until the plastic surgeons were going to do a skin flap. So when he came to my office, we're now on Oregon Street. I've now got 380,000 square feet of space in Coloride and Milwaukee and so on. And he's standing in the doorway there, and this side is dead. This side crinkles up a little. He can't use this because that cap is rigidizing every muscle in his face. So I said, what's the matter, Dan? Your heavier face is dead. Yeah, he says, it's a polyvinyl chloride cap. I said, well, you know, what would any self-respecting inventor do? We're dealing with the most tough gossamer material in polyethylene, polyurethanes. So I said, you go home and compound your stuff and make yourself a, not a polyvinyl chloride, you know, vinyl chloride is chlorine, and that's carcinogen. You keep that on long enough, yeah. And I said, and the water too, you're going to get cancer. I said, so make one. So about two months after that, he came back to my office, and I said, I'd forgotten about what we had talked about, but he stood there in the office and, you know, and Jesus, the guy, he'd gone, cuckoo. Well, he had made the, he had made the urethane thing. So he said, well, where do we go from here? Well, I said, why don't you come up with an idea? I've got you to a point where you've got this damn prosthetic on there. Well, I said, what we do, we go to Mayo. So up to Mayo we went, and they listened, and they said, well, we don't have the funds to fund further research on this so that we get the packet put together so that you send it out to all the, what do they call these guys that make your face look young again? The plastic surgeons. So I said, okay, I'll take care of that. Don't worry about that. I just want to work in concert with your research doctors inside here. So I did that, and we worked for a period of about three years, and I think I had spent around $400,000 on that program. You had the, put the staff together, then? Yeah, yeah. I had this fellow, Rosa, who was formerly head of research at Bostrom, and now I had MIP, Medical Industrial Polymer Sciences, MIP Sciences, I had that. And he was the head man, and he had taken a couple of the other guys from Bostrom. So we were working on prosthetics. The second thing we were working on was to make a flame-proof foam for installation in airplanes, railroad cars, and so on. Well, we were going along, and A, I went to the military hospitals where I saw guys without arms and legs and basket cases and all from the war. And I had a kit put together. I had a professional put a kit together so we could leave a kit with them, how to do it, how to do it, how to do it. Well, nothing happened. So I said, hey, what the hell is this? So I was back at Mayo again, and a kid had been in a car accident, and he slid along the concrete. And so when they had taken the bandages off, there was just a couple of strings here, the ear. Fourteen surgical interventions later, they had taken little skin flaps and so on and tried to rebuild the ear. Well, the ear had weaked away, so there was still just a couple of lumps. But the plastic surgeons had had 14 operations. They didn't give a shit about the cosmetics to the poor son of a bitch that had to endure it. Because what they could have done with me, all they do is to take off the flaps, leave the hole, we take a cast of this ear, and we made that out of polyurethane so that you could, because you've got a compound complex curves here, so that you pour the stuff in the ear, in the mold, turn it inside out, and you had a copy of the other ear. Did I hear a buzzer? No. Well, nothing was going, and I was getting sick of the whole situation of the medical profession. So I was working with General Draper on behalf of Planned Parenthood, and General Draper got the head of the Rockefeller Foundation, the Ford Foundation, and Mayo sent two doctors, and everybody was there except my living exhibit, Dan Rosa. He had to go to a wedding in Detroit, so I didn't have my exhibit there. Well, that peed me off no end, because here I had the most high-powered guys who I wanted to financially support me, because I had learned from my controller that I was losing $30,000 a month, and I just couldn't continue that way. So, at any rate, he wasn't there. So then I got back home. Now I feel more comfortable. And a guy called me from Minneapolis, and he had heard through the grapevine somewhere, Skolpovskan. Skolpovskan, not Skolpovskan. Any reference to beer is out. So then this guy called me from Minneapolis, and he said, Mr. Bostrom, I've heard about your work with Mayo, but the big tonnage is not in medicine, it's in movies. When we make up the three gorillas, for example, for, what's his name, do you remember that little skit? He said, the actors have to be under for eight hours. Now with yours, we just make a cast of the gorilla, and then we can put it on, and we can use this material in the movies. So I said, okay, you're in Minneapolis? Okay. When can you come to Milwaukee? I can come tomorrow. I said, Dan, tomorrow a guy's going to be here, which represents the big tonnage of the medical. I'm sick of the medical, because I see those plastic surgeons. They don't care about the patient. They care about 12 surgical indimensions, so let's forget about that. Well, he said, I can't be here tomorrow. I'm building a cottage up in Mercer. I said, you're building a cottage in Mercer? I said, yeah. When I was in Washington with those high-powered guys, you had to go to a wedding in Detroit. I said, you go to Mercer. Good day. Well, this guy came down, and I told him all I could tell him about the process and so on and so forth. He left, and that was that. Well, I then was totally sick of a man by the name of Dan Rosa. In the meantime, we had developed this fire-retardant foam, and we were making it for steel case and for a number of other office furniture manufacturers. I noticed that there was more doggone foam going out to the boxcars and the siding than was going to the customer. I asked Dan, hey, what's the situation here? Well, he says it's affected by humidity and so on and so forth. I said, okay, it's affected by humidity, is it? So then my controller came back in again and said, Harold, you can't continue this way. I said, okay, shut it down. I'm through, finished, kaput. So I closed it down, and it was quite a loss. I don't know what the hell. I had bought the Foxhead Brewing Company building in Waukesha, and I had all the big tanks and all of it controlled by electrical control, grams into the spout where the stuff mixed before it goes to the oven, all those installations. I let the whole damn thing go, and I sold it to a guy in Chicago for $35,000. I was disgusted with it. So that was the end of MIP Sciences. So, okay, you don't win them all, you don't lose them all. So I said, okay, to my wife, sell the Foxhead Brewing Company building. Well, in the meantime, inflation and so on, so I sold it for more than I paid for it, so there was no real estate loss. And that was the end of my active MIP Sciences. So then I kept coming back to that business of composites and weightlessness and energy saving and so on. So I got together with the two fellows who had bought, after this guy David Knaup had destroyed it, it took him seven years, he sold it to two men by the name of Ray Dietrich, who was the accountant that I had hired, and another fellow by the name of Whitey Harmon, who was the engineer. And he had sold it to these two guys. And so they're running it now for about five years. And they... Tell them to put it on a little louder, huh? That's an old favorite tune. Put it on a little louder. It's an old Scandinavian tune. Not enough to drive the people out, but just so we can hear it. So at any rate... We're trying to get the radio. Oh, you have to turn it up up there? You hear that thing going? This is my... They're on a strike up there. Oh, this is my... The two fellows, Dietrich and Harmon, they couldn't get along. One is an engineer, the other is an accountant. And they're not going anywhere in any real sense. So I see that the composite age is with us. And I want to see to it that you get a fact sheet, which I may not have with me, but I wish I will mail, and I'm just putting this down so that you know that you're going to get it. The fact sheet tells you what happened in terms of the fibers revolution, which is the end of the Iron Age, and how Amalga is going to work out in those dimensions. And I'm going to make hundreds of millions if I last another five years. I'm going to go on 79, so I don't have infinite life. But my mother's sister lived to be 102 in four months. And on her 100th birthday, we had a big birthday party, and I said, Holder, what have you got in mind for me, short-term, long-term? Well, she said, Forget about the long-term, but the short-term. All right, but what about the short-term? She said, I want you to live four months longer than I. I said, How long are you going to live? She said, That's my business. She lived to be 102 in four months. So if I'm going to fulfill her dictum to me, I've got to live to be 102 in eight months. That's a hell of a long... That'll be beyond the year 2000, for God's sake. Then the new revolution will come along. We're going to have some revolutions, all right. So at any rate, I said to Ray Dietrich, I've developed an active involvement with Les Aspen. Les Aspen is chairman of the military operations. So I went down to see Les. Les happened to have been born on a farm on Lake Beulah, which is only about four miles away from Booth Lake, which is where I sort of grew up, with Aunt Hulda and her husband. They had enough money so I could drive in their Maxwell and later on their Chrysler to go out to Booth Lake. And there I became what was known as the champion fisherman because we had big bluegills in those days. This goes back into the 20s. So Les Aspen is growing up on Lake Beulah. So he's an old personal friend of yours. That's right. So I went to visit him and I said, Les, you're complaining about the fact that the state of Wisconsin gets only 1.7% of the federal budget of what's being laid out by what I call cash per Schweinbergler and you want some more. Well, I said, I think it can be arranged because there are two sides to this edge and I don't like the military side at all. Nobody wants to die in a nuclear holocaust. And the way you're going at it, this is what's going to happen ultimately unless we can get some sense up here. But I said, I'll tell you another thing. Weightlessness is going to contribute to our independence from the boys in the Persian Gulf. Because take, for example, a gondola, it's called, a car, takes 100,000 pounds of low sulfur coal from the open pits of Wyoming to all the utilities of the nation to furnace, to fuel the furnaces to make electricity and then it goes back empty 62,000 pounds. So you've got 124,000 pounds to deliver 100,000 pounds of coal. Now we can make a gondola that will be 70% lighter than 62,000 pounds both on the outbound and inbound and you'll be out from in under the Persian Gulf. You will be self-sufficient within the nation and therefore they can't screw you up to $32 a barrel. But what is more important to me is that that will be conserved for petrochemicals, fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, which cannot be replaced except through the use of crude, which is the dead ferns and the dead dinosaurs from millions of years ago. So I said, I will see to it that we will quote, and I don't want any hanky-panky from Hercules and all the other guys who are the military industrial complex on the inside. If I come with something new and a price that's no bullshit, then I want that order. He said, Harold, you'll have all the support that this office can give you. So now I got two of my men today down in St. Louis at the big arsenal down there. I also called my old friend who is with the plant parent with me. She's the widow of Jim McDonald, McDonald Douglas. They got 29 plants. He died some years ago, and I wrote her and said, maybe you remember me. I was General William Draper who came to St. Louis to address you and your group of local plant parent-readers. I said, I am back in composites, and I want you to talk to your son Sandy, and I want an audience with him. We can bring some things. I said, you know, what I'm going to earn, I don't need more than what I've got, four or five pairs of shoes. As it goes over to plant parentage, it goes over to bringing a state of equilibrium between man and nature, because man is going to reproduce. When I was 27 years old, the population was 2 billion. Now, 50 years later, it's 5 billion. At the present rate of accumulation, geometrically, it's going to be 7.6 billion by the year 2000, which is only 13 years away. How the hell are you going to avoid war when there are that many more scrabbling over what is becoming less and less of? When I have kidnapping, you'll have all the damn stuff we've got, unless we control the user, the consumers, and accept the fact that life can be beautiful on a much less consumer's basis. So, he's out in California. I'm going to go see Sandy McDonald next week. I'm just filling in what I'm doing now, compiling.