 Well, we have 7th of April, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Mr. and Mrs. Burdett Kullberg in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 29th of April, 1923 in Rockford. Mrs. Kullberg was born 26th of September, 1923, also in Rockford. We start now with you, Mr. Kullberg, your parents. They came from Sweden. My father came from Sweden, from Nyrke. How old was he then when he left his home? I would say 15 or 16. He came alone? No, he came with somebody else. And his parents remained in Sweden? Yes, his parents. And he came from a family of 12 or 13, and I think most of them died in Sweden. There was about 4 or 5. Only one brother had come to Rockford before, his name was Oscar, Oscar Kullberg, and that's why Adolph came. He stayed with Oscar. Yes, that's right. So that's the only two of that family of, we say 12 or 13, there were so many that died when they were very young. Some at birth, some we found at the church yard, they were like 2 years, 3 years old. So there wasn't a very large family left, they died so young. So many of them didn't live, well some 23 we found and 33, but we found the one brother, Henning, his children were living. So Bredet, when we were in Sweden in 1983, we found, was it 6 or 8 cousins. And they put us up royally. Were they aware that you were here in the United States and that it were to somebody else? Yes, they were aware that we were here, but we had never seen them or no contact whatsoever. And so we called them when we were coming there and surprised them. Oh you didn't write? Oh yes. You surprised them? Oh yes. You didn't call? So you had the addresses to them? Yes, we had the address to write to them. And they were Svenevad and Nerke? And Nerke, yeah. So your father, the ticket was probably sent from his older brother in Rockford. Evidently it was, that I wouldn't have any idea. And your grandpa, what kind of work was he doing, a farmer? You mean Sweden? Yes. The whole family was blacksmiths in Svenevad. They had a blacksmith shop and it's still there. It's not operating, but it's still there. And then they went into bicycles when that became popular. So your uncles, they were also in the same? Right, they were all in the same little group. It was a small settlement there. And my, what would I call him? I call him Uncle Gus, but he's really my cousin. And he was a blacksmith here in Rockford. And the blacksmith shop was called, if I can remember the name of the blacksmith shop, which he was the only blacksmith in town. Gypstrom was his name. And he was also a musician. He played clarinet very well. And our whole family in Sweden are all musicians. And so we're a group of musicians. So that's from your father's side then? That's from my father's side. And that's how we became to be musicians, because we get together every week with the whole family here in Rockford and play. I see. So your father, what kind of instrument? He played clarinet also. And my Uncle Oscar, which was my dad's brother, he was a violin and trumpet player. And he had a daughter that was an organist for a church. Her name was Lufthansa, Martha Lufthansa, for many years. And she was very, very good. And she was married to Leslie Lufthansa, which was a singer and an educator, which was very, he was very good. High school. Pardon? He was a principal of all schools here. High school, yeah. Here in Rockford. In Rockford. He died very young. He had a heart attack. Yes, he was a tremendous educator. So your father, he had a natural talent. He was 15 when he came. Yes. So he was trained by his brother in Sweden. So he was interested in music. And when he came here, he was a tulle and dye maker. And he worked in Rockford. And when he came, I think they must have helped each other out when they came, because it must have been very hard when he came over from Sweden. So he came here around 1905, 1906? In that area, right. He come over on the Kungsholm. I remember him telling me that. Oh, I see. But you must tell Mr. Sutterdahl that your father died when you were 13 years old. Yeah, so I don't have too much recollection of things. Was it an accident then? No, he had something with his heart. And I think if it was in today's medical situations, he would have come through it. But at that time, they didn't know what to do. So that's why it isn't so clear to him exactly. He didn't have all the stories from Sweden and that. How about your uncle now? Did he live on then so you could be together? That would be my cousin. I call him my uncle. Here in Rockford. Oh, Oscar. Oscar. Oscar lived maybe about three, four more years than Adolph, didn't he? Because he got to be 63. But he, I would say about maybe three to five years more than my dad. Because I can't remember it. I was too young. But my uncle, or my cousin Gust, which I call my uncle, he lived to be 80 some years old. And when I was over in Sweden, I saw his sister. And that would be in what little town would that be? Do you remember? I'll tell the name of it. Out of Svendavod, about maybe 20 miles on a lake. And when she saw me, she just went crazy because she thought I was Adolph. Oh, I see. Could you see any resemblance in your cousins now? Oh, yes. They were. They were all tall and thin. No obese people at all. No, very tall, thin. So that's a family. Yeah, that was a family trait evidently. Evidently heritage because one of the cousins looked just like one of Oscar's daughters. And one of the men looked just like one of Oscar's sons. Now I have a cousin, which would be Oscar's daughter, is living in California, which is married to a college professor, which is retired now, which is Irving Alquist. And the other brother to her has got Alzheimer's disease, and so has his wife. But they were kind musicians also. And see, there was a brother to her, to Ruthie, that passed away at 55. He was a clarinet player. He was a clarinet player. So it's all in the family, the music. And there was an Edith, which she had no musical talent at all. But then there was Martha, which was the organist I'm telling you about. Perhaps she had it, but it wasn't brought out. Yeah, right. What did they ask you about now? Did they know about your father's ability to play and musician, also over here in Rockford now? Yeah, because- How much did they know about your- We all got together every Saturday night. No, no. Here, but I mean in Sweden, when you visit Sweden now. Oh. How much did they know about your- They didn't know that much about him. They didn't know- Because you see, he left when he was a young boy. And he didn't apparently write too often home then because he was too young when he left. As I find that all Swedes never wrote home. I mean, do you find that true? Yes, it's very seldom. That they just stopped. So they happened to your family then? Yes. There was no- So they didn't know too much then? No. Nothing happened at all. So they had a lot of questions. Yes. Very interested to know what was happening. And then they told you about the first years in Sweden for your father, of course, when he- Well, the only one who was knowledgeable about that was Regner, wasn't it? Yes, he had a bachelor cousin who lived in the old homestead. We saw the home. We saw the bedroom where all the children were born. We saw the complete home the way it was, and he's kept it up the same. The old cupboard said, oh, what was it? It must have been 1720 on that, and he liked genealogy. So he made us up a whole list of all the children, and that's how we know exactly how each one died at what age, so we know how young they were. So he remembered your father-in-law. Oh, yes. Yes. And on the wall, they had all types of things they had made in the blacksmith shop going up the stairs, and they took this long, long poker for a fire and handed it to us and said, we've been waiting for you to come to Sweden. So we took it. Because he had made it. He had made it. Your father's made it. That was interesting. Your father never told you what he had made? No. No. No. Because I wasn't old enough for him to really tell me. I see. He didn't ask any questions either. No. No. And apparently when they came from Sweden back then, they came to America. They kind of closed the door behind them. Yeah. It's funny how they did that. It's strange. So it was a brand new world for you when I went to America. Yes, it was. Oh, my. So now you have established a contact. Right. Oh, yes. Right. Were they able to understand you now? I mean, you speak pretty good Swedish. Yeah, I could speak Swedish. Because the older ones couldn't understand or speak English. No. The children of his cousins, there were two boys that could speak English, and we could talk between the children and then the parents. But you both understand pretty good Swedish. Yes. Yeah, right. You are not. Fairly well. Because they don't talk too fast. I suppose that's it. You get the kids, you get the cousins. And the thing was, one of my cousin's boys was a medical student at that time. And our son is a doctor, you know. So and he was with us. He's the one that brought us over there because he had a conference in Stockholm. In Stockholm. And that's how we got over there. And then the other cousin's boy was about the same age, so they got along very well. With our son. And he was over here last. Last summer. Last summer we had him for five weeks. Anders Kullberg came for five weeks. So and he worked for an electric company or something, I think. And they were the same name in Sweden, Kullberg. Yes. Exactly. It started out with Johnson. And then I think my great-great-grandfather changed it to. There were too many. They were living on a hill or something, so he changed it to Kullberg. Which means. Yeah, that's correct. A little know. A little know, yeah. So let's see, what else can we tell you? His name was Kullberg when he came here. Yes. No, it would have been his great-grandfather that changed it. Yeah, right. They changed it over in Sweden. So did he tell you anything about Ellis Island when he came through there? No, that he didn't. The only thing he was telling me about when we used to have breakfast in bed was how he come over on the ship and how it was. I guess he didn't get sick, but a lot of people got sick. It took about seven days or something like that to come over. That's about the only thing I can remember. And your mother, now, they met here in Rockford, then? Yes. And her parents. Because she was living next door to. Oscar. Oscar. And he was staying with Oscar. And something happened with my mother's husband. So then they got together. And how much older was he than she? 20 years? No, not quite that much. 15? No. She had had a divorce with her, you know, with his stepbrother. Yes. So, no, there probably was about 17 years difference in age. She was much younger. So they married, and they came from where in Rock? I mean, in Sweden, your mother's parents. Småland. So you didn't visit there? No. I didn't know anybody because they'd been gone so long that I. So your mother, did she live longer, though? Yes, she lived to be 84. She could not tell you anything about the background then? No, not really. She was. And your grandparents, were they dead when you were growing up? Yes, they died when I was growing up. We were young. Yes. So you never had. Your grandparents, your granny was 80. Yes. They wouldn't call that very young. No, but did you associate with them? We knew them. Oh, sure. They lived with them. Yes. So you didn't go back from then? But you didn't ask any questions at that time? No. Where they came from or anything? No. Sweden was just far away. That's right. Careless. How did you realize now that you were a Swede? In high school or grammar school or? Well, I couldn't talk English when I went to school. I started school. When he started school, he could not speak English. You spoke Swedish then? Only Swedish. Oh. Yeah, because my dad spoke Swedish at home. Yeah, but he was so young when he came, though. He still kept the Swedish. Well, yeah, but he got to be, before he got married, was what, 25? Oh, you see, he didn't marry right away when he came from Sweden. No. No. He lived with Oscar. But no, he evidently, I never met his father, you see. He died when he was 13. I did not know him that young. So I do not know his father at all. So you see, he must have been 25, 30. When he married. Yeah, when he married, see. But he kept Swedish then with your mother. Yeah. Back in Borås, Brokosvenska. Yeah. And then your mother was living with her parents. And she could speak Swedish. But how about your grandmother? She could speak Swedish. Oh, but no. But they spoke English in their house. They did? Yes, but not in ours. We spoke only Swedish. Oh, I see. Did you go to a Swedish church then? Well, my mother was baptized and confirmed in the Zion Church, which was to be Swedish. It was Swedish at that time. Did you go to Sunday school there then? No, I went to another one. And I went to an English one then when I was born. That was the First Free Church. First Free. And then Swedish too. Oh, but they also had Swedish too. Oh, sure. Oh, yes. Up until recently. Servants, yeah. Right. And singing. Mm-hmm. So you became interested in clarinet or flute? Flute. I'm a flutist. I was solo flutist with the Rockford Symphony for 43 years. Why did you pick the instrument? Your father played clarinet? Because my father said he sat in Sminnevard and heard someone playing the flute up in the hills, and he enjoyed it so much. And so that's what I took. And I thought, well, let's, you know, at that time. And it sounded all right with you? It sounded all right with me. And I fell in love with it. Were you able to play then when you were 13 so he could listen to you? Yes. In fact, I played for him when he was on his deathbed. He wanted me to. And I had won the state contest in Illinois, and he had promised me a new piccolo if I would win. So I won. You were in school then? Yes, I was. High school. Right, in junior high school. And the day that he was buried, my new piccolo came. So it was significant in that effect. So you never had the time to play for him? Afterwards, no. But when he got this attack, I had played a solo at one of the schools, and when I got to this place where he was at, at the party, he asked me how it went, and I said, fine. And right after that, he just collapsed. So that's where I remember him. So you had no trouble then with musical renditions? There sounds like you were a pro then in it. In other words, you went in more in high school? I've been professional. Oh yes, yes. So did you take lessons then after high school? Well, I studied professionally. Here in Rockford or? Chicago. Chicago. Yeah. And then I was with the Navy band. I took a Navy band overseas. I've been music the whole time. Oh, I see. His tour of service with World War II was the director of a 34-piece band. Oh, you were the director? Yeah. Band in Hawaii. Yeah. Oh, you had doctorate music then? In other words, you went through the whole? Well, I wasn't a doctor of music, no, because I'd never been to college. Went up to the top, yeah. And I would carry shows and stuff like that overseas during World War II. So that's pretty good then for Svendelborg. For Svendelborg, yeah. And you took lessons to the flute. That's remarkable. Well, at one time when Lily Pons, I think everybody knows Lily Pons in Europe, he accompanied Lily Pons when she came to Rockford with the symphony. Oh, I see. He accompanied her, yes. So you had to have some practice sessions then with her to qualify? She was French, you know. And yeah, she only spoke French. But you had no trouble to speak the same language? Music-wise, you do the same thing. She was married to Andra Konstantopoulos at that time. So and then you played with the orchestra here in? In Rockford. In Rockford. For how many years? 43. 43 years? 43 years, yeah. And did you have your own teaching? I teach. Private or? I teach here. With the school? No, I teach at home here. Oh, I see. For students. For students, yeah. Right. So did they know about that in Sweden, all your cousins? They had no idea about the? Not really, no. The custom of the orchestra was? No, no. I didn't take my instrument with either. You didn't? No. But there was, how many there at the dinner? I think there were 22. They all sang for one half hour in Swedish to us. Is that right? Yeah, because they knew we were musicians. It was a choir. It was a choir. It was a choir. They used to get together as a whole family, but now they kind of? Were they religious, now, the people in Sweden? Not really. No. Not really. No. No, we did not find that. No, they do not attend church. The church is just the state church, and it's very cold. And they didn't belong to any free church? No. No, no. Baptist or? No. Or Pentecostal or Philadelphia? No. Do you find that over there very much? Well, they had a different, around Örebrod, there was a foothold of free church movement. Oh, was it? You know, with Frank Manx, he was like a free church. Yes, I remember that name. Frank Manx. Yeah. Because his books were sold over here. Well, his, her family, she had a preacher, so she can tell you a little bit about that. And let's see, I forget where it was at, but she'll tell you. And that'd be kind of interesting. So you had a good time then? Oh, boy. I'll tell you, that was fun. I don't know if that was fun again or not, but Ö It was unexpected, in other words. Right. And, well, he had that conference over there, my son, and so Ö How did you know now, the Svendevod? I mean, how did you get that Ö Well, I've always known Svendevod. Yeah, but it was through Ruth, this lady out in California. She visited, oh, I don't know if it was eight or ten years previous. It was that much difference in time, and she had made the contact first. And she was a cousin of Ö So she knew Ö Yes. ÖOscar's daughter. Oscar's daughter Ö My dad's brother. Ölives out in California, and she had made the contact, so she had the addresses. So we wrote to a bunch of them, but then we just heard from this one, whose son was studying to be a doctor, and invited us to come and stay with them if we wanted to. And then, how was it? Did he tell us all the names? No. Possibly he did. I can't remember, but we got it through Ruth, and she was a Colbert. Ruth Colbert Alquist. So that's how Ö Otherwise, we would not have known to have written over there, no. It would have been impossible. No, it would have been impossible. Then the funny thing was, when we got to Sweden, and we drove from Ö We got a car in Copenhagen, and we went across to Ö Well, of course, then on the way Ö See, I have relatives. My daughter-in-law has relatives. We had people all over. We had to visit. In one week, we did all this terrible Ö One, or it was because of your son's conference, then? Yes. He had a conference. We were in the city hall. We had a beautiful buffet in the city hall. Stadshuset. Stadshuset, yeah. Yeah, yeah, didn't we? And we were there four days, so we had to do all this. So that's why we started out in Helsingborg. That's where we started. And two daughters of my mother's cousin, and my mother's cousin was a predicate. I see. This is where I was going to tell you that Ö Oh, yes. Where did that come from, though, in Sweden? Do you want to turn it on, or you've got it on? Yeah, about your parents, though. They came from Sweden, both of them. No, both of my parents were born in Rockford, Illinois. Larsson. Yes, and my mother's name was Carlson, but both of their parents were born in Sweden. So my Ö And your father's name, though, his name was Ö Clarence. Clarence Larsson. Larsson. Clarence Larsson. Clarence Gust Larsson. And my mother was Ruth Elizabeth Carlson. Ruth Ö My grandfather had one brother still living in Sweden, and I know they were born in Vistieland. I'm not sure exactly what town, because now that brother has Ö Let's see now. That brother had Ö Einer Carlson was the preacher. Einer had four children. One son is in the office equipment business in Vistieland. We visited him. Two daughters live in Helsingborg. Britta Ö and I can't remember the other one right now Ö and one was a missionary, one works in a bank. The missionary Ö And you had a connection with those names. Yes, oh yes. I wrote Ö To your parents then. Oh yes. My mother has written to them for years and years. Every Christmas we correspond. That's gone on, and my mother wrote in Swedish to them too. And her cousin, the preacher, came over here two times to America and stayed in our home. He was Ö Was he with the Free Religious Movement? He was with the Philadelphia Ö Philadelphia, Pentecostal. Philadelphia. And he had a church in Kalmar, for a long time in Kalmar, but then he was transferred to Helsingborg. So I did see the home where he used to live, but now the two daughters live in Radhus, and they had just moved in there. Let's see, what else was I going to say about them? Oh and then the son in Viglanda, he goes to a Philadelphia church too, that we were in and saw that church. And I do not know that there were anyone else, I think all the rest of my grandfather's family came to America, but it was just this one brother, and that's his family that's left over there. And then my daughter-in-law, her name was Gloria Nelson, and she had, both sides of her family we found people. Her father had a cousin over in LaHomme, which we went to after Helsingborg. And from Helsingborg to LaHomme to Viglanda, and then from Viglanda it was over on the coast, her grandmother Miller had relatives over there. So you see we had both sides, and then from there we headed right for Svenevod, and then to Våderbro and Stockholm. That was a hectic week. Yes. Very hectic week. So how could you sort all this out now after you took a few weeks? Oh I must say too, when I wrote to the two, second, third, whatever cousins that would be, they sent me maps, and outlined exactly how to find their houses and everything, and a map of Sweden, how to get to all the glass works and everything, but we had like ten minutes, you know, at one glass place. Kosta I think it was, yeah, so it was just too fast. So you have to go back a second time too. Yes, oh yes, we have to go back. We have to wait for our granddaughter to get a little bigger now. She was not born when we went in 83, so now she's just two. So your son now, he is a doctor in Rockford? In Rockford, yes. At the Swedish American? Right. Yes. He's back in Rockford. He's a lung specialist. Oh I see. And his name is Frederick Clarence. It's taken from his two grandfathers. So he went, how about you, you both went to college down there, I mean high school? Oh yes. Did you continue on to college? She went to college. I went to Rockford College, but I did not get a degree. It was only for girls at that time? Only female seminary, right. And there were students from all over the United States that were coming in? Oh yes, all over coming in. How many were actually from Rockford, do you remember that? Well I don't remember exactly, let's see, I would have been the class of 46 is what I would have been. And oh there were lots from Wisconsin around. There weren't many that were from very long distances, the greater portion I'd say was Rockford at that time. At that time. We lived at home, you know, we didn't live on campus. At that time it was not unusual to send a girl to college, but in the 20s it was unusual to send a girl to college, wasn't it? For the well to do to do. I think so. Although in the 40s it was kind of rare. It was coming in. It was coming in. Oh yes, but it wasn't as necessary as now, I mean you need a degree now. Yes, definitely. But at that time there were the boys. Yes. Who were favored. Right. Some problems here. Is that right? We went to Upsilla because we had a meeting up there in Upsilla. Oh yes, that was on the agenda for him to go to a conference, but we also found that his cousin's daughter was married to a priest. Oh yeah, that was interesting. Fourth generation priest and he worked right there in Upsilla at the university, or the church. The church. You mean the Lutheran church? Oh, the big church in Upsilla. State church. Oh yes, the huge church. So yeah, we met them there. She worked in Stockholm, so she took the train in every day. She was in education also, but I think he wasn't preaching. He was just working, I suppose, church records in that. But it was very interesting because it was the fourth generation. Yeah, a priest. Olof Bexell. Bexell. Was his name. Olof Bexell. Bexell, yeah. And he had a big picture of his great-grandfather on the wall. So he was in the family. In the apartment. Oh yes, fourth generation. They don't go to church much in Sweden, do they? Oh, you noticed that. Did you discuss that with the Swedes? Did you ask them about the... We went to look on Sunday when we were in Senebad, and I think there were 12 people in that whole big church. It was easy to take the poll then. Yeah. It was very easy to take the poll. Did you ask, did they explain to you why the reason? No, we never got that intimate with them really. It was difficult. We were there for such a short time. To translate. Right. Yeah, the translation was difficult. That would take so much time. Do you have an explanation for that or not? Well they say that they've been for so many generations in the family, and they go to church. And now they are great on nature. In other words, they want every spare time they can get to be in the south and out in the woods. Oh yeah. And they feel, us Swedes feel, that spending it in the church is unnecessary. They can rather be out in the woods, you know. And what they say, lap asul. They get a sun tan. Lap, lap up the sun, yeah right. Well I think the church has to go out in the land. Well they do now. They go out in the nature. Oh do they? And the young people are interested in it. The generation growing up in the 20s and 30s are not that interested for some reason. That's interesting. Well there are different explanations, but I agree with you. There are not too many in the church. Because when we went to Uppsala, there was a woman preacher that was preaching. In one sector of that church. And nobody was in the church. But they had to preach. I understand. That's what they said. They had to feed. They had to, yeah. Feed the women. And nobody was there. That was funny. Was it in Uppsala? Uppsala. Yes, in Uppsala. In that big church. Huge. Yeah, the domkyrkan. Yeah. So it was just one little area that she had. Yeah, but there must have been someone there also. No, well there was people walking around. But nobody was sitting. Nobody was sitting. No, no. And she was preaching. Oh. Pre-practice. Yeah, we'll rule with that. Okay. She went to work at National Lock. But in the meantime, when I was, well I was only 13, I remember the landlord coming saying that we couldn't stay there any longer because we couldn't afford to pay the rent. You rented an apartment at the time? Yes, it was a, well it was a, not an apartment, but it was a, what would you call it, a flat. A flat. Well, a flat. Yeah. And so we had to move out. So we moved down with my grandmother. So there was no pardon or no understanding from the? No, it was cold. And he was a religious man too. Was he a Swede? Yeah. All strands. But he, I think he was scared to get his money. But then my mother went to work at National Lock and I, when I got to be 16, I quit. That's why I didn't go to college. Because we couldn't. You had to help out too. I had to help out. For survival. Right. And so then, and I studied music in Chicago and traveled back and forth. And I got a job because I got a. You commuted with the train then? Either train or car. Yes. And it was, what was I going to say? Oh, I got a job playing. I got work by playing for some picnic. I told the employment manager that if he would give me a job, I would play the job. It was for a Pied Piper. I don't know if you know what that means or not, but a Pied Piper, he plays the flute and all the kids follow along. Yes, yes. Pied Piper. Sure. Okay. Hamlin. And so I asked him if he would give me a job, if I would do that. He says he would. And I was underage at that time because they weren't supposed to hire until 17 or something like that. But he got me in. So I stayed there and studied at the same time. And I took a correspondence course in engineering. So I was an engineer. And so we made it. We finally. And then I left that to go in business with her dad because he was getting older. What kind of business was that? That wasn't a wholesale meat business. Well, no, it was retail. You better insert here. World War II came along. Oh, yes. All right. World War II came and you were in the service for two years. Then when he returned back, he went back to Greenleys and worked for some while on the drafting board. But then my father asked if he wouldn't like to join him. My father had the meat market, the old fashioned meat market. On the 7th or Broadway? On Broadway. Next door where you saw it. Oh, you mean Kelly's? Yes. Kelly. Kelly was my father's nickname. Kelly is a nickname for Clarence. Oh, I see. Yes. So he started. 46. My father started, well, no, I'm trying to tell him that like 1918, my father started in business. It's many, many years. Not that that market was exactly there, but he started as what? All Strands. There were different markets around. I think he started his own business around 1918. I tried to ask my mother once and she thought perhaps it was in that time because he was very, very young too. So all these years, but then he wanted Burdett to join him. So it was about in 1947, between 1946 and 1947 that he came and joined him in business. How did they fit in though? I mean, here you were a musician and engineer and everything and then going to the meat market. And that never cut my fingers. And he has never. So you had to learn from the beginning then from your father. Right. How did it work out? Very good. Yeah. He was a piece of a guy. You learned a trade then from him. I learned a trade from him. And then I had a bachelor uncle. He had had asthma so bad from youth. So he died very young, 52 years old, he died. And he was the bookkeeper and he taught me the books. So that's how I'm the bookkeeper. So the whole family. So then we had a butcher die when we went to Germany that year. We went on the Rhine River cruise in 1972 in May. When we arrived home in June, the man that worked for us, my father was not living at this time either. He died in 1960 very suddenly of a heart attack. But this gentleman passed away in June and it was at that time we made the decision to close our little grocery meat store and go into the Scandinavian, complete Scandinavian store and wholesale meats. We had owned all those buildings so we sold them. Then we wanted to rent just a bakery where Skogsborg had worked. But it was close by. It was right next door. That's where we were in, where you came in. It's next door right now. That was the bakery. Yeah. We were next door to that before. So this meat market, was that what you can call a Swedish meat market? Oh yeah. Oh yeah, it would be a Swedish because we had shelters at that at Christmas time. Curve and everything. Curve, yeah. They made it all. Yeah, we made it all. But then we wanted to try it. We tried it for a year in the old place to see if people would like it. And everybody seemed to like it. So then we decided to move next door and go fully Swedish with gifts and only open up at Christmas time. With the meat and food. With the meat and food and the gifts. Have you noticed over the years then, is there less interest now for that Swedish kind of food? Well, we always thought it would drop off every year and every year it gets better. I don't know if it's for the reason that there's nobody left. So the third and the fourth generation are getting back into it then? Yes. Right. It's really, I guess the people that really want to go back to the ethnic things. Yes, we find every Christmas that there's somebody that comes in that says, I want to do a real Swedish dinner. Would you help me? So you sell lutefish too then? Oh yeah. Right. Lutefish gets the biggest drop of everything. It's going down. Siltas. It is going down. Yeah, that's going down. But siltas is going up. Because they used to make their own siltas at home, you know. We used to sell them meat for the siltas. Now they want it all set because we make a very good silta and the people love it. And it's veal and fresh silta. And so they trust us now and now they come in and buy it by the big slabs, you know. Well, they come in and they say, well, my mother or my grandmother used to make it. Make it just like that. Oh, and I can't, you know, I don't know how to make it. So for every grandmother that drops off, then you've got new customers. Right. They don't trust themselves. And the grandmothers get too old to do it, you know, and things like that. Yeah, they're gone now. So it is. But we were just discussing this a while ago what to do because it gets bigger every year. But one of these years it's going to fall off, we feel. Because when it goes on generation to generation, the younger kids don't like it. But it's the people in the age of 50s, 60s, and 70s. That's our biggest. And they're not able to do it themselves. No, they probably aren't. And they've got the money now to spend whatever they want to. And they spend big money on it. Oh, and we must insert here that we have done this ethnic Christmas store since 1973. And we have not yet to have had a check bounce. Is that right? Not one. So they are good customers. Oh, yeah. Wonderful. The Scandinavian people are fabulous. They want to give us all sort of credentials and everything. And I said, don't worry, you're here and you're Scandinavian. I said, you're trusted. And we have never yet. Are there only Scandinavians? Or do you get any Irish or Germans, Lithuanians? Oh, a few come in. A few come in. Oh, yes. You have a few. They are married in the Middle East. Oh, yes. Oh, you find so many. You find a lot of Italians are married to Swedes that like the Swedish things. And so we find a lot of that. And they're just fabulous people. How about the sausage now? Do you mix potatoes in it or do you have some? We use potato flour. Oh, flour. Yeah. It's too hard for us commercially to make it with potatoes. I see. So they want to keep or it's hard to handle? Well, it's just hard to handle when you're putting on production. It gets dark. Well, it gets dark. But there's a way to cover that too. And it's dark. You have problems with that. Yeah. And so it... So the flour will keep then? Sure. And you are producing for wholesale now then? Wholesale and retail. Oh, yes. Right. And you do that all year round? Yeah, that we do year round. Right. So... But then in November, you open up retail? At the end of October, we open up for the retail store. So we have November and December full months. And then until February? No, no, just into January. Oh, I see. Maybe 10 days or something like that. Because then the weather usually in Rockford, we get big storms. We didn't this year, but usually it gets so bad. And the people have had so much for Christmas. They've eaten so much that... It stops just like that. It stops. I see. So they won't go out then? No. No. Well, we found this when we had the old market with the little groceries, you know, grocerette. And then it dropped off in January so badly. So we know that. That they've spent all their money and they're not going to buy any more. It'd be few coming, but it wouldn't be worth it. So then we don't. So that's... you have tested the water then? Oh yes, we have. There's some revival coming along. Yeah, right. So what, Lew Tiske now, is that dropping off? That is dropping off. So that you have to be used to when you are growing up, I suppose, or... Yes. I would say. You both eat Lew Tiske? Yes. And your son just goes crazy for it. Some do. Oh, he loves it. And the little granddaughter too. She ate it this last Christmas. So it's a matter of bringing people up in it. It's too late when they are 10, 15. That's right. It's too late. And it's the way you fix it too, you know. Yeah. Preparation. But we have found that a lot of people like this cooking pouch now that comes over. It's all... or do they pouch it here? I guess they do. Yeah, I think so. They have it all pouched in a plastic bag. And it's frozen. So you don't prepare it yourself then? No. That's done in Minneapolis or Chicago? It's all looted. It's all looted there. Even Duluth does some looting. Yeah, right. Duluth does too. So it's all looted. We just keep changing the water to keep it fresh. Do you remember in the 30s that the stores have the dry fish? Oh, yes. Do you remember that? Yes. They still had that at that time. They had it. Well, it could have been up to the 40s even. Up to the 40s. But, you know, they always talked about the dogs coming by. But that's only stories, really. They don't have that. They don't have that. They don't have that. They don't have that. They don't have that. They don't have that. But it probably could have happened. Oh, it could have happened one time or something because you'd have it standing outside. But that was... You hear that from everybody that comes in, don't you? They tell that story. We tried to buy a dried up board just to have for flavor in the store. You can't even buy it. You can't buy it now. No, we can't even buy a dried board. So that's a... It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It pays off. It's past era. It's past era. That's right. Do you like Ludwig Fisk? Oh, yes. Do you? Do you have quite a bit? Well, only for Christmas. So we only eat it at Christmas in Sweden. Ah, yeah. Ah, yeah. We never had it before. Thanksgiving? Maybe around the 6th, or the... No, no, no. Not there early. You never start before Christmas Eve. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. There's a tradition, see? Oh, I remember my mother telling when she grew up, here in America, though. Christmas Eve was when you opened up the door and saw the Christmas tree, not like we do here. No, I would say they're a bit changing because of the commercialism. Sure. But then we could have it at New Year's Eve, for instance, or New Year's Day, we could have Lutvisko. Oh yeah. But not usually after. Because a lot of people say that, you know, if you like it so well, why don't you have it more often? But they just like, you know, you just don't do it. I mean, yeah, well, that's what we find. It's just the same with Siltas. They have it, boy, they'll go like crazy before Christmas and the day after Christmas. Well, after New Year's, I should say. It's all through. So you better sell it for Christmas and New Year's or you're going to be stuck with it. So we've learned our lesson on that one. So you work full time then? You hire people then over the Christmas season? Yes. Well, we have we have a crew that works up at the other place, you know, to do the cooking. And I'm just on Broadway. And the wholesale meat. So he and I are on Broadway. I can't remember, did you stop in and you heard our music going? Yeah. So he and I try to be there all the time so that when anybody comes in, it's the familiar face. You don't leave it to some help that you hire that doesn't even know Swedish. And I try to talk Swedish to them when they come in the door. And if they don't answer or know something, then I know they're not Swedish. But then there's a lot of people that enjoy that. That's right. And how about today? Do they answer you? If they're in Sweden, they'll try and answer some way. And they enjoy that sort of thing. But many of the old timers have dropped off. They've kind of gone. Oh, yes. Yeah. There's not too. But we have a lot of quite a few of people from Sweden here with a Swedish company we have out here. Central Manufacturing Company. Have you interviewed any of those people? No. Central Manufacturing. Central. Central Manufacturing. Where are they located? In Hersnam, I think, or in that area out there by the post office. Oh, there, Morgottshammar, you mean? Yeah. Oh, yeah. But they call it. They used to be central. Oh, is it all Morgottshammar? Yeah, there's a big sign there, Morgottshammar. Oh, well, it starts out. Oh, there's the same one. Yes. And most of those people come down. And they like to speak Swedish because most of them can't speak English. So they are here for a longer time or? I think they stay for two years, don't they? It can be three. Two to three years. In a couple of terms. Now we're taking a new crew then. Yes. We met some very nice people. We haven't had so many young families lately, but about maybe eight, nine years ago, we had young families and the little children, when they came in with them, heard the music and they would sing it. And oh, my, the customers could see them singing and hear them and they'd be dancing with the music. And that was wonderful. But now we haven't had. So they miss Sweden. And they were coming home to Broadway then. Right. So they liked that sort of thing. And they were good buyers. They were good buyers. So that's you are keeping the traditions going. Yes. We're trying to keep it. Our son wants to keep it going. I don't know. So he is interested in the background. Very much so. He wants to. He's thinking of where we're trying to figure out a way to do it so that he can keep it going. Because, I mean, in medicine, he's going to have to retire, you know, when he gets older. But he's not the old. Oh, no, he's only 30. He's 36. But he sees a potential in it and he sees the enjoyment in it. And he likes it so much that he would like to because we're getting older and we're about ready to, you know, throw in the. Not quite yet. No, he likes it. And I don't know, you know, who's going to carry on. Well, there's a time to start in the right. The guidance is there. Right. Oh, yeah. Right. The guidance is there. And it's just a matter of how to figure it out, how to do it, because I think there's a potential for it yet for a few years. Yes, because it seems to me if some non-Swedes start something like a bakery, where is some of the flavor is lost because there is something missing that the Swedes will notice after a while. You see. Yeah, that's right. And boy, the minute the Swede don't like something, he never going back. They are stubborn people, which I am one of. They're honest. And so you never had the check you bounced on the one good customer. Isn't that something? Isn't it wonderful? Because almost every store has some. When we had the other market in the group, we just had them all the time. And we have never had a bad check. And the people can't figure out why we don't take their name or address or anything. This is if you're Scandinavian. We don't want it. We found it out. That's how many years? Seventy two. Seventy three. Seventy three. Eighty three is twenty fifteen years. About fourteen, fifteen. And in that time, we have found out that the Scandinavians are pretty nice people. Good credit rating. Wonderful people. That's a good statement. Yeah, right. It is. Interesting. How about the churches now? Are they playing a role in keeping the Swedish tradition? Well, yes, I think the Lutheran churches are, but we're finding that the older people are getting tired. They're older now. So First Lutheran and I think it's Zion also that are only doing the Lucia every other year. And we find the Lutheran churches are keeping up the Swedish tradition more than any others. They're the ones that are doing it. But now the younger crowd, I don't know if they're working and can't help or what, but they're not continuing it. So that's what we find from those people coming into the store. They come in after their Lucia and they say, well, we're not going to do it next year. We can't do it every year because we don't have enough help anymore. So that's what. How about the Salvation Army? Do they have any Swedish programs? They do. But they have a Lucia. Oh, yes, we go there every year. They have a Lucia and they have a coffee after and they have the children of the church. They go down the line taking turns being the queen, you know. But the pastor down this Salvation Army is Spanish, isn't he? Well, that matters not what the pastor is because that matters not. But no, they can't continue that every year. Yeah, the Salvation Army does. Right. But that's at night on a Saturday night. It always is. But the others at the Lutheran churches are Saturday morning and they're through by noon, I believe. And I don't know what the Erlander home, they do something. They usually have it in the church, though. In Tabor. Tabor church. Well, Carlson. Yeah, he's a hard worker. Oh, my, he's a worker. So how about the Free Church and the Covenant? Are they like the hymnals they are singing now? Do they go back sometimes to the, or is it all Americanized? All Americanized. All Americanized now. Both of those churches. They're so spread out now. That the people that are coming, you wouldn't even realize that it was a Swedish background from the names. Oh, they're too large. Have you been out to the Free Church here? Yes, we have. You've been out there? Yeah, it's just enormous. Is that a big one? Yeah, it certainly is. But you find that there's too much mixture now. So they're not just Swedish. But they don't have to fall back down to the Swedish traditions to keep people. No. New members in old times. Right. So you wouldn't know it had a Swedish tradition unless you saw the archives. Yeah, my grandfather is one of the back, I think, early founders. Oh, the Free Church. Free Church, yeah. Are the Swedes come over so much in, like my dad came over? Was it poverty? Well, during that time, if we came before 1905, 1906 and up to 1909, for instance, there was a big strike. A strike? A big general strike in Sweden in 1909. And the years before, you know, it was very, very unrest in the workplace. And so they came over in droves. They had. And especially from the area, of course, with the iron ore manufacturing. They were hard hit. They were. Yeah. So there was nothing to do. They were starving. The whole country was locked out, you know, everything. And they were some of the workers for the socialistic movement at that time. I see. And that's what took over than a socialistic movement. Yeah. What was it before that? Well, there was the management, you know, rule the whole thing. In other words, they had the voting rights, you know, in the blocks. And I see the worker. He had nothing. And that's right. They were really so. And so are the resentment, you know, for some of the working class to go to church, for instance, because they felt that the ministers went with the management. I see. So a lot of those people turn into the temperance movements. Yes. And the socialists were together. And they were also there in Rockford. Well, they had a temperance. Well, Skogsberg was with the temperance, wasn't he? Yes. Or is he still with them? Or I don't know. He's still with them. Yes. They still have a temperance. Oh, yeah. Big group. They were non-church. Some of the children, you know, it's very interesting. They turn into be good church members. So there was almost like something was missing. You know, they wanted to find out. So they go in different. So the temperance isn't really a religious group then? No, only in the sense that they are non-alcoholic. That's it. In other words, they are abstaining from alcohol and beverages. But they also had a big educational program in Sweden and also here. So they had, well, here in Rockford, for instance, they sent out the professor from University of Chicago. They came here, you know, to give them lessons in different things. Parliamentary rules. And so they were not just a bunch of stupid people. They were well read. But of course, the Depression. That killed everything upside down. You know, I mean, they didn't have any means and no money. Yeah. When you don't have any money, you can't do anything. You have no respect. In other words, they were depressed. Right. But that was the reason that most of them came over in 1905 in that area. That's right. There was just nothing to do over there. That's right. And then the First World War was another time. I think that's when my dad came over, too. He didn't want to go into the army. There could be one. When did he have to go in? When you were 16? No, 19. 19? Okay. He came before that. And I don't think he wanted to go in the army. A lot of them, you know, they didn't want the military service. Oh, that's probably why he came. And what was it to do with the, there was the military of Sweden helped Germany out with the cavalry? During the First World War? During the First World War. Do you know anything about that? Because I remember him saying if they hadn't had the Swedish cavalry helping them. Now, is that? Yeah, but they were not down there. They weren't there, huh? No, I never heard of that. There might have been some talk about it, though. But I never heard of that. Or if they would have had them. I can't remember which it was. It was something about because the cavalry at that time was real. Your parents, now, did they go back to Sweden for any visit like that? No, they couldn't afford to. Until your father died, of course. Yeah, right. He died. How long did she stay with the National Lockdown working? Oh, she got remarried to Halsted, Arthur Halsted in, it would be 1944. Forty four. They got married. She got remarried again. And she was married until. No, she was. She must have left National Locks shortly. Before that. After she married. Yeah. But how long was she married there? Oh, they were married a long time. He passed away in 73, I think it was. And they had a real good time. I mean, enjoyable. It was not his first marriage either, so it was very nice for all of us. But they didn't go back to Sweden or anything. No, no, no. He was Swedish also. Your parents, now, did they join any other organizations here in Rockford? No. Like Lagerhallen or Switzerland also? No. They weren't club members of any kind. And likewise for me. So they stayed with the church then? Yeah. Right. The friendship they had. Right. Same with my parents too, so we didn't belong to clubs either. Yeah. So you had youth groups when you were growing up? Yes. We were so busy with the church that there wasn't time for anything more. And then the church was down on. It was down on 6th Street. That was the big church. And at that time there was always division lines between the Lutherans and the Covenants and the Methodists. Yes. There was. They had disappeared now though? Yes. Disappeared. So there's no discussions anymore? No. Before there was no way a Catholic could get to heaven. How about your mother? Was she afraid that you wanted to marry a Catholic, for instance, or an Irish girl? Not really. Italian? Because we had so much association with the church that it just melted in. So you had the friendship established already? Oh, absolutely. We knew the family and everything. There was just no problem. And to think that our son did the same thing here at the Miller. Yeah. He melted right in. So, no, I don't know. You just didn't worry because your friends and your groups were like that. But whether they, you know, in our era if we'd brought in something we might have been told then. We probably would have. But we never did. No, I was never told anything. Never any questions. Has the church changed in your opinion over the years? Yes. Very much so. In what way? More liberal. More liberal? More liberal. Is it for the good or for the worse? How do you see it? Oh, I think it's for the better. Do they try to cater to the young people more than to the old ones, for instance? Like music now. I mean, all the churches have changed to music. Oh, yeah. They're catering to the younger. Is this for the young generation? Well, why do they let the old ones be left out? What's the future? What's the future of the church? The future of the church is young people. The old people are begun. They also say that religion and the church is tradition. You've got to feel at home. Like the old people now, they are sitting maybe listening to music. Yeah, and they don't like it. They don't like it? No, they don't like it. Do you punish them? I mean, they built the church up. Not really. Why should they change? Why don't they change? Why don't the old people change? Why don't they go along with this? Yeah, but you remember… Why don't they realize that it's the future of the young people? And music changes. I've been in the business for so many years, which you know, and I've seen how you've had to change every year. Why does it change, though? Is it, you know, like your parents now? Yes. My parents didn't like classical music. No, they didn't go through any changes like you have. No, no. Because they learned what the old people did. They didn't know any better. They didn't know any better. When you… in the music business, you better go along with the trends. I mean, you don't have to go drastically. Like my son is just a classical buff. I mean, he just wants classical music. Now, I've been in the music business long enough to know that I've been a dance man, I've been playing all kinds of music. Did you play dance music also? I did at one time. I mean, I didn't know any more. But I mean, I know the trend in which it's going. And it's going toward this younger group. I don't want to stop it because the kids love it. It's going to go back the other way. It will? You take another five, ten years and it's going to go back the other way. But this young music now… Oh, that rock and roll, that's… It's so wild. That's too… But some churches are caving to it, though, more or less, a little bit. A little bit, yeah. All of them have to work it in a little bit. What do you mean work into it? In other words, they've got to please the young ones to stay with the church. That's right. Do you think they will leave if they are a little bit more sophisticated? Well, if they're interested, you have to keep them interested. And I think we have a music director out there that's really fabulous. Out at our… At the Free Church. Free Church. He's from California. He's from California. And he's… I mean, every… He is a professional one. He's professional. And he works… He worked out in California. He knows the trend. And the trend comes from California to the middle of the United States. And it came from New York, and it comes this way. And he knows the trends. And he can see them. But he does it so well that the old folks really shouldn't be disturbed by it. But some of them are, like you say. Are you disturbed by it? Well, I work with old people all the time. You know, so I'm probably affected by their thinking. You hear it. In other words, what they… Adolf Miller would really condemn it. And so would Bob Miller. And he would condemn it. He's a younger one, though. But he's not young enough to… He's not young enough. Well, it's his temperament. It's the way they're thinking. And if you're in the business, you can see this thing, how it happens. And, you know, I would say I don't like to weigh out rock and roll. I think that's out. But don't you think the old people, now, when they go to church, I mean, every Sunday. Here they go to church. Yes. You know, regularly. Don't you think most of those older generation, over 55, 60, they like to sit back and relax and have tradition and listen to the old hymnals and the songs that they sing, you know, and the songs. Yeah, but you know, you can sing Onward, Christian Soldier so many times, and you can sing all these old gospel things so many times. I know this is what people like, is repetition. That is the easy way out. That's the easy way out. You feel at home. Why not learn something new? But they don't want to do that. They want to go back to the old ways.