 Well, it's 11th of September, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Tillie Gustafsson in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1908, 1st of July, in Hennesand. You came to the United States– 19– Let's see. 1910, we came to the United States, yeah. Why did they leave Sweden, your father and mother? Well, his father and mother was already here in the United States. They were? Yeah, they were in Rockford then. But then we came to Duluth. I think he went to Duluth on account of the lumber mills up there, you know, at that time in Sweden. They worked in a lumber yard, you know. They already did? My father did. So I said, well, when they came to Duluth, that's where they start working. And then his father and mother, they come here to Rockford. Then we moved to Rockford, too. So his father and mother was still– was here in America, too. But he wasn't born in America or anything. So they had left several years earlier, perhaps, and came to Rockford. Yeah. Your grandparents. They was on your father's side. Yeah, my father's side. Farr or farmor? Yeah, my mother's side. Nobody came here. Well, she had a brother that came, but he went to Chicago. We never heard nothing more from him. Your mother's name now was Wilhelmina Selling. Yeah, uh-huh. It's an unusual name. It is unusual, uh-huh. But she was born in Hennesand. Yeah, uh-huh. And her brother disappeared, more or less, in the United States. Yeah, her brother, yeah. He came from– When his sister died, my mother died. And then my sister went in there to live with him for a while, but after that, we never heard nothing more from him. He just disappeared altogether. But her parents stayed in Sweden, though. Oh, yes. Uh-huh. They did. Yeah, uh-huh. So your father was a sawmill worker. Yeah. In Hennesand. Well, he worked for the police department and the fire department, too, in Sweden. I don't know why they come here to here in America for. Yeah, uh-huh. He was a pretty good job, though. I don't know why didn't he stay. He would have been better off, I think. Well, he left. Yeah, well, I think he left because maybe his mother and father talked him into coming here, too, I think. He had no relation up in Duluth, though, that he came to? Oh, yeah. We had relations up Duluth. Yeah, we had aunt and uncles up there. My father had an aunt and uncle living up there. That's why they came to Duluth. And then he had a sister living there, too, at that time. So there was a whole family then, though. Yeah. So do you remember anything from Duluth? You were four years old when you left there. Oh, yeah. We remember Duluth because we'd been up there so much, you know, visiting. How about before you left Rockford, though? Do you remember any of that time when you were three or four? Well, we went to school. I went to kindergarten in Duluth, but we remembered, yeah. Oh, you did? Uh-huh. So you must have been more than four years old then when you left Duluth. Well, ten, fourteen, about five, six years old when we came to Rockford then, see. You came in 19... 1914 we came to Rockford. Uh-huh. So what kind of work was your father doing then? My father worked in a machine shop, a rocker machine and tool. So he started there and continued with... Well, he worked there for many years. Well, he worked at Barbara Coleman's towards the last. He worked at Green's. He worked a little all over, but he worked at Barbara Coleman's more than he done anything else. So three of your children that were born out of your sisters or brothers were born here in the United States? Yeah, there was three that was born in Sweden. The other two was born here in America, see. And then your mother died when she was very young. Yeah, she was about 38, 39 years old when she died, yeah. So what happened then? She died of ammonia following childbirth. Oh, I see. So you remember that when she died then? Oh, yes, we lived on 11th Street, 520 11th Street, 5... We lived there then at the time she died. So your dad had bought the house there? No, we were renting there. You were renting? Uh-huh. So what happened then when your mother died? Did you have to... My father remarried, but then we were scattered all over. I was in the orphanage on Mountain Joliet. You know, we were strung all over, you know. Well, none of the kids stayed with the father then? Well, they were back and forth, went to the orphanage, so we were sent here and there, and then we really didn't have much of a home, you can see. You know, then my father remarried after, you know. It was pretty hard on you then. Oh, yeah, it was hard when we were kids, but it went like everything else, you know. So how old were you then when your mother died? I was about seven, eight years old. She died in 1916. So you came to Joliet? Well, then I was sent– I went to the orphanage home, to Joliet. For how many years? For about a year I was there only. A year? And then you were– That was a Swedish Lutheran's orphanage home at that time. And your mother came there? My brother went, too. My brother was there for quite a few years. To Joliet? Yeah. He didn't even know he had a father when he left there. Oh, I see. That's the way it is when a mother dies. A father, at those days– It's hard for a man, too, you know, to take care of a bunch of kids. Do you remember if your dad visited you in Joliet? No, he never came to visit us, uh-uh. He never did? No, I think it wasn't– Yeah, see, my aunt in Duluth, she had a boy that died, and then I went up there to live, see, for a while, for about a year, till she got another baby. Then I came back here to Rockford, see. Yeah. And you've got your three brothers now. Were they also out in the homes? My sisters, you mean? Your brothers, your three brothers. No, one was in– But the other one went to Duluth, and then the other one, I don't know where he went. He was a little all over, stayed at different people, that's all. So after a year in Joliet, what happened to you then? You came to Rockford? Then I went up in Duluth to live with my aunt. And then when she got her baby, then I– Then you came back here? Then I came back here to Rockford, yeah. Did you stay with your father then? Oh, yeah, I stayed with my father and my stepmother. Then I stayed with my grandmother, too. We were a little all over. So your grandparents were still living then in Rockford? Well, my father was living in Rockford here, yeah. You mean your grandparents, your farfar and farmor? Yeah, she was in Rockford till she died, yeah. You were staying with them, and then you went to school here in Rockford? Yeah, I went to school here in Rockford, yeah. So then how was your stepmother? Was she of Swedish background? My stepmother? Yeah. She was Swedish? Yeah, she was from Erland. From Erland? I don't know. How long have you been in Rockford? Only a few– How long have– I've been back and forth so many times, but I visited her for years. So did they have any children then? My step– Yeah, they got– I don't know if you know Knut Romberg? I heard a name. He was a card game player. That was my stepbrother. My father married his mother, see. So you got along pretty good then with your stepmother? Oh, yes and no, you know, how that is. Why didn't you want to live with them? Well, we were living with them, but then she had four boys of her own, you know, but that makes a lot of difference, see, yeah. So there was a big family. Yeah, well, they wasn't here– They came to America after they got married, see. Oh, I see. But what church did you join then, the family? We went to Sign Church. We still go there. Sign and Rootman? Yeah. Then we went to Salvation Army a lot too. Oh, I see. So you were confirmed then at the– At Sign Church. I still belong there and everything, yeah. Were you confirmed in Swedish? No, uh-uh. English? We couldn't write or read Swedish. In those days, they had the Swedish classes too, you know. But how about not living with your grandparents? Didn't they talk Swedish to you? Oh, yeah, we talked Swedish at home. My stepmother and my father, they all talked Swedish at home, yes. So you picked up quite a bit of Swedish then. Yeah, so I can understand Swedish and stuff, but after you get out and get away, you know, then you don't talk Swedish anymore neither, you know. So after your schooling then, what kind of– Did you take a job then or– Well, I start working now. I was 16 years old, yeah. What kind of work? I worked in a factory, Thayer Actions at that time, a piano factory. Then I worked in a lock company for about 30 years, 36 years. Oh, I see. In the office or in the– No, in the factory. In the factory? Yeah. Was it a special job to do or– No, just ordinary factory work. I worked on punch presses most of the time. It was kind of unusual, though, for a lady to go into the factories in the 20s. God, it was easy to get a job then. Was it easy? Oh, gosh, when we start working– There was not too many women working, though. Oh, yes, there was too. In 1924, I start working, and my God, you could get a job anyplace. They hired a lot of girls in the factories in those days. They did? Yes. You could go to any factory and get a job in those days, but those times are gone now. Yeah, and it was a pretty good job? Pretty decent or– We were on piecework all the time. Sure? Yeah. So you had to be pretty fast then with your– Well, yeah, sure. You had to work for your money. You had to assemble things or what did you do? Well, I worked on punch presses. That was, I don't know, punching out stuff. I can't explain to you what it was anyways. Oh, I see. So it wasn't a hard job then? Well, no, it wasn't very hard. Dirty? Oh, yeah. The lock company was in order for dirty jobs there. A lot of oil splashing all over. Yeah, uh-huh. But then they had a lot of clean work, too. They don't have jobs like that anymore. Everything is automation nowadays. In a lock company, that's gone out of business now. Well, they still got a factory. So how many women were working there then compared to the men? Oh, God, there were more women than men in those days. There was? Yes, I think so. And you had no union then at that time? No, not at that time, uh-uh. Were there any talk about union activities? Not at that time, no. They didn't talk about the union until about– when the war– after the war. Then they started unionizing. So nobody wanted to talk about it before? No, there was no unions here in Rockford at all. I never heard of them then. They didn't come in to organize either? No, they didn't come in until about in the 40s or after the war. Then they start organizing the unions. But now they're going now, too, you know. So they came and they went. Yeah. But it was good– in your opinion, though, it was good to have a union? Well, I think so, too, but I think the unions went a little bit too far, that's all. Were you for it when it started up after the war? Well, I'm getting a pension from a lock company. If it wasn't for the union, we wouldn't have gotten that. But you didn't know that when you started off? Oh, no. I didn't know– Were most of the workers for the unions after the war? Oh, yes. They were all for the union after the war. Even the older workers? Yes. Because I don't think the lock company paid– I worked there during the war, and I don't think they paid– They didn't pay very good during the war. That's what they say anyways. Oh, you don't remember that? Well, I remember what I got, but I don't know what the other factories was getting. But they claimed the lock company wasn't paying very much during the war, but I was satisfied because my husband was working, too, you know. Oh, he was working there, too? No, he worked at Rock Machine, too. I see. So how about during the Depression, though? Did you have a job then? What? During the Depression, in the 30s? Well, I got pension from lock company. Yeah, I know, but during the Depression in 1930? No, they didn't have pensions in the factory. No, but I mean, did you work then during the war? Oh, yes, I worked in the– You were never laid off? No, I was– Well, I was laid off at lock company, and then went back to Thayer Action. I got right back there again, see. Because it was pretty rough time for a lot of people. Oh, yeah. Well, I mean, the factories was going good then. I mean, you didn't have to worry so much about jobs as you do nowadays. Do you think it's worse now than then? Well, it was all right, I mean. Did your husband work during the Depression? Well, we were all out of work during the Depression until 1929, the Depression. Well, I got laid off then at the lock company when the Depression came then, see. And how long did you have to stay home then without a job? Well, then I went over to Thayer Action, got a job. Then when they– After Christmas, I got back at the lock company. But then I quit there for a while because they wasn't making enough money. But then I went back there after and started working again, see. So were mostly Swedes working there at the National Lock? All there was was Swedes there. Swedes? Yeah. So the management were Swedes? Sure. The Swedes are the ones that started that factory up. There were no Italians in there or Germans or Lithuanians? That was Hoagland that started that factory to begin with. Hoagland? Yeah. But then after the war, Italians came in there and Germans, Lithuanians, Polacks. Well, no, that was bought out by the company in Peoria, Illinois, I think. They bought it? They bought the place out, yeah. So you never worked with any other groups in Sweden? You never had any Italian girls on the assembly line or Polacks, Lithuanians? Oh, they were all kinds– all nationalities in those places. They all were– Even in National Lock? Yeah, there were a lot of Polish and Italians. How were they to work with? Well, they were all right to work for. There was no– No, we didn't have no trouble getting along in the factory with people. It all depends upon what kind of person you are yourself, too. We always got along. Well, sometimes you have to take more than you can give. Well, that's always the way with everything anyways, but you gotta learn to take it, that's all. Yeah. And then, off work, did you join any Swedish organizations like Vasa, Viking? Well, I belonged to the Vasa and I belonged to the Vikings. Both of them? Yeah. Oh. And then to the Culture Society? Yeah. The Vasa, I belonged there– Gotta be about– The Vikings will be 50 years next year, I think, and then the Vasa, I belonged there about just as long, too, I think. So your husband joined there, too, then? Well, he joined before I did. That's how I went. So you met your husband in National Lock? No, I didn't meet– I don't know where I met him. At a dance, I think. What year did you get married? I got married in 1934. 1934? Yeah. Right during the Depression. Well, things were getting a little bit better then, though. So they was– It was starting in 1929, about in 1934, 1935, things started picking up a little bit. It wasn't hard to get jobs in those days for women, anyways. It was easier? Yeah. My husband, he worked at the Hedra Piano Company at that time. Oh, I see. But you didn't want to do any housework, though. So you went into the factory. You asked for a job from the beginning. Well, I'd done a little housework. When I quit the National Lock, I went– I'd done housework during the Depression time. Was it easy to get the housework? Yes, it was easy, but it wasn't hard to get jobs and the housework jobs in those days. So there were enough wealthy people that could employ– Oh, yeah, there was a lot of– They were on Harlem Boulevard at that time. On the west side. Yeah, but now Harlem Boulevard, you and I can afford to live there now, you know. So there's not a wealthy place anymore? No, they're up on Spring Creek Road now, you know. Oh. So the neighborhoods have changed. Yeah. So you remember Seventh Avenue, Seventh Street and– Oh, gosh, yes. We were born on Broadway and Seventh Street and Broadway. That's for sure, yeah. It was a living place. Yeah. Well, it was all Swedes in those days. When my grandmother come– My gosh, when her sister came down from Duluth, she was surprised that you could go in any store you wanted to. Everybody talked Swedish, you know. They didn't do that in Duluth? No, they didn't do them like her sister. My grandmother's sister said she thought it was funny that my grandmother could go in any store on Broadway and Seventh Street and talk Swede to everybody. But up there, you couldn't do that. There wasn't that many Swedes up there. That's why they learned to talk English too faster. Oh, they did? My grandmother, she couldn't talk English when she died even. But I think it's because up there, nobody talks so much Swedish up in Duluth as they do down here too, you know. So your brother, for instance, or your aunts up there in Duluth– Yeah. Did they talk better English then? Well, they talked– At home, they talked Swedish and stuff like that, but yeah, they talked better English than– Than in Rockford? Yes, uh-huh. Because they had no way to talk Swedish. Yeah, because there wasn't too many Swedish people up there, you know, like there was here in Rockford. How did they do it up in Duluth? Did they have a pretty good living or got good jobs? Well, now it's terrible up there. At that time, I don't know what people done. I think they had the lumber mills up there in those days, see. But during the Depression, they didn't come down here to look for a job. They stayed up there. They stayed up there. Well, my father's brother-in-law, he was a big contractor up there, see. There was the Bodin? Yeah, the Bodin's up there. They were big contractors, you know. But they're all dead now. That's all dissolved. So you have visited Duluth and your relation up there several times then? Up in Duluth, you mean? Yeah, we got some– we got a brother up there. If you compare the situation down here in Rockford with Duluth, would you rather live in Duluth, you think, than Rockford? No, I'd rather live in Rockford. We've been here so many years anyway. I wouldn't ever– Is the climate too cold up there, you think? It's awfully cold, but then we've been away from there so many years. It's so hilly, that's what I don't like there. It's a hilly country, you know. But your relation up there, they like it better? Oh, yeah. Well, they were contractors, and my father's sister, they stayed up there because, you know, they went up there and they got jobs, and they just stayed. They bought homes and stuff like that, too, you know. Do they belong to any organizations? No, I don't think they belong to anything like that. They don't belong to nothing like that, uh-uh. Only the church? Yeah. Yeah, they never did belong to anything like that. Well, not that we– We didn't– They never– They never was a kind to smoke or drink or anything like that, but I didn't either as far as that, but I think when you belong to those, like the Vikings and stuff, there's drinking there, you know. But we never drank. We went there. No, they never did belong to anything up there. They just had family, and they were more in the family than their neighbors and stuff, too, you know. So you children– Now, you were five children, three boys and two girls. Yeah, uh-huh. You got together and later in life– Well, we were separate so much. We really didn't get together. I got a brother that– My brother died in Chicago about seven, eight years ago, about ten years ago, see? And then my brother, next to that, he died about six years ago in Rockford here, see? So now you have your sister in Rockford. Yeah, then I got a brother up in Duluth, but we don't have much to do with him because he's been gone since he's been a baby. You know, you're just strangers then, you know. He came away. How about your step-sisters and brothers? Well, one of them is living up the Valley View on the high rise. The other ones are dead. Oh, I see. All of them? Three of them. There was four boys, and they're all dead but one. But they were born after you, though. Oh, yeah. Well, that one that's living now, he's my age, and the other ones was– Well, they were– They were pretty immediate. There was a couple years between them. They were older. So when your father married your stepmother, she already had kids then? Well, she had them in Sweden, yes. She'd been married in Sweden, and then they came here to America after, see? So they were not your real stepbrothers and sisters then? They were– They were my stepbr– Yeah, they were– Not the real type. Your father was not the father of them? No, no, no. And there were no children? No, they didn't have– My father never had no children with anybody else or anything like that, yeah. So your father, did he go back to Sweden at any time? No, he never went back to Sweden. And not your grandparents either? My grandmother, she went back to Sweden and come back again. She was going to go back there to live. How old was she then? Gosh, she was 65 when she came back. So why didn't she come back? Did she die somewhere or what happened? Well, her and her husband, they were– They separated when they were there, you know. And then she sold all her– She borrowed all her money, and then when she came back here, didn't have a cent. And then when they– Then her sister up in Duluth and stuff, they had Ellis Island then, you know. They had a hard time getting her back in the United States, but she got back here anyways. So she had trouble there? Oh, well, yeah. She didn't have no money because she gave all her money– She borrowed all her money to her brothers, and you know how that is. You never get it back. So she didn't talk too much about Sweden and going back again after she came back here? Well, she went back one time, but she never went back a second time because then she lived here till she died. She was about 80 when she died. Oh, I see. What did she say about Sweden? Well, they didn't say much about Sweden anyways. And she also belonged to the Sáhja Lutren? No, she didn't go to no church at all. No church? No, uh-uh. And no Vikings or no Hoss? No, they never went– My father never belonged to anything like that neither. He never cared for stuff like that, you know. So people are different. Somebody– Well, if I hadn't married my husband, if he didn't belong, I maybe wouldn't have belonged either because none of us belonged to anything like that before, see. So it depends on how you– But years ago, they used to have sick benefit, the lodges, but they've also did, but the Vikings don't have that anymore, see. They had insurance. Not very much. Well, you got to pay for it. Yeah, they have, but not very much. It all depends on how much you want to take out yourself. But when you were working at National Lockdown in the 20s, you had no insurance at the factory. At the lockup, I did, yeah. You did? From the very beginning? No, not at the very beginning, uh-uh. So then it was good to have VASA as a hospitalization? Yeah, that's true too, yeah. So a lot of people joined VASA then? Yeah, they joined the lodges on account of that mostly. I think that's why we joined mostly on account of the sick benefit and stuff because they didn't have that in the factories in those days. They didn't have that till after the war. They come in with all that stuff, you know. Were you interested in dancing in– Oh, yeah, we would just go to dance when we were young, yeah. And there were a lot of dances going on in Rockford at that time? Oh, yeah, there were a lot of Swedish dances. Then we used to go down to England. We used to go up to Central Park and Harlem Park. That wasn't the Swedish stuff, though, yeah. Was there a big dance palace up there on Harlem Park? Well, Harlem Park, that was a nice place, but that's been gone for years. But that was not the Swedish– No, uh-uh. Neither– It wasn't American. Yeah, and then Central Park, yeah, that was no Swedish organization or anything like that. But a lot of Swedes went there? Oh, yeah, well, there was a lot of Swedes in Rockford. They all went, you know. But anybody else could come there, too, then? Germans and Italians? Yes, sure, that's for everybody, yes. But you had to be careful you didn't date an Italian, though. Well, I don't know what to– We worked with Italians and stuff. They were just as good as anybody else. It's just the people that had that in their heads, that's all. Did marriage occur, though, between Swedes and Italians and Germans, do you think, in the Great– Well, there was quite a few of them that married Italians, too. How many were got, or was it– There wasn't as many, but I don't know where they got that from. They were just as nice as anybody else. Years ago, the people was that way. They were suspicious? Yeah. And then people started to talk, and then– Most of the Italians, they settled in South Rockford, you know. Yes. South Rockford is around 11th Street and down there on– It's way on South Main Street, up above there. Oh, South Main Street. Where were they settled? They were Italian places. And the Lithuanians, they settled around 15th Avenue, around that way. That was not too far from National Park, though. It was around the factory area, I guess. Well, there was mostly Swedes around National Rock in those days. Oh, that's back then. Where did you live, now, your husband? We lived on 11th Street, on Prospect Street and 11th Street. We've been here for 35 years, you know. So you had a house down there then? No, we rented it until we bought this place here. Then you bought this. They were just building them up when we bought them, see. So that was a brand-new area. Yeah, it was at that time. But it's getting old now. Yeah, but it's still got a pretty good quality on the houses. Well, it's not too bad yet, I mean. Martin Hawkinson built all these houses around here at that time. He was the Swedish contractor. Oh, yeah, I knew Martin since he was a kid, too, yeah. Do you have any contacts with people in Sweden, or there are no relations left that you know of? Well, my sister, we've had company from Sweden on my husband's side. And then my sister was... Then I had a cousin that came from... She was here visiting twice, too. She come from... She lives in Stockholm, but she was born up and had a son, too. That was my brother's daughter. She came here, yeah. But she could talk English and everything. I think most of the Swedes that come from Sweden nowadays, they can talk English. But on my husband's side... He came from Halland? They couldn't talk English at all. He came from Halland? Yeah. Did you get off with the families together on the Sundays and so on for dinner or something? No, we didn't get together too much with the families. They didn't seem to get along too good, for one thing. You know, I think when my stepmother came, then that kind of... You know how that is, and it's not the same then, you know. She kind of broke into a family, and she didn't know too much about... Well, there wasn't too many here, neither relatives, neither, you could say. Yeah, but how about your grandparents? Now, did they accept the new bride to your father, or were they reluctant against it, you think? Oh, yeah, well, my grandmother was living was different. They lived on... She had a house on 18th Avenue close to National Lock for many years. Yeah. I don't know how they'd done it. They came here, and they had a nice home and everything, but then when they sold everything and went to Sweden, then she'd come back with nothing. That's the way it is. But it's kind of strange to your father. Now, he had five children there. Yeah. And then he gave you away, all of you. Well, we were– And there'd been four new ones. Well, one adopted, but we were scattered all over. Well, one was adopted? Yeah, the one up in Duluth was– What was the reason for that, you think? Yeah, well, I don't know if he was adopted. Some people took him anyways, yeah. But then your father got four other kids with his new wife. Well, she came as a housekeeper. When my mother died, that's how they met, see? Oh, and then they married. Yeah, that's the way they do it. Years ago, they'd hire housekeepers, and they married them, see? They tried them out then first. Yeah, well, I mean, when they have a bunch of kids, they didn't have enough money to hire people neither, you know? And these people come from Sweden. They didn't know anybody. They had a half a job, that's all, you know? But there was too much time for you all to stay home, so you had to go to the homes. Yeah. So the days now– You were one year at Joliet. You said, was there an easy time, or was it– Do you remember this? Well, they had a lot of hard times in those days, getting along and stuff. There was a housewife at that home. My father worked all the time, though, but then– Well, they didn't know how to manage money neither, for one thing, you know? But at the home now in Joliet– Yeah. How do you remember that time? Was it a hard time for you? Well, it was– That was during the First World War. Well, we didn't get enough to eat, I didn't think, anyways. Well, it was hard to get– Well, they had food, but we had kids. They liked to eat all the time. We didn't get enough– At least– We didn't get enough to eat anyway. And then you had to fend for yourself to get enough? Oh, no. They had– It was an orphanage home. They had people take care of people, you know. They were nice to you then? Oh, yeah. They were pretty nice. You can't complain or anything like that. Did you have any school there at the home? Oh, yeah. I went to school. Sure, we went to city school there, you know. Oh, I see. So there were a whole bunch of people then, or youngsters? Oh, there was all kinds of– There was a couple from Rockford, too. I knew a fellow that was there, Harold Honk. He worked for the city here in Rockford. I went out with him after– I didn't know– We were there when we were kids, but then I met him at Rockford after. He remembered me, and I went out with him a couple times, and that was all, see. But he's dead now, I know that, yeah. So all the children there, they were from– They would come from all over the state. Broken-up homes. Either mother or father was there. Yeah. So there was many hard memories. Oh, yeah. But then it goes like everything else. When you grow up, you kind of forget about that. Well, I had a nice husband and stuff like that. That's all. Who's that? Hi.