 Kassette 2, Side 1, fortsättning med intervjun av Wallis Sundqvist, Rock Island i Danoja. December 18, 1985. Så, City of Molina, när du var länkare här, var du spelade runt på sjön i Mississippi? Det ägna Mississippi. Gick du på den och fiskade? Gick du på barger och röda trafik? Jag gick alltid på fisk. Faktiskt är att min pappa var fiskare. På den tiden gick han och fiskade... ...fisk på natt en del gånger. Han hade en vän med honom, några vänster. De kom hem med en massa karp. Många fick karp och de slöt dem. Han fick de stora karpen. De fiskade med trottlinjer eller så. De fiskade med no-balls och så vidare. Min mor fiskade den och pickade den. De fick de stora karpen och pickade perch. Det var jättekul när det stod. Jag vet inte vad det var. Vinnigret och farorna? Ja, det var fixat. Det var ganska stora. De fick... ...de hade bära läger, men... ...dessa andra... ...de fick det. Men det var jättekul. Fiskade de andra? Ja, en gång i en while, men... ...möjligt perch. Jag menar karp. Jag fiskade mycket. I faktum fiskade jag ganska mycket. Vi fiskade i båt, men vi blev för äldre för att fiska i båt. Så vi fiskade det ut. Jag har en äldre, och han har gått borta. Han har varit död i några år. Det tog sig att fiska i båt. Men jag fiskar med polnöjningar. Jag får nog tillräckligt mycket att äta. Men i 1900-talet var röret klart? Jag kan inte säga så mycket om det. Jag var för liten, det var mycket vatten. Men det är det det är nu. För alla i färgerna, de här färgerna och allt annat... ...de lägger mycket in i det. Men det är samma sak överallt. Alla är förvaltade. Man hör det på nyheter... ...att fiskade är en sak av förr. Med den typen av vatten som är polerad med olika saker. Många är mest från fabrik. Och jag tror att alla vet att det är gjort. Hur om fiskar? Fiskar? Ja, jag fiskar fiskar. Men när du var liten... Ja, det var fiskar där också. De fiskade fiskar? Ja, men min mor fiskade... Jag fiskar fiskar och fiskar... ...och några fiskar. Men jag har inte rätt typ av fisk... ...för att fånga den här fisk. De stora? Ja. Så när du var liten... ...vill du gå med dina bröder? Nej, vi hade... ...det var stora familjer. Jag talar om det förra året. Alla svenskar? Alla svenskar i Belgien. Jag hade bara så många belgianer som svenska vänner. Var de också i samma bära? Ja, samma bära. De hade inte en, två barn. De hade en halvdanna. Du hade ingen halvdanna människor... ...för att du inte var i kring. De hade stora familjer. Men det var många... ...många barn runt. Vi spelade basball och liten fotboll. Vi fick en riktigt bra länge. Men Molin var mycket mindre då? Ja, vi hade strykkar. Det var bara transport. När vi blev lite äldre... ...som jag sa... ...vunns om någon annan hade en liten liss. Var familjerna samtidigt på söndag... ...för att få dörr och kaffe? Vissa svenska familjer var det. När mina bröder och sista var märkade... ...hade de familjer. De var alltid på mitt mammas plats. Det var ett plats att stoppa. Vi levde nära tillsammans. Det var bara att gå i stund. Ingen levde av. Alla var i en sju-block-dörr. Så vi kunde vara tillsammans. Sondag var en stor dag. Vi hade många... Vad om på kvällarna? På kvällarna var vi alltid på mammas plats. Vi hade alla lilla barn. På kvällarna var det... ...vi hade en Santa Claus. Var du på Santa Claus när du var liten? Ja, och mina grannkommar och allt annat. Vi... ...på mitt mammas plats... ...hade alla kvällar där. Min mamma, om jag minns... ...kunde ha en kväll till januari 13. Jag vet inte varför det var kvällsäsong... ...för att ta dem ner. Vi hade kvällar. De dagarna... ...vill man använda kandler. Live kandler? I kvällarna. Vi var väldigt bära med dem. Om kandlerna var lilla... ...så var det någon som var runt. Vi hade alltid Santa Claus. Vem var Santa Claus när man blev lite äldre? Vi hade alltid... Ditt pappa? Nej, en av mina bröder. De spelade Santa Claus. Vi hade en vanlig Santa Claus. När var kvällarna... ...brottet in i ett hus? Hur länge? Min mamma hade det tidigare. Kvällarna... ...vi hade dekorationer... ...inte så dekorationerade som de är nu. De hade alla strimor... ...förr kunde man göra lilla hjärtar... ...och sånt där. Och kvällarna... ...var väldigt speciellt... ...om var man skulle lägga dem. De skulle behöva bli lilla. Men de var bara lilla på Christmas Eve... ...och när folk var i rummet. När barnen var där... ...för ett litet tag... ...kunde man inte gå och lägga dem kvällar. Det var först som jag vet varför det hände. Vi var beredda med det. Jag kan aldrig vilja minska att vi hade en fyr. Men det var många som hade fyr... ...för att de var beredda. Nu har man alla elektriska ljus... ...och sånt där. Det är lite annorlunda. När man har kvällarna... ...får de lite brödda. Så man måste vara beredd. Men vi hade... ...de lilla ljudsvänterna. Så du hade Christmas 3 redan... ...på Christmas Eve. Och sen hade du dörrar på natt. Du hade ljudfisk. Ja. Och herring, ljudfisk och silt. Och det här andra... ...som min mor brukade göra... ...det var... ...som andra saker... ...som var gjorda av Karls och Malchow. Karlwurst? Ja, vi hade alla det. Ja. Allt var svenskt i vårt hus. Vi kunde inte veta vad... ...min mor gjorde. En av de stora var så här. Och sen... ...Hardtack. Vad var det? Kunde de köpa alla de stäpelserna i Molin? I Rock Island? I den svenska ståren kan man köpa ljudfisk och herring. Ja. Men Gud... ...hade de det själv? Ja, det var klart. Och potatoblån. Det var ett årsrum. Hon gjorde det själv? Min mor gjorde det själv. Jag har några av deras skäp. Horns... Karlwurst. Min mor gjorde det. Jag gick till klubben i Cleveland... ...och gick till... ...och fick mjölk som de gjorde. Det är när... ...Karl har skäpt... ...och det måste vara... ...det fyrsta eller tredje gången. Jag gick till den och fick... ...de hade en därgfarm. Var var däremot du var? Hur nära var det? Riktigt här på Prospekt Park. Jag kastade på 13 St. Och de hade karls? Gud, de hade en därgfarm. Jag jobbade där... ...sometimes when I was a kid. Took care of their garden and stuff. And anyway... ...there was... ...quite an experience. But we had sweet stuff all the time. So on Christmas Eve... ...did you get to see Santa Claus? Or did you wait till Sunday morning? Like the American custom? No, we had... ...we... On Christmas Eve? We had...like...at night time. Christmas Eve, yeah. And then you went to bed... ...and... ...jurodda på Christmas day. Yeah. We still get stuff the next day too, you know. Oh, I see. You had a stocking then? Well, I can't remember having any stocking... ...but I... ...I suppose I did have just like everybody else's. What kind of gifts? We never hung them on the tree though. We had different kind of... ...we had them someplace else. You know, I'm talking about when I was real small. Yes, they were also made. Do you remember what you received? Well, not the thing special really. Well, not the thing special really. It was just... ...I can't remember. I know... ...I got a bicycle one time... ...when I was old enough to ride one. I thought that was pretty good. It's a Christmas gift. I got it from the family and my brothers. I never had a bicycle. When I got that bicycle... ...I was really okay. That was really something. Anyway, I took care of it. I had it for quite a while. But then you weren't big enough, so Santa Claus didn't come with you. Oh, no, no, no. But I had other family. My brothers had kids, you know. They still talk about it today. In fact, they talk about it all the time... ...about the big times we used to have. So it was enjoyable. So there were always activities going on? Yeah, well, I had my brothers and sisters. They was all there and they all had kids, you know. They were all there and they all had kids, you know. And that was it. And then you said the Christmas tree was still up... ...January 13th. January 13th. My mother kept it up there. I don't know why that's an old Swedish tradition or something. I don't know why that's an old Swedish tradition or something. What happened then? Did you have a party at that particular time when you brought... I can't recall that. We probably did have something going. I can't recall. Did the kids come together and dance? You remember that? Well, not really. You didn't dance around the Christmas tree? Well, not in our house. There were too many people there for that. But they always did a lot... Well, of course, at the lodges, you know. Different places here. They used to have Christmas trees where the kids... ...were the parties. You know, because that was like a lodge. Something like that. But in our house, our house was too small. When you got a Christmas tree in there... ...you had to put it over in a corner somewhere. And another thing too... ...you didn't have this electrical appliances here. You didn't have this electrical appliances here. My mother used to cook on a coal stove. My mother used to cook on a coal stove. You know, one of them great big kitchen stoves. You know, one of them great big kitchen stoves. You know, one of them great big kitchen stoves. It had a half a dozen burners and stuff on there. And I know in the wintertime... ...when we'd come in, us kids... ...our cold feet... ...we'd pull that kitchen oven door down... ...there was always fire in there. That's the way we heated our feet up. That's the way we heated our feet up. But anyway, my mother was cooking all the time. But anyway, my mother was cooking all the time. She always had something on the stove. She always had something on the stove. If it wasn't the coffee pot... ...I don't think that coffee pot... ...emptied out and be refilled again. But she had other stuff. Were you drinking coffee earlier? When I was a kid? I always drank coffee. Always done coffee? Yeah, I drank coffee just like everybody else. All the rest of them drank coffee. I had to have it too. But anyway, that was it. So did you have cream in the coffee? I did years ago. We all had to use cream. But I don't use it now anymore. I think it's just something I do alone. Did you drink on the puffat as they call it? You pour it on the saucer and then drink it? You pour it on the saucer and then drink it? Some of them did. You never did it? Well, I suppose I did. I could have done that too. They used to call it coffee po' beet. Then they had that love sugar. So when the old people came to your house... ...not like the ladies and the old men... ...they all used to drink it on the pot then? Some of them. Yeah, po' beet. We had that sugar there all the time. We used that all the time. But it was enjoyable because... ...when anybody stopped in... ...there was always coffee. Coffee was always ready. They just sat there... There was strong coffee at that time too. They poured it right in the kettle. I remember my mother... ...had a grinder, grind coffee. She poured it right in the water in the kettle. Super coffee. Yeah, yeah. I remember my mother... Super coffee. They didn't have that fancy stuff. No Mr. Coffee at that time. No, no Mr. Coffee. It was just regular stuff that you grind. I see some stores... ...they still got that if you want to grind it. But now they've perfected coffee so much. Decaffeinated coffee and then caffeinated. It's all ground up. So it doesn't taste like mother's coffee anymore? It's been so many years ago... ...I couldn't tell you whether this is better or not. I was used to her coffee. But it was good. Everybody else liked it because they stopped in. So when you came home from school... ...did you go home for lunch? I did, yeah. I came home for dinner. There was always something good smelling. We had chickens. My brother and I used to come home... ...and see who could get home first. We used to get down in the kitchen... ...and get some eggs. You had your own chicken coop? We had chickens. Years ago we had chickens there. How many did you have? I don't know, maybe a couple dozen or so. Did most of the people have... Everybody had chickens. They all had chickens. Then we used to have... ...I've never seen this... I think... ...well... ...in those days we never had inside toilets. I'm talking about when I was a kid. All the houses had a good size barn down there. They had a chicken coop. Then they fenced in for the chickens outside. Then I don't know... ...we had to keep a lot of stuff in there. Like a storage shed? Yes, a storage shed. Then we had a... An outhouse? Yes, we had an outside toilet. When we got around to have an inside plumbing... ...that was a big thing for us. And everybody else. What time was that you think they came into Mourin? I don't know. I was still a kid yet. Before the first world war? Yes. Then we had another thing too. We got rid of stove heat. Stove heat was taken out of there. Then they had gas furnaces put in. Gas furnaces? You didn't have a stoker with a coal stoker in the basement? Oh, yes. We had that. But then when we got gas... You threw it out? We got rid of all that stuff. We put in new gas. So every house had to shovel coal? You shoveled coal, buddy. It was my job to get the firewood in there... ...for the stoves. And get coal. We had a coal shed. I used to have to get down there. We used to have two or three buckets of them coal. You didn't have a stove in the basement then? Oh, no. You had to pick out for every day a couple of pails. We had stoves. We had a nice stove in our living room. You know, one of those kind of fancy... And it was coal-fired? Coal-fired, yes. Yes. And we had a stove upstairs. So there was an opening in the ceiling... ...that went upstairs also for heat? I don't remember having that, but we had a stove upstairs. Where you slept? We slept, yes. All those boys. So you all had the responsibility to keep the stoves? You all had the responsibility to keep this fire going... ...and bring in the coal? Well, we... I had fire... We didn't think... We wanted to have that in because that kept us warm too. Nobody hesitated about getting coal. If I had seen a couple of coal buckets there... ...and one of them was empty, we'd fill it up again. And we had firewood. You always had to have some firewood. And we had a place... We had a summer kitchen outside of our back door. And we'd keep some of the stuff in there, you know... ...so you could have it handy. So this summer kitchen, you know, mother moved out in the spring... ...May or June to do some cooking out there? No, no. She had a stove out there? No, my mother had that thing going in the summertime too. Why did they call it the summer kitchen? Did you eat out there? Well, no, no. We put a lot of supplies out there. We used to get... I remember my dad used to get a half a side in the wintertime. Pork? Yeah, it was pork. Just like a half a hog laying up there. And then we'd have some other beef too. We had that in the wintertime. They would cut up a lot of stuff off of that thing. I know my dad and my mother could make a lot of things out of that. Did they smoke a lot of meat, pork and ham? Well, I think sometimes they would smoke it... ...but I'm not too much on that. We had stuff there where we could cut it off, you know. And of course they know how to cut that meat. I wouldn't know the first thing about it, how to cut it. But we'd get it from out there in the country... ...when they butchered out there. You're older sisters now. You had one that was born in 1889. She was quite... Well, my sisters... Were they trained by your mother... ...how to do and cook and cut up meat? Well, I guess I think so because they were all good cooks. You were the last one in the bunch now. You were probably spoiled a little bit. You didn't have to do as many things as they had to. Well, I had to do a lot of errands. I know a lot of times I used to help my mother wash. Well, I used to have one of them old boards, you know. But I got rid of that and got educated... ...and they had a washing machine where they had a handle on it. Push that back and forth. And it was your job? I was there, yeah. I enjoyed doing it but I got tired of it after I got started. But anyway... ...she would take those clothes and then in the summertime hang them up. Well, while I was hanging up I was helping her wash. You know, load. Well, then they washed pretty often. Not like once a week like we had. We had a lot of washing to do, maybe every other day. In them days where you'd fill that up... ...we washed right outside on the back porch. And it was boiling water and for everything it was white. Well, I guess it was boiling water. It was hot water and in them days you had those copper boilers, you know. Yes, you had to fire up. But you didn't have it as convenient. I wouldn't say you could get the clothes as clean as you can nowadays... ...because right now, you know, we had regular... I believe my mother, if I remember right... ...we used to get them big bars of soap. My mother used to cut them up, shave them off. I see. That was used for... We didn't have all these fancy box sugars. I mean, with different kinds of soap. There's a new box every week almost on TV. Yeah, well, here. There's always a new one. And then you got liquid soap now. Everything, everybody's got something new. So when you were growing up there was not such a thing. There was just the bars open and scraped it off... ...and they lasted for many years. Well, yeah. In other words, I mean the same system. Same system, yeah. So the washing machine, they came in when you were about 10, 11? Oh, yeah, I would say so. Anyway, I was old enough to... I was big enough to... Back and forth. Back and forth with that handle. You could sit there too if you were a bigger person. You could put your foot on there, help you, you know. Oh, I see. But I had to stand up, you know. Push that bag. It wasn't too hard. It was a good exercise for you. Well, anyway, she's going to hang up clothes. She can't be... But that was quite an improvement. To have a washing machine like that. And then of course when the electricity got in, why? How about refrigerators now? They came in early but not in the regular home. Icebox with a lot of ice in it. That was it. Icebox? Icebox, yeah. And they were delivered twice and not quite ice, man. Yeah, he'd come around there and you'd get maybe 50 or I don't know what size. We had a pretty good size icebox. We had to have a big one. And I don't know how many pounds of ice went in there but there was a lot of ice. But we was chippin' on it all the time. Us kids, you know. We'd chip some of that ice, get that ice so we could make a cold drink. So it didn't last long. And he put that ice... Your mother put the cart in the window then. How many pounds she needed. Yeah, well, she got ice every time they come by. And there was a horse drawn iceman. I think, if I remember right, I did have a cart. Like 25, 50, whatever you wanted. And he put it outside the porch. So it went inside the kitchen. How did it work? Oh, he put it in the icebox. Right in the kitchen? Well, yeah, he put the ice away from us, if I remember it. And he had the big... Oh, they had those claws on his back and carried it in. Yeah, he did that. So, of course, that's been a long time since they delivered ice. But he was a busy man though. Oh, sure, everybody got ice. And in the wintertime, nothing was used then? Not in the wintertime, no. Only in the summer? Only in the summertime, yeah. And he had a lot of ice. He was busy because everybody got ice. When he came by, they wanted ice. It was 25 pounds or 50 or what. Maybe some of them... We only had one icebox. It was a big one. Do you remember if you mixed ice with your drink? In other words, if you had some cold drink, like iced tea, could you put some ice in there? No, we could chip the ice off there. We'd chip the ice off of there. And put it in a glass of water and make it cold. How about ice cream? Well, we wasn't too much on ice cream. We was too many of us to have ice cream. Of course, we could buy ice cream cones then for a nickel, you know. I used to get ice cream cone once in a while, but I don't remember my brothers. But not in the homes? My brothers would sometimes bring ice cream home. Them day was all hand-packed. We'd bring some of that home. And I'd get ice cream that way. But they didn't last long. You had to consume it immediately after the arrival. That lasted just about 15-20 minutes after we got home with it. My mother used to like ice cream. But anyway, that was it. What flavor was it? Was it chocolate? No, I think vanilla is the only thing I can remember. They probably had others. But vanilla was... They wasn't too much ice cream out them days. They had ice cream, but not like it is now. Everybody's had ice cream. What kind of store could you buy the ice cream in? There was a lot of pool halls up there on the corner. And they would have some drinks there. Around your neighborhood? So you didn't have to go downtown? No, no, no. There was pool halls and that. They'd have ice cream in there. And there were quite a few grocery stores too? Yeah, grocery stores. Almost in every block? Yeah, they did have. There's half a dozen around our place. And they sold meat and anything you wanted? Meat, groceries, what have you. And nothing was... no expiration date on anything? No, no. We never had any trouble. It didn't last too long at our place. But now you can take stuff and you can have it for weeks. You can freeze it in just an hour or two. Just like I got a big freezer out there. And there's an icebox on this side. And I'm just for myself. I get along fine. Don't have to run upstairs. You mentioned here now you had the art house. Do you remember when you were a little boy, if you really had to go out there, did you avoid it? At night time? Yeah, because you were scared to walk out? If it was in the morning or something like that, we had a facility upstairs. For temporary use? It was in a regular stool. I see. It was like a toilet. Yeah, that lid came down. And that was necessary. For emergency. We always took care of that before we went to bed at night. Of course older people I think probably can't... I was a kid. I'd go to sleep at night. I wouldn't have to go until I got up in the morning. So it was in your system. Well, if I did, I had the facilities there. But were you scared to walk out at night? No, no, no, there was no problem there going out at night. Were you ever scared for dark? No, no. But didn't the people that came together, the English fellows, talk a lot of what they call a spook history? Did they use that kind of... Well, no, I never... To scare the young people? No, I never experienced any of that. Not in Europe? No, no, everybody was so nice. Never had no problems there at all. I enjoyed being with my family. Was there a regular clean out by the city or did each homeowner take care of it? City. Well, no, there would be a fellow come by to do that. So not each homeowner cleaned out? No, no, no, no. They had a regular... Handysakker, they call them. Yeah, well anyway, they'd come by and they would clean your toilet out. I mean, they had a special wagon for that. And it was horse drawn? Yeah, yeah. And then they brought it to the dumping place? I don't know where they took it. I really wouldn't know if they had a place to take it, of course. And it was once every month? Well, they'd come... ...Wallace, Sunquist, Rock Island, Illinois. It was a good time. In other words, you went through a lot of different things. Oh yeah, that's right. The washing bowl crank and... I was the one, in them days too... I'd go to the store to get stuff. I'd get that from my mother. But they used to deliver groceries, you know, years ago. They'd have the grocery man come down and he'd take your order to your house. He came right to the house? He'd come right to the house, take your order. And then they would deliver it to you. See? Yeah, oh, that was common. Do you think there are so many kids now in the family? Oh yeah, we could go up and get our groceries. But they would stop there if you wanted something. Well, they had a lot of sweetie stuff if you wanted, you know. But they stopped at the house. And there was no extra charge for this delivery? No, no. They'd stop right at your house and take your order and they'd deliver it. It was one of these horse and wagon jobs, you know. Yeah, sure. Yeah. How about that? They were selling door to door then, actually, because they could probably tell them to buy this and... Well, you didn't have to, but if you wanted something, why... His regular customers, see. I mean, when he came to take the order, he could say, you know, today we have this and you should think about buying this and so on. Well, yeah, it was a business for him and a convenience for the people. That's what I would say it would be. Especially for old people, of course. Yeah, you didn't have to, but I know that my mother would write down what I wanted, what she wanted, and I'd bring it up there and give it to the clerk up there in the store. Well, them days, every time you bought something, them days, you'd have to sack it up. You wanted some beans, why, they'd have to sack it up for you. There was no canned goods like you can go around now, pick anything up from soup to nuts. I'm talking about on canned stuff. Well, you didn't have them them days. The stuff you had to get then, why, you had to bring it home and you'd have to make it. There, that was it. Everything from scratch. Yeah, yeah. Go to the Meat Star and now they see you come in there and they used to have weenies hanging up, you know, big stacks of them, I'm talking about years ago. You want a weenie, they'd drop one of them weenies off and give it to you and you'd eat weenies while he was getting the order ready for you. And they don't give them away like that nowadays. They want about a dollar and a half pound for them. So that's the difference, see. So that was an experience then to go to the grocery store and see. You would trade them with something, a little bit candy maybe. Oh yeah, they always give you something. They were always a good measurement. Yeah, they'd give you a piece of candy or if you went to the meat store they'd always have those weenies hanging out. Do you remember that your mother had to bring back something that was bad? No, I can't. People never complained about anything, they just threw it out there if something was not right. No, I don't think they've ever got anything bad. It was a good turnover I suppose. Whatever you got then you used to have to make it yourself. I wonder now about meat, you know, because nowadays you had to be so careful and everything. But years ago they could hang there for weeks and meat loaves and everything. Well, you couldn't take care of meat then like you can now. What did they do in the summertime for instance with meat, fresh meat? Well, I think you just got what you had to have. It was up to the customer to see. No, we had a meat store just a couple of blocks away from us and we could go up there and get meat as we needed it then. But I remember years ago, like I say, we used to get beef and hang that outside. But it worked out good. We raised all our kids, our family was raised and done a good job. And the eggs you have right on your own property? Yeah, yeah. What are the roosters crowing in the morning? We used to like eggs. The first one down there, down there to get some eggs. We had some extra ones. We kept the eggs taken care of all the time. Did you fry them then or you boiled them? No, we'd fry them. And you had potatoes? Yes, but we'd fry them. We used to like to fry eggs. I and my brother, we'd fry eggs. We'd go home and see who could get the eggs. Rush to the hen house. Well, anyway, we had those. The fire was always going so... Well, you know what the cook where we used to have them, them great big iron frying pans and all stuff like that. Those are the thing of the past although I got a couple of them out there and I don't very seldom use them. But cooking now is so much... So many things you can have for cooking, so it's a whole lot different. But I enjoyed the years ago being with my family and I was brought up that way. I had the good and the bad, really. And then you married a Swedish girl too. She was born over here. Oh, yeah. We had a daughter and two boys. How did they catch on with the Swedish culture? Did they learn to prepare smorgasbord? Fry eggs like you did? Oh, yeah. They still do. They still do, yeah. I got a daughter that's a good cook. They kept up the tradition of lutefisk and herring. Well, they like herring but I won't say for the lutefisk. But they like herring and potato bologna and stuff like that. You had a liking for lutefisk? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I haven't made any here the last... I think I made some. You could buy it already. You take it home and fix it yourself, which is very simple the way it is. But no years ago when you got it dry and had it soaked down the basement. Then when you had that, like my mother's folks downstairs, we had that soaking all the time. We ate a lot of it then. So that worked out real good. So that was quite an experience. It tastes good with the white sauce and pepper on it. Yes, sir. That was good. But now the stuff they got now is practically already prepared. I think it's probably got a little different taste than what it used to be years ago. The young generation doesn't care for that kind of... Too many of them. It's older Swedish people that buy it. I don't know of any young people that buy it. Well, if you go to Smörgåsborg for instance, you can see them. Most of the Swedes of course eat lutefisk. But the young generation born here, they avoid it. That's a general rule, I would say. But silt and we still make that. We make silt and potato bologna. And I make herring. In fact, I get it down there and I make up two or three jars of it. You can't get... I used to get herring, you know, the whole size herring. But get it now, now it's all filleted herring. You like to hold the whole thing? Yes, it's already filleted. You can take it home and soak it and then cut it up the way you want it. And then you add your onions and paprika and whatever seasoning you like to have in there. And fix it yourself. So it works pretty good that way. Nowadays you belong to Vasa, Noble... Yes, Noble Art 388. When did you join? I brought there for, I'd say about five years. Five years? So you were not an early member then? I'm a 65 year member of Switheads. So that was the beginning of the Swedish organization to you? Yes, Vasa. Vasa a lot, yes. I mean the Switzer Lodge, that was the first one you joined? Oh, yes. I brought that. October 20th, 1920. I was a full-fledged member. You know, 16 years old. Have you been an officer in that organization? Well, I have, yes. I'm an officer of the lodge up there right now. I'm trustee and have charge of the bank accounts and so forth. And keep track of the money. How about the young generation? Are they interested to join? Well, we're having problems getting younger people. Yes, we are. We are. But we get new members. We get some younger members too, but they don't follow through. Well, we've got an old Swedish custom. We always have things to eat after we get through with our meeting. We had a nice Christmas party here last Sunday. And we had about 35 there I guess. And a nice meal. Everything was free, you know. And had a Christmas exchange. So we get along good that way. Keep the traditions going. But there's a lot of people that can't come down, you know, in the weather conditions. But they still belong. I'm talking about the older people. So the Vossel Lodge is the same. We have meetings down there, I would say. I'm chairman of the committee down there for trying to get people in. And we have a difficulty there too, see, with the younger people. Do they have other interests? Yeah, they have other interests. When we go down there, mostly older people, you know. How about your children? You had four of them? Yeah, my kids belonged to the Swede. Yeah, yeah. They belonged to the Swede. Are they living in the Kvar Cities? Yeah, Ward lives in Rock Island and Jim lives in Moline. My other daughter lives in Western Springs. And they all went through college? Well, Ward didn't go through college. But Jim, I would say he went to Augustana and then he went to college up there in Wisconsin. And his three kids all are college educated. The one that's in now, he'll be out of college in June. And they're all working. And so that's Ward's family. He ain't got any kids at home, they're all married. So they're drifted around. How about the contact with Sweden, or with the relation over there? I have no contact with them at all. No connection? No. So they were broken when your parents died? Yeah, and most of those, they would be maybe like my cousins or something like that. And they're as old as I am, practically. Or maybe someone would be older. So I had no connections with them at all. Swedish doctors in Moline. Were there any, when you were growing up, that the people went to for cures of colds and sickness? No, I don't, oh, there were Swedish doctors I suppose, but I don't remember offhand what I... No special name that you remember? No, no I don't. How about the undertakers, which one was the biggest? Well, the Estudals, they've been there, Swedish background from years back. For many years. So that's maybe third generation Estudals. I don't know, there's one in Rackhallen, Larsen, but I don't know too much about him. But Estudals, we've always had our arrangements with the Estudal people. The fact is, I know all the, well, the Estudal family, you know, they belonged to the lodges where we were, and even so right now. You remember the old men I suppose? Oh yeah, the Estudals, sure, and the other ones coming down, sure. So this is the third generation that's operating? Oh, I would say so, yeah, I would say so, yeah. How about lawyers and insurance men? You have Oakleaf, they were Swedish. Oh yeah, there were a lot of, I suppose, insurance people that got a Swedish background. And there would be doctors too. I know there's people named Johnson and different Swedish names, but I wouldn't know anything about them really. How were they divided, the Swedes in Rackhallen and Moline? Were there more Swedes in Moline than Rackhallen? Well, I would say Moline. That used to be the stopping ground there when they come in. That would be Moline. I'd say Moline. Because Rackhallen is more connected with, I understand, a college, I suppose, to the teachers. Well, there's Swedes here in Rackhallen too. There's Swedes in Rackhallen. And they live up around this area where you live now? Where they live here, and they could be living anywhere. But I think Moline and Rackhallen and East Moline, I know there's Swedish people in East Moline too. And I think overall, I think they're pretty well distributed around. I think all nationalities are concerned now. It used to be years ago, it would just be one or two, but I think they're pretty well mixed up with everything right now. Yeah, like they're talking about the Belgians that live on Seventh Street and the Swedes over there, but it's not there anymore. No, they live next door and what have you. Like the Belgians now, do they have a meeting center like the Swedes? Well, I think most of them belong to have what you call a friend circle up in Moline. And they have some lodges, but I think most of them belong to friend circle. But I don't think you have to be Belgium there to belong, but it's originated with that. It's just like everything else. With any organization, you've got to branch out because... There are different ideas. With just one nationality, you're not going to... And you have to get something there for the young people. If you don't, it's going to fade out. And that's the hard part. You can't get young people to join. But they have their organization. Like the Swedes now, they had Alfell and Aller Lager, they had Vasa, Viking, Svenska Brudarförbundet, and Svetjöld, and Fridhjem, the Temperance. And then they had some singing groups. There were a lot of groups of Swedes. How about the Belgians now? Do they have so many groups, do you think? I don't think there. I know there used to be a lot of Swedish groups with singing. Choirs and singing and things of that kind. But now I don't know about the Belgians. See, Belgians, mostly Belgians, they're Catholic. That's the origin of their homeland. And they're Catholics here. And of course I don't go to a Catholic church or any of their functions, so I've lost track of that. I try to keep up with my own church. And that keeps me busy. Maybe they are functioning more or less through the church, the Belgians. Because the Swedes, they are Lutherans, Baptists, Methodists, and the Free Church, and they are divided. But the Belgians, they are religiously one group. Yes, they are Catholic. But they are having a hard time with Catholic religion now. They are a little bit freer. Yes, there are a lot of things they don't, well, I hear it on television and that's where I get most of my information. You know, you can't get divorced, this and this. There are so many things there, so they are having big problems. And there are different things, confession, you have to go and all this and that. I don't know, it's just one of those things.