 I'm sitting together with Lamont Hultgren, born in Illinois. He was born in 1909, 29th of May in Andover, Illinois. And we have today the 22nd of April, 1986. Was that the 21st of May? Or did you say the 21st of May? It's 21st of May. May 21st. May 21st. So 21st of May, 1909, you were born in Andover. So your parents, were they farmers in Andover? Yes, they were. Yes. My parents were. We first, we lived just about two and a half miles from Andover, from the village of Andover. What direction on the? South of Andover. And my dad farmed, some of his farm was on the north side of the Edwards River. Most all of his farm was on the north side. In fact, we farmed right up to the Edwards River there. So he was on pretty good bottom land then? Good bottom land, yes. And we rented the farm there. And then, of course, my grandparents, the Bengtsons, they lived just across the road in a little, that house is gone now. And then my uncle, Art Bengtson, lived just exactly across the road from our lane in the farmhouse there. And that was your mother's brother? That was my mother's brother, yes. What year, do you know when they came over, roughly? But I'm not sure what year it would be. I would think it probably was in the 70s, 1870s. And they came from? They from Småland. Småland. Yes. You don't know the place? No. Not exactly. Yeah, they came from a funny town. I told you I couldn't pronounce the letter B. Oh, Veksjö? Yeah. Oh. Close to Veksjö, yeah. Yes. Well, that's where my records are. But that's on my, that was on my mother's side, yes. You don't know the reason why they came? Did they have a relation here already in Andover? Or? No, I don't believe they had relation here. But they came direct to Andover. They came direct to Andover, yes. They started renting land and? They rented land and were farmers. How big of a tract did they rent, 80 acres or? No, my, the grandparents on my father's side, they rented, and they rented, on one side of the road was 160 acres, and on the others, I think it was 80 acres on the other side, 240 acre, 240 acre farm. And I'm not sure, eventually they bought it. But I'm not sure of the price or whatever they, what they paid for it. It was a pretty good slab of land there. Yes. And then my dad, of course, moved from the village of Andover. We were about 2 and 1 1 half miles south of Andover. Then when we moved, we only moved twice. Then we moved to a farm about two miles further south. And then my dad rented a farm. And then my dad rented, bought a farm. He bought a 160 acre farm just directly south on the Andover Woodall Road, about four miles south of Andover. And that's where we spent most of our lives and lived there. It's rather interesting there that when he bought the land, 160 acres on one side of the road, the other side of the road, 80 acres on the other side of the road that didn't have any buildings was for rent. And at that time, that was probably in the, let's see, that would probably be in the, I was in high school. So that would be in the 20s. He bought the land for 80 acres for $5,000. And due to the fact that we were so many children in the family, why he didn't have, he didn't pay off the money. He just paid the interest. At that time, it was $300 a year interest. A $6,000 at 5% was $300 a year. He paid $300 a year. And the bank didn't need anything on the primary. No, it didn't pay anything on the primary. And he paid $300 interest because the farmer he bought it from just was satisfied with the $300 interest. He did that for 20 years. He paid out $6,000 interest and paid $5,000 for the land. $5,000 for the business deal. $5,000, but at the time, he was using that money for our education, for our schooling. He wanted to save for our schooling and college. But I always thought that was interesting, $5,000 for 80 acres of land and $6,000 worth of interest. So they went direct to the owner of the land. It didn't go through any bank. No, it didn't go through any bank. It went right directly to the farm, between the two farmers. And the farmer was satisfied with the $300. Where did he live, in Andover then? No, the, that was, me and the man, he bought the land up. Well, he just lived in a joining farm. But he was, I think he was going to retire. He was older than my dad. He was a Swede, Almond Johnson. And he didn't have any children or any? Yes, he had two children. One, in fact, one of the daughters lives in Andover and the other one is in Florida. The two children. They were not interested in the continued farming? No, they, well, they already owned a big farm. And this was just a little bit away from him. It didn't, it didn't join, it didn't really join his farm. So he, it was across the road from us and it was handy for us. So it was inconvenient for him with the horsepower? Yeah, well, the horsepower at that time was a little more inconvenient that way. So how was the farm located? Now, you said on the north side of the Edwards River. Yeah, the first farm we rented was on the north side of the Edwards River. And the farm that my dad, before we moved, we moved on the south side of the Edwards River. But, and then we, the land we bought was on the south side of the Edwards River. It was on the- Is the river running east and west there then? Yeah, the river runs east and west. Edwards River. How long did it continue to do that before it- Well, let's see, it goes through, it goes through, oh, it goes through Ophiim and it goes on past, in Sedona, I think there. And also goes up east toward, toward, I don't really know how far it would go east, but it goes up toward the, oh, up toward the Kiwanee area up in there. And it's still going east and west? Yeah, still going east. I mean, west and east or wherever. That's right. I see. And that land, do you remember that river being flooded? Oh, yes. Every year? Not every year, but once it flooded for, once it flooded for, oh, it flooded for, it was almost, let's see, it would be about from the corner there would be at least a half a mile. It flooded, the water came up for a half a mile and haystacks and straw stacks would come down and in some cases, and on top of the straw stacks and haystacks were pigs. And one time, and I remember at the flood where we, and there were horses and mules floating and swimming in the water and they got caught in the barbed wire fence and we had to go out in the boats and cut the wires so that they would come loose. They got caught in the barbed wire fence. But the danger was that we were afraid after we cut the wires that they would crawl up on top of the boat that we were in, because they were struggling to keep, they were desperate and as soon as we'd cut the wires, we had to hurry to get away so that they wouldn't follow us and jump and try to get into our boat. But they swam? They were swimming. Of course, in some cases they could hit, get the ground too, but near the main channel, it was, it was of course very deep, but near the main channel. But out in the fields, it was rather shallow and they could still, they could still touch ground. But there was, like I said, there was, the most interesting thing was to see a great big straw stack coming down on the flooded waters with pigs on top of the straw stack. Of course, they were desperate. They were trying to find any place they could, trees or fence posts or something to latch onto. How big of a spread was it? That would be about... How many acres? Oh, I would cover a half, the half mile would probably cover, probably cover over a hundred acres in width in flood. And they happened in the fall or in the spring? This happened in the spring. And I can't exactly remember the year. It must've been, because I must've been around, it must've been in the 20s, I think, because I remember I was old enough to be in it. It must be before planting time then. Yes, before planting time. And I suppose that they had thrashed the year before and the haystack and the straw stacks were still there. So this happened not every year, you said, but- No, no. Sometimes it would get, the river, the Ebers River would get full, but very seldom. There's only this one year that I can remember a real bad flood. Was that before they dredged it out or- Oh, that, yes, it was before they dredged it out, yeah. Now it hasn't, for many, many, for many years now, it's never been anywhere near that high because they straightened it and dredged it. So it became a, but it also made, it was a good farming ground on the bottom land there. So the fall crop, for instance, was never in danger then most of the time? No. You could always harvest corn and- Yeah, because we used to, of course, once in a while, what it did, and sometimes it would leave little ponds and there would be fish left in the- In the fields. In the fields. And we would go down and, but near the, I remember when we lived on the three miles south, two and a half miles south of Andover, we would go in there with our boots and stir up the water, and the muddy water would bring the bullheads. They'd go for air and they'd come to the surface and stick their mouth up above the surface, and then we would get under them and scoop them up and throw them up on the dry ground. And then we had tubs, and we, somebody would throw them in the tubs of, in a tub. And then what we would do, we would take them home and put them in the big fish tank, or in the big water tanks, the horse water tanks, and then they would be in there for some time and then they would be real, they'd be good for eating because they would stay in the clear water for maybe weeks or months. So- You could have raced them then after a few months. Oh, we could have raced them, yeah, we just kept them in tubs, in tanks of water, and then we would dip out some for meals. How big would they be then? Oh, some of them, of course, and the bullheads are, I guess, like catfish. They're really better when they're just medium-sized. And these, I would say, these probably were one pound, or they were the best eating. Some of them were, and we wouldn't keep any that were not, but they were all about good size, eating size, about one pounders, and maybe a little better than that, some of them. So this was an ever-treading, a threat to the farmer in the area, all the time, that is flooding them. Yes, it was. Not the fact that there was, most of it was all farm ground, so it really was never any concern about any homes or to speak of, but it was for farming ground because it would spoil the crops, or it would, and it would sometimes, you couldn't farm the ground because it was too much water. What did they do then if they couldn't get on the planting in the spring? Did they leave it then for? Yeah, they had to leave it, and it became wasteland and weeds, and sometimes they would put in a later crop, but it spoiled the crops for the year. Because it was all horsepower then. It was all horsepower, that's right. Very few farmers had a tractor in the 20s. I don't recall, I don't recall in the 20s, very few would have. I know the first tractor we had was, that was after I started college, and I would think probably, that was, we didn't get it, we got an Oliver, I think, and I think our first tractor was about 1930, but some of the farmers had had tractors before that. So before that time, the farmers didn't take the horses out and just run over the open field for? No, if you could cultivate five acres in one day with the horse, that was a good day's hard work. With a team? With a team, that would mean, and many of those, what we did, most of us, were the walking plows. And I remember we had one field where we had half-mile rows, five rows made an acre, and that's how we were able to tell that we could do five acres in one day, and that was very unusual, because it would take, but what really happened, my dad, this was before I was able to work, when I was real small, my father was a real hard worker, he would go down with one team of horses at dawn, and then my mother would take another team of horses down for lunch, and they would switch teams at least probably three and four times a day, and he would just keep on cultivating or plowing from sunrise till sunset. And put in, that was some long days. Did man have to stay in it all the time? Man stayed in the field all the time, and the mother would get the horses off from the barn and take them down and exchange a team of horses, and then she would take the, put the other horses, feed the other horses, take them back to the barn, and one thing that was very, in those days, was the fact that he worked six long days a week, but on Sundays, never, and I think mainly it was from the standpoint not on his own, but he rested the horses. He didn't think the horses should be worked to seven days a week. Never any work on Sundays. Never any work on Sundays. And that was pretty much true for all farmers. They- They fed the pigs and the cows. They did the chore, but they would not work the horses in the fields on the seventh day on Sunday. Did they have any mules? Oh yes, and the mules were big, strong, and- How were they then? Was they more thin for the hard work, I mean steady? Well, mules would kind of, were stubborn. They would take care of themselves. They wouldn't overwork. Now, we had horses that would become overheated, and they'd go just like almost crazy. They would just run, and they'd be frothing, or I mean, foaming from the sweat and everything, and they would just go berserk, but a mule would never. They would stop, and they would rest, and you just couldn't get them to go. And another thing is we had the big, we had some big mules, big, tall things that you could put their head up. You couldn't even get the bridle on them, and they had long ears, and they hated to have the bridle put on them, and I remember my dad, he was about the, he was the only one that could put a bridle on them. When every time a hired man came in, when they tried to put the bridle on a mule and put the ears underneath the bridle, they'd take their head and throw them against the side, and unless, until my dad stayed right there and watched and talked to them, he'd find that the hired man would finally be able to bridle them. But the thing about them was, too, that if you acted scared, they had your buffalo. They'd, you could never get a bridle on them, but if you went up there with confidence and just made up your mind you were gonna do it, why, they would let you put the bridle on, but they were different from a horse because the ears was just long, and it hurt them when they bent their ears over to put it under the bridle. So this sounds like they were smarter than the horses then. I mean, more smart in that sense of being orderly. Oh, yes, the mules, I think, were smarter than the horses in many ways, but they didn't work as hard. They quit. They quit, and you had to use the whip on them once in a while because you had to let them know that you were the boss. Even as a team. They'd take advantage of you as a team. Even as a team, no, they all worked together then. Yeah. One quit, the other one quit, too. Yeah, they would, they seemed like they would, they really wanted to be the boss. Be the boss. Be the boss. How about when darkness fell? They say, I heard something about it when it was dark or became dark, they quit. Yeah, they got tired. They slowed down, and they'd want to go, first thing you know, they'd head for home, and you'd have to pull the reins pretty tight to get them to stay in there, to go another round with the plow or something. They seemed to know when it was time to go home. They seemed to know when it was time to quit. Were they used for combines, I mean binders later on? Oh yes, yeah. Any kind of farm shores then? They were used, the only thing is they were never used for like, well, you had a gang plow, you'd always have three horses, and then you'd have another two horses up in the lead, and the mule was never good for a lead horse. You'd have to, because they would stop way before you come to the end of the row, and they seemed like they always wanted short change on. Make it short at any time. Make it short, they wanted to turn before you come to the end. Oh, I see. Yeah, they were smart. They were really smart then. And they were. So you remember driving a team of. Oh yes, I had many times. Why do they keep the mules though when they were stuck? Well, they were tough, and they could stand a lot of. Were they healthier? They were always, never had to keep a mule in the barn for a day's rest or anything. They conserved their energy, it seemed like, and they were really, and they never did perspire and sweat like the other horses. And we had some Arabians which were very good. They were tough, and they didn't perspire. For work horses? For work horses, they were better. And they were shorter hair, and seemed to stand the heat a lot better. Because you see, in those days, the heat was pretty bad out there. During the midday, when you were farming, why, the sun would be really poured down on you, and it was hard to keep going. Comparing the feeding schedule now for horses and mules, or also the feeding contents, were they content with less? I think the mules took less feed. And of course, that was true for horses too. It seems to me the Arabians took less feed. I suppose it's just like humans. We had some horses that we fed, we could feed about half the ears of corn, and still they kept the weight good. And others would eat twice as much and still be thin. It varied. I think they're pretty much like humans. Some of them seem to take a lot more feed, and yet they kept their weight down. When you were out in the field in the morning, you started the day after breakfast, did you have a coffee break in between? Oh yes, always. It was long days. Did somebody come over? Somebody always came in. We just stopped long enough at the end of the row to have lunch. And we usually... But you didn't go home then for lunch? Oh no, we didn't go home for lunch. Mother and father would come in, and mother or a sister would come out with lunch. And that probably would be around nine o'clock. We did come home at noon. And then again at about three o'clock, four o'clock, probably four o'clock in the afternoon, they would come out with lunch at the end of the row, and we would have lunch, and then we would work till late into the evening. Although, it was a little different in haying, then we were at home and we were putting hay in the barn, then we would have lunch at the house. You had a heavy meal then at the... No, a heavy meal was... Of course, all meals were big. The breakfast was big because you worked hard in the meals. Well, I'll tell you, it seems funny that, well, like in haying time, here you would be with a pitchfork and loading hay, rack after rack, and putting it up way up high, lifted an awful lot of weight during the day, do that all day long. And that requires a lot of strength and a lot of muscle to do that all day long. So you had to have, you'd be worn out at the end of doing that for about the end, three, four hours while you were ready for a cup of Swedish penicillin. So you drank a lot of coffee then? Oh, drank a lot of coffee. You started as a young boy with coffee? Yeah, oh yes, I think we started diet. We started, I can't say exactly, but I would say probably about the time I started school, about six or seven, I suppose. You didn't have coffee with you to school, though? No, no, we didn't. It was milk? Yeah, we'd had milk with us. That's what we had, a lot of milk, because we did a lot of milking. When the crop, that you were accustomed to when you were growing up, there was oat, corn. Yeah, a lot more oats than there is now, even wheat. We would grow winter wheat, yeah. And that was one of the most highest priced at that time. I remember my dad would, and it was very heavy, my dad would take a team of horses and a load of wheat to the town, and he seemed like that'd get more money, we'd get more money for the load of wheat than we did corn or oats. But we did raise a lot of oats, because in those days, they didn't do the fertilizer. The only fertilizer we ever put on a field was from the manure, either from the cow manure or the pig manure or chicken manure on the fields. You had a spreader in? We had a spreader, yeah. It's what they call a bloom spreader, two horses, and a spreader, and a load of oats. And a spreader, and we would, that's the only fertilizer we used. When did you spread the oats, or in the wintertime? Well, usually, no, we would, yeah, well, we would spread in the fall. But not too much in the winter, because it was frozen, of course, but in the fall, right after, as a general rule, during the time we were threshing, and when it was on a rainy day, we went threshing, well, then we would use the, we'd go working on the manure spreader. Then another thing they did that you don't see nowadays is the fact that we rotated. We would have two ears of corn, and then we would have to put oats in, and then with the oats, we would put clover seed. And then the next year, we would have, the fourth year, we would have hay and clover. Then we would plow up the clover, and then raise two more ears of corn, and then oats again, and then clover. So every, we only got two ears of, two ears of corn, one ear of oats, and one ear of clover. It was rotating, and then? Rotating. Clover did the, and then? Everything that, in other words, that was supposed to put the nitrogen back in the soil. So there was no soybeans or anything like that at that time? No, I don't remember ever, I don't remember soybeans coming in until very, much later. No, we, and we had barley, which I hated, because the, oh, that's, the spears on that was just terrible, it was shocking. When you put it in shocks, why, and the threshing, too, was terrible, and stacking of barley was terrible. And that was used for feeding the pigs, then, the barley? Barley was, yes, that was used, a lot of times we would make it in some kind of a mesh. We would mix things together, and put oats and barley, and put it in a barrel, and some water, and then put it in the troughs, dish it out with, put it out in a pail, and put it in troughs. For the pigs? For the pigs. How about the cows, then, what kind of? Well, that was the cows, they would, most of all was corn and hay. The best hay, of course, was clover, and alfalfa for the, we had some alfalfa, too. When did they come in, in the 20s, alfalfa? They came in in the 20s and 30s, and the one nice thing about alfalfa, we could cut it three times a year. It would grow up real early in the spring, and then we'd cut it, and mow it, and harvest it, and we'd get three crops off the land. But that was a tough proposition, to plow the ground, or after alfalfa? Well, sometimes we would have, oh, alfalfa was hard to plow. The roots were deep, and it was hard to plow, and it'd take a lot of horse power. Usually, we had to put on a sulky plow. We would put on four horses instead of the regular three, and sometimes, on the gang plow, we would put on three in the back and three in the front, make six horses for the gang plow. That was a two-plow share. Six horses for three people? Yeah, yeah, sometimes when, it was better that way, because of the fact that they wouldn't have to pull as hard, and it could last, the horses lasted longer. But we also used the- Was there 14-inch plow as well? That was two plow shares, and they were, I don't know how many inches they were. I think they would plow about, I think about 12-inch, 24-inches is about what the width every round. But we used, for the horse feed, we used Timothy a lot for the clover, pretty much clover for the cattle, and Timothy for the horses. Timothy, he was the best for the horses. So how about the oats? Oats, yeah, the oats, we would change. Usually, as a general rule, we fed the horses corn in the morning, oats at noon, and corn again at night. And the corn, was there crossed with the middle or something like that, or did they give it? No, no, we just fed it, just for the ears, yeah. We just fed them the ears. But the cattle, what we would have to do, we'd have to crack it. In other words, we'd pound it on the stalls that we fed them out of, big troughs. And we would, one ear of corn, we'd probably knock it into three pieces, two and three pieces for the cattle, because they would. Was that done with a hammer mill or some kind of? No, we would just crack it with our hand. We'd just hold on the end of the corn ear and hit it against the wood, and it would crack off into two and three places. It was hard sometimes to crack it in three or four pieces. It's easy to crack it just in the middle, but sometimes it was a real solid ear, you'd have to hit it awful hard against the wood piece in the trough there to get it to crack into three or four pieces. But Dad always wanted it cracked up as fine as he could, because it was easier for the cattle to, and it depended upon whether there were small calves or big steers that we were feeding for market. And they were able to chew off the corn? Oh yeah, they'd just take it in one gulp. But the horses would use their teeth and they would nibble it off like you would sweet corn. And they'd leave the cob, but the cattle would take the whole, the whole one half of the ear of corn in one gulp and down it. And they'd chew it around. And they were able to digest it then? Yeah, they'd chew it, they'd chew a little bit on it, but it evidently went down cobs and all, a little different. Horses, of course, they did. And the pigs, they could use the whole ear? Yeah, no, pigs would take it off with their teeth, something like a horse. They would bite the kernels off. This is site two continuation with Lamont-Hawkins, Moline, Illinois. 22nd of April, 1986. Site two. Well, I was telling you about the feeding the hogs. Well, we would throw the corn out on a, usually as a general rule, we tried to have a concrete, a platform feeding lot there right outside the hog house. We'd throw the corn, the ear of corn out, and they would, of course, they would eat it off the corn ears. But the thing that was difficult was they left the cobs, and we would have to, that was one of our jobs, was many times we would have to take a scoop shuttle and take all the cobs off to one side. And of course, they were also, sometimes the manure were there too, and we'd have to use the scoop shuttle to scrape off the cobs and the manure off the feeding pavement that we, or concrete slab that we had there outside the hog house. Oh, and I suppose a lot of times you just threw it out on the ground, but the cobs was always a big job of cleaning up after animals. And the dry ones were used for? Oh, we used those for the kitchen stove, yes, and for the cook stove, and for the heating stoves. That made, in the mornings, in order to make a fire, that was the best thing there was. They caught fire easily? Oh, caught fire easily, but they were no good for heat. They would just burn up in a fraction of a minute. They'd burn up real fast, but it was good that way. And in the early times, they were also used for toilet paper? Yes, oh yes, in the old outhouse, yeah. And the Sears Rubik catalog was out there with papers, and they came after the corn cobs, yeah. So there was a revolution. Yeah, then they were- Alfalfa, did it make any difference if you have alfalfa for two years and plowed it, or if you kept alfalfa for five, six years, were the root system more in the ground then? They were more in the ground, and as a general rule, they didn't like to keep it that long because corn was a more profitable crop, and it made more money. It was... Corn was, they liked to have as much corn as they could because it was the best and the most profitable crop. But it must have been a wonderful feature. I mean, crop though, cutting it three times a year. Oh yes, it was a good crop because you would get so much hay out of it that it was, and not only that, I remember when we, what we would do sometimes would be to plow it under. We'd let maybe the third crop we'd plow under because, I'm not sure if it's true or not, but that would be good fertilizer to plow it under. But the roots were so deep and so thick that it was, it took more horsepower. So in the, plowing was always done in the fall? No, we did some spring plowing too, but most of it, they liked to do it in the fall. Even on the alfalfa fields? On the alfalfa fields, let me see. I think we did it more on the spring there than the alfalfa fields, it seemed to me. I'm not, I'm not real, I can't remember whether we did. Were you able then to disk it up good enough to get rid of the root system? Oh yes, yes, but it was different than it was now because you had to do it so many times. Disking, you had to go over it and over it. And the disk was always used instead of a harrow? And I think too, oh no, we used the harrow too, but the harrow wasn't used until after the disk. We would disk it several times and then we would use the, just before planting. The harrow was always used before planting the corn and it made it like a garden. It got it real smooth and got all the lumps and of course what they would do most of the time, like sometimes it was difficult to plow down all the corn stalks. Many times we would burn corn stalks. We'd rake it, we had a regular rake that was with two horses. It was never safe for the cattle for straw, I mean, for what you call it, under the pigs to sleep on or anything like that? No, straw was the best. We used straw. But many times what they would do with the corn, they would, instead of real early in the year before we even start picking it, we would start shocking some of the corn and taking the corn, cutting it by hand most of the time, cutting it by hand and taking a bundle of corn and throwing it out in the pasture for the pigs and the cows. And then that was before we even started picking. Sometimes we'd do that on the out rows so it would be easier to pick too. And the end rows were always drilled. The others were checked, the other corn was checked. When I mean checked, there was a wire and there was a little knob. And when it hit that little knob, the two or three curls of corn would drop down and that would be probably at least three and three and a half feet apart. Now they drill, now everything is drilled and they know your wire is used, of course. They used the regular planter wire where you had to change it at the end of each row. You had to move it over another three and a half foot and then go back on that wire and then it would check in the corn at two and three curls at a time. Was that a system you can see either way you stand at the field? Yeah, you could see. And then we would, the first time we plowed the corn, we'd plow it lengthwise and the next time we would plow it crosswise. But sometimes it was a little crooked because the check mark was, if the wire wasn't stretched tight enough, then the check wire was off a little bit and then you would have to put your plow off to the side so that you wouldn't plow up your corn when that's crossing. And the corn was cultivating. And you cultivated, every farmer cultivated at least three times, some of them four times. First they would go lengthwise, then crosswise, and then lengthwise, and then lay it by. The fourth time, as a general rule, it was laid by. When they laid it by, it meant that you threw the dirt up against the corn and piled it up as high as you could for the last time. And of course, in those days, it wasn't high-bred corn. So the more dirt you could put up against the corn, it wouldn't blow down during the rest of the year. Was the stalk weak? The stalk was weak, oh yes, much weaker. Didn't have the roots that it has now. And it would blow down, and it would be lying on the ground when you come to pick it. And so my dad would, he'd always, which is something I couldn't do, he always had a, he wore a husking peg and a husking hook. And he used the husking peg for the corn standing up, and he used the hook for the corn lying down. And I never could use a hook, I always used a peg. But he picked about twice as fast as I did. It was, of course nowadays, people wouldn't know about the peg and the hook. That's the way they husked the corn in those days. Did you question anything about the methods when you were growing up on the farm? I questioned the early hours and the hard work. No, the methods, you just, you felt that was the only, that was the way to do it, was the only way to do it. Your dad had a good idea, especially when he husked the. Oh yes. Double amount of corn. Oh yes, and he could, and he was real, he was real good, and of course in those days they had national and state and local corn husking champions and they had contests and people would, and they'd also weigh the husks that came with it too, so that you couldn't just throw the ear in the wagon, you'd have to husk it clean. Cleanliness counted quite a bit. But I remember one instance where I, the reason I say it, I questioned, my dad would get up real early in the morning and I remember one time we, I had to sit in the wagon, lay in the wagon and sleep till it got daylight enough to see the corn and we were at the end of the row and one year I brought a, when I was in Augustana College, I brought a fellow by the name of Claude Berkman from Texas. It was too far for him to go home over Thanksgiving, so I brought him over to, I brought him to the farm and so he didn't know anything about husking corn and I wasn't too good at it either, but he said, well, we went in the wagon, he said, well, we'll go in first, your dad, because two of us certainly can keep ahead of him, and I said, I doubt it. He said, oh, you mean that two young guys like us can't keep ahead of him? And he said, sure, we can keep ahead of him. So we did and my dad came after, and I don't know whether he just wanted to pick faster that day or not, but anyway, when we, he ran that pole, the horses in the pole were on our rear all the way through the field. We got to the other end, we were sweating and tired, and we worked as fast as we could, and he was running the pole against us the whole way, and he says, my friend from Augie, Claude, says, let's let him go ahead, we can't keep this up all day. So he had a good system. Oh, he knew, he just took one swipe at the corn ear. When he took the peg or the hook, he would just take one swipe and then break it off and throw it in the wagon, it was clean. We'd take two swipes at every ear, and then we'd get some husk with it and throw it in the wagon. So they took double time right there. Took double time for us, but he knew just how to grab it and how to, he had done a lot of, of course, he had picked a lot of corn before he was farming on his own. He had hired out as a hired hand in the farm when he was a young boy. So he learned from the beginning then, not his dad. Oh yes, yeah, he'd been growing up on the farm. Because your granddad on your father's side now, he was also a farmer. A farmer, yes, uh-huh. He came from Sweden though. Yes, he came from Sweden, from Småland. How could they adapt now, I mean, coming from a different environment in the stony Småland and this beautiful land, deep topsoil, those soils. They must've adjusted because they seemed to know, I imagine they had to learn as they went along because there was things that were different here than no doubt than what they were in Sweden. And the methods were different here too than there. Here, I remember being in Sweden, why they did an awful lot of, like in the hay, they did a lot of shocking. And while we did pretty much of a raking and using the pitchfork and putting the hay right away, as soon as it was dry, we would load it onto the hay rack and haul it in to the barn. And then we would use a big fork. And then we had a pulley, rope pulley, and a team in the back of the barn that would hook onto the rope and then hooked onto the fork. And we would put the fork in the hay and it would lift it up into the barn. And so they never dried in stacks then? Not, no, we did not dry stacks. We would put it in, we usually had a windrow or a side rake. It's the way that we, we didn't leave it out in the field. In fact, now you notice they're leaving it out in the fields now. But we always, we'd put it in the, we tried to get it in the barn dry. But how about the second and third crop of alfalfa? Wasn't that a little bit more? Oh, it took a little longer for it to dry, much longer. It was green and you had to be kind of careful because it could heat up in the barn and then your barn would, your hay in the barn would catch fire. Because it caught fire? Oh yes, quite a number of barns burned up on, on, On green grass. On green grass. Once in a while they would make haystacks, but just instead of like they did in Sweden, instead of small haystacks all over the field, they would have one big one way in the end of the field. And sometimes you would do that, but that was only when the barn was full. We would load the barn first. And then the wintertime, yeah, we'd take a hay knife and cut most of the time, it was so hard to get out, we'd have to take a hay knife and cut a section at a time and then feed it, throw it down to the, to the, into the, where the milk cows were, to where the horses were, and cut it with a, with a knife, hay knife. We had mentioned about, I don't know if you wanted to mention anything about our, some of our neighbors. Yes. How about the old... Oh, we had some old Swedes. It was, it was quite interesting. We had names in those times, I think, it's the same course, of course the Andover Children's Homes there, and everybody had a nickname. Was you close to Andover? Oh yeah, we were close to the Andover Children's Home. We were only about three, four miles away from the Andover's home, and I went to school with the Andover Children's Home there with many of them, and, but everybody, it seemed like everybody had a nickname. And of course, the couple of the old farmers and old men around us, one was called Grimma Frank, one was called Peter Paul, and one was Nils Larsa, Larson, Nils Larson. Those were three interesting individuals. Now, Peter Paul lived in the, right close to us in the timber. There was the, there was, right south of Andover, about two miles out of Andover, is a big, and still is some timber in there, and he lived in the middle of that timber, old Peter Paul. And he was always, he had a big, long, black beard, and he lived by himself, and he was always late. For instance, when my folks were going to the Andover Lutheran Church, and they were on their way home, while here was Peter Paul coming to church. And he was, and he was always behind schedule, and he was an individual that, that everybody knew. He was, and then there was the fellow by the name of Grimma Frank. I don't know that, now, Peter Paul had some relatives, but Grimma Frank, I don't know where he came from, but he just lived up in the timber too. And he, my dad owned the farm, land up there, and he was in an old, little one-room, one-room house, was like a log cabin. And I can just remember him. He lived there, and he didn't do anything, the farm, but he's, my dad took care of him. And I remember when he passed away, why, they, my dad used to go up there about once a week to check on the cattle and that. And one interesting thing was that, see, we weren't too far from the railroad, about, Lynn Center was probably about four miles away in the railroad, and sometimes there would, there would come people coming off of the railroad, would be walking across, and they would find this old, deserted, little log cabin there, and they would, they would probably use it for a while. And I remember one Sunday, my dad checking on the cattle, then he'd always check on this house. He thought there was something, wondered if somebody was in that house, so he went over to, he tried to open the door, and somebody was holding the door closed, and he knocked on the door, and he said, this is Luther Hulkern, I'm checking on the cattle, I just wondered if somebody was in here. And he, dad said the door opened a little bit, and the guy had his hand in his back hip pocket, and it kind of, it rather, it scared him a little, because he didn't know if a man was going to shoot him, or had a gun, and he, then he, my dad said, I started talking pretty fast about the fact that I owned cattle here, and it was perfectly all right for him to be here, and, and, and, this, of course, this is, you don't realize nowadays, it's a big, big timber, and this little cottage right in the middle of the timber, where these, where these old fellows used to live. And I remember the, the Peter, going back to the Peter Paul, when he, I was a young kid in grade school, and his, he became ill, and the reason he became ill is because of the fact that in those days, they didn't have any refrigeration. He opened up, they tell me he opened up a can of tomatoes, and he would put it on the shelf, and then he would eat, he'd probably eat some the next day, or two days later, or three days later, he would eat, if he ate half a can of tomatoes, he would eat the other half. Well, he got tomain poisoning from eating out of cans that were standing on the shelf. Well, he became very, very ill, and he was dying, and he, his sister, Lucinda Paul, was, came back from somewhere, I think she was, I think she lived in Cambridge at that time, she came to take care of him, and she asked me if I would, they knew there'd be a, he was gonna go, and probably be a funeral, and the visitors coming there, and he'd always, his, the house was terrible, the, outside the, right outside the front door were tin cans, he'd open up the front door and throw the tin can right outside, and there was a stack of tin cans there, real high stack of tin cans, she said, would you please take all these cans away, but don't make any noise, because he'll be mad if he knows that you're taking those cans away if he hears you, so I got a wheelbarrow, I think I got paid 50 cents for a day's work for hauling away tin cans way out to the garbage somewhere, and there, but I never will forget it, because as a young boy, that made quite an impression on me. You met this guy, didn't you? Oh yes, I knew both of them, I knew Grimma Frank, and Peter Paul, and Nils Larsen lived in my, he lived, I don't know, they evidently didn't charge any rent, he lived in my, in my grand, in my mother's home, and grandmother's, grandfather's home, and Nils Larsen was a fellow that I would go up and visit, and I always remember he'd give me coffee, he wanted to give me coffee, and he would sit there with these, he didn't use cream, but he used sugar lumps, sugar cubes, or they called them sugar lumps in his coffee, and he'd always want me to sit, he'd sit and talk with me, and they always thought that he had money, and they did find, my dad did find some money in a barrel of sawdust that was hidden when he passed away, he was a very interesting old Swede. They never been married? No, don't they? No, Nils Larsen, Grubber Frank, or Peter Paul, they must have come from Sweden, I don't know the history of them, but they evidently came from Sweden, and they were, they had never been married. Now my grandfather, Samuel Bengtsson, my mother's father, had been married three times, and I never will forget that he, they never, it's in the church records, but you see in those days, I guess they didn't know the date of birth exactly, and some of them said that Samuel Bengtsson was at least, they, some had him up to 108 years old when he passed away, and my mother said he was 102, she should have known more than some of them, but some of them tried to say he was 108, but she claimed he was 102 when he passed away. But I, when he became older, they moved him from the old homestead, which where Grubber Frank, or Nils Larsen stayed later, they moved him to my uncle's across the road from us, there's a little lane going into our farm, and then he was across the road with my uncle Art Bengtsson, and he was bed-fast at 100, and he, my mother would send lunch over, and I would carry a tray over for his lunch, and he'd always give me a nickel for carrying the tray over, and I liked to deliver lunch to him, and he would sit and talk to me, and some of the things he would tell me would be, I'd say, well, how can I live to be as old as you are? And he said, young man, he said, you eat a lot of, you eat a lot of honey and drink a lot of buttermilk. You see, he was a bee man, and so he did eat a lot of honey, and he did drink, and he never milked a cow in his life, but his wife did, and he would drink, and in those days, the buttermilk was quite different from what it's now, it was churned, and it was pieces, chunks of butter in it sometimes when you were drinking. He said, you drink a lot of buttermilk and eat a lot of honey, you'll live to be a real old fellow. Well, I always liked honey, but I never cared for the buttermilk. But, and then he would say to me, the fact that he was that old, 100 years old, when he was- That was your grandfather. That was my grandfather, Benkson, Samuel Benkson, and he would say, I've outlived three wives. He said, there's nothing for me to live for. He said, I should not be living now. He said, I've gone way past what I should be for. He was satisfied, but I never will forget, and of course in those days, they had, all of those men had, Samuel, they had beards, long, gray beards. Was he able not to speak to you, I mean, in English? Yes, he could speak in English. It was broken English, but he'd rather speak Swedish, though, and I think at that time, he did speak a lot of Swedish, but he could speak in broken, it was- Did you understand any Swedish when you were growing up? I could understand it, I couldn't speak it, but I could understand pretty well. Because both your parents now were born in- Yes, in Andover, yes. They were brought up in both Swedish and English, I think. Yeah, but I seem like I understood pretty well, but I had difficulty in speaking. Didn't learn to speak as well as I could understand, but it seemed like with the grandparents, I could understand pretty well. So those guys that we're talking about, Henry S. Larson and- Grubbe Frank and Peter Paul. Peter Paul, yeah. He came late to church, you said. Did he have his own service then after the church? No, no, he would have to turn around. Many times he would ride with us back, and then he never seemed, I had never seen a man like it, and all the people around Andover knew that he was way behind schedule, late. He didn't seem to have a care in the world, and he was supposed to work for my dad sometimes, and he would come, well, he would come toward evening to go to work, and my dad, of course, was the kind of a man that was out early in the morning, and he would have, and then sometimes, I can remember him, I can remember him out, my dad was even, and of course, we went to bed fairly early on the farm, and I could hear him, outside he would be yelling Luther, and my dad would say, what do you want, Peter? I'm in bed. And he said, well, I just wanted to know, he'd have some reason. Another thing those people played a lot of was 42, not too much with them, but my uncle across the street, 42 was, played a lot of 42. What was that? That's with dominoes, a game with dominoes, and it was quite, around Andover, the 42 was quite a, instead of cards, they used dominoes in old times. They say it's an old Texas game, 42, and it's played with dominoes, but they just loved it. They would play like, there was a, I never will forget that the Rask boys were up in the timber too. Now, they lived not very far from the old Andover mill, where the mill used to be. They lived up in the timber there. You remember the mill? No, I don't. I know, I remember the location, and I remember, they were, I was told that that was where the mill was, but I don't remember much about the mill. But I remember the Rask boys' brothers, they never married, but their mother, I can remember the mother and the two Rask boys, and they lived up there in the woods. And I never will forget, they drank quite a bit. And they used to play 42 with my uncle and come, and they sometimes didn't buy a little too much, but I never will forget the day that my, the one of the Rask boys came to my dad and said, well, mother died last night. And the dad said, did you call a doctor? Well, of course, in those days, the doctors, it was horse and buggy days. And he said, no, he said, he said, I know she's dead, he said, we stuck a pin in her. And that's the way they decided that she, that- What's the column? The column is report. Yeah, the column is report from the son. And that's the way he determined it. And then one other time, another neighbor to us was a fellow by the name of, and he never married, was Adolph, he was like, was a lot of bachelors in those old men that were bachelors. And Adolph Freed was another one that was lived close by us. And he was also, he, wonderful neighbor, but he did, he did drink some. And I remember one time he, they must've had a little party at his house and played some 42 or something, and they been drinking. And it was during the winter, it was a snowstorm. And he evidently wandered out of the house and right outside his house on the road, he fell and laid in the snow drift. And my mother and I, my mother was driving a horse and buggy, and I was in it. I remember we'd been to Danielson's to an anniversary party, birthday party or something. And I was just a little bit of a fellow. And my mother and the horse came along and this body was covered with snow, but the pony, as it came down the road, didn't notice it until it got right on top of it. And then when he, when the pony saw there was a man, something in the road there, it jumped to the side, threw me out of the buggy, and the horse ran away. Pony ran away. My mother's in the cart. And I guess my dad must've been outside because he heard the buggy and the horse coming in real fast. And he ran out to stop the buggy. And my mother was scared to death that I was thrown out of the buggy and the pony ran away. And so he jumped in, my dad jumped in the buggy and went right back to get me. And then he also helped to get Adolph freed back in the house so he wouldn't have frozen to death. Otherwise he may have frozen to death that night. So, I mean, it's a kind of an interesting thing, but in those days, it was just, that was the way things were in those days. It was- Those fellows now, they seem to have a very stressed life. In other words, there was no stress at all. No, no, they- No schedule. No schedule, that's how, I think they were behind schedule all the time. They seemed, they didn't know what was going on outside of their own little abode where they were living. And living in the timber like that, day in and day out, night in, night out, why they were, I would think they would be very lonely, but no doubt they always had something to do. Did they work or did they get some support so they could- They had good gardens. No pension. No, there was no pension at that time. And they would visit the, they'd probably go once a week to the store in Andover, the little grocery store in Andover. But I think a lot of their things was from, they would raise chickens and they had a cow and they had a horse, and so they could get, do things, of course. You mentioned, you know, they got sick from- Domain- Meat or food. Yeah, well, Peter Paul, there's no question in my mind, but when he died from domain poisoning from the cans, that, of course, the only refrigeration that I can remember that you could do, you could put some things out and down into the well, in a cold well. And of course, that was, those things would not last too long either because that wasn't too cold. But- But there was most of the, the cost then actually was for the tin cans, they'd either get the poison. That's right, yeah. But if they eat now meat and pork, did anybody get sick of that? They didn't seem to. I don't know, I think what they did, they probably, what they did, I think probably they fixed it and probably cooked it. And then after it was cooked, it would stay around for a couple of days maybe. Did they smoke a lot of ham? Oh, yes, yes. We had a smokehouse on our farm. We had a little, just like a little outhouse, a little building. And my dad made it, we smoked the hams in that.