 I just decided that I wasn't going to stand for it any longer. I was going to get a fan and there was all of this to it. So the person in charge, he come down. And I knew he was going to come down and talk to me and my helper, that was the guy that introduced me to my wife. So anyway, I said to my helper, when he comes to talk, let that furnace go full blast. Don't turn it off. So he did. And here comes the guy, see. I stood on one side of him and my helper stood on the other side of him. And we kind of worked around him so that he had his back up against the furnace, see. And we talked for a while and I noticed he was getting pretty warm. So he says, I'll see if I can get a fan for you, he says. I'll see what I can do. And he walked away. And when he walked away, his white shirt was brown. So you see, it got pretty hot. The next morning we had a fan. So that was just an example of what you had to do. You had to force them to give you a little bit. Was the management putting the deaf ear to your demand more or less? Because they didn't care. Because they sat up in their office and they had no problems with the— No, we had air conditioning up there. Air conditioning? Oh yeah, it was nice up there. You would think they would have some compassion for where your place was going. The production—the superintendent, he was about as nice a guy as you could ever run across. But he didn't have the say. The production manager and the president of the company, the president of the production manager, he was the son-in-law to the president. Now if they had anything to do with it or not, I don't know. But you would think a fan is such a small amount of money for a big company like that. I mean, it didn't even— Yeah, but what you see— It was your start here. Just in the department where I worked, there was eight big furnaces. Okay. So I got a fan. The other guys, we ought to have a fan too. See? The next—so then that worked over in the next department. So they already figured it out? Yeah. So they had to have fans too, see? So pretty soon, you know, the kids' company could only manufacture so much electricity. They had their own outfit, you know? They could only manufacture so— So after we had been pushing for some of these air favors and got them, they had to buy electricity because they couldn't manufacture enough to keep us going. So that made a bigger impact than you would think then. Oh, yeah. But you got to speak up. Oh, you got to force them. But at that time, when you came in, you were not afraid to speak up. If it had been five years earlier, they would have kicked you out because there was no law then to organize. The part of that was I really didn't care because I couldn't probably get a worse job anyplace else. You know, when it really come down to it, I couldn't probably get a worse job than I had in there, and that was the reason the doctor told me to get the hell out of there. So— But you were a strong guy, you know? I mean, you were healthy and you were used to hard work and— Yeah, I was in good shape. And you must be hundreds of years much weaker than— But, you know, you stand in that heat eight hours a day, and once you get run down, it's pretty hard to get back up. And like I say, I only weighed about 125 pounds. I weigh 180 now. I only weighed about 125 pounds. In 1945, when I got sick, I was out here on the farm. I got pneumonia, and one of my—because of the pneumonia, one of my lungs broke, and I went to the sanitarium for six months and one week. I weighed 115 pounds when I went in. I weighed 160 when I went out. But that's where I learned how to live, them six months. When you made these demands, those demands to the management, the main office of the UAW, did they tell you what to say? I mean, to instruct you to be more careful or— Ask for anything that you can think of. The more things— They did what they said. They pushed for the top. Yeah, pushed for the top. But the more you ask for, the more you may get. Who were those guys now? Were they former workers, or were they— The president of the union, he didn't work for a kids' company. He got fired. He got fired? Yeah, he got fired. The president of the union, he got fired. What happened there then? Well, there was more or less a personal disagreement of the reason he got fired. And he had no chance of trying to get the job back because of what he had done. You can abuse somebody so much. I don't care. I don't care who you are or who you belong to and who you are. You got to have a little respect for the management. See what I mean? So they had the right then to fire him? Oh, yeah. There was no question about it. The union couldn't protect him? There was nothing we could do. There was nothing we could do. But we could still keep him as a member, and we could still keep him as president for the union, which I didn't quite agree with. Because a man like that, he had a bone to pick. Yeah, wouldn't there be a— An aggravating bone to pick. Yes, you would think so. But— It would be an aggravating factor. But the AWA, UWA, they were in favor of that. When he— How could you bargain with him then if the management knew that you're a bargainer? At the bargaining sessions where we meet, we didn't accomplish much of anything. But individually, we could accomplish something. I'll give you one example. Everybody thought that we ought to have a shower in the place, you know. And the question come—then the question come up, how much it cost. And the union, they had brought up the blueprints for all these showers that they were going to build all around the place, you know. They went into hundreds and hundreds of dollars, even them days, you know. And then the question come up, how many of the workers are going to take a shower before they go home at night, you know. And of course, the union, they had to figure out everybody was going to take a shower, see. Well, we had argued on that for at least three months. So it got toward spring. And the president, he had to go to some kind of a convention. And of course, when the president left, I was there in charge. So the first meeting I was in charge of, I asked the company if they would do something, not building any new shower, bathrooms, or whatever you want to call them, if they could improve on what we did have and put in some showers in what we did have, see. Oh, yeah. They would do that. We can start on that next week. And they did. Why was it easy to talk one on one? No, this was at the bargaining session. At the bargaining session? OK. Yeah. Yeah, we can start on that next week. So they did. But we didn't get any new bathrooms. We just got showers in the old places that we had. When we got showerheads, we'd turn the clothes off and get a hot and cold shower, and we regulated it any way we wanted. But we didn't have any fancy addition to buildings or anything. So when spring come and everything got hot, put out, we got fired by the union for doing that. Did you went too far? Yeah, I went too far in the wrong direction. Because by doing that, there was no chance in the world we could talk them into building new shower. See what I mean? That's right. You went too far. But we got showers. Within two weeks, we could take a shower. But it wasn't the old. But what they were doing, those old men working there anyway, if you were running around naked, nobody give a damn about that. You know what I mean? We didn't have to have special. God, they had probably half a dozen women working in the assembly, or maybe a dozen women working in the assembly. Well, they had a place they could go up in the main office and take showers if they wanted to. They were separate up there. You know what I mean? So you see what I mean. You can ask for too much and get nothing. Ask for something that was reasonable, and even not too hard to do business with. But you were always asking. And then trying to keep them here guys that didn't work, trying to keep them on the jobs and you don't get fired or something like that. That was the worst part. What did you answer the labor leaders then? When they jumped me for doing it? So I told them, I said, I got showers. But you spoiled the opportunity for them to build new ones. I can see where I did that. But here's the thing. There was four, five of us that took showers. The only thing they were thinking about was get to the clock and punch out in time and away you go. You didn't take showers, but everybody needed to take a shower though. Well, you work in that heat, yes. But no, Jesus, hell, yes. How about workloads? They was your own? They didn't have any overalls for you? No, no, no. We had all clothes. Gloves and everything. You're saying we had lockers and we had wash basin. You could wash hot and cold water, no question about that. And toilets and everything else. What they did, they used to put a partition in one place there and install the showers, put a wooden floor on there you could walk on. Instead of walking on the cement, you know, they made a graded wooden floor. Perfectly all right with me. Nothing wrong with it. Six of us could take showers in the department where I worked. Six of us could take showers at the time. It didn't take long to run through and get the sweat off. But I spoiled the opportunity for them to get new ones. Is that what they said? Well, yeah. The leadership. But you were not voted out of office though, were you? No, no, no. But I took a little heat from it, like you might say, you know. How about vacation? When did that come up? Well, with Case Company, you see, you were lucky if you had any work at all between June and September. So we got vacation all right without pay. So there was never a question? Oh, yeah. There was never a question about who was to use. You were happy to work. So they took care of themselves then. Oh, yeah. Most of the implement companies shut down during the summer months. Sure, sure. There was a common factor. Yeah. A lot of times I was off between middle of June and after Liberty. In reading minutes now of organizations like Vasa, Viking, Lyra, and UL here in Rockford, for instance, it seems that when somebody died, a lot of workers attended the funeral. Were they paid by the company to take off of funerals? Towards the end. Not as long as I worked for Case Company. You had no time off for that? No, no. We could get time off. We could get time off, but we didn't get paid. No pay. But if we had to go to court as a witness, we got that in. If we had to go to court as a witness, or for some other reason, yes, we'd get time off and we'd get paid. There was the last. I wasn't on as vice president at that time because I resigned over a disagreement between me and the district office. What was the district office? In Chicago? Yeah. Chicago. Yeah. What kind of people were they now from the district office? Were they on the same level? Get all you can. Ask for all you can get. And don't give in. Don't make any difference if you get it or not. Don't give in. Yeah, but there's a philosophy that won't work though. I mean, how can they... Well, you can see it now today, for instance, but at that time... It's the same thing today. Ask for everything you can probably think of. If you can't think of what to ask for, call them and they'll let you know. So there should be no understanding that the management had problems to get it running or so on. Just get your hand into it. What's in it for me? But you had another philosophy. You were more... You could see both sides. I'd rather take a little bit and get something because maybe I could get a little more the next time. You know, you can't reach for the sky and get it the first time. It takes a little while. That's the way I was brought up. But here we have now... There was a layoff during the summer for all implement companies. There was a standard procedure during the 20s and 30s. And a lot of workers had to go out and take farm jobs and... Whatever. Wouldn't it have been better to take it a little bit easier during the month you worked and take a month less in the summer? It would not be profitable to run the operation then, I suppose. No, you see, it cost money to run that shop even. To open it up. I mean, the overhead is so much, and if you shut it down... It wasn't exactly completely shut down, but, you know, the biggest majority of the workers wasn't working. But is this ideal to run people to the last drop of strength? Like my dad, he was working. Because as a blacksmith, he was doing repair work, see? And there was work for him. But the production schedule on the farm machinery started in about September. That's when the production schedule came up. And when we finished that schedule by noon, or somewhere around in there, the last of the schedule we worked on were hay equipment, see? And of course they had to be finished by noon. And so then we had to wait for the next schedule to open. And depending on how much they anticipated to make the next year, had a big decision on when we started in the fall. I know there was one year we didn't start until the last week of September. Because... Because too much to operate... Well, it was... They had figured the schedule, we can produce so much in such a length of time, and then they opened it up. And that's the way it went, see? And in them days, you know, they didn't have to worry about it. All they had to do was to give you a call, come in, and you'd be there. Because chances are you didn't... And if they lost a few other guys, you know, well, that didn't make no difference. Like the guy said, we can always have some niggers to do it. That's the difference, you know what I mean. There were plenty of people around. When you mentioned that your father, he was a strong man, he would take any kind of abuse of hard work. Do you think that that generation of his was a stronger generation? Were they physically more... Physically, I think. I think physically, I think, because they were brought up in a different environment. Were they not as hot-headed as the next generation? Oh, yeah. They were? Yeah, some of them, they were. They're both kinds, you know. I mean the masses, now, because they took in abuse during the 20s. No, not the masses. Not the masses. Because, like I said, most of the older people that worked on the case company, they were easy to satisfy. There was the younger ones. They were the hardest ones to satisfy. Because there were a lot of people there who were 50 years old or more. But why was it like that, though? You know, the younger ones were hard to satisfy. The next generation, the first generation before them, I mean the previous, they were satisfied. Why were they brought up in a different way then? Like your father, now, for instance, he'd have a question, you know, it was a hard job. No. Did you question it? Were you brought up in the same school? Well, I took, like I said, when the guy asked me if I could dig ditches, yeah, I could dig ditches. And you worked for him in the smithy. You did exactly what he told you. You didn't tell him that I don't want to do it this way. Oh, no, no, you didn't say that. Well, sometimes Dad and I, although I was just a young kid, you know, in the blacksmith shop, sometimes I told him that I think we can do it this way. And if he thought that my idea was pretty good, he'd change. He'd let me do it that way. I remember especially, we were making harrows, you know, like they had in the old country. And I always had to thread the tines, put the threads on them. And I told him, I said, the way you want me to do it, I'd like to do it the other way, better. Well, if that's the way you want to do it, you can produce more. So even though I was only probably about 10, 11 years old or something like that, he let me go ahead, he'd make the stuff, he'd let me go ahead and assemble the harrows, or the plows, or something like that. Well, I did it a little different than he did. And you felt good about that? Well, I couldn't. You couldn't complain the next time? No, you see, and another thing, it looked to me like I could do it faster, too, I think. So that way, him and I, we got along real good on that subject. And so that's the way I was brought up. But as far as hard work, you just go out and do it. And that's it. It's strange, though, during the 20s, and especially the construction in Chicago, you have a lot of samples of, they run the people almost to death, they are bleeding out of their nose and everything just to keep the job. And if it didn't work fast enough, off they went. If they had continued on during the 30s, what would happen? I mean, they were never satisfied, the bosses. I don't really know what would have happened. It was ridiculous to kill people off, you know. Yeah, yeah. I don't know really what would have happened if it hadn't been exchanged. I'm not saying that you and me are all together wrong. But maybe the pressure was a blessing in disguise, because nobody had anything to do in the early 30s. No. People needed a rest. I was working, like I say, I was frying hamburgers and washing dishes. I was doing all right. I'm making a living. But even then, working 72 hours a week for $19, $20, and all you could eat, it wasn't much money. But you lived. But then coming back after that kind of long hours, but the work was not physically heavy. Coming back now to a physically demanding job, how did you feel then? Were you more aggressive? I don't like this. Something's got to give here. Do you think a lot of people had it in their heads? Well, maybe. I'd done it because I had to make a living. It took some time, though, to get used to that kind of... But I never really did like to work for a case company. I never really did like... Were they pressing harder during the war than before the war? No, the only thing that finished me off was when they took me off the job I had and put me on to make bullets. That's when I decided that this is it for me. That's when my father-in-law said that. They only ran a little bit harder then. Maybe they had... You take a chunk of iron, I'd say 18 inches, a chunk, and it was 5 inches round. That would be 150 pounds. And you take that in the end of a pair of tongs... How were you able to turn those slabs then? And then you put it in the die, and this hammer goes like this. And then you turn it so that when you get done, it was formed like a point on a bullet. Then they took them from there into the machine shop and polished them up and sent them down to the arsenal. And there was a production schedule on them. So there was rush then? Yeah. You imagine yourself making 90 of them an hour. Well, there'd be 45. You know what I mean, because every time you cut them off you get two. The schedule was 90 an hour. So you had just about one minute. So then you decided this is it? I said to the boss, I said, this is it. You were not afraid to be drafted, though, if you came out of the factory? How about drafting? You were not drafted? No. No. I was drafted when I laid in the hospital. That's when I got an order from the draft board to report to Chicago at such a time. So Doc, I'd only been in the hospital a couple of months then. I was at the sanitarium a couple of months then. So the doc had to come in. So I said to him, you better hurry up and get me in pretty good shape, because I've got to go to Chicago at such and such a day. He said, what's the matter with you? You going to Chicago? I said, yeah, I've got to go in the Army. I said, here, and I handed him the letter. He said, give me that, he says. And that's the last I heard of it. About three weeks afterwards, I got another letter, 4F. So maybe that was a good thing you got there? Yeah. Well, this long, I had a crack in it that big. It took six months to heal. You couldn't work that for six months? No. I didn't do it. Well, I pushed wheelchairs. I worked pneumothorax for three and a half years afterwards. So then when you came out on the farm, then, you felt free, everything of union jobs or stewards and party tables. Then I got involved in the school business. How did that happen? You came on the farm here and you were married? Well, there was, like I said, the second year I was up there. On the farm. You rented land then? I rented land up there. One morning, I didn't know nothing about it, but one morning, my neighbor came over and handed me this portfolio. I said, what's that for? He said, well, we had a meeting at the school last night, he says, and nobody wanted a job as a secretary, he says, for the school. So we gave it to you. Here it is. A unanimous decision by the people who were there. You never attended a meeting? I'd never been to the school. They didn't even know if you could write even? This guy here and I, we had done a little talking. So I took care of that job. So you became the secretary? Yeah, I took the job. You had to write the minutes? The week after I got the job, they came over and told me I had to do something because the well was polluted and it was up to me to get it fixed. I got it fixed. You were a working secretary. Well, I had to get a whole lot of people to do the work, do the job and everything else. I called the rest of the guys together and I asked them, you got the job, you had to do it. And I said, okay, I'll do it. And that's it. And that was in 1943? Yes, in 1943. During the war? Yes. And you are still on the school board? That's the first year I was on the board, see, in 1943. And then I stayed on the, no, there was a country school up there. You had a country school for Winnebago? No, just for, we had country schools. Just for this part around here, see. What do you call this part around here? Is there a special name for it? Well, you see that there was the Sander School, see. And then you had different schools with different names, like the Smith School up here. And country schools all over, you know. And it was for eight grades. And if you wanted to go on farther than eight grades, then you had to go to high school, see. And so I was on that board until I got sick and had to go to the hospital. And I was replaced by another person, see. And, but I got the fever, you know. So from there on I kept putting my nose in it, I guess. Did you become politically involved then out here in this area? Well, then not as far as politics was concerned, because I don't mind telling you I've always been a Democrat. I vote for the man, not the part he belongs to. How did you get the idea of being a Democrat? I think that's from the old country. Because my daddy always was a Social Democrat in the old country. Bunder for Bunder, is what it was called. My daddy belonged to Bunder for Bunder in the old country. And there was something similar to the Democratic here, and I think that might have had a lot to do with it. And I was in New York when Roosevelt got elected. And I'd known him, I'd seen him, I shook hands with him. And I liked him, because I'd seen what he did for New York. And I guess that kind of stuck with me, too, you know. So, but like I say, politics around here, most of the families are Republicans around here, and me being a Democrat, we don't mix, do we? And that has nothing to do with it when it comes to school. It's non-political, then. Yeah, it is non-political, see, especially around here. So when they decided that they were going to move the high school out of Pecatonica and consolidate the whole damn thing around here, you know, they were going to build a high school out in the country here someplace. So, like I said, the deeper I got involved in it, the deeper I got into it. And we had, there were quite a number of big farmers and businessmen in Pecatonica, and down in Seward, and so forth and so on. And for some reason or another, they supported me, what I was doing. Now, there were quite a few big farmers that didn't support me. But I felt I had a good support, and I felt I was doing the right thing. So I just kept on fighting for having a school in Pec, a high school. How far is Pecatonica from here? Oh, about four miles, something like that. So that was the logical place, according to your belief, then? Well, we had gone to Pec school and so forth and so on. Why didn't you want to have it in other... Well, because, like I said, big is not always better. And that's always been... The big union they had down there, I never thought was the perfect thing. And I never been too much in favor of too big a government. I never really liked to have George do everything for me. I like to do a little bit myself, even though I'm not educated to do it. I like to fight anyway. See what I mean? And being that this group supported me and supported what I was doing, it encouraged me to keep on, and I did. So when I got down to the last point where we were going to lose the school because the attorney we had had made a mistake on the papers. And I happened to find out about it. Was he hired by you? Oh yeah, he was hired by us. He was an outsider. Yeah, well... But you see, he was working both sides of the fence. The group I belonged to, we were a small group. Just Pecatonica, the whole thing, that was a big thing. So it came down to the point where we had lost the case because of the mistake he had made in the papers that he sent in to, because he was in the court, you know. He had made a mistake in the papers that he sent in. Who found out about that? Did you read them? Well, he told us that the reason we lost was I made a silly mistake. I was at the sales barn, and I happened to hear the lawyer and one of those my opposition farmers have a conversation. He didn't know I was listening to him, and I probably shouldn't have been listening to him, but I was. And he says, to this farmer, you ain't nothing to worry about. He says, I've taken care of it. The case is lost. Now, we were paying him. So I called a meeting. In fact, we all met, and it was decided that we hire a different lawyer. And being that I was involved in it as much as I was, you picked the committee to go with you. So I says, okay, who will volunteer to go with me and get a new lawyer? So two guys, businessmen in fact, volunteered to go with me. I'm going to pick them up the next morning, go down to Rockport and hire a different lawyer, and start all over again. I got down to Pecatonica. One of the guys that was going to go with me, he had a very important engagement in Freeport, so he couldn't go. The other guy, he said he was sick. He didn't feel good enough. So you can go by yourself. And there was a fellow sitting there. He'd always been on our side, and he was the son of the undertaker. And he says, I know you're doing the right thing, actually. He says, I'll go with you. So we went. And we talked to them. Got a lawyer down there, and we talked to them. And the lawyer, he says, who's going to pay for it? So I says, well, I got a 150-acre farm. I'll guarantee you wages. I'll take it. Well, then the rest of the guys, when they found we got a new lawyer, they got so mad at us that they kicked us out of that district. And they formed the district of their own. And that's how we got back to school. What year was that, that school came in? It must have been in... 56. Had you been on that board? No, no, I was on for nine years. After that, I got elected to the school board, and I was on there for nine years. And then my kids, they got out of school, and I quit. I figured, let somebody else, you know. Well, there was another thing, too. I'd been in business in Pekatown, I guess, in with another fellow in the implement business for a couple of years, and I knew that wasn't going to pay out, because 63 was a bad year anyway. So I decided I bought my partner out, and then I closed the place and sold out. And it wasn't 63, and then I decided that, well, my son, he'd be out of school, so I run for another term, see. So that's how I got off. Well, now, four years ago, my son, my oldest son, he'd been on the school board, see. He decided that he didn't want to be on there anymore. I stuck my nose out, and I said, if duty calls, I'll serve. Now you serve your grandchildren. Now I've been on for a little over three years, so my term is up in November. Is it easier not to be on the school board than it was 25 years ago? There's no money involved. No, no, but you don't get no money for it, you know. You work for nothing. No, but I mean 25 years ago, you could sit there and decide, and you could, in other words, be in charge of things. Nowadays you have to hire a consultant. You didn't do that 25 years ago. Well, we always had a superintendent. A superintendent, but I mean, also he helped tell you what to do and so on. Yeah, we had lawyers. We always had a lawyer. Even in the beginning? Yes. Always? That lawyer that we hired, we kept him. Oh, yes. And when it got to the point where we would decide what to do, build a new high school or add on to the old, we had a consultant. And I insisted on that. What do you think about the consultants, though? Do they really understand your problems coming in from out the rough? Oh, yes. There's no question about that. They do? Oh, yes, if you hire the right one. Yeah, but how do you know that? Well, you listen to them. See? So you don't take the first one? Oh, no. Oh, no. That's the one to pick from. Yeah. So we hired. If I'm not mistaken, we paid that guy $2,000. A certain amount of money, I remember. Now, the effect figure, I'm not quite sure, but I know it was a certain amount of money he was to do and show us what was the best thing for us to do. And we hired him. And he told us the best thing to do was to build a new high school. And that's what we did. We took his advice. And I'm glad we did because that was the thing to do. You didn't come into this, the baby boom. I mean, there was a lot of schools built 20 years ago, and they were overbuilt. Now they're closing them up again. What happened with your school there in Panama? We got approximately, well, not quite as many now, but it's almost the same amount of kids as we had before. So you didn't overbuild them? No, because, you see, we put additions to it. Since we built it, we added on to it. Is it easy for you out there in the country to figure out the size of a school, you think, for 20 years ahead in the city? No. Like in Rockford, for instance, there are a lot of empty schools now there. You see, Pecatonica, as far as buildings is concerned, Pecatonica's probably twice as big now as it was 30 years ago. And it has something to do with it. Young people move in, and you know, they have kids. So the planners in the 60s, they planned right then, in other words? Yeah, I say so. I think we planned, but it'd still be good for another five, six years. So there's nothing wrong with that. Running for politics now, or a political position, you couldn't win as a Democrat then? No. There are too many Republicans. Yeah, I couldn't. I couldn't. Even today, there are too many Republicans. Haven't they changed now, the last few years? Well, of course, I'm getting too old. But, like I say, no, I don't think I could. Like if I was to run for something like a county board member or something like that, no, I wouldn't get elected. Because it doesn't include just Pecatonica. You see, if you're a board member, a county board member, you're taking a tremendous territory out here in the country. But this is Winnebago County. Yeah, this is Winnebago County. But the board members from this county, from this section, we got sections, you know. And the board members from this section, you take in there. Because one man, one vote, you know. And when you get into Rockford, the districts are smaller. So there's one man and one vote. No, I couldn't. There's no chance in the world that a Democrat could win. You didn't want to go to Republicans either? I'm too stubborn for that. You would think that there were some Republicans shifting over and over to Democrats. Oh, yes, yes, it is. But they're not running for the office. No, it's practically a Republican. Well, in Rockford, you know, the courthouse, there's quite a few Democrats in the courthouse. There's no question about that. The guy in the county office down there, he was born and raised in Pecotonica. But he left Pec. So, no, I wouldn't want to. I'd like to. I was on a meeting last night for the Improvement Association for Pecotonica. Like I said, they asked me, what do you think about it? So I said, you better get some new leaders on that committee, because most of them are there. When you're going to do something like that, you can't exactly figure out what's in it for me. You have to figure out what's the best for the community. And the same thing with the school district. When you're doing something like that, you can't exactly figure out what's in it for me. You've got to figure out what's the best for the district. And that's the deal. That's the way it has to be. But it won't always work that way. And that's when you have difficulties, because you're elected to serve the whole district. You're not elected to serve, like here, I'm in Burrard Township, so I'm supposed to stick up for Burrard Township. Well, that's all right. I can stick up for them, but at the same time, I can stick up for the ones that live up in Stevenson County, too, because we all got the same problem. You've got to listen to their demands, also. Yes, because they pay the same taxes as we do. But some people forget that once they get... What do you think about the politics now in Rockford over the years? There was a lot of Swedes, of course, in the 20s, and you had harsh trouble. There's one trouble with some of the Swedes. When they get disgusted, they say, Oh, the heck with them. And do you mean they get away from that? They don't go and vote. But that's the only way to change it, though. Yeah, yeah, yeah, but if the people don't go there to the elections. You don't see too many Swedish names now on the county board and the city council in Rockford. Why the second and third generation? Are they not interested in politics? No, they got interested in something else, I guess. I think, the way it looks. So if you had stayed in Rockford, do you think you would have run for office then as a Democrat? I might have. Because you had Hallström and Blom, they were actually socialists. So, yeah, I might have. There were no socialists left when you came in 1935 and started the case. There was a social arbiter club. You didn't see any? No, I didn't. They were all gone? No, I joined the Swedish club, you heard of that. I joined that in 1937. So I've belonged there for about 50 years now. So that was before your time that David Kallin or Henry Anderson... Yeah. You knew those guys, though? I heard of them, but I didn't. But you never met them? No, I never met them. No. No. And I don't remember... Uhlbom, if I'm not... Oh, that was the home of him? No, not Uhlbom. The other guy at the drugstore. Blom? Blom, yeah. He was mayor then, you know. How was he a mayor in your thoughts? Well, I wasn't that much in politics or anything in them days. I think he was all right. He'd done what he thought was the best for Oxford. And them old-timers, those on there, them days, you know, they'd done what they thought was best for Oxford. You take all them old Swedes that built and run all these factories. I honestly believe that they'd done that because they felt that was the thing to do for Oxford. Now, if you get somebody in there to build a factory, how much money can I get out of the city, how much money can I get out of the state, and how much taxes are they going to abate so I don't have to pay? Right? They never asked that question. Them old Swedes, they didn't. They started it again in Oxford. Well, I shouldn't say they were all old Swedes. There were other nationalities too. But they all had the same idea. I do this because that's the best thing, and I'll make a little bit on it. And that's the way Oxford was built. And that's the way most others. But now, if I buy this place for so many million dollars, and I can merge it with somebody else, I can make so many million dollars. That's the thing to do. But maybe 2,000 workers are without a job tomorrow. Forget about that. But how much do I make? And it dribbles down all the way to Washington. If I can buy $12 million worth of ammunition from the United States and sell it to Iran for $30 million, I can send $8 million down to Nicaragua. Right? And of course, I've got to have the rest for my work, you know? And if anybody asks you about it, I can't remember that. So what do they say now, the Republicans out there? Can you talk to them about it? Do they feel kind of bad that what's happening? I mean, everybody can read it now. Yeah, but I don't like to tell them about it because I don't like to make them feel bad. It's hard to discuss politics, though. But I tell you, you get into a bunch and you listen. There are a lot of people that are disgusted with the way things are going. And to a certain extent, maybe it's all right. To another extent, maybe it's not so good. I remember before Roosevelt got elected. And maybe I'm wrong, but I think he saved this country. I really think he did. But still a lot of people don't think he was a great president. Why? I mean, he gave them Social Security, the Union laws, and the right to organize and everything. You would think he would get the highest perish there is. But still, they say, well, he was no good, you know? I know. Why do they do that? That part I'm not smart enough to answer. But I've seen the conditions in New York. Because, like I say, I'm a little bit nosy. I've got to find out what's going on, not just around me. I like to find out what's going on on the outside. I was up in the Bronx, but that didn't stop me from going downtown to see how those poor souls were sleeping in the parks with newspapers for cover. And the cops chased me out of there. They told me, you better get out of there or you're going to get mugged or something like that. But I got a glimpse of it. I walked along with the cops and I see those poor souls that were laying around in the parks there with newspapers for cover. How long are people going to take that kind of stuff? But that kind of situation never occurred, for instance, out here in Pecatonic. Because the farmers, they still had made a living on the farm, even if it was meager. A very, very poor living. But they still had the food, though. Oh, yeah, sure. But they had nothing. They had nothing. They had nothing there. They had a newspaper over their head. Well, they were sleeping on newspapers and covered up. And, I don't know, you ever been in New York? Yes. All right, you know what Lower Manhattan looks like? Oh, yes, yes. Okay. I think they still... Battery Park. I still think they got parks down there the same way as they did when I was there in the 30s. Picture yourself, that ground covered with people. You walked by, all stairways and everything covered with people. And they had no way to escape from there. No way. They had no way to get off Manhattan. If they wanted to get out, they would have to walk through the tunnel because they wouldn't have the five cents to get on a boat or a ferry or something like that. How long is people going to be able to do those things without getting radical about it? Of course, they were so starved out that they couldn't do nothing anyway. And then, I remember one time there, I was living up there and I had a room and this lady I was living with, she had more room than me. And one of the guys, he was kind of a little bit of... He was a German and he was kind of a little bit high class. So he says to me, he was making money, I don't know where he made it, but he was making money. So he says to me, he says, Let's dress up, he says, and go downtown Manhattan and have a good time. So I said, Oh, we'll go to some hotel and listen to a good show and all this and that, have a big meal and all that. We got off the subway down there and headed for this place. He knew where the place was down there. And we see these old people laying there, sitting around, half dead. And we went in, high class, a good show. He paid for it, them days, for $15 a piece. That was big money. We had a good meal, good show and everything else. There was no depression in there. And then we walked back through down people and down on the subway and back home. You can see the difference. And it kind of makes you wonder, how long is the people going to be able to take these things? Well, I know when Roosevelt instituted this here PWA or WPA, whatever you call it, he also instituted this way that, like me, I worked nights. And I worked my way up to where I was making $26, getting paid $26 a week. So he decided that in order to put people back to work, cut my wages down to $18 and paid the other guy $8, give me a helper, see, and pay him $8. See what I mean? In other words, I paid my helper. And that's the way it started out. And a lot of people got work that way. Was there a resentment from the workers that made $26 like yourself? Did you feel better for the situation? How would you feel? I wouldn't have... The union workers wouldn't do it today. Oh, no, no, no. It wouldn't have been so bad if the help you got would have been any good, you know. But some of them were... I went to three of them in two weeks. Well, they left, and I didn't fire them or anything, but they just didn't show up, so then they hired somebody else. So there was a law then during the Roskilde years? Well, it was not exactly a law, but he requested that the people do those things, and the restaurants, they done it. Because, like, on a Saturday night, from 6 o'clock to about 1 o'clock at night, I had to work like the Dixons all by myself. So it was a help for me to get somebody to wash dishes for me, because I was doing everything. You probably know what them lunch wagons looked like. Yes. Yeah, well, that's what I worked in, lunch wagons like that. And one man worked there all by himself, you know. And you get a big crowd. It's hard work. And some of them guys, there was one of the guys that come to work for me in the morning. I asked him, I said, which way you going? On the trolley cars is what we run. Well, no big difference, he says, I can find some place to lay down and sleep. He says, I don't have a place where I live. I says, well, heck, you can go with me home. I says, and stay where I stay, I says. You can sleep on the floor. That's better than sleep someplace else. So we did. For a couple of two or three days, he stayed with me, and we got along real well. On Monday night was my night off, and so I told him, I says, here's the key to the door. I'm going up to see my sister. So when you get done in the morning, I says, I'm not here. I says, you got the key, you can go in and sleep. I was going up to see my sister. So when I come back, there was nobody there, and there was a note laying on the table there. And I looked in the closet, and the closet was empty, no clothes. So then I looked at the note, and the note says, I'm sorry I did this, he says, but here's the ticket from the pawn shop. He says, that's where your clothes are. He had took practically everything I had. I had a white shirt for each day I worked, and white pants for each day I worked, and I had Chinese laundered for me, and I had other clothes. He had took everything I had that wasn't worth anything, and he went over to the pawn shop and got $7.35 for it in the pawn shop, and he left the ticket on the table, so it cost me $7.10. Was he a complete stranger to you? Yeah, he was a complete stranger. I didn't know him. He was not a Swede? No, no. He was just some kid. What made you believe that he was human beings after that? He was a nice kid, a young kid, nice kid, probably 17, 18 years old, something like that. But you never lent the key to anybody else after that? No, I never asked anybody to go with me home. So you learned by experience? Oh yeah, yeah. It cost me $7.35 to get all my shirts and pants back, and coat. Well, I had a coat and a jacket, because you didn't get much for old clothes them days either. But you would think the guy would be decent enough. You took the liberty to have to trust him. I think he was decent enough to leave the stubs on you. Well, that's decent, but I think the first thing you should have done in the first place, in other words, you trusted him. Yeah. And he could have trusted you to pay back for being honest. I don't know. He wasn't that kind of a guy, I guess. But there are probably people that believe that you've got to rip as much as you can. You know, sometimes it scares me the way them kids are brought up nowadays. You know, there is... What do you think, like religion, you belong to a church? Yeah. Pecatonica? I go to Pecatonica Church. To the old Swedish church there? Yeah, but actually we belong to our savior, Sluteran, in Rockford. I help to build it. That's why we don't go there that much. I help to build that. I got my name in the cornerstone on that church. Why did you go into Rockford? It was too far away, though. Well, you see, when my sons started to go to... I joined that when I lived in Rockford. We got married and lived in Rockford. But you see, when the kids would go to confirmation, it was easier for me to bring them down here. And of course, her family always belonged to that church. Her grandfather, he used to pump the organ down there in that church. So that's why we go to church there. Are there many Swedish offsprings here now from Pecatonica that are on here? How many are in this area of Swedes? Second and third generation? Second, third generation. That's quite a bunch. That's quite a bunch. Quite a bunch of people. Quite a bunch. And they were mostly farmers? Yeah, mostly farmers. Yeah, there were a lot of old Swede farmers up around Pecatonica. There is no Swedish organization around here except the church? Not that I know of. Then you went to Rockford and joined there, didn't you? Well, the people around here, they don't go much in. I say I belong to the church. I joined there before I got married. And I'm a poor member because I pay my dues. That's about all I win once in a while, so forth and so on. But, so I say I'm a poor member as far as that goes. But, no, I was a deacon when we selected the location for the new church in Rockford. And there, too, we did the same thing. We hired an expert to tell us what to do. And it paid off. Every time I went to the location where the church is, we couldn't drive there with the car. We had to walk. But, you know, years ago, there were no consultants. There was a group of people out in the country. It was a group of farmers. They sat down there and they talked and they discussed the thing.