 So he had invented the... He invented this shaft you see. And there was quite a bolt I tell you. They had a long head on there. And then when the bolt was full, a lot of grooves on it and it was finished. Then they send them to the electrician and they put gears on their head. They cut gears on it. So they were soldered to shafts and all that. And Svan had even... They built machines right on top of one another. And they had them build two special machines to work with this bolt. And you know, we used to run that day and night for a long time. There was good money in it. Long, big bolts. And then when Rex North bought the company, then the electrician came and asked them, Will you buy that machine that cuts the gear and cut the gear to one head? And then you send the bolt to us complete and they're complete. No, we don't buy no machines at Rex North. Well, then we take them to Japan, we said. They make them in Japan then. So they lost the order right before the company. How could they refuse an order like that? Gee, it's indecent. They didn't understand anything. Had Svan been there, he would have bought that machine right away. There was big business in making those. See how foolish they were at Rex North. When you see here, there was no... This Rex North, where are they located, the headquarters? In Midwalker. So they didn't understand that? No. So that's how the shop went down. You lose big orders like that, then it goes down and down. And you know what Svan Hielman said one time, If you're going to be in screw business, you've got to make all kinds of screws that the customer wants. See, he specialized on to please the customer. You know, and he was... I know that. And he ford, Ford Company needed some bolts, and they just needed them. They'd put them on if they had to make them on a Saturday or Sunday or night. Used to please them. And that way, you know, they got orders. So the biggest customer now for Rockford Products, when you were working for them, when Svan Hielman was running it, who was the biggest customer? The automotive industry? Yeah, the automotive industry, General Electric and Ford Company. So they were trained, it was going out every week. Yeah. Or maybe every day. Oh, yeah. Was he competing with National Lock? He was. You know, Svan Hielman had been with National Lock. And he went out from there and started his own shop. But he was a tremendous guy. You know, he was self-educated, Svan Hielman. He was self-educated and could run. So he was not an engineer then for Sweden? No. But he had some... He had had a little factory in Chicago one time. I don't know what it was, Locks or something he made. And he came to Rockford with the circus. He came to Rockford with the circus. He was strong man. Circus? Yeah. He was strong man on the circus one time. Yeah. So he was like your brother? Yeah, he was strong man. Sure. He was well built, Svan Hielman. He was a strong man. What was he doing then? I don't know what he did in the circus. But he was a strong man in the circus. And he came to the circus to Rockford and jumped off there. That's what he's been telling me. So he was just a regular guy? Yeah. But think how he learned English good. He did? Yeah. And when he was at Lock Company there one time, he had a boss there, his name was Tiet. And Svan Hielman was his boss. And Svan Hielman, of course, he was over him. And he had written a letter to him one time. And there was a word there he had to go to the dictionary. That guy was in school in this country and everything. And he had to go to the dictionary and see what it was. So there are quite a few stories about Svan Hielman. Yeah. Do you remember any of the original people here in Rockford when you came here? Buse Albin, did you hear of him? Yeah, I'm sure of Buse Albin. Did he work for Rockford Products? No, he didn't work for Rockford Products. He worked some other places. Rockford Drop Forge? Yeah, Drop Forge, I think it was. So you knew him? Buse Albin. I'd seen him even, I'd run away from him one time. You did? Yes, we met him in the park one Sunday. And you know he was drunk all the time? He was? Yeah. And then a guy and I walked to a little park down there. And he come and asked for matches. And I had no matches. I had no matches, I say. And he got mad. And he come with his fist. He went back on my neck like that. And I saw it, so I walked fast. I got away from him. You couldn't trust him. You couldn't trust him, you know. And that was Buse Albin. That was the cruelest I'd ever been through. So he was actually a strong guy then? That Buse Albin, yeah. Yeah, he was a strong guy. And he drank, but at the end he said he quit. He got tired of the fighting. He quit drinking at the end. So he sobered up? Yeah, he sobered up. He became a regular person? Yeah, he was in all kinds of fights. And they said the police had a rough time to get him into the parry wagon. Yeah. And there was a... He had a policeman, his name was Lindström. Oskar Lindström? Yeah, he come from Sweden. And he was going to arrest Buse Albin one time. And they didn't know how to take him. And Lindström, she showed him. How they were going to take him down the stairway. And Lindström, he took him, arms around him like that. And he arsed him down like that. And he held his arm around him like that. Under his arms, up like that. And he held like that. Then he bit Lindström in the tongue. When he took him down. So there was many interesting things happening here. For example? Years ago. That was more interesting then than it is now. It's more dull now. Yeah, it's more dull I think. In those days when those Swedes came and immigrants. That was more interesting. But many of them suffered during the depression. No work, nothing to eat. Yeah. Like the bachelor for instance, they had a rough time during the depression. Yeah, that was tough. Yeah, it was tough. They had to try everything, you know. All you could get was food and... Some places. But it was for so many years though that you kept on. Yeah, so long, yes. That's right. Of course I was out on farm two summers. I didn't plan to go back to Sweden. I thought that I would get out of it someday. And then when the war broke out. Then they were sure they were going to get out of it. You were home in 1936, that was the first time. 1936 I was home. And then you went back again for a visit in 1970? 1952 I went home. 1952 again? And then 1971, the last time. So 1952, your parents, were they still living? They were still living, 1952. So you stayed there for a couple of months? I was six weeks. Six weeks? I flew home. Six weeks. Yeah, 1952, yeah. Did you see any changes in your neighborhood then, home in Värmland? Oh yeah, certain changes. But then you know, when I came home in 1971, between 1952 and 1971, the biggest change I saw was the roads in Sweden. Hard surface. During that time, 19 years it was, and then there was mostly hard surface all over Sweden. Gosh, there was only those side roads, gravel roads. So that was a big improvement I saw in Sweden. That was the biggest improvement I ever seen. And I come back. We traveled north from Värmland up through northern Värmland, into Dalarna, and then up Herjedalen, Jämtland, and then we crossed the border into Norway, then got to Trondheim in Norway. And there was hard surface all over. Did you have your boys with you then? No, no, I was traveling alone. I went alone. Did you have your brother with you then, traveling? No, in Sweden I went with my brother. His daughter had a Volkswagen, and his wife and my brother and her, we were traveling up in the Norwegian, in the mountains there. That was nice. Dorefjell. We were up there. So you had a good trip then. Yeah. So the last time you went back was in 1970? 1971. And you still, no, you don't have the brother left now in Sweden. He died, you said? He died, yeah. 81. The family is gone in Sweden now. So you have contacts with Sweden, or you write letters? We write. My brother's wife writes to us regularly, and we write back to her. And then every Christmas the cousin writes, but that's only Christmas time. Your brother was in Sweden. Did you and he compare the differences, who had it the best? If he had it better in Sweden, and you had it better here in Rockford? Oh, no. No, we never discussed it, no. How did you find Sweden? I mean, your brother, he was the farmer there. Fleskården i Västra Emtervik. He made pretty good living. He made pretty good, worked for him, and he did the stole-built, and they made it pretty good, I think. And then when he retired, he bought this house in Glava. There was a house for sale there. A house, and there was a garage, and another few houses more, and a little stuga. And there was some lot to be sold that he could sell if he wanted to build more houses on. And he got that, he thought it was a good bargain, and he bought it, and he stayed there. I was over there and saw it. It was a little nice house. So you joined the church then with your wife, you married in the first Catholic church, and you have been staying with them. And your sons were raised there also. But you never belonged to any organizations then? No, not, I didn't belong to anything here in Rockport. That's the only... You have not been any politically involved? No. I stayed away from politics. You were running for an officer's position? No. There's too much problem with politics. Why is it, when you came in 1929 to Rockport, there were a lot of Swedes here, Blom was the mayor, and Hallström was... Blom was mayor. Hallström was mayor. A lot of Swedish older men. But nowadays you don't see not too many Swedish names. No. Why is that? Well, you know, they are dying out. You mean the second generation or the third generation? Oh, yeah. Are they not interested? Yes, there's some from that second generation. Oh, sure there is. They are still... Yeah, but there seems to be more Italian names than Irish. Well, we haven't had any Swedish mayors since Lundström. He was the last one. He was the last one. Yeah, Lundström. Then came Schleicher, and then came this here McNamara. So they... I don't know. But there are many that are of Swedish descent that have jobs. They are older men still. Yeah. They're what I'm looking at, the board, I mean, the city council. Yeah. I don't see too many Swedish names there any. No. Not right now. There used to be the Augustos and like that, but there ain't any now. So they are taking a rest from the political life of the Swedes. Yeah. We had Jan B. Andersson, you know. Oh, yeah, he was a Swede. He was a Swede. How do you consider him as a politician? Was he a middle of the road kind of a politician? He became a middle of the road at the end. And the Republican, they thought he was too liberal. He was too liberal for them. They wanted to get rid of him. He was a free church man. Yeah. But he became too liberal, they thought. So after his fling with the presidency, he didn't go back as a congressman or senator? No. Why didn't he do that? Did he see himself as finished? Maybe. Maybe that was it. Yeah. It says in the paper Truman was not a popular man, but he was a good president. He was a strong president, they say now. Do you believe he is one of the better ones? Yeah. Truman was one of the best. And it says that history said Truman will find out that I've been right, said Truman. When they criticized him. And now, for all those, they say Truman was a good president. Yeah. He was a strong president. They didn't fool him. Those guys didn't fool him. There was one thing there he didn't let nobody fool him. Yeah. He is rated as the sixth president. What do you think about the religion now? There are so many different spectacles going on now with religion on TV, for instance. Has that gone too far? People seem to believe in them now. Yeah, there's some, you know, like that old rabble we heard now. You can't believe it. You can't believe it. No, but people still believe in them though, because they send money all the time. Yeah, I never sent anything to them. Never. I don't send money to any of those television beggars. I wouldn't send anything. Gosh, there's so many others to give to that can use the money. I know that they say they use them right, but they take some of it. They take some of it. They have to, to make the thing go. The guy pays for television and, I don't know. The church you belong to now, First Covenant, has that changed over the years since you... No, they haven't changed much. It's much the same. Do you feel comfortable with the church today as you did four years ago? Yeah. It's just like... But there has been changes though. I mean, they have the hymnals. Your singing are different. Yeah, they're using much the same hymnals in our church. So you still feel pretty good with it? Yeah. You know, there are many songs that Frykman wrote from Värmland. They are still in there. Yeah. And Skog. Nils Frykman. Yeah. And Hultman. Skog and Hultman, yeah. They're all favored songs. Yeah.