 This is cassette two, this continuation with Roland and Helen Berglund in Omaha, Nebraska. 14th of October, 1987, cassette two, side one. So now when you brought home your first date in the big city of Chicago, what did your mother say then? Who was it? It was probably my sister. Was she brought home the first date? No. She was probably my first date maybe. We went to a dance or something. In Chicago at that time, in my younger years, we'd go to the school dances, of course there were, and then every park in Chicago had dances. Open to the public. Open to the public. There was a live band there every night. In high school? Yeah, for high school kids. Every night of the week you could go from one park to the other. And in the gymnasium there they'd have dances. But there was a danger, I mean, if you had gone to a Viking or a Swiss Jewel Hall for dancing, your mother would not know exactly what kind of people you were. Well, yeah, we never got that far. I was always probably too quick for that kind of stuff. Because in those parks you met Polish, Irish, Germans, Russians, Jewish girls, Italians. Never thought of it. But did she warn you, I mean, to dance together with people of... Well, there was always... Well, it always happened when the lady friends of the family, they were the ones who oversaw that, you know. You bring home a Swedish girl now, and there was always that hint. Always somebody. And of course, there was mother always shaking her head, yes. That'd be nice. There was nothing about she couldn't be Catholic or anything like that? Yeah, there might have been a little mention of religion. I'd say there might have been, but it wasn't pushed. It was just they didn't know, maybe. It was in those days. There was a lot of animosity, one to the other. It was clannish. The Swedes, they stayed together. They were mostly all Lutheran. And they weren't that a religious group that we were. Oh, I don't know. Maybe they were on Sunday. But after church, they sure had a good time. They let loose. Oh, yeah. So when you came home with Helen Olsen, your mother felt pretty good? Well, sure. We went to high school together. She was a freshman in high school. So you knew the family then? His family, father and mother? I really didn't know her last name until I asked her to go on her first date to go to a prom. She was a freshman, a first year in high school, and I was a... I was a junior. I was one year behind her. Now you're older already. See, first you want to be younger, and then you want to be older. You were just one year ahead of me. Yes, that's right. But anyway, you went to the prom with me. And so I had... I don't remember bringing you home to mother. After quite a while. It was a while, wasn't it? You never mentioned it either. Oh, yes, I had to. How could I get out with a clean shirt and pressed pants and all that? In a corsage. Yes, in a corsage. And I got the car. I think I got the car, didn't I? There was a couple of us that went together on another car maybe. 1940. When was it? The car was new in 1940. I was going through high school through the 40s there to 44. Yes, it was... It was 43. Yes. Did most of the high school students, the boys, have a car at that time? No, not very many. Very few? Very few, I'd say. They had to walk then in order to take a ride? Walk or it was a streetcar. But the transportation was so good in Chicago that that's what I miss out here in Omaha now is the mass transportation that... Takes you where? Any direction? Yes, you could go one way or the other and you'd transfer south and west or east or north or wherever in Chicago at that time. And you got used to it. You'd get on a bus, get on a streetcar. I mean, in the cold of winter, it was cold. And you'd look for a warm spot on the streetcar. Some of them were pretty warm and some of them were pretty cold, too. Especially if you had to stand on the backside there. When it was wide open, it wouldn't close them up. So you did marry Helen Olsen then? Yeah. What year? 1950. 1950. I came out here to Omaha in 1949 and then went back and got her in 1950. She followed out pretty good. You married in Chicago? We married in Oak Park, Illinois. My church. Was there a Swedish... No. No Swedish church? No. Why... Oak Park Church? That was United Evangelical Lutheran Church. Oh, I see. And that was the closest church to where your parents lived? Not really, but... We started going there when we were very small. So you went to Sunday school there? Yeah. And that's where I got married, too. So if I ask you then... So you married and then moved west to Omaha? Yes. What did your parents say when you came home with Roland Berlin? It was just my mother. Your father was dead? Yes, he died when I was 11. I see. So it was just my mother, and my mother was very happy that he was a Swede. So she told you about being careful about dating... No, she didn't tell me to be careful. I brought home quite a variety. You did? She brought home a lot of Italians, and she says, Where did you get that dark one? Yeah, that's the first I've heard. What's all this dark ones you're talking about? That dark one. She says, Can't you find a Swede? Go for the blonde one. Right. So she was happy then? Yeah. And so your father, they came from Sweden about the same time? Father came in 1923, and mother came in 1925. And they didn't know anything about each other? No, they knew each other in Sweden, but he came first. And then she came two years later. He sent for her. And they married here then in... In Chicago. In Chicago. About a year later. And they lived out there in Oak Park? No, they lived in Chicago. But it was just that some friends down the street were going to that church, and they took my sister and I. That's how we ended up in the Oak Park Church. Did they marry in the Swedish American Church? I don't know where they got married. I don't think they did. What kind of work was your father in? My father was a baker. Baker? And so were his brothers. They had their own bakery? Yes, the one brother had his own bakery. And I think he came over first. Where was it located in Chicago? I don't know. I can't remember. It must have been long before your time then. Well, I remember being there once. And I think that was just before the Depression came. So he died young, your father? Yes, in 1939. Accident? No, he had bad lungs and tuberculosis. And working in a bakery, all that flour and everything got into his lungs. And he only had one lung to begin with. So it was downhill. Was he on sanatorium for a while? No, at that time I don't even think they had sanatoriums. I don't know. They had one up there on Polanski. Oh, did they? My father. Oh, really? I don't know. But... So he died young then? Mm-hmm. I was only 11. So what happened then? There were three girls in the family and your mother? Just my sister and I. Two girls. I see. It was two girls? Mm-hmm. That's right. You were only three girls. And then my mother just kept on working, and she says, Your girls are going to finish high school. And she just kept on working. And, of course, as soon as we got old enough, we went to work too then after school. Did she work in a bakery? She did eventually. But she was cleaning house when she first came to the States. And then she went to school. And then she liked school so well, and she was learning English and everything. And then she decided she wasn't going to get married. But they told her, Either get married or you have to go back. Because that was the reason why she came to the United States. But she changed her mind because she liked school, and she would have gone on with it. Then after she got married, my sister came shortly after. But I thought that was funny. But she was able to keep you in school. Yeah. And my sister and I both worked after school in order to make ends meet. And then she did cleaning houses, and then she worked in the bakery, and then she worked in a fish company. She had many jobs, many jobs, always trying to get more money and do better. Was she able to go back for the rest of the Sweden? Yes. Mother? Mother, yeah. Here's her passport. She went back in 1967. Oh, that's right. Forty years later. Almost, well, a little bit more than 40 years. Forty-two years later, she finally went back. Ingeborg Olsson. Uh-huh. So she was born 1897. Uh-huh. I finally talked her into going, and she was a member of the Svithjid. And she was living here in Omaha. She moved there? She moved out here, too. Yeah. Oh, many years later. She didn't live with us. No. She didn't. Oh, no. She wouldn't live with us. No. But many years later, she moved back here, and I finally talked her into going back to Sweden, and I'm glad I did. So her sisters and brothers, were they still living somewhere over there? They're all there. She was the only one in her family that came to the States, whereas on my father's side, I think most of them came to the States, and she was the only one. So she had a good visit then with her brothers and sisters. Right. And she came from Blekinge? Yeah. You don't know the place? Kyrkult, Blekinge, Hobby, Talskrona? That sounds familiar, and then Runneby sounds familiar. You never been to Sweden? No. I hope to go. Maybe in 1989. I hope. I hope to go. I really want to go because I have quite a few cousins. Do you correspond with them? Yes, with the one cousin I have been. In Blekinge? No, he's in Stockholm. He's in Stockholm. But he cannot write or read English, my cousin. So his grandson writes me letters and reads my English to him. Which I was surprised. I thought everybody would learn English by this time. He's about your age, then? Yeah. He's about your age, then? Oh, here's a piece. So your mother, she lived in, yes, in the late Stockholm, Lapland, and the folk dances. Did you dance any folk dances? Hamburg, Danish? Yes. So you were very young then to dance? Oh, yes. Yeah. With his mother and his family, well, relatives. Did you belong to any dance team in Chicago? No. No. But his mother would have parties, and that's where I learned how to do the shahdash and the hamba. All the friends, they danced. They always had the accordion. There was always music. Well, if Lawrence O'Glean was there, there was the accordion. He went out at his cottage out in Algonquin, his house he built out there. Well, everybody helped him out there. On weekends, the accordion came out and the drink came out and the dancing went. We ate and drank and danced. And there was mostly people then from Långermanland and friends from Omsk? Oh, well, Sweden, they weren't all just from Långermanland. They were from all over. But everybody danced. Waltz, waltz, and polka and hamba. Yeah, shahdash. And, of course, at our wedding, we had quite a few shahdash. You had the wedding in Chicago? Yes. And it was down, where was the reception, down on Belmont there? On Clark Street. Clark and Belmont somewhere down there. Yeah, in a Swedish hall. It was a Swedish hall. Viking Temple? No. I don't even remember. The IODT cafe was not there at that time. No, 1950, I don't think so. I don't know if it was. It was some Swedish hall. It was a little hall there and it was enough. And ate and danced, but, you know, you're young, you don't pay any attention. Mom pretty well took care of everything. And my mother. And your mother, yeah. Because I was out here in Omaha and I had to drive back. I had a job here, so I drove back and all the wedding arrangements were made. Right, you had it easy. You came to a set table. Yeah, where's the sous-vide? Right. That's right. That's right. So you brought the whiskey from the Midwest? No, Roy Bowman. Paul Crowan. Roy Bowman, he helped on that. He was my best man. He went and got all that stuff. I don't know if I ever paid him. I owe you. Yeah. So that was a good old time. Oh, yeah. Do you remember if your parents went on to Indiana, the sand dunes? No. Because some streets had summer cottages down there. Yeah, no. My father never did have a car. He never had a car. And, of course, he died in 1939. And during the Depression, we had to move to a basement flat. And he worked for the WPA then, which was outside work and through the government. So he was laid off then from the bakery? Oh, yeah. The bakery closed up. They lost money at the bank, lots of money at the bank. The bank closed. And no money to be had after? No. No. So he worked for the government, the WPA, whatever that was. What kind of work was he doing then? Outside construction. Outside construction. And he was very healthy then. Maybe it was too hot for him though. Yeah. Yeah, a little bit. But he never did learn how to drive. We never had a car. And none of his brothers, from what I remember, had a car either. We always went by bus or streetcar. So the publication, Transportation, I mean, was a good issue, was it? Yeah. And it was hard to park a car. Not everybody had to get a hot-chase. You didn't want to buy a new car and put it out on the street. Yeah, that's true. Some did, some didn't. But there were plenty of garages to rent. At that time. You might rent a garage half a block away or a block away in Chicago. Someone who had a garage, they would have a garage for rent. Oh, I see. And so. No cars in it. No, well, they had a house with a garage and no car. And so they would rent it for money, income. That was easy. $3 a month or $5 a month. In fact, we had a garage, a two-car garage behind our house on Giddings, and we rented half of it to, I don't know, it was a Jewish man who had, he bought a new car every year or every two years. He'd pay $200 and get a new car every year at that time, which was great, but he had to have a garage. And I think Mom charged him $8 a month at that time is what the going rate was. And I'm sure it went that way in other places too. So talking about dating, your sister, she brought home. Italian. Italian boy. John DeMattis. How did she meet him, in high school or on the dance? How was it? Doris, she was a good, she liked to sing. I think she went to take singing lessons, and I think John was, he was singing too. Yeah, they both sang. And they both sang. But nothing came of it, the singing. The singing wasn't that good. Oh, she was good. She could shake the roof. She had a powerful voice. She sang Verdi's, well. Oh, classical. It was a classic, the one I remember that was so. Semi. Semi-classical, yeah. So then she met. John DeMattis. DeMattis. So what did Mother say then? She didn't like it. I think she mellowed in her later years, but not too much. It's not easy then to. No, it was hard on John. They lived together. Oh, he understood it also. Yeah, but your mother didn't say anything to him, does she? Oh, I'm sure she did. You bet, she was one, she wouldn't let that. Undercover. Oh, no. She let him know that she was, well, not just because he was. Well, maybe she, she. Well, he wasn't family, really. Or whatever. I don't know how it's. They had to get along because Mom bought the house and sister and he moved downstairs. Mom lived upstairs. They lived in the same house. They paid Mom rent and they still live in the house. It's theirs now. So he helped. They needed a man around the house. It was like a family house, which, well, in Sweden they had those houses, where, Mormor's house. Yes. Or Farfar's house. They built the little, and stuga, what was it? Undantogsstuga. Yeah. It was called. So she lived with them then, your. Yes. And I was out here. So. So they worked out then, there was no problem with. No, I got as far away from my mother as I could. And my wife's mother. You had a mother with a Swedish wife. Yeah, but my. Blonde wife. The trouble is, though, my wife's mother, she showed up. I was 500 miles away from her, too, you know, and she'd come out here and live. There's a saying, you know, pigs feet and grandmothers taste best cold. And our best cold. No. So you didn't have that trouble? No. No. My mother lived in, and she took care of older people and sick people. In Omaha. In Omaha. But she didn't live with you, though? No, never. She never lived here with us. No. But your kids grew up with her around then, so she. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Well, especially the younger one. I think it was. Closer to Grandma. Yeah. Babysitting and. No. No? No. You couldn't go over there and. No. The girls were older. No. No. You mean you had that much respect for her? I would never ask her because she lived in with other people, you know, taking care of them, where it wasn't her. She couldn't, then. I didn't think she could, so I always had to get a babysitter, you know. You couldn't pick her up to take the old horse either, was that? We never did it, never. Grandma Olsen would get on a bus and she'd show up here. Yeah, she'd come out. You could look out the front window and here she'd come walking down the street. Yeah. Well, I'm talking about my mother would show up, too. When I turned 40. Yeah. It was on a Sunday when my birthday was, the 15th of May, and it was on a Sunday. And you usually sleep in on Sunday. But this Sunday there was a knock on the front door at 8.30 or so in the morning. In the morning. And guess who was at the door? Mother. Happy birthday, Roland, she says. She had flown in and taken a cab from the airport just to, here I'm 40 years old, well, we're going to celebrate your birthday. And she did it when I was 15, she did it when I was... That's it. That's all. She remembered. She remembered. But she would show up on my birthday. Uh-huh. Yeah. 30, I think she came out on it when I was 32. Could be. 30, 40, and 50 she showed up. Uh-huh. Yeah. So she was with your daughters, too, then? When she'd come out to visit, yeah. Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. They got along fine. Uh-huh. Oh, yeah. I could understand a lot of Swedish, but I can't speak it. I know a few words. And if they talk slow, I can understand. So you and your mother seldom spoke Swedish then? You never spoke Swedish? Well, after Daddy died, there was no one to speak Swedish with. And she was the one that kept the family together. But then after he died, the family just kind of, his brothers kind of, never did see him too much, you know. And she had no one to speak Swedish with, you know. So, but when I started school, it was half English and half Swedish. It was? Oh, yes. And the same with my sister, and they couldn't understand us. But you don't remember anything of that from that time back? But you didn't have any problem speaking English in school, though? No, no. Once we got in first grade or so, and you're around the other children, you know, we could speak English, you know. But going to the store, she would ask, and you don't use those words in school. It would be half Swedish and half English. You also had them accompanied. Yeah, I had. To swing it on up there. Right. And the teacher would hear that, of course. Oh, yes. How about the other students? Did they tease you about it? I don't remember. I expect they did. I expect they did, you know. Well, I think there were other children of other nationalities, too, that spoke their language. And so they had the same predicament there with others. I know I didn't speak English, kindergarten or first grade, whatever it was. But you learned quick. Yeah. Well, what about our parents? Mother tells a story of when she came here. She worked for a person up north, Chicago, Evanston area. Very well to do as a maid or a housekeeper. And the lady of the house wanted a grapefruit for her breakfast. And mother couldn't understand what a grapefruit was. She'd never heard grapefruit, the word. And I guess the lady of the house described it as citrus. Well, when mother heard the word citrus, she interpreted it as citron. And that's what she brought the lady of the house. Well, that was a little bit different. A little different than a grapefruit, of course. You know, citron is lemon. Then dad, when he was laboring, he carried, well, bricks. He was a hog carrier, I guess you'd call him. He carried brick up the ladders, and he and his co-worker, one of the bricks slipped and it fell and it broke a window glass of a joining building. And, of course, they felt responsible, so they said they would fix it on the lunch hour. And they went down to the hardware store to get what they needed. And the dad wanted, he didn't know what the word for putty was, but he knew what he wanted, so he asked for ten cents worth of chit. That's what putty is in Swedish. And so he got the putty, and they fixed the window. There are some strange words that you use. Then, of course, mother, she wanted a crochet needle. She didn't know the word for a needle. She went down to the Woolworth's Five and Dime, and all she did was sign language or did this, and the lady knew what she wanted, what she needed, and sold it to her. So it was hard for them, the language. If you think about people that can't talk the language, it's difficult to get along, very difficult. Even in Sweden, when someone that doesn't understand the language, they have their own slang. And, well, even the farmers, they speak Swedish. When they say mycke, not mycke, they say mytche, the old saying, I guess. Were you able to understand your relation out there, the older ones? Yes, some. I mean, well, if I couldn't, I had to ask, or repeat, or say, tell them as best I knew how, what it was. Because I didn't go to school to learn Swedish, and it was just day-to-day talk. I mean, it wasn't any, that was linguistic or... Next slide. Next slide. Cassette 2, Sight 2, continuation with Roland and Helen Berglund, Oma, Nebraska. Cassette 2, Sight 2. In your high school, no, they didn't offer any Swedish lessons. No. Because there were too few Swedes. Right. Yeah, that's true, there was no... The only offering we had, well, not in grammar school, but in high school, the only languages there that I recall were... Spanish. Spanish, French. Latin. Latin. There might have been French. Could be. In fact, my one teacher there in high school wanted me to take French, because it had to do with mechanical, well, architectural... I guess the French were... Well, she had a good head on her, she meant well. But I took Spanish one year just to satisfy her that I took a language. I didn't take any. Oh, you didn't have to take any language? No. Well, the English we had to have. Oh, I understand. Yes, compulsory. Of course. But I mean, did you have any use now for Spanish? No. Well, if I'd have known then what I know now, yes, it would have worked out well. I could have, well, explored further south, maybe. Now, even. Someone that is educated in electronics to go south. Who's to know? Into sales. Instead of being a service person, I could have worn a white shirt and a tie and a coat and had an office and maybe driven a Cadillac. And speak Espanol. And speak Espanol, yes. So, you have stayed in the same job then in Omaha? Basically in the same type... Electronic fields. Electronic, yes, service. They've been your main... and this was what you wanted to stay with and retire from? That's all I know. Well, sure. Now, talking about that, it's... Why did you move west, though? Didn't they have an offer in... you had General Electric in Chicago? Yes. But I was into television service. Television was just starting here in Omaha. It was brand new. They needed service people. And I was single. I was ready to go. And I came. I went with another man who was going to open up a business here, and I worked with him for over 20 years. Did they pay better here than in Chicago? I don't know. I'd say it would have been better in Chicago, possibly. It had to be. I mean, Chicago would have paid better. But out here, I don't know, within two weeks I knew I liked it out here. People are more sociable. Easier to park. Easier to park, yeah. Oh, my. People in Chicago are so, well, you don't realize until you get away from there and see how it is elsewhere. They're more congenial. They're easier to talk to. You try to attract someone's attention in Chicago, well, they think you're crazy, and they turn away from you and walk and run from you. And that's been going on for 50 years and more. When I left Chicago and I said I was getting married and moving to Omaha, Nebraska, they asked me where that was, and I says, I don't know. I haven't got the faintest idea where Omaha, Nebraska is at. Have they still got Indians there? I said, I don't know where he's taking me. And I did not like it for the first year. It was too small. It was too hard of a change to have. Yeah, too small compared to Chicago. Yeah, but you can go from one end of this town to the other in less than half an hour. Yeah, but do you really need that bigness of Chicago to like it? No. Didn't you hate the rush hour traffic? Yes, I worked for five years in downtown Chicago, and I had to take the streetcar and the subway, and it would take me an hour to get to work. Well, it was two hours spent every day then for pay. You still liked it, better? You get used to it, don't you? It's part of living when you're there. That's what you did for a living. But you didn't miss it then when you came here. I mean, were you not glad to be away from it? You missed it. I missed it, the big city. Two hours. I read a lot of books. I read a lot of books. If I could get a seat, if I could get a seat, I read a lot of books. How about you now? Did you miss this hectic drive all the time in Chicago? Well, there was no drive for me there. I didn't have to drive. I had just finished school. I had to come back from service. So you were ready to get a new job then. I was ready to go somewhere else. I hadn't had an opportunity to work in Chicago area at all, really. And so I worked in a small fix-it store there close to the house and was approached about this Omaha situation. In two weeks' time, I had made up my mind and I came out. So how was the movement? Were they helpful people when you came? I suppose you didn't go around asking for help, but you didn't have to. Well, you're single, you know, and you had a job, you had money. I was single, and every paycheck went into my wallet. I never made it to the bank. The boss would say, when are you going to cash them checks? I had accumulated maybe ten paychecks in my wallet, you know, and he's trying to balance his books. And he lived at the Y. He's like, I used it when he was in Chicago. Well, when you're single, you know, you don't have that much to do. You start work at 8, 8.30 in the morning, and you went until 8, 8.30 at night here is how we worked at the time. And I was single, and well, naturally, a boss who will take advantage of you, basically he did, but he was good to me. He helped us build this house. He built a house next door to us here. And so we were pretty close. He was a Jewish man. So he was helpful then. And he was helpful, yeah. And that's all we knew here in Omaha. That's all we knew. We didn't know anybody else. You didn't get in contact with the other Swedes, though? No. Not until this last four or five years that we got out here to Boston. Boston, yeah. We had all of this background and didn't take it well. We were busy with our children, you see, and our family at the time, and we didn't expand into the social area. We knew about Boston before, but like we say, we were busy with the girls. Did they meet downtown earlier, before they had this place up north? Yeah, I think there was a place, a Swedish hall. There was a Swedish auditorium downtown area, on Cass Street or somewhere. I remember pointing it out once. On Chicago, was it? Chicago Street? It could be. It could be. You didn't go to dances down there? No. The dancing was over. It was past. No? We went to Peony Park, and the new friends that we got acquainted with up and down the street here, we would go to Peony Park or go to different halls that are around the area here. And go dancing. Every Saturday night, well, you get a babysitter, you go out to eat and go dancing. Or to a movie. Or to a movie, yeah. Then the TV came in. Yeah. We still like to get out. No, but they were the 50s, so you had TV quite early on, because you were working with it. No. No, we didn't have it right away either. I worked on it, but we didn't have one in the house. No. Well, it takes money to buy those. They were expensive then in the beginning. Well, sure. The first set we had, I think Bob gave it to us. Yeah. We just lived in a one-room apartment when we first got married. And then you built this house in 1953? One. 51, we moved out here. No, two. 52. 52, we moved out here. And then your homesick and longing for Chicago was gone. Yeah. So the house helped them to bridge over the... Yeah, and our first daughter. Right. But until she came, there was nothing to do. Well, you would have had that in Chicago, too, nothing to do with... You had your first child. Where would we have lived? Until she came, I was homesick. Yeah. So while you were married, did you quit work then? Yeah. It was not in fashion to do that, in other words. Yes. Your husband would feel... Although I did... Not to be right, what do you call it? And there was this feeling that... It was that feeling. You were supposed to be the supplier of... Yes, I was the head of the house. I should... Provide. Provide. And it... Well, I wasn't that strict as some were, I don't think. Was it later coming here in Omaha, you think, than Chicago? Was it what? Was it later coming here that the housewife went to work than in Chicago, for instance? I don't know. I don't know. Because living here, I don't know what happened back there. I don't know, but I... You are like your friends now, for instance. They go to work in Chicago when they're married. Oh, I did, too, until the first baby came. Oh, you did? Oh, yeah. I found a job right away, as soon as I came here. Oh, yeah, she did. But then, after the first baby, then you... Then I quit. Well, then I started working nights after the second baby came. And then I was working nights there, oh, a couple, three nights a week or something, which was good to get out of the house after being home with two of them. So it felt good to get out, you know. Oh, Chicago, that's... Well, it was nice to go visit. Because our mothers were there in our early years, we would make a point to... We drove back every Christmas. Every Christmas, yeah. Every Christmas. Even the girls went with us. Oh, yeah, for a long time, and they remember it to this day. Oh, yeah. They miss that. In fact, my sister mentions it many times that it's not Christmases like we used to have. Where are you? Why aren't you here? With lutefish. Lutefish. They also eat the lutefish? Oh, yeah. Oh, I love it. My Italian brother-in-law, he eats it. That's the same as bacala in Italian. They eat the same thing. They call it bacala, I believe. So he went in the store and stayed with your sister? Yes. He likes the pig's feet. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Pig's feet. That I won't touch. Oh, they're good. How about your daughters now? Did they marry non-Scandinavians? Yes, none. Their first daughter might be a little bit. German descent. German? Von Barnhart. There's no Swedish there. Oh. You could put a von in front of Von Barnhart, and that's pretty German to me. No, they didn't marry Swedes. No, they didn't. We tried. We put the little whisper in the ear. It didn't take. It didn't take. So, and they stayed in this area then after they married? No, the first and second daughter, after they got out of high school, the first daughter moved out to Houston. To Texas? Texas. Texas. And then the second daughter moved out there, oh, maybe five years later. And now the second daughter is back home here. And the first daughter has always lived in Omaha. Our baby, our third daughter. Our third daughter. Yeah. She lives here. Did they go to college? No. They did all finish high school, which that's all we completed. Well, not having a father. That's hard. It was all a mother could do to get us both through high school. It was hard for us to, well, it was a good thing that we had public schools and we were in a good school district here, as I found out, really didn't realize until we were here for a while, that this area, it was a good area for schools. 66, yeah, we're in district. School district, 66. So this was far out on 56? Yes. At that time, there was farm country out there. Oh, yeah, the city limits was 72nd Street. We could sit here and see the cows out here. There was a dairy farm out here when we first moved out. Our second daughter, now she went to college at night, and she did finally get her degree. And then our youngest. Not a degree. She got a paper. Whatever. And our youngest daughter, she went to some sort of a college too, and she's a teacher for Montessori School. So they did go on on their own and got some college. Well, Joyce is a computer analyst. Uh-huh. Let me look at the card. I forget now. So she went to the computer. Uh-huh. She's a systems analyst. Uh-huh. She does well. She makes more money than I do. Uh-huh. She's like my mother. Exactly. There she is. There's my mother, almost. Isn't she? No. No? Well, there's your sister. Yeah. No, that's our daughters. That's our daughters. Well, there's your daughters, yeah. Yeah. These are our daughters and the grandkids. Here's our first daughter, our eldest. That's our second daughter. Joyce. Joyce, and that's Carol, our youngest. And then the grandkids. And our grandchildren. That's three by them, and she has two, and they have one, and another one on the way. And a half. And they all have their mothers here. They all have mothers. Yeah. I do babysitting. I do babysitting. My mother didn't, but I do. You can't avoid them. No. No? It's all right. That's great. Uh-huh. So they have it much easier than you had when you were growing up in the 30s. Yes. Yeah. Well, we say that, but they don't. No, they wouldn't know the difference. They don't know. Right. They don't know. They know what they read and what we may tell them, but they have it hard, too. It's hard for the younger generation today, I think. It's a faster pace. They don't know what it is, but it's a faster pace, yeah. But they'll say the same thing when they get to our age, I think. We never had a house in Chicago. We always rented. Always rented. Yeah. In apartments. This is my first house, and it'll probably be my last one. We stayed. We built it, and we stayed here. Yeah. We added on. This area wasn't this big. We added. Well, where she's sitting, that was a wall right there. Yeah. So we had a window here, and it was a window here. Step by step. We just added this on. After the girls left. Yeah. Well, we couldn't afford it. We built the house, and, well, every bit of it was usable. There was no wasted space in this house. No. Well, why build any more when you can't afford it? Yeah. It was a little rough then, too, for us, you know, raising them. Well, it was, what did we pay? The principal and interest was $52 a month. Taxes and insurance brought it up to $100 a month. Now the kids have to pay. It was a lot of money in those days, but not today where they pay $800 a month. How can we afford it? I don't understand. And then drive a new car to boot. Something's phony. I don't know. It's all figured out by computer. Yeah. Yeah. They know it. Oh, boy. Today. Mm-hmm. That was the end of the interview with Roland and Helen Berglund, Omaar Nebreska. End of interview. And we have today, 14th October, 1987.