 This is cassette three, side one, continuation with Stephen Northsea, Ruck Rilloy, cassette three, side one. Did you join any organizations other than IOGT? Oh yeah. I belong to, I was singing with Lyon Singer Society. Oh, singing? Yeah. Oh, Lyon? Yeah, Lyon. Yeah. When did you join them? Well, the Good Temples, we organized a chorus there. And then they moved to Pittsburgh. There were most of them singers, were singing in Good Temple chorus. So then, then they went, then the chorus didn't exist anymore. So then I went to Lyon Singer Society. So then Lyon Singer Society gave up. Then I joined Harmony, Norwegian Singer Society, up here on 7th Street and 15th Avenue. Oh, there's Norwegian? There's Norwegian, yeah. Oh, so they took you in then as a... Yeah, sure. Sing second tenor. So then, when they gave up, then I went to, yeah there. So then I sing with them now, from that time when they gave up. And then they organized, the guy, a group. There's a group there, you can go up and see. Oh, there's the veterans? Yeah, the Rockford Senior Citizen Chorus. They are called the veteran singer? Yeah. And they are from formerly Lyron, IOGT? Yeah, some of them. Some of them. Yeah, sure. So Lyron, when did they disband to sing? Well I don't remember the year, but they were... 50s? Oh yeah, they were, no they were little... I think I was singing with Harmony for 10 years, probably 12. So then we organized a group, got together, you know. And do you still sing in Swedish? Swedish and English. Both? Both, yeah. So I belong to that group. I belong to Harmony, or I belong to the Senior Citizen in Chicago. Go in there once a month, have a rehearsal. Once a month? Yeah. And here, now, I sing last night with Harmony. We have a rehearsal, sing new songs for this year coming now. And the group, I'm gonna start to sing tomorrow night. Not tomorrow noon, one o'clock with them. With the veterans? Yeah. Do you sing in Norwegian language then with Harmony? Oh yeah. Norwegian? Norwegian, Danish and Swedish. Oh they have Swedish on their repertoire also? Oh yeah, sure. Same thing in this hair group. Same thing in the group in Chicago. So you are really active then in... Yeah. Oh I belong to the Small Lands Club. Belong to the Värtsjöter Club. Belong to the Swedish Society. So I'm a busy guy. Did you belong to Vasa and Viking? I belong to Vasa, boy. How about church affiliation? Did you join any church when you came over? Oh yeah, I joined Trinity Lutheran Church. But I don't go there. Did you do that when you first came over or did it take... No, no, they took a little time, you know. I joined there after I got married. Where did you marry? Out in Bridgeport or...? No, here in Rockford. In Rockford? So who married you? The minister that married you, who was he? Well he passed away now. I don't remember his name but he belonged to Trinity Lutheran Church. Oh now, backstands. The old backstand was second minister, that old man. So when he passed away then he took over. So then he had his son. So now they, them two, they have... The old backstand, he passed away. The young one, he retired. So they have no minister now. But the bar is selling a good one. Bar is selling a good one in the morning. But they don't treat me right. They don't? No, I mean backstands. When my Eddie, Eddie was sick. For three years I put up in the backstand for three years for a heart. They never up to see him. I had two operations, they never come to see me. So much money I have gave them to Trinity Lutheran Church when they built that new church. So I think I have paid you plenty. And you haven't paid me back anything. But I still belong to the church. So you had your children baptized there and confirmed? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Just my boy, because my daughter passed away two days after she was born. Oh, I see. So she was... There was something wrong, her swallow, the mucus. So they couldn't get that out, so she passed away. When you moved out to Bridgeport during the war, did you join IOGT out there then? No, I have quit IOGT here in Blackford. You have quit IOGT? Yeah. I get mad at them. After so many years? Yeah. You had different philosophies that they... Oh yeah. You see, they... They don't fool me. And if they do anything wrong, I don't like having anything to do with them. You let Landström know the same thing? Yeah. How about during... you came here very early, 1911. Do you remember there were quite a few Swedish boys that refused to serve in the army during 1917? Hallström was with them, you know. Yeah, yeah. And he actually told them not to... Not to register. Oh, I know. And they were taken to a bribe-prison in Chicago. Yeah, sure. I remember that. I know that, yeah. There was some of the good Templars there. Some of the good Templars were... Yeah. Socialists. Yeah, sure. So when they come in there, they have to register anyway. But they stayed a few months there, or... They stayed a year. A year? Yeah. And if they didn't become citizens, they have to go back to Sweden? No, they don't need to go back, but they can send them back though. No, they don't need to do that. I was the first one they took. My brother and I. They took you? Yeah. Took me. Did you refuse to... No, I was in the courthouse on the naked. So they examined me and said, well, there's nothing wrong with you. You're going to be a good soldier. Yeah, I said, I might be, but I don't think you can take me over because I don't have any papers. I didn't take my first paper. So then they said, oh, no, I don't think you can. But you probably can take me here, stay here in the United States, but I was married then. My wife was up in Rochester, Minnesota. Because when the girl was born, then they put an air kill on my wife. They should have never taken the instrument. They should have taken it with the... Caesarean. Caesarean operation. Get that baby out. That girl lived, the girl, way over, close to 13 pounds. It was a big girl. She drank buttermilk every day. So I have to have the whole refrigerator full of buttermilk. Just grab buttermilk. That's all. That's why the baby got so big. Did the doctor tell her to drink a lot of buttermilk or... No. She didn't ask the doctor. But they wanted to make sure that the baby got enough. Yeah. So they spoiled her for me. Cost me over a thousand dollars for two operations. Them days. So what happened then after you were drafted? You were drafted then? I was drafted, yeah. Well... You said you were not a citizen then? Yeah, I said I had my first paper that's all so you can send me over. No, since we know that, we can take you in the Army. Well, I said that's perfect too. But I had my wife up in Rochester, Minnesota. So you get the fermenter? Yeah. So I don't need to go. But some of the others, they were... did they refuse right there and then? No, these were not married. They took them, see? But some of them refused? Yeah. Well, they refused, you know, these went to... to Bradwell. For that year. How many were they, you think? Well, that was pretty many. I was very insolent. But Mary, though, had two kids. Me and my wife, they tried to give us as much food as we could. They didn't have any money, nothing like that. And they didn't get any money from the city? No, no, no. They didn't do that. And they... what do you have to... they haven't taken them anyway. So what's the use that they do tricks like that? Yeah, Halstom, I guess he told them. Did you hear Halstom anything with his speeches? What he told them? Oh, no, no. I don't went to Blackhawks Park. Oh, Blackhawks Park? Yeah. There where they met? Yeah, sure. So then he talked to them. But then he changed his mind, though, after they... Yeah, after he come back. Then he was mayor there. But he was elected the one with the socialist ticket. Yeah, yeah. Was he a good mayor? Oh, yeah. He was awful nice. Because I had a house up on 20th Street, between 15th and 16th Avenue. And we were half of them were in the city, and half was in the country. So the city was... you can have a real toilet in the house, you know. But then there you have to have outhouse and cesspool, you know. So I built my house. So I called Lennstrom. And I called Halstrom. So he come up, he said, well, see what you want. Well, I'd like to go in the city. So I can... I'm going to build a house now. So I want you to tell me how to do to get in the city here. Well, if you can get three blocks, then we can make it so you can come in the city. So I went to all them houses that were on three blocks. He said, yeah, we're ready to go so we can get water and nothing here down, outhouse. Then the Halloween, then they tipped them over. So they have a heck of a time to lift them up and put them in the place again. Well, that was a gimmick they had. Yeah, yeah. For fun. Yeah, sure. Was there every Halloween? Yeah. My brother, he had his. But I don't have it because he built first and then I built second. So when I build my house, then we get water and sewer and everything. And pay the street. So they'd be so happy, you know, after we did all that. Nobody else like to do it. So I figure, well, I'm going to try. So I called him. He said, OK, see, we're going to see what we can do. If you get so many in there, then we start to walk right away. And he walked over there and looked at the cement. He had some kind of instruments he put down to see if there was just enough cement. But there was lower cement than what it was supposed to be. And he told them, no, you put real good cement and you get a little higher. Because I don't want that stuff. And you have put down here now. So he was particularly the lower cement. Oh, yeah. Wasn't he paid a little bonus for each bag of cement he sold? No, I don't think so. But it was good. Oh, yeah. He got it. So then he was with me for four years, I guess. I think so. So then he went in insurance company. So I had my house insured in his. So then we had a wind in Rockville. So then I live up on Organ Avenue in Rolling Green. So I had just five of the shingles blow out my house. The mother around me, half of the shingles we had, they were blowing off. So I called him. So he said, well, you think I have to put the sending over so you don't get water in your attic? No, I said, I don't think so, because I had the black tar paper first before they put the shingles on. Oh, yeah. Then you're all right. So he said, I'm going to send up the guy the fastest I can. So the fella come up on Sunday morning and put them five shingles up. I have shingles left so he don't need to buy new ones. So he come and he said, what the heck are you going to do? Don't you go to church Sunday? No, he says, we have to go around because there are lots of, sometimes the whole one side of the house, you have to put new shingles on. So I said, well, that's a good thing you come. Because I've already got the church, me and my wife. So I said, well, we go to church so you can take the shingles in the garage so you don't need to go to the office and get some new. He said, oh, guess they're going to do that. He was good to me though. So he was all right, but he was a little bit radical then in the beginning. Oh, yeah. Sure. So you don't remember if anybody was sent back to Sweden. They all came back to Rockford and... Well, they liked to go, they can go. There was some there, some the government sent. Did the government pay the ticket then? Yeah, sure. Because I think there were some of the guys that play soccer football with me. Oh, you also play soccer? Yeah, sure. You did? Yeah. I organized Vegas Athletic Cup. What year was that? Well, they were when we had started coming in the new building here. And I organized a soccer team. It was before the war then? Yeah. And we did boxing and stuff like that, you know. We had a good time. And you got people then almost every month from Sweden coming in. Were they able to play soccer at the time? Oh, yeah, sure. There were lots of them in Sweden, some have played soccer in Sweden. But they had to come from the cities then. All the countries didn't know anything about soccer. No, no, no. They were city people like Ängelborg, Malmö and... Yeah, sure....Oros. So you had a good team then, Harry? Oh, yeah. There were six teams here. Six teams? Uh-huh. All Swedish players? Yeah. Well, I won Scots, I won English. And then there were three Swedes. There was Vegas, the Swedish American, first and second. In 1960, we were champions, the Vegas. So you were the best team then? Yeah. There was one Scot, somewhere in the Scots team. He had red hair, little one. He was center. And he was fast, I tell you. Made with his hand. And the ball come, he just hit it. So there was one Scot, he was... Yeah, he played close to the goal. Big guy, you know. So that's the time. We were, the Vegas and Scots, we were first on both of those teams. So then you're gonna see who's gonna be the champion. So we played at Black Ops Park, you know, there. We played soccer there. Lots of time up here on Leavitt Street, we played. So they had a rain Saturday. They play on Sunday, muddy. And I come, you know, hit the ball. And that big guy, he comes, I... I don't know how I got my leg, but he went and he get mud all over him. And then I put in the jewel there. So I wanted nothing. So we were champion then. So then they gave up, I guess. These are all the rest. They went to the Swedish Athletic Club, but then picked up that trophy with them. So I don't think I'm well, if you like to have them, you can have. So then they gave up the soccer team. So then they don't have any, the Swedish, they don't have any soccer team. But you also have boxers there, exhibition boxing? Oh yeah, sure. Wrestling too? Wrestling, yeah. Running and art and... And then they train, I was 19, I went up to 11th Street and go down to Blackheart Park. So we had a good time. So Blackheart Park, there was a soccer field on there? Yeah. And you had rooms available for dressing? Yeah, sure. You have a shower there and everything? Oh yeah, yeah, sure. So we had a good time. Did Vega play for the outfit? Oh yeah. Shoes and socks and... How about the old people, or the Swedish people, did they come and watch you play? Oh sure. They did? Yeah, yeah. They had a little meal. Steve, smack the kula, smack the kula. What position did you play? Sometimes placenta, sometimes... I go a little all over. Sometimes I play back. But it was interesting. Oh, I played soccer football when I was seven years old in Sweden. So you knew how to do it when you came here? Yeah, sure. But some of them had to learn it when they came here. Oh yeah, some son never had them. But they soon catch up. If they were too old, did they have a harder time to learn it or pick it up, I suppose? No, they used to be... well... Chip Pearson, you remember him? Oh yeah. No, Clip. Clip, yeah. Clip Pearson. Oh yeah, we had an awful good time. So they kept the boys busy? Oh yeah. How about the girls? They were also interested in gymnastics. Oh yeah, but they used to come over to them. So I always told the girls, how's that you come and look and see when we play soccer football? I think you have to pay so much to look at us. Oh, we're going to see who got the best legs. And said, have you found somebody? Oh yeah. All of you guys, you got beautiful legs. I said, we got more beautiful than you have. Yeah, but you ain't seen my legs. And then you can't show them. Yeah, you were nuts. So there was no admission charge then to the games? No, no. Everybody could watch it? Yeah, sure. No. Well... How about the conflicts between the Irish and the Swedes and the Italians? Oh, it was all right. I have over at Lansdome, I have Lithuanians, Italians, Volkers, and they were okay. There were no unions over at Lansdome? No, but they organized, they got a union there. So then we went together, you know, have some kind of insurance, put so much every month. Hospitalization or... Yeah, something like that. So then Lansdome filled up over there on 11th Street. So then we had a meeting, so then I don't remember how much money we had in the place over there. So then we had, we took one hour off. So Lansdome come to me and said, well, you have stopped the machine? I said, yeah. Because you liquidated it now, so we're gonna get all the money we have in the bank and give all the Volkers so much. So we had a heck of a time, you know, to... To get it off. To get it out, you know, so we don't cheat anybody. So that was, I was the last one, so then we know how many men there was, so we just paid so much to each man. So I think it was 25 cents, that was short. So I said, well, then I take that short so the rest can get so much, even all of them except me. I said, it'll make no difference to me. So that's what we did. So you got it out? Yeah. But no pension though? No, just kick in the hiney. You never had any pension then? No. Or were you able then to... you retired at 65, you said? Yeah, sure. Has there been any hardship on you then, or did you save it? No, no, not so far. I have enough to take care of me and... You had your own house? Yeah, I had two houses I sold when I went down to Pittsburgh. The last time I was a fool. That only mistake I made in my life when I sold a house up in Rolling Green. Then I couldn't sit pretty there. They were paid up to full. I had it one year. Had so much mortgage on it. Paid up the mortgage for a year. And that's pretty good to do. And then I sold it, my darn fool. Because the money I had to throw out when my wife was sick. Paid the rent and paid the hospital. Paid out thousands and thousands of dollars. And no insurance then? At that time? No, she didn't have any insurance. You didn't have any insurance? I had an insurance. But it didn't help me. So then I had two operations. I had an insurance when I first got married. My insurance company in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. So I had gallstone, you know. I don't know if I had any gallstone. Sometimes I got kind of sick in my stomach, but I didn't pay much attention to it. So then a year after, my wife had passed away then. A year after, you know, then I get the same thing again. I got, oh, I was sick like a dog. I ate the pizza. So I called my granddaughter. I said, well, I think I have to go up to the hospital. She said, what's the matter with your dad? What's the matter with your grandpa? I said, oh, I feel awful. My stomach, it hurt me so, so I don't know what to do. So she called the ambulance. Two ambulances come out here. So I said, what are you doing here? Oh, we're going to pick you up. My granddaughter said that I had an awful stomachache. I said, yeah. So they took me. He said, did you go into St. Anthony? I said, no, since I got to Swedish-American. For the doctor come, so he said, yeah. I'm going to operate on you in the morning. So he operated on me, put clamps in my stomach. Then I saw my doctor, so I said to my granddaughter, that little guy going to court me? He was just a young fellow. Yeah. I said, I don't think he's more than 21 years old. Well, he says, he's supposed to be good. He's never in doctor's shirts. So he caught me, and he asked me, have you been enslaved before? No, I says, I never been enslaved. Whatever I have pain, they don't put me to sleep. So I don't think you need to put me to sleep either. Oh, yes, we have to do that. So he left. So, well, when he was through with me, then I was in the covering room. Then a lady come in and said, well, we can take you down to your room now, because you are OK now. So. So I said, oh, you're going to take me down? So I kind of said, well, fool the two of them. It was a nice color, color girl. So then my granddaughter says, he said, you can't, but he must be full of pit. So I said, well, I'm going to take you down. So he said, well, I'm going to take you down. So I said, well, I'm going to take you down. So I said, well, I'm going to take you down. She said, you can't, but he must be full of pit. He don't feel he have any pains or anything. She said, what she said to you? Well, she said, I was nice looking. And he said anything like that. He always do that. Oh, yes. Sometime then we go to restaurant and we eat. So he always said, I thank you so much, my dear. Because I asked for something. But I said, don't tell your hubby that. So one of them said, I'm not married. My granddaughter said, well, Grandpa, you're not supposed to say anything like that. I said, why not? Yeah, I know you're full of the dick. So I come down to my room there and nurses, they come. They said, well, they hurt you. I said, why? Why would you like to know that? Well, then they give you a pain pill. No, I said, I can stand the pain. I don't like having a pill. So different nurses come in. And well, I told a little bit with them. So I have one nurse, she come in. So I said, good morning. Good morning. That's all she said. She said, how do you feel today? Oh, I said, I feel OK, but I don't know how you feel. She said, why? Well, I said, you can smile, or you can say good morning. Very nice. So have you no smile? She said, you're the first one to tell me that. Next morning, she come. Good morning, and she get hold of my pill. And then she smiled. So then she said to me, do you like that all the time? I said, yeah, why not? Don't you like it? Oh, she says, I love it. But I never have talked to sick people. I guess you're not sick. I said, no, I can't go, but go now. Oh, she says, you can't do that. Well, I'm going to ask my doctor. That was the second day, you know. So they fought there. They come and said, well, you're going to take the clamps off. Because I never seen a man heal up so fast as you do. So they did. But I had a bag on the side. So then I went home. I stayed with my niece, because she was a nurse up in St. Anthony Hospital. So she said to my granddaughter, I don't like to have Steve laying all alone here on the homestead. Because if he's going to fix his kneel and stuff like that, they'll go out. I don't like that so soon. He was just the third day that they took off the clamp and everything like that. So I don't want that. So I had my bag. Well, the draining came out, everything. So then my granddaughter write to the insurance company that I've been up in the house for so many days. But he is in the doctor's care, and so he can go home. He stopped to pay me. And I was in the doctor's care anyway. He stopped to pay me. So I told to my wife, well, do you give me money for the days I was in the hospital, not anything else? But they said, when you get sick, and if you lay home, they pay you. So I said, I ain't getting no more. I said, I ain't getting more than a few days I was up in the hospital. That's all they pay me, nothing more. So she called him. She said, what's the matter with you? He had paid you since he first got married. And he's in the doctor's care. You don't pay him. How's that? No, when he's home from the hospital, then we don't pay. Then we quit. So I said, they can take the down insuring and stick up whatever they want when they like that. So then they said, well, you tell your grandma you have to read the fine print. That's what he said there. Ain't that nuts? A lot of people get fooled like that. Yeah. So I got fooled. So I figured. But you're in good health now, though. Yeah. Have you been smoking most of your life, or when did you quit that? Oh, I quit that. Well, I smoked another seven years old and smoked. Seven years old? Yeah. You was a python. No, cigarettes I bought. It only cost one cigarette. The only thing when I started to smoke pipe, that was when I went to Sweden in 1946, because the cigarettes were awful high there. So then I bought a pipe of tobacco. So I've been smoking. Well, I bought a package of cigarettes. Well, I had lived in my house up in Rolling Green for I don't know how many years. And I got pain striked over here, some three to four o'clock in the morning. So I went up, and I swing my arms, I walk, and I swing my arms, I walk in the living room back and forth. So my wife said, well, I think I'll call Dr. Anderson. Dr. Anderson, that was my doctor. So then he come. So I told him about it. Well, he said, I can't see anything wrong with your heart. So we see how everything goes. If you get it back, probably the better you come up to the hospital. So it was my wife's birthday and her mother's day. So I take my whole relation, take them out for dinner, Sunday dinner, for a birthday and a midday. And I got so down sick, so I couldn't go. So then my granddaughter, she come, and her mother. My boy, he was gone. So he got killed. Your boy? And Ohio Turnpike. Car accident? Yeah. Because there was a turn there, you know, there were two iron trucks went together. They were talking, so they didn't pass. So he come kind of high speed, you know, on three things. So his whole head cut up so we couldn't see him. So then she cried, said to me, well, if you don't call your doctor, then I call my doctor. Because my first grandpa, he passed away, and I don't want you to pass away. So I said, well, you can call Anderson. So then, doctor Anderson told him, well, take him up to the hospital right away. And he said, hold on, I'm not going to talk to him. I said, well, doctor, if you want to see me, you see me Monday morning at 7 o'clock. But I stay home. Yeah, I'm in the same day off sick. Don't make a difference, just stay home. Yeah, but you can't die then. Well, if I'm supposed to die, then I die. 7 o'clock I went up. Then they took X-ray. The blood drop went through my heart. Was it because of smoking, you think? No, I don't know. No? Did you stop smoking then, or had you stopped it before? No, I stopped then. You did? Yeah. I had up the whole container of cigarettes. So my daughter-in-law, she smoked. So I gave it to her. So. And you never smoked since? Yes. Then after I get well, then I smoke again. But it never bothered you? No. So I lay in bed three weeks. Opened up three weeks home. So then he comes, he said, well, now you can take a walk one block. Next day, take two blocks, so forth, so on. So then he said, well, in three weeks, you can come to my office, and I examine you. Now you can take the car and ride to Chicago. So. Oh, I started walking right away. Didn't bother me, so. So you have had pretty good health then over the years? Yeah. Strong? Yeah. And when did you start running for Vega and soccer playing? Was it in the middle 20s? Oh, yeah, I was there for. Did you continue to play soccer after Vega? Yeah. Did you continue to play soccer after Vega? Yeah. Yeah. No. No. Then there was no soccer playing then. But then some guys from the Swedish-American disorganized the soccer playing. So I know some of the guys playing. But I'm not mad. The sons of the soccer players now in Rockport, were they interested in soccer playing? No. I don't think the kids did very interested. They didn't care about it? No. They didn't interest in anything. They got into football and baseball. Yeah, sure. So you were interested in football and baseball? No, just soccer. I don't care much for that. You don't care about the rest of it? No. So you had a long, interesting life. Oh, yeah. I had a wonderful life. But you got something good going there in Utanför Klippan, though. Oh, yeah. With Rita Hillingfern. Yeah, sure. Oh, yeah. Don't you think when you recall all those events that you made a mistake, that maybe you should have got a little closer to her? You didn't know she was to you, though. No, no. I don't know that before she told me. Was she shy? She wouldn't tell you anything about it, though? No, no. Her feelings? No, she was not very shy, you know. No, I wouldn't say that. But because she always would come to me, so I figured there was something. So when she saw me, she always came to me. She said, well, I got riding. Are you going with me? When she had the house, the big book, you know, got to Klippan, then she come to the garden there, said, well, Steve, I got to Klippan. Can I go with? Yeah, I said, I have to walk. Yeah, man, you can go with anyway. So I just told the old guy, you know, he don't do anything. I have to do everything. So I told him, well, I said, I go with Breita to Klippan. So she liked to have company. So we come in there, you know, so I went in, had a cup of coffee, and a piece of torta, you know. Did she have it, too? Yeah, sure. How far was it from Klippan where you had this? Oh, they took probably three quarters of an hour to walk up. To walk up? Yeah. They were an awful big hill there. There was one girl, her name was Helen. They had tumbula, you know, basa, what they called for. A tumbula, they swing the wheel. So I won, I bought a ticket, so I won a beautiful ladies set. So then they said, she said to me, oh, Steve, can I have that? Well, I said, you can have it if I can take you home. See, I don't have any girl with me, see? Yeah, but I'm engaged, so I can't, I can't take, you can't take me home. Of course, I have my boyfriend with me. Well, I said, it don't make any difference. If you like to have it, then I have to take you home. Well, she said, I can talk to you. So I stayed there, danced, you know, till 12 o'clock, then they quit, but then I started to walk home. I saw somebody come walking up on the hill there. So I said to her, where are you going? Oh, I'm going to meet you. So you can take me home so I can get that set. So I took her home and stayed at the 3 o'clock in the morning. They had a, you know, a bank or table there, or there were three all around, you know. So we sat there and talked and kissed, you know, and. She took that chance? Yeah. She wanted that gift? Yeah, sure. So you always liked to dance? Yeah. Are you still dancing? Yeah, sure. Not so much now as I used to. Dance and tease the girls, you know. They're still in you. Yeah. So the girls told me. The boy is still in you. Yeah, so there were one girl, she said, oh, Steve, why don't you get married? I said, you'd like to marry me? Oh, yeah, any time you'd like to marry, because I love you. Yeah, I said, I'll tell you what I'm going to do. When there'll be two tourists in a week, then I'll marry you. She said, what? Yeah. Yeah, it's an interesting, interesting beginning. And you have a. Well, I'll tell you if I can write the book. There's a lot of stuff for it. Oh, yeah. You can have a lot of details filled in there. Oh, yeah, sure. Harmony, I gave some kind of, he asked me. I like you ask me now. So I told him, well, I can give you plenty if you want to. He said, oh, no, not that much. So I just took a little bit, you know, told them a little bit, everything about it, see? So I thought to myself, well, you can put it, whatever you want. When was the last time you went back to Sweden for a visit? 1946. But it was the last time. Yeah, that's the only time. That's when Lance and Tim was here and everything. And you never had any reason you thought to go back? No. Because your mother died. And how about your sisters now? Oh, they're still alive. But I don't know where they are. You don't correspond with them? No, since my brother passed away. Then he wrote, his wife wrote to them. But she never got an answer. So they didn't know if they had moved or anything like that. So they didn't know the address. And it'd be hard to write to Sweden to find out where they are. So if they can't write to me, then I don't write to them. So you haven't heard from them? No. Not from you? No, no. He didn't hear from you? No. Not since my brother passed away. What year was that? When I was two years he passed away. It was 91 when he passed away. Two years ago? Yeah. Oh, but that's not that long ago. No, no. But... Because I'd be 93. You're not going to write back to them, you said? Huh? You're not going to write back to them? No. What are you going to write back to them? What are you going to do now? Take a picture of them. Yeah, but I'm not dressed. From here on, you're fine. Oh. Sure. Then I'm going to put my glasses on, huh? Oh, no. No, no glasses. No. Are you sure you're talking now? Yeah, yeah. So you have grandchildren who are living in Iraq? Yeah, I have just one. I had a boy, too, but a girl. Yeah. So then he passed away. Her brother. Oh, I see. So I just have one on a gate and some. You can take pictures of him. He is there. He's that's. He is here in Rockford. Yeah, no, yeah, he Rockford because some of them. And yeah, my granddaughter, she was married before. So she just took the voice and she married an Italian guy. So your son, though, he married a Swedish girl or? No, an English girl. He married. So she passed away six years after he got killed. Oh, them two did love each other. Then I put some so I can show them to you. The interview with Stephen Orsi continues on Cassette 3. End of this tape. Continues on Cassette 3. Stephen Orsi, Rockford, Illinois.