 When I was home, I was home in 1928. I went on 28 to Sweden. And then you met your wife? And then I come back 29 and I met my wife. Then we was going to go up on the boat. For the first time? First time, yeah. And she stopped. She had a relation in New York. So she stayed there till, oh, what, six months. And then come back to Rockford and we got married. In 1929 then? 1929. So this is Eric Anderson in Rockford, Illinois, that's sitting here talking to me. And he was born 1900, 8th of August in Umeå, Överboda, in Västerbottens län in Sweden. And he came to America in 1923, in the month of May. And we have 18th of November, 1986. So your parents now, Johan August Andersson and Clara Kristina, that was your mother? That's right. They were born in Överboda in Västerbottens län. That's right. What kind of work did he work with, your father? He was a good shoemaker. And he also had a small farm. He worked on the farm in summertime and wintertime. He was making shoes. At home? Yeah. In his home? Right in his home. So he didn't go into town at Umeå or stay home? No. And he was known all around there for being a good shoemaker. How many kids were you in the family? We were seven, but there was nine altogether. Two died when we were small. How many boys were you? Three boys. Three boys? And four girls. Four girls. And you are one of the younger ones? My brother, I got a brother here in Rockford. He's four years younger than I am. So he would be the youngest one in the family, and I'm next to it. And they're all dead except my brother here in Rockford. The only one left? Yeah. But you have nephews though in Sweden? Oh yes, yes. That I have. Relation, you know. I got all kinds of... I see that you have a lot of mementos from Umeå, Överboda. Yes. Oh, there I got the whole family. I gotta show you that. So you had to start out... how old were you when you had to help out on the farm then? Oh yeah, yes. Little boy? Seven, eight? Nine years of age? One day, yes. What did you have to do then? Oh, well, you know on a little farm, you know there's always something to do. If you don't do anything else, you feed the chickens and the pigs. And take care of the cows when they grazed and everything like that? Oh yeah, yes. So you went to school in Överboda? Yes. How far away from Umeå is this? It's almost three Swedish miles. Three Swedish miles? Yes. Did you go often into town? No, no. Not too often? No. No, those days, you know, well, they had to... it wasn't much for the automobile business in those days. You had to go in horse and buggy. Less than you were old enough to go with a bicycle. That we did a lot of times. Oh, in the summertime, so. But how about in the wintertime, though? Did you use your skis then to go to different places? Oh yes. And I was good on skis too when I was young, when I was home. You were? You started out early? Oh yes. I was five years old, I broke the first pair of skis from my dad. He had some big skis. I didn't have my own, but he had some big skis. And I wanted to go in the hills, you know. And one day I made it to the hit, the tree, and I broke the ski. Wish I got a good licking for it. Well, you got a licking for that? Oh yes. It was not an accident? No. So, but you got another pair then. Did he make the skis for you? No, no. I don't know. I don't know. How did you get the skis? Did you buy them or did you make them yourself? When I got older, then I had a sister there, you know, was married to one that was pretty handy to make everything, furniture, anything. He made skis. He made some skis for me. What was his name? Kronstrom. Kronstrom? Yeah. Jonas Kronstrom. So he made a pair of skis for you. Were they long ones or were they the right size just for you? Oh, the narrow kind. Oh, the narrow kind? Yes. That was kind of unusual for that time though, I mean to... Yeah, yeah. But they fixed them up so you could go on a lot of times a long, long distance. In school now, did you, all the kids use skis in school? Oh yeah. I would say so. You had the competition in school between you boys? Oh yeah. We always had that. How long of a distance then when you were about 10 or 11 or 12? Oh, I used to go right into town, you know, for three miles. Oh, I see. You had no trouble? No trouble, no. I was good on skis. And I liked to go in the hills too, you know. And then we had, you know... Ski jumping? Yeah, jumping, yeah. But then you had to use another pair of skis though? Another kind, yeah. So did you win a lot of competitions then when you were young? No, we wasn't, you know, not regular. No. There was just more or less between our kids. You didn't belong to any club or... No, no, not in Sweden, no. But there were a lot of skiers up there though, in the... Oh yeah, a bit. Good ones? Yeah, pretty good some of them. So do you remember any of the good ones that you looked up to being like? No, I tell you, so long ago I kind of forgotten about them. I kind of forgot about them. Because Utterström, he was after you left. Sven Utterström. Oh, yes, yes. You remember that name? Oh yeah, that I do. You probably know him. I don't know. No, I never seen him. You never seen him. That was after you left though? Oh, yes. Oh. So there was all winter long, then a lot of skiing. How about ice skating? Did you do that up there? Ice skating? No, that was very poor on them. I was on them. But you know, those days when we were kids, we didn't have ice skates like they have nowadays. Like this kid you see here, that's my daughter. Yeah. This little one here. There she is again. She was the one that could go and skate. I see. Yeah, she had a rock for it. Then of course my wife, she had to make up a costume, you know, for that. And then... Ice skating? Yeah. And then she had to have the best of skates, you know, to go on. Oh, she was good. But you never tried it though, I mean, more than just a little bit? Just a little bit. I was very poor on that. How about your daughters now? Were they interested in skiing? This one here, yes. She was interested in skiing? Oh yeah, she loved it. Oh, she was a cute little devil too. She was a little... Yep. I got the picture, I'm getting a picture on the wall there. But after you left Sweden, you never tried the skis on there in Rockford? No, no, no. Never did? I never did. You never had any longing to try it out here? No. It was only a necessity when you were back home? When I got there, but I got... I was too darn busy for making money. So, after school now, you went through grey school, two years, and then four years of... I didn't have much schooling. No? How many years do you think you went to school? Oh, about five years. All of it? All of it, yeah. And then you had to start work? Yeah. What kind of work did you get then? Well, I'll tell you. I started work with my brother. I got my oldest brother in Sweden, well he's dead now. He took after my father and he was a shoemaker. So I learned the trade from my brother. To be a shoemaker? Yeah. Was that good business or kept you busy all the time, I suppose? Oh yeah. Well, this was right during the... you know, the bad time. First World War? The 18th. But your brother, he was called out in military service though? He was, yeah. He was out? He was out. He was too young? I was too young. So were you able to get the essential material then to make shoes? Boots and... Oh yeah. You had no trouble to get it during the war? No. We was working together after I learned the trade, but you was working together. We had... my brother, he had a shoe shop. In Överboda? In Överboda, yeah. And I used to go out and sell shoes too because... to get more business. How were you able to keep all the sizes though? Did you have samples with you or you took orders? I took orders, yeah. But you had samples with you? Oh yeah, yes. And they was dress shoes? No, they was not regular dress shoes. Boots? It was mostly these high top sports shoes. Oh, I see. They were high top? Yes. Yeah, we made quite a few of them. And I had good luck selling it too. And how much would they cost then at that time? Down and up I got now. 25 kronas? 25 and 30 I think it was. For high boots? High boots, yeah. All hand made. And they were like stövle then? Lederstövle? Well, they was not that high, not... But so... And they were for dress? Yeah, they used them a lot for dress too. How about the work shoes now? What kind of work shoes were you making? You know, for lumberjacks? For the people working out in the woods? Oh yeah, well, they made the same thing. What have you? I have, yes. Styrpjäxor, what is it called? Styrpjäxor. And they were tied with the shoe string? With the string all the way up. All the way up. And you made the whole thing? Yeah. How long would it take then to make a pair like that? Oh, you have to do pretty good to make one pair in two days. Two days? Yeah, around Sida, you know. Yeah, yeah. That was a lot of work for them. That was by hand? All by hand. And when I come to this country, well, then I took up harness. Harness making? Yeah. So you learned the trade then in Sweden to be a harness maker? No, a shoemaker. Shoemaker? But not a harness maker, no. But when you know how to make shoes, well, you can know how to make harness too. So when you made the shoe now in Sweden, styrpjäxor, priggan i syran, prigg, prigg. Wooden plig. Yeah, and then you also had them sword man. Well, they were strong. Oh, yeah. They lasted one season, and then they came back for repairs the next. You put on new soles. Oh, yeah, yeah. So the uppers, you never worried about? No, it was good leather. It was good leather? Oh, yeah. Det var björnleder. So how many years did you work with this then in Sweden until you left in 1923? 1923. So that was your job then? Yes. So how did you get interested in the United States, no, America? What did you sit and read about it, or you heard somebody tell about it? What happened? It was really my brother, my youngest brother is still here in Rockford. He wanted to go. I never thought of going to this country, but he wanted to go. What kind of work did he do then in Sweden? Was he helping out the windershoe making business? No. He did work some, but not very much. Otherwise, he was working on the farmer. And he wanted to go to the United States? He wanted to go. So I thought, well, heck, if he wanted to go, well, I might as well go too, because the rest of the streets never come. What did your older brother say then? Then he lost a good worker there. Your brother, no, he lost a good companion and worker. What did he say about it? Oh, well, what could he do? Was he married, your brother? Not him. I mean the older one that you worked with. Oh, the older one, yes. He was married? He was married, and he had three boys and one girl. Oh, so he was not interested in going to the United States then? No, no. No, he had a family, and he couldn't go. He couldn't go. So was there anybody else from the area that had gone before you that had written back and told you about Rockford or any other place? No, no. Those people I know from my area, they must have went up to Washington, D.C. No, not Washington. State? State, in Lumber. Did they come back for a visit to your home area so you talked to them? No, no. No? So you had no first-hand experience from someone? No, no, except from my… See, I had a sister that went to this country. Earlier? Earlier, and so that was one reason. Then I also had an uncle here in… In fact, I had two uncles. One up in Michigan, and one here in Rockford. Was that a more brother or father brother? More brother. More brother? Yeah. In Michigan? Where in Michigan did he…? Hancock. Upper Michigan? Yeah. Oh, I see. But they were all back then and told your parents about what happened? Oh, yeah, especially my uncle here in Rockford. He also was home. He was home in Sweden. So you met him then? He was just a kid, but eight years old when he was home in Sweden. But you don't remember what he said at that time? No. So your uncle here in Rockford, what was his name? Axel Eriksson. Axel Eriksson? Yeah. He's dead now. He's dead, but he had come here many years before you came? Oh, yes. So he was established? Yeah, he was superintendent in the Heston Hopkins Harness Factory. Oh, I see. Here in Rockford? Yeah, he was superintendent, so that's where I started work. So you had some expectations then when you came here? Oh, yes. So how did you get the ticket now? Did they send that one to you from Rockford, or did you buy your own ticket in Umeå? I bought my own. In Umeå? In Umeå, yeah. All the way to Rockford? All the way to Rockford, yeah. So do you remember how much it cost in 1923? It was around 100 kronor, I think. 100 kronor? From India, yeah. And that was all the way from Umeå with the train to Göteborg? Well, that was just for the boat. For the boat. So you went together then, your brother and… Yes. What did the pastor say now? You were confirmed then in Överboda? You were confirmed in Överboda? Yes, yes. So the pastor, you came now to ask for the dismissal letter. What did he tell you? Oh. Did he warn you about going, or…? Oh, no, that he didn't. No? I guess he was glad to get rid of me. Why? Well, I don't know why, but… Did you go often to church? You saw the pastor often, or…? No, no, I wasn't much of a church-going. That I wasn't. Did the young people go often to church after they were confirmed? No, they didn't. They stayed home? So the next trip to the church was when they married then, after confirmation? So you left then in May of 1923? Oh, yeah, 1923, yes. Do you remember what you packed in your suitcase when you left? Did you have any tools with you to be a harness maker, or…? I think I had… Knives? A few tools. I think I've got a picture of someplace I would like to show you. All the tools I had from making harness. I had a case fixed up a little bit bigger than this here. Because you had a… A regular case, and I put in all the little tools I had for being a harness maker. And I gave it to… I gave my way to the… to a place for the… Well, to show different things from the Heston Hopkins, the leather company, and so forth. And I gave all the tools there to the… It's like a museum? Yes. Here in Rockford? Yeah. I see. And some of those tools you brought with you from Sweden? No, not those. But do you remember if you took any with you from Sweden? Like knives? And pliers? No, but it was… I took a few. Because if you have a good knife, you don't want to give it up. Well, I had a special knife that I used for cutting leather. It was more like a pen knife, but it was very, very handy for to cut. Like an X-Acto knife? Yes. Sharp and… Because you had a trade then when you came here. So you were not afraid then to come to Rockford. In other words, you had a land… I mean, a job already secured. I had a good job when I got here. So your brother, now, he was a little bit younger. He was four years younger. Yes. He was only 14 then? No, he was 18. 18. He didn't have a job then. He was just a regular worker. Yes. Was he expected to start with the harness work too, with your uncle here? No. Well, he did. He did work in there for a short while. But then he got a job in the furnace factory, and he worked there. And then he got to work for them to repair motors and stuff, rewiring them and so forth. And he got good on that. He got goddamn good on that. So he was an electrician then? Yes. How about entering Ellis Island? Now, you didn't have any problems, you and your brother, when you came in there. You went through the medical examination. Oh, yeah. No problem. No problem at all. And then you got on the train, and you didn't know any English. Not a bit. How did you order food? Do you remember that, the first time when you came on the train there? On the boat, you had everything served to you. Yes. But on the train? On the train, you know, those days, there was a lot of Swedes coming over to this country. So you had a lot of friends then from Sweden? Oh, yeah. You made friends with? Yes. So there was no problem. Like here in Rockford, like on 7th Street in Rockford, well, heck, there was... Oh, apparently every place there was no other talk of Swedes. No, but on the train, no, you couldn't talk to much Swedish at all. Well, you know, there was a lot of people coming over for the first time, too, you know. Do you remember if you had to show any money when you went to Ellis Island? You had to have a certain amount. I forgot now how much it was, but it was very little, you suppose. And you also had to have... To come to this country, you had to have somebody that would feel responsible for you after you get to this country. Guarantee? Yes. And that was your uncle then? That was my uncle, yeah. Erik Andersson? No, Axel... Axel Eriksson. Axel Eriksson, yeah. Axel Eriksson was his name. That's correct. And so when you came here, then, did you stay with Axel Eriksson, or did you rent a room, you and your brother? We had... They had fixed up and rented a place for us when we got there. So we lived together there for about a year's time. And that was down on 7th Street? No, it was on the west side of the river. West side of the river? Yes. Wasn't it kind of unusual, though? Yes, it was, but then there was a factory of us. Oh, the Harness factory? Yes. Oh, I see. So you started to live with the Italians then, and the Irish people? Oh, yeah. How did that affect you? I mean, here you came from Överbudan, a small community out in the country, and to a town. How did that affect you? Did you feel homesick there for a while? Oh, of course. I was not living on the farm the later years of us in Sweden. I was not living on the farm, no. I'd been out quite a bit. But it was a smaller town, though, compared to Rockford. Oh, yeah. Rockford, when you come here, well, I don't think there was Ö Rockford, I don't think there was over Ö around 35,000 people. But it was still a big town, though, compared to Ö Oh, yeah. Ö to the Swedish. Oh, yeah. So living on the west side there in this room with your brother, you could talk and Ö Oh, yeah. Ö a lot, but they didn't talk Swedish on the west side, though. Not much, no. No. You had to go over to 7th Street. Yes. There you came into Sweden. Then I come back to Sweden. So you lived in Italy on the west side and in Sweden on the east side. Oh, you know, then, God damn it. How did you eat then? Did you fix your own food? No, we had rum and board and the whole thing in the bar. Was that from a Swedish family? Yes. Oh, a Swedish family. Yeah. And we had a very nice place. And then you Ö Ten dollars a week. With the board? With the board, yeah. Washing too? The whole thing, washing and the whole thing. Ten dollars a week. And how much were you paid then when your uncle, Axel Eriksson, took you to the harness shop? How much were you offered to work for? Oh, I tell you, I started off with 40 cents, 40 cents an hour. But I didn't stay in there long. I started work, I had a premium for my work. Peace work you mean? I used to make, I used to make 50 dollars a week. 50 dollars a week? 50 dollars a week. In 1923? Yep. And you paid 10 dollars for rum and board? That's right. So you were able to save quite a bit of money then? Oh, yes I did. And what kind of work were you doing then? There was saddles for horses and Ö Well, a harness, a regular harness, you know, working for Ö Work horses? Yeah, work horses. Were they still using a lot of horses in Rockford in the vicinity? Oh, yeah, they have. It was big business? Oh, yeah. And then we made a lot of stuff that went to South America. Oh, I see, to the cowboys down there. Yeah, and then Ö Sight 2, continuation with Eric Anderson, Rockford, Illinois, 18th of November, 1986. Sight 2, cassette 1. So you and your brother, did he start with you too at the first few weeks there, your brother? Yes. What kind of work could he do then? In other words, you were experienced, but he was not. He was not, he was not experienced. What kind of work did he get then? Oh, a lot of things, you know, for Ö He assembled smaller parts and Ö But he was not working there very long. How much was he paid, compared to you? I think he got about 30 cents an hour. 10 cents less? Yes. But then when you were getting 50 dollars a week, he was not working there any more then? He wasnít working there then. Did he not like the job? No, he wanted to have something Ö He wanted to learn something more important, thatís why he got into the electrical business. And he got to be doing darn good. Your uncle, now he was a supervisor, or superintendent. Superintendent. So he could hire people, he could fire people. Did he hire a lot of Swedes? No, there wasnít many Swedes there, no. You were one of the few then? I was one of the few. So you had to learn to speak English quite rapidly, in other words. Yes. How did you work, did you have a team, or did you work for yourself? More for myself, yes. So you didnít have to talk to anybody? Oh yes. There was one Irishman, I never forgot him though. I never forgot him, he was the best guy I ever knew. He tried to learn me, he was working onÖwe had big tables, I was working on one side and he was on the other side. And he used to pick up tools with his hand and lay in front of me. He done that a lot of times. And he wanted to learn me. Was he more experienced than you were? We were about the same. And he alwaysÖI never forgot his gold teeth. As soon as he opened his mouth I saw them gold teeth banging in there. Was he born in Ireland or was he born here? I think he came over from Ireland. He was an older man too. So he taught you a lot of English then? He wanted to learn me English. He was helpful towards you? Oh yes, oh yes. But the Italians, they wanted to learn you dirty words and stuff. Oh I see. Did they talk Italian among themselves then? Oh yes. They did? How were they as craftsmen though? Were they good harness makers? Oh yes, they were pretty handy. They were? But they were not as helpful as the Irish? They were not as helpful as the Irish guy? No, no, no. No, that Irishman, he was nice. So, what did you talk about now, with the Italians and the Irish? There was more Italians than Swedes then working at the harness shop? There was more Italians than the Polish. There were a lot of Poles too working there. How could you compete then against, I mean you were almost outclassed there. Oh yes, yes. How could you defend yourself? You just had to get along, that's all. You know to get along, someone has to give and somebody has to be on top of each other. Oh yes. Did you feel that at any time? Did you have that pressure on you that you were outnumbered by some other nationality? Well, you know, I didn't mind that a bit. In fact, I liked them really better than some of them Swedes. Because some of them Swedes, if you've been there for a couple of years, they think they're smart and they kind of laugh at you because you're... The difficulties you had? Yes. They took a step on you? Yes. They didn't want you to succeed too fast? That's it. Yeah. No, I tell you, I... Some of the Swedes, I thought they were dumb. The way they acted, just like they were superior to the one that just came over. So they were not helpful then in any way to you? Well, some... You had to fend for yourself? Some, somewhere, yes. But you know, on the east side now, in the factories, National Lock, Sundstrans, Empire, Republic Furniture and everything, they were all Swedes. Yes. Now, how did... you talk to your friends now, how did they like their job? I mean, they were all Swedes. Well, I made more money than they did. So you made more money? Oh yeah. Quite a bit more money? I made darn good money. Well, you probably made double or triple some of the salaries they had. Yes. And that was because you were an experienced craftsman when you came? Oh yeah. When you came into the harness making, what was the name of the company? Heston Hopkins. Heston Hopkins. Yeah. And they were all American? No Swedes were owners there? Well, there was some Swedes, yes. In the ownership? In the ownership, yes. There was all... Jewish? I really don't know. No, I think they were American born. Heston sounds like a German though. Yes. That is us. So it must have been part German. Yeah, they're all gone. So your uncle now, he was a big stepping stone for you to get this job. Oh yeah, yes. So you didn't have to show any great reports or anything that you were experienced? No. No, he knew that you knew the business. What did he learn, his job, I mean to get this position? Did he learn it in Sweden too? No. He learned it here? No, but he knew about Sweden. He was working in... He used to talk about he worked for a place there in Sweden where they had... had all kinds of different business, selling stuff and so forth. He was from North Sweden too then? Yes. From the Umeå area. But he learned the harness making over here in Rockford, when he came here then. Your uncle? He learned it right here in Rockford. He was pretty good. So he was able to raise himself to superintendent level? Oh yeah, yes. What did he tell you now about when you first came here? You probably asked, you know, how you're doing things here and what should you do and how should you work. Did he tell you any pointers to help you out? Oh yeah, yeah. But I really didn't need no help. I really didn't need no help. When I got started, well, I didn't have no problem. Did you see anything that made better over here compared to Sweden? Or were they more advanced in Sweden with this kind of work? Did they do things faster here or more sloppy? They had done better work in Sweden. They did? Yes. In what way? Well, everything had to be more perfect. You mean tighter seams? Well, everything, and the looks and everything was better in Sweden than here. Where was? More or less careless with the... More speed? Yes. To do it fast? Yeah. But the harness making was always known for being very particular, you know, with the cowboy boots and the reins and the bridle. But you didn't see that. There was more speed to get it the way to your table. Yeah. But there were certain jobs, I suppose, you had to be more particular, though. Oh, yeah. Yes. They were more expensive. So the horses in Sweden, they were better dressed than the Americans then, you would say? I would say so. I would say so. And how long did you work here then? How long did you stay in that place for one year? You rented a room on the west side of Borås? Oh, yeah. About a year, I think we stayed. And then I moved over towards 7th Street after that. You liked the Sweden side better? Oh, yeah. Yes. When you walked out on the west side, how far west of the river was it? 10 blocks? 20 blocks? Let's see. Or Hessen? Oh, I think it was just about 11 blocks. 11 blocks? Past the river, yeah. So when you walked out there in the evening, you didn't hear too much Swedish spoken on that side? No. So it was Irish, Polish, Italian? Yeah. Well, there was a few Swedes there too, of course. How about restaurants? There were no Swedish restaurants there? No. So you had to eat in a Polish restaurant then, or Italian? Well, when I had a room on board, I had all the stuff. That was home-cooked meals then? Yes. I see. And you still ate Swedish then because of the Swedish landlord? Oh, yeah. And you went to the café or restaurant down there, there was none Swedish? No, there wasn't. So you went over quite often then to 7th Street? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. You could get the snuff and cigars and Swedish newspapers? Yeah. You couldn't buy any Swedish newspapers on the west side? Well, I used to have Swedish... I used to get one a month, that's all. From Sweden? Well, I paid too much a year for it, and I got that. And they came from Sweden? Yes. From Sweden. Was that from a local paper home in Umeå or...? Västerbottens Kurir. Oh, Västerbottens Kurir, yeah. So then you could follow what happened there? Yes. How long did you continue to subscribe to that one? How long did you subscribe to that paper? For how many years? Oh, a year at a time. Yeah, but for how many years did you keep it? You don't have it today. No, no, no. When did you discontinue? I got some Swedish paper from my friend. That's Swedish paper. Yeah. And this is good paper. Kvällstunden, yeah, but that's a newer one though that you have gotten recently. Yeah, I got it from my neighbor. But the Västerbottens Kurir, how many years did you continue to have that? Do you remember? 10, 15, 20 years? Oh, I must have had it for about 8 years, I think. 8 years? And then you dropped it off? Then I dropped it. Then you could read Rockford papers. Oh, yeah. So, and you continued to work for this harness making company then for how many years? Well, I'll tell you, I worked there for quite a few years. Five. For five years, one stretch. To 1928? Yeah, then I went to Sweden. Oh, and so you made $50 a week then for five straight years? Did they give you any pay raise during that time? Or was that the limit you could get then? That was the high, $50 a week. So we used to get, I done the work, we used to get a ticket for each half. And the end of the week you turn in your tickets and then you got the pay. But I always was ahead of the game. I saved some tickets the week after. I didn't turn it all in. I just saved it so in case I got a bad devil, then I wouldn't have this to. I see, so you had a good average then? Yes. Did you fool the management a little bit there? Well, you had to. So how did you learn that? Did the Irish guy taught you that? No, I taught it myself. So it doesn't pay then to be up to snuff right away. You got to learn the game. So did you notice then that you made pretty good money compared to other Swedish workers on 7th Street? Oh yeah. You were well above the average. I was, you know, machine and tool and tools and all that stuff. But during that time they were not so much. So I was making just as good as any tool maker. And there was no union? No union, no. No? There never been a union there? No, there didn't. And there was no talk about unions either? No, no, there wasn't. And you didn't have any reason to have a union because you made pretty good money and... I was satisfied. You were satisfied? And I suppose you couldn't... Heck, I made enough money there. I had a trip back to Sweden. I stayed there for nine months. And I come back. And I come back and I got married. I bought an automobile and I bought a front room set, dining room set, kitchen set, and the whole god damn thing. All cash? All cash money after my trip. So what did you say then when you came back to Sweden in 1928? You were one of those successful Swedish Americans. Yes, I was. You didn't have any gold on the teeth though because you were still a young guy. Yes. Well, I was only 28 years old, you know. Like this Irish guy, no? He had gold teeth, you said. Yeah. Did you go to the dentist at that time to fix your teeth if you had a decay or anything like that? Or you didn't have any toothaches? You don't remember that? Yes, I did. But you didn't have any gold? No, I didn't. Did you care about these gold teeth shining through his mouth? Well, I thought they looked a lot richer. They looked richer? Yeah. But you didn't want to have it yourself coming back to Sweden? No, no. What did you tell your brother and sisters in Sweden or your parents when you came back? Well, you said you'd done pretty good. You came back there and... Yeah, I thought I was doing pretty good. You had a new set of clothes and... Oh, yeah. Did you dress all American then when you came back? I was, yes. Did you differ from the people in Örebroda? Did they see that you were American when you came back? Well, I had... You know, my oldest brother, he had a couple of boys. And one day, one of the boys looked at my watch and... I didn't have a gold watch, you know. I had the white gold. He said, you know, you're an American. You don't got a gold watch. Oh, so he knew that. Yeah. He thought I want to have a gold watch. Oh, so they looked for things like that. Yeah. So you stayed home for nine months. Was there a reason you were looking for a girlfriend or you were looking for a job in Sweden? Or were you thinking about going back again? I was not sure. I only bought the ticket one way, going home, because I was not sure if I was going to... Did you take out all your money from the bank? No. You still had the money in the bank here? Yes. In the Swedish bank? Yeah, I had it there. You didn't have the money on the west side in the bank there? No, no. I had it in the 7th Street, in the bank on the 7th Street. Did your uncle know Axel Eriksson tell you to put them there? No, I forgot. How did you... because you didn't know which bank was best, though. Yeah. Well, nobody knew, I suppose, before the depression. Well, when I got back from Sweden, well, then it started to be in depression. So you had actually thought of staying in Sweden? Yeah, I was. I was not sure. So if you had found a girlfriend in Örebroda, and she said, I won't go back with you, you'd probably have stayed? I had one. In Sweden? But she didn't want to go to this country. But I didn't want to stay there. I wanted to get back to this country. What was it drawing you back? To this country? Yeah. Was there something missing? Well, I'll tell you. In this country here, you feel like you're just as good as the next guy. In Sweden, they got this idea of a preacher, a schoolteacher, a doctor. Well, that was much better. But in this country, I feel like I'm just as good as the next guy. I can say that to any of them. So that was a big benefit? In other words, you felt better here? Yeah. Freer? Yes. So you left your girlfriend then? Oh, yeah. And she didn't want to come with you? I'm glad she didn't come. I got this one instead. Then you came to Gothenburg, and then you found her? Yes. You found her in the blue sky? That's right. How did you meet? Well, just walking up to the boat. You know, you got to walk up there. She was going there, and I looked at her. She looked very nice, and we started talking. Of course, that was eight, nine days on the boat, so I had plenty of time. That was Hilda Pettersson's first trip to the United States? That's right. And she was going to New York? New York. So you started to talk then and converse, and you were experienced now? That's right. So she was probably happy to meet you, that had already been here? Yeah, well, she did know some English. She did, because her parents had been in this country. So she knew some about it? Oh, yeah. And she realized that you had money in your pocket here, and you also had money in the bank in Rockford? I don't know. You didn't say anything about that? No, no, no. No, we didn't talk much about money. So you had a trip eight days together on the boat then? Eight days. So what did you decide then? You had to part in New York. You had to take the train to Rockford, and she stayed. Yeah. What did you say then to each other? I decided she was going to write, that we was going to write to each other and so forth. Sure enough, there she come. One day she called up our wrote and said she was come to Rockford, and we got married. So when you left her in New York, you gave her your address here in Rockford? Oh, yeah. Did you have a place here then, an apartment you lived in? Where did you live at that time? Oh, I had the... At the time when I come back from the war, I just had a regular room, you know. You were boarding? Yes. But not with your brother? No, no. So you corresponded then with her? Oh, yeah. How long time did it take then, just one year, and she came from New York and settled here in Rockford? Because you married in 1929? Yes. Yeah, it was about six months. Six months. So she had barely started to work then. Oh, yeah. Did she feel unhappy in New York, you think? Well, she didn't care too much. She was working, you know, in homes, you know. So she came to Rockford. Your brother now, what was his name? He's the one that's still living there. Axel. Axel Anderson. That's right. How did he – he was not able to go back with you to Sweden in 1928. Did he have a good job then at that time? No, he wasn't making much money. So he had not been able to save up as you had then? So he would have gone, but he didn't have enough money. And I could have borrowed him money, but I thought it would be kind of foolish. As long as he got – he started to be pretty good on the job he was working. So I thought it would be foolish to go before he was complete. So he didn't go. He stayed on. And he was living for himself in another apartment? Yes. On 7th Street? Yes. Did you – you got married in 1929 in what church? Did you join the church then at that time? No, but the priest – it was a free church. Free church? Yeah, yeah. It was church there on 7th Street. So you just rented a pastor for a wedding ceremony, but you didn't join then? No. You didn't join the church then? No, no, no. How about other organizations? Did you join Svithjod, Vasa, Viking? No, Svithjod. Svithjod Club. You joined that when you came here? No, not when I came here first. I joined that in 1940. In 1940. So in your work now in the harness factory, did you have insurance then in case you cut yourself in the finger or…? No, there wasn't. There was no insurance there. No insurance? What would happen then if you got sick? I don't know. So somebody cut themselves. I suppose this job now you can easily… You know, in those days it wasn't like this now. Now every factory, every place, they have to have insurance. But in those days, there wasn't much talk about the insurance and stuff. And it was the same for all? Yes. Did you have any vacation every year? A couple of days you could take off with pay? No, no, not those days. You just worked there and turned your ticket in? Huh? You just worked there and turned your ticket in every week? Yes. So there was not too many benefits? No, I tell you, those days there was not much talk about vacation and so on. That never… If you was going to have vacation, you just took it on time. On time. And there was very few that did that? Oh, yes. Very few. You didn't take any fishing trips up to Wisconsin or Minnesota or anything like that? Oh, yes. When you worked, you took days off? If I wanted to do that, I just took the days off. But you were not paid then? Not paid, no. But nowadays, well, yes. But don't you think it was easy for you? I mean, you could go in and talk to your uncle. I'd take off a couple of days now and he would understand that. But how about the rest of the workers? Would they have that feeling, you know, maybe I don't have a job when I come back? Well, I was always sure about getting a job back. Another thing I can tell you, I never, ever, whenever I worked, I never asked for any raise. You never asked? Never. Why? In other words, they saw your talents and they gave you a raise? I had the feeling that I didn't have to ask for a raise. If I felt like I had more money, well, I was told I was going to quit. To find out why I wanted to quit, well, I said I wanted to better myself. Make some more money, then I got a raise. But I never asked for a raise. I never did. But like this harness making, there were not too many opportunities to get that kind of a job in Rockport. Then you had to start your own. But you were sure of yourself you could start your own. I thought, well, I always could do something else. You never thought of starting your own, though? No, no, no. Would that have been possible, you think? Or did the time change? Too many horses were going to the slaughterhouse instead of living? Yes. It was a dying product. It was dying. Nothing, nothing at all anymore. And you could see that in the television? Yes, I could see that. So what happened then? You married. Did you buy a house then? Or you rented an apartment first? I rented first for a couple of years, and then I bought a place. Then I bought a place. And the Depression hit.