 I think in the 1900s. But you were born here, though? No. I was born in Sweden, I guess, before they come. Oh, I see. You don't remember what place it was in Sweden where you were born? Well, at Vimelby. Vimelby? Yeah. In Småland? Yeah. Aha. Well, it's 18th of August, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Henry Martin Gustafsson in the— 25th of August. Of August. Of August. 1896. Yeah. He was born in Vimelby, Småland, and came to the United States—you believe it was in the 1900s? You came here. You don't remember anything about coming here, though? No. Not at all? No. Oh. So your father now married your mother. She worked as a maid in your father's home. Yeah. And that's how they met. Yeah. What was the reason they left for the United States now? Why didn't they stay in Sweden, in Vimelby or Småland? Well, at that time, everybody was coming to the United States. There was work here, see, and in Sweden, there was nothing. They were putting their star to death, so they advertised to come to the United States. So that's how they come. They knew somebody from Sweden, wrote to them, told them to come to the United States. There's all kinds of work. Were they in Orien or—they were around this area then, Orien, New Windsor, Aledo, and all those places? Scherard, around Scherard. That's how they happened to end up in Orien, I guess. I see. Orien was quite a town at that time. Were you the only child? No. I had four brothers and one sister. Were they born in Sweden also? Yes. My brother Gus and brother Charlie was born in Sweden. I think Tony and Sig was born after they— Came here? Came here. Were they older than you? Oh, yes. I was the youngest. The youngest. Are they still living? No. No, I'm the only one left. My sister's gone, too. So I'm the only one left of the family. So your family, your mother and father, did they have a farm in Sweden? Did they have a farm there? That I don't know if they owned the farm or not, but they worked at the farming. Everybody in Sweden had a piece of ground of their own, and they called them farmers. So you came here into Chirard and Orien. Did your dad— Let's see. It was over—a little place over by Chirard. Everybody in Sweden, all the people that was coming to the United States, they mentioned this little place. They heard so much, they was all going there. So that's where they all landed. They come from Sweden, seemed like it was around New Windsor is where it was at that time. It had a different name. But anyhow, that's where they was going, and that's where they would land. All the old-timers lived there, see, old-timers that they knew. They'd have them come and place them, see, or have a place for them. Did they know there was people from Sweden? They knew of them. Some of them? They knew of them, but— They brought them? Yeah. So that was a standing name. They went there, and then everybody else was going to go there too, see, being that they knew of these people. Were they the Samuelsons family? Huh? The Samuelsons family in Chirard? Samuelsons? Samuelsons. So you didn't come to them then? No. So where did you settle then, your family, your father and mother now in Chirard? Was it outside the village? Yeah, it was a little coal mining town, see. Oh, in Cable? Yeah, Cable. Oh, in Cable. Yeah. Well, there was quite a town then when you came there. Yeah, it was one of the biggest, and it wasn't any bigger then than what it is now. Yeah, but there was more houses then at that time. Yeah, more work. More work, yeah. Yeah. Coal mine was open. Yeah, and it wasn't enough work to take care of all of them that come there, but it was work, it was something to do, to make a living. So you grew up then in Cable? No, I grew up in Orien because my dad moved to Orien, puttin' a ride away. So he did start to work in the coal mine then? Well, he got a job on a section on the railroad. The Rock Island branch, they was puttin' that in at the time, so he got a job. So he turned out to be a railroad man after that, that is he worked on, they called it the section at that time, see. And in Orien, this fella by the name of Bjork was his boss, and he lived right across the railroad track, the Rock Island railroad track from where my dad lived, see. So he favored my dad quite a bit, give him work, steady work. And that's—so he didn't turn out to be a miner, he turned out to be a railroad man. They called it a railroad man, even the section man, you know, was a railroad man, they worked for the railroad. How long did he work with that? Until he retired from the railroad, he retired from the Rock Island railroad. So he worked there all his life then? Yeah. You mentioned that your mother, she died when you were a little boy. Yeah. Huh? Yeah. I was the youngest in the family. You don't remember your mother? Oh, yes. I remember her. My sister got the job of keeping the house, and she wasn't very old after my mother died. Your oldest sister then? No, my youngest sister. Your youngest sister? Yeah. What was her name? She was—I think it—I got to think. Oh, I'll think of it pretty soon. Edna, I think. Edna? Yeah. So she stayed home then? Yeah. Did your dad remarry, or he—? No. No? He stayed—? He lost his wife, and then he had all the kids. He made them take over to run the place. You didn't have a farm or anything like that? Huh? Did you have a farm? No. You lived right at home? Yeah. And, see, my dad worked—at that time, they said for the railroad, he was sectioned, worked on the section. And his boss lived right across the railroad from him in the east end of town. And we've owned that—we've kept that place in relation—I think it's still in relation—the home place. But we settled in the west part of town, this town, they called it Cable. That was the west part of— Cable, U.K.? It was a big, big town, you see. They laid it out for a big city, you see. And Oregon was laid out for a big city. And all them small towns at that time belonged to Oregon. Oh, you mean Cherokee belonged to Oregon, too? Oh, yeah. It was all one territory. And then they made small towns out of it, and the Sherard and— Sudona. And the railroad went through there, see. So it was a busy place. And that Rock Island sub, they called it, it was a branch off the regular Rock Island Railroad afterwards, see. But Oregon, where it went through Oregon, that was there before the regular Rock Island took over. And Oregon, the Rock Island, you see, it comes from Rock—it runs from Rock Island to Peoria. And my dad, he worked for the Rock Island most of the time. Just there, just around there? Yeah. This Bjerke, the boss, lived right across the railroad from us. And them places are still there. Our whole home place is still there. So when your mother and father came, now, with your family, with all the kids, you joined the church then in Oregon? Or did you go to the Sherard Church or Missouri? No, no, we joined the church in Oregon. In Oregon, the Lutheran Church? Yeah, the Lutheran Church. So you were confirmed there? Yep. And you went to Sunday school? Yeah, we used to go to Sunday school there. And you had to be confirmed in Swedish then? Huh? Were you confirmed in Swedish? Yeah, yeah, I was confirmed in the Swedish language. I had a Swedish catechism. And I was too much Swede, see, to be confirmed in American, the American language. So I was confirmed in Swede. And I belonged to the Lutheran Church there. Did you talk Swedish all the time then when you were growing up? Yeah, to start with. When I went to school, then I tried to stay away from talking Swede and tried to talk American exclusively. Whenever they'd ask you or say something in Swedish, you always tried to answer them back in American. How about now when you come home in the afternoon when you talk to your sisters and brothers? Did you talk Swedish then? Or did you use English then? Your sisters and brothers? Partly, until they started to learn it, see. But we talked Swede to them, too. And if we talked Swede, then we'd try to explain it on American, see. So I went to American school, you know. No Swedish there? No, no. How about the teaching? Was she a Swedish background? No, she wasn't. And tried to learn us Americans, see. And we learned it fast, you know. As kids, we picked it up pretty fast. Was your mother living when you were confirmed? Oh, no. No? No, she died when I was a young fella. What did she die from? Well, I don't really know what it was, but at that time they called it consumption, see. It was tuberculosis, what it was. And they called it consumption at that time. She died at home? Yeah. Oh, yes. At that time, there was no hospital, like it turned out to be. So when they were sick, they were sick at home, and that's where she died. And she was buried in the Lutheran cemetery in Orien. And her grave is still there. And I think my dad was buried there, too. Same place? Yeah. At that time, they bought lots, see, and the whole family was supposed to be buried there. And it seems to me like my two oldest brothers were buried there. My oldest brother, Gus, he made the cruises around the world with the fleet when it went around, see. They tried to take in all the countries, and they called it the cruise around the world, see. And, of course, I enlisted in the service when I got old enough. The First World War? Yeah. I was in during the First World War, and I was enlisted, see, and I was overdue getting out of my enlistment. But they held me on reserve time. They kept me there, see. They didn't let me go out on my regular enlistment time. So I forget how many years I put in the service. It was all of 14 years, I know. 14 years? Yeah. In the Army? Yep. I was enlisted for three, and I put in about 14 all told before they let me go. So you were made an officer then at the end, or in charge of— Well, noncommissioned officer. Noncommissioned. And that was something at that time, see. You had to go to school to become an officer, but I was—they called it afterwards staff sergeant, see. I was sergeant, and I was good enough to be an officer. I took the officer's place right along, you might say, but I couldn't pass the examination to become an officer, so I had to hold it down on just regular pay, see, sergeant's pay. Where were you stationed? Huh? Where were you stationed then? Oh, I was stationed all around. I was mostly in the Panama Canal, and in that territory, see. But there's where I really, really was stationed steady was in the Panama Canal, see. I was on one side in the Pacific part of the time, and in Atlantic part of the time. They considered me a big shot, see, because I knew so much, see. They even gave me a lieutenant's job, see. I knew more than what the officers did. They all come to me for information, see, or if they get stuck on the problem, they all always come to me to straighten them out. What kind of problems could there be then? Oh, a lot of problems as far as that goes, about different things on the ship, see. I was on transport quite a bit of the time, see. We hauled troops, see, during the First World War. I was stationed on transport. I was same as lieutenant on there, and any problem come up, they'd always come to me, see. I knew more than any of them boys that went to school, see. They were just learning, and I knew it from A to Z, different things, you see. From experience? Yeah. So what unit were you with then, the Navy or the Army? You were in the Army? Well, I enlisted in the Coast Artillery. And, see, I enlisted in the Coast Artillery. That was the Army, and I was in the mine laying company, see. There's the mine there. Here's the automatic anchor, and here's the distance weight. They always throw that distance weight. When they dropped the automatic anchor, they threw distance weight over at the same time. When it would hit the bottom, I'd close the pole in the automatic anchor, so it would pull the mine under 15 feet, submerge the mine 15 feet. I see. So you were familiar with detonations and munitions and stuff like that? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I knew the works. And, see, they hadn't been transferred to the mine laying company yet. I was a Coast Artilleryman, and that's what I was, and they transferred me to the mine laying company because I knew mine laying from A to Z, as far as that goes. And they put me on there so that I could give instructions, see. Were there the big round ones with the pegs? Huh? How did they look like, those mines? There's one right there. Oh, there's the way? Yeah. So that was mandatory, to have a tattoo made on your arm like that when you were in that service? Huh? That was mandatory for the recruits or the enlisted men? I don't know. I had a tattooing outfit, see. You had that? Yeah, and I tattooed myself up here first, a dagger, and then I tattooed myself on the arm here. And then when I got in the mine laying— You did this yourself, too? Yeah, and I put that on there, too. I see. And most of the guys had stuff like that on their arms and shoulders and back. Yeah, you see, they'd come to me for tattoos, see. So you had an extra business going there then? Yeah, yeah. I got paid. How much did you charge now for a figure like this? Well— In the mine? In them days, that outfit there, if I was charging for it, would be about $2. $2? Yeah, and— Just one sitting? Huh? Just one sitting? Yeah. I could see it so—we called that black, that blues was this, the outline, see. How did you learn to do that? I just picked it up, see. I tattooed myself, and everybody come to see the tattoo and want me to tattoo them, see. You had to be careful, though, with the needles. They were clean. Oh, yeah. Did you use alcohol or something to clean them all in, or what? Yeah, yeah. I would clean them in alcohol. And I don't know, but I had a whole outfit, see. I had diagrams of different things, and I'd show them the books, see. And they could pick what they wanted? Yeah. I want you to put that on. What kind of insignia did they choose? What was the most popular? Well, it depended on what branch of service they were in, see. They'd pick out something that went with the branch of service that they were in. You see, when I had this done, I was in the mine lane service, and the first thing I thought about was putting in the mine. This is the anchor. They called that the anchor. And this is the distant weight. The distant weight in the automatic anchor weighed 700 pounds, a regular one, see. How far underneath the waterline are those mines? How far? Are they hanging underneath the water level, I mean the top of the water? Well, they never sank, see. That's why they had that distant weight on there. When it hit the bottom, it would close the pole in the automatic anchor. And you see, that was 15 feet right there from the automatic anchor, see. And when it hit the bottom, it would close the pole in there and it would pull the mine under 15 feet. From the water level? Yeah. I see. Pulled it under 15 feet. So nobody could see it then? That's right. It submerged the mine 15 feet. And when we had mine laying practice, we'd take them mines up, you see. The mine planner would come along and take it up with the winch and check it and probably put new ammunition in there and have it ready to go again, see. It was quite a business, the mine laying. And that was during the First World War? Yeah. And you see, I knew so much about it that the officers would come to me for instructions. At that time, money was nothing. If you'd get a tip, maybe you'd get a nickel or ten cents tip, see. And you got up to a quarter, you'd get quite a tip. It was big money. Yeah. That is the regular American money, see. You take foreign money, that was nothing in them days. But American money was the gold, see. All after that American money, the foreign countries, see, silver and gold. Silver dollar. Yeah, silver dollar. How long time did you spend down in Panama Zone? Was that guard duty or did you do some other work down there on the canal? No, I was stationed there. As a guard? Yeah. Well, I belonged to the company, see. And I was a non-commissioned officer. And you take the coast artillery lieutenants and the captain and lieutenants. And we had a captain and probably three lieutenants in one outfit. But the captain, he was the head guy, see. And the lieutenants, that was a first and second lieutenant and a straight lieutenant, see. Straight lieutenant, then he was eligible to become captain, see. The captain, he had the running of the company then, you see. And things came up. The lieutenants got it first and they'd have to go to the captain for instructions, see, to go ahead, whatever it was. Of course, I never was a non-commissioned officer. Sergeant was my big aim. But then lieutenants, they'd come to the sergeant, see, for instructions. How did you take the climate down there in Panama? It was humid and hot and mosquitos. Well, we got used to it. Wherever we went, we got used to being there. I don't, offhand, I don't remember just, but I was a young fellow and I could take it. You were never sick from malaria or anything like that? No. No? No. It was a time malaria was just getting over with, see, where I was at. And anybody could catch it or get it, see, at any time as far as that goes. Was that from the mosquitos then? Huh? Was that from the mosquitos? Well, they thought it was from mosquitos, but I don't think, I think it was the climate more than anything else. And that is, they blamed it on the mosquitos, but I think it was the climate that had more to do with it than mosquitos. Were you married then when you were down there? No. No? Oh, no. But you stayed in it for 14 years? Yeah. And then you came back to Oregon? Yeah. What happened then? Did you get tired of it or what was the reason you quit? Well, my enlistment was way overdue, and I went out, see, I went out to, I left the service then for a while, but it wasn't long. And I had that in my blood, and I enlisted again and went right back down to Panama. So I knew everything down there, and the officers all come to me for instruction, see. They were glad to see you back? Yeah. But then when you came back then finally to Oregon, then you married? Well, I married a girl. The old saying, us enlisted men would lay up with the women, see, they went for enlisted men. They did? Yeah, oh yeah. Why was that? Was it a safe income, you think, or was it a uniform? Well, they thought they had money, see, and we always did have a payday, see, and so we usually always had money, too, to take them out, you know. So the girl laid up for that? Yeah. You got a dollar a minute? Yeah. So we'd take them out and buy them each, see. And at that time, a dollar went a long ways. That is a dollar, a silver dollar. You got a hold of a silver dollar. The bills shortly came out before that, but them bad bills, they'd throw them away. They wanted that silver dollar. You had the safety for it? They couldn't get in their head that you could get a silver dollar or get the value of a silver dollar out of that bill. They'd get a hold of that, they'd either tear them up or get rid of them. They wanted that silver dollar. So they didn't have the respect for the papers? No. So how did you meet your wife now? What was her name? Well, I had offhand, I don't remember a maiden name. Well, then her first name was? Marie. Marie. Marie Parker. She was an American? Yeah. Marie Parker was her name. She'd been married to a Parker before. And she left him and married me. Was she from Oregon? No, she's from over on Cable or Sherrard, over in there. She was born there? Yeah. Was she with another Swedish background? No. Of course, with me, I understood and I could talk Swedish, but I never did. I never ran across anybody that I could talk to or that used the same language. Like your dad now, how long did he live? Oh, my mother died when I was—I wasn't over five years old, about three, I think, when she died. And my dad, he lived—he even batched it. He raised us kids. I had two—Brother Gust, he was in the—he made the cruise around the world with the fleet in 1978, whatever it was. And that's what got me in the notion of enlisting. When I got old enough, I enlisted. I enlisted in the Coast Artillery. So you came back and married before the Depression? Yeah. Yeah. And then you stayed home in Oregon? Yeah. Your wife didn't want you to go to Panama anymore? Oh, no. No. But you had it in your blood? Huh? You had it in your blood to go to Panama? Yeah. So what happened then? What kind of work did you settle with then? You became a farmer or a carpenter? I was a carpenter, and I was handy, see? When I was in the Army, I learned how to do carpenter work and worked in a machine shop. And so when I got back to Oregon, they all flocked to me to see if they could learn something from me, see? But I knew everything by heart. I turned out to be a good carpenter and machine work. I understood that. I didn't have any machine there. At that time, we used to just started grinding valves, see? We'd grind valves, and even on the automobiles, we'd grind the valves and it'd run like new. You overhauled the engines? Yeah. So there was a lot of work done. And you settled then in Oregon and raised your family there? Yeah, I think that's where—that was my hometown, you see. Everything was Oregon to me. How many children did you have now? How many? Yeah. I had three girls and three boys, I think. Either three or four, I started to figure it. And they are all living? Yes. Yes, as far as I know, they are. Are they interested in the Swedish background from your father's side and your mother's side? Huh? Are they interested in the Swedish background you had now? Oh, they'll sit and listen, hear me tell stories, see, but it's nothing to them because they— They don't understand it? They didn't come up with it, you know, but they'll sit and listen and I'd tell stories about things that had happened. And they'd sit and listen and they didn't believe half of it, but I never told them a lie. It was straight stuff, so they had to believe it. And that was what your father had told you then, or— Yeah. What did your father tell you now about Sweden that you couldn't remember? Oh, he used to tell me about how they traded horses, you know, and at that time there was no automobiles. It was just horses. If they were going anyplace, they had to hitch up horses and go. And it was that way when I come to this country for a long time before the automobiles started coming in, you see. That was something else, you see, when the automobiles took over. So he—your father never went back to Sweden? No. He stayed there all his life? Yeah. Did any of his brothers or sisters come over to this country? Yes. They did? Yeah, and they all went back. Went back and— Stayed in Sweden? Some of them stayed and some of them just went back for a visit. Did they stay? I think my dad went back for a visit and then he come right back over here. He said, there's no money over there. You see, they could get a job and get pretty good pay in this country, but over there they couldn't even buy a job. So your uncles and aunts, did they settle in the Oregon area too, Osheron? Well— Or Moline? I didn't have very many of them, but I had—well, my dad had a brother. He didn't live very long here. He died. His oldest brother. What was his name? Gosh, I can't remember. They always pronounced it on Swede. Tony. I had a brother, Tony, and an uncle, Tony. And he was named after my dad's brother. What did Anton and Swedish name be? Konstan. Oh, Konstan. Yeah. Anton too. Anton was Anton, and the nickname be Konstan. Konstan. A lot of that stuff, I've forgotten it, but I knew all of it at one time. What kind of work did they have here? Were they farmers or carpenters? Most of them was carpenters, and then they worked in the machine shop. They didn't know nothing about farming, but that's where all the machine shops started from them Swedes. They come over here and start them machine shops and one thing, another. So they were pretty good machinists. Carpenter work, that comes from Sweden too. They could build anything. So they had a good reputation? Yeah. Swedish carpenters. Yeah. So were you known as a Swedish carpenter, Henry Gustafsson? Well, I wasn't known as a Swedish carpenter, but I was known as a carpenter. I was a good carpenter. So you built houses in Oregon too then? Huh? You built houses too then in Oregon? Yeah. Somebody would want to put up a barn or something, and they'd come to me and ask me how they would build it. One thing, another, machine shed or something, how they would build it. After I got through telling them, I said, will you build it? Well, I said, yes. If I had time, you wait. I'd say, you wait until I get time, I'll build it. I'm pretty busy right now, but when I get time, I'll build it for you if you want to wait. But some of them couldn't wait, you know. They'd start the building, and I'd go to take over. It looked like hell too, you know, where they'd been experimenting more than anything else. Who taught you to build now? I mean, what did you learn to trade? I mean, to put the houses and two-by-fours and rectors and studs and boards on them in the right way? My dad was a carpenter. Oh, he was? Yeah. So he taught you then how to do it? Oh, yeah. And I was a pretty good carpenter. They all wanted me to do work for them, see. So you kept busy then? Yeah. So you were a carpenter then most of the time? Yeah. That was your living? Yeah. And your children or whatever growing up, did they learn also the carpenter trade, or your boys? Yeah, some of them wouldn't have anything to do with it, see. No? How come? They didn't like the work, see, the carpenter work. I had one boy that was pretty good at it. He'd come and ask instructions, see, and then he'd go ahead. I was a good carpenter. I could build anything, making a difference, whatever it was. They'd come to me and ask me, I want this and I want that. How would you go at it? And I'd explain it to them, and they'd say, will you build it? That's the way it ended up, see. They said, well, you wait until I get time, I'll build it. I'm pretty busy right now, but whatever, run out of, so I got time, I'll build it for you. Did you go into the city still, Molina, Rock Island, the millhouses? Molina was just – East Molina, see, they were just starting to build down there. So you went in there too then? Oh, yes. During the war? Or after the war? It was during, before the war, most of it then. When the war came on, then I quit and went into the service, see. But, well, I went into the service, I put a lot of time in there. They'd come to me for instructions more than anything else then. The second World War, they knew that I knew this, going to build something or put it up well. They'll say, now how would you build it, or can you tell us how to build it? And I'd tell them. They'd always ask me, well, now can you do it? If I didn't have any work, well, I'd go ahead and take a job, see. There was plenty of work then. Oh, yeah. How was it during the Depression, though? Huh? During the Depression? It was hard to get a job. Hard? Yeah. How were you able to survive with your family? You stayed in Oregon, and were you able to have some building construction going on? Oh, I'd have an odd little job, see. They'd come to me and I'd work or do something for practically nothing just to survive. And you belonged to the Lutheran Church in Oregon? Yeah. The whole family? Yeah. Yeah, I was confirmed out of the Lutheran Church. There were no other organizations in Oregon that were Swedish that you belonged to? Well, they was putting all Swedes in Oregon. But did they have any organization outside the church? No, to start with, they didn't. The church was the main group they belonged to? Yeah. Oh. Then after I got married, then my wife, she was a Methodist. She was? So I transferred to the Methodist—a Swede Methodist. In Oregon? Yeah. So she had me transferred to her church, see. I hadn't belonged to church. No getting out of it. You see, in them days, everybody was pretty religious. They were? Yeah. So you didn't join the Methodist church then? Huh? Yeah. You didn't join? Yeah. How about your children? Were they raised in the Lutheran Church or in the Methodist? Well, they probably—the oldest ones were probably raised in the Lutheran Church, but— I mean your children? Yeah, but they eventually transferred to the Methodist. I see. So they were very religious in Oregon? Oh, yeah. And the Lutheran Church was the biggest? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I used to have pictures of the old Lutheran Church. Do you remember Pastor Holmberg? Who? Pastor Holmberg. Oh, yeah. Holmberg. Yeah, Holmberg. Pastor Holmberg. Yeah, I remember him. So now you belong to the Methodist Church then? Yeah. Yeah, I've been a Methodist ever since. Is there any difference between the Lutherans and the Methodists, according to your— No, there wasn't any difference. There's not much difference in the Lutherans and the Methodists. Only the Lutherans, they wouldn't talk Swede, see? And the Methodists—a lot of the Methodists didn't even understand Swede. That was the difference, was the language. But otherwise, everything was about the same. I got to get a napkin blown on my nose. You're older than me. Oh, this is your second wife, and this is Parker. Yeah. You were married the first time? Yeah. Was that a Swedish lady? Yeah. She died, and Miss Parker was the first woman that I should have married, see? She married Parker, a fellow by the name of Parker. That's how she got her name. But you had no children with your first wife? No. Oh. And how about politics now? Are you a Republican or a Democrat? Oh, I come up Republican. In them days, all the religious fellows were Republicans. They were? Yeah. The Democrats, they were kind of scarce, although those that wasn't Swedes were Democrats. They was all Democrats. And when it come to voting, it was either Republican or Democrat. Of course, the Republicans, they always rated that as, say, it was always strong enough to beat the Democrats. So Orien, especially Orien, was Republican. So you are a lifelong Republican then? Yes, I guess so, until these latter years. I vote for the man.