 This is cassette two, this continuation with Helge Swanson, South Bend, Indiana. Cassette two, side one. But the question was about the different nationalities. You said the Polacks, the Germans. Yeah, Polacks and Germans, and mostly that I work with. Americans. And Americans, yes. And the Swedes were the minority. Minority, yes. How was it to work with them? Which one? I find the Germans, I worked for a German foreman, and we got along very well. He was a real nice fellow. But I had worked with fellows, being a tool dynamaker, sometimes you work with somebody, and you have different things you have to do together. And I find that the Germans are hard to work with. They are hard-stern and kind of stubborn, and they like to boss you, and they get nasty. Sometimes I have had that. Poles, I find, were very nice. I worked with Polish fellows, and they were very nice to work with. How about the Norwegians and the Finns? Did you work together with them? No, I have not worked with any Norwegians or Finns. Yes, I worked with a Finlander, born here, of course. He was very much Americanized, but he was a very nice fellow. And the Swedes? Well, I think the Swedes get along very good, very nice. Most of them are very hard-working, honest workers, and try to do their job the best they can. And don't take the credit from somebody else. Take the credit for what you do, but not take the credit from what somebody else does. Were they helpful to you when you first came here, when you asked questions? Were they helpful towards your operation? Yes, that's right. They helped you? Oh, yes. I worked with Swedish fellows in Chicago when I was just starting out, and they were very helpful. You know, you can become, most of the time you can become just like friends. But that's another thing about the Germans. They are not helpful. When you work, they like to take the attitude that they know a little bit more than you do, and they won't tell you anything. I had that experience quite a bit. And I worked for a fellow of German descent. I was the foreman, and he owned the place. And there was a fight all the time. He was hard to work for. You tried to convince him your idea was better? Yes, that's right. He was too hard with his employees. You were in between them. That's right, yeah. He was very unfair and very hard to work for. But he became a millionaire, so he did all right. We were friends, but we fought. He fired me once. I came back. I quit next time. But we're still friends, and he made money. That's what he had me for. You didn't try to go it alone, on your own? I was thinking about it, but too big of a risk to get into something. And I didn't have the education that you needed, really, to go in on your own. But if you had started something in 1939, when you came back, for instance, at the doorsteps of the war, then so many times, the small shop owners really got the orders. Oh, yes, you could have done very well. A lot of things that were done or produced during that time were very simple things. Oh, yes. That was a big market. And the government even tuned the factory for you. It was necessary. That's right. That was a big market. A lot of people started out, and they were doing good. They become big shots. They're poor now. Today, they're poor. They went out of business. They went too big then? What happened then? Too big. Invested too much money. Things got a little bit too slow, and they couldn't stand that. That's right. And the fellows, they lost everything they had. So that was not a safe way to go, unless you were well smart and had a business idea about this thing. I worked for the company in Chicago. They went bankrupt. Because there was not enough work to get and competition. So after ten—well, you survived the Depression. A lot of people had to go back to Sweden. Oh, yes. I survived real good. You were able to go home to Sweden and go back again. Yes. I survived real well because I worked at Spanish Park. It was just part-time, I can say, because we worked two days. I was working on production to start out with, and that was the first part. So we worked one day, two days, three days probably. Maybe it was a whole week, and then worked another few days. But I was single. I had an apartment of my own. Cheap. Hamburger was ten cents a pound. And you didn't invest any money in any banks that you owned? I did, yes. It was the Chicago Bank. The first year I was here, the first two years, I didn't save too much, but it was a matter of five, six hundred dollars I had in the bank, which I lost. They closed it for you? In 29. You never got it back? In 29, yes. So that— That went, yes. You never went to the bank with your money again? Oh, yes. You did? Oh, yes. I've been doing— But I mean, it took a time, though, before you— I didn't get that back. No. There was a big bank in Chicago. I don't know what happened. On the south side? Yeah, on the south side. That's right. It was tough in the Depression, but I managed because— I guess one reason, too, I managed pretty good, because I was on my own. I went on my own when I was 13 years old. So you knew how to handle money, then? Yes. At least get something, what I needed for the money. You didn't have much money to handle, but whatever it was, you knew how to do it. That's right, what to do, and how to cut your expenses. You didn't— Sure, because in Sweden, we weren't—like, I worked in the forest there, and we had just to have one room, and did our own cooking, just like a lumberjack, you know. And so I managed, and I didn't feel bad about it. I just was happy and kept going. Oh, yes. You didn't see any silver lining, though, when you went there? No, that's right. But like I said, after the war started, everything has—I've never been out of work. I have changed many jobs, different jobs, to try to improve myself, and sometimes did and sometimes didn't, but everything is going real good. I'm very pleased with this country and the way things turned out for me. When did you buy your first house? You rented first? I rented first, right. During the war, I rented first when we got married, and I bought the first house in 1954. A pretty good-sized home, two-story, seven rooms. Did you rent out some rooms then? Oh, no, no. I had three daughters. We took all that. We had a den and a kitchen and a dining room and a living room and three bedrooms altogether. Oh, yes. And then you sold the one when you went down to Arkansas? Yes, after I had it for about four years. My daughter, the youngest daughter, lived there. Then she went out to California for a while, and it was standing empty. I sold it in 1934. In Arkansas, we lived in a mobile home down there because, one other thing, I wasn't going to stay there. I was just going to work. I went with my son-in-law down there because he wanted me along because he was just starting into service apprenticeship. He said he wanted me to go along, and I was willing to go. I was happy to go because I'd been in South Bend all my life, working in South Bend all my life, and I would like to go. So I went down there, and it turned out real good. It was not so high, but there again, we went into a lot of overtime, worked a lot of overtime, and things got pretty good down there. What kind of toys were fabricated on there? Metal, metal toys, dollhouses, pots and pans that kids played with, and all kinds of pinball machines, all kinds of pinball machines, and target shooting machines. Then we went into a lot of plastic, injection plastics, and all kinds of toys like that. And your job down there was a constructor? Tool and die maker, mostly dies. We built dies, mostly sheet metal dies. Draw dies for drawing pots and pans and different things. We made some iron, play iron for girls, iron boards. Interesting. It was very interesting. I worked there, and usually they worked different than most places because they didn't have a tool, a die designer. So what we got, we got a part, and we got a part that was on a drawing, a drawing, see, on a part. And then they say, here, make a die, a tiny die, and build a die for this. So you go in on the drawing board and draw up the die, and then you take it out in the shop, cut the steel, and build it. So that was very interesting and fascinating, too, because you didn't know what was going to happen. When you put the die in the press, maybe it didn't work right. So you had to... A little bit more overtime. Yeah. Hey, we got the heavy part next week. The die is not ready. Okay, you work Saturday, Sunday, 11, 12 o'clock at night. And I've been a sucker for overtime. I never got enough overtime. But you were able to take a longer rest after all. Yeah. As a matter of fact, when I worked in South Bend, after I had left the drawing board, I worked in the shop during the day and worked on the drawing board at night in some small company. I had two jobs. You burned the candles in both hands. That's right. And so far you've been healthy. Right? Yeah. Being that I worked overtime and I worked over 65, I've drawn pretty good pensions. I get my Social Security by $1,000 a month, which is... You have many, many quarters. Almost twice as much as the average. So I saved some money and I put those in the money market when that was good. And in the 80s, 70s, the money market started coming in 15, 18, 15 percent. Then you were working. I was working. I was making, the last years that I worked, after I started on my Social Security, for the three last years I worked until Social Security and my investments, I was making, my income was over $30,000 a year. And then there was high interest also during the 70s. Yeah, there was kind of interest I got from there and that. So it's been pretty good. I still have those, draw the interest. I have set up so I get a check every week. And all the stock market is going to hit $3,000. I got out of the stock market. I had some insurance stock and some investments, but when I retired I invested that in notes. I know exactly what I'm going to get every week. So you can go and live in Sweden now for two years without working? Oh, yeah. I'm in Sweden now and I started as a Swedish pensioner. Kaka på kaka. So you have been back many times then in Sweden? Yes, five times. But during that time I've been gone, spent three years over there, because I didn't go for three or four weeks. I was up almost close to two years the first time. The second time I was there for almost a year. Then Karen and I went there for a little shorter time, four or five weeks. How about you? Were you interested in the Swedish background? No. Agnes is not. In their respect, she would learn to speak Swedish. She's interested to a certain extent, but she doesn't get into it that much. Even though Karen spoke Swedish when we came back, being that we never spoke Swedish at home, we never learned to speak Swedish. And there is not enough Swedish people in South Bend. So we had a little group of Swedes, but otherwise the whole group, all their playmates, all the playmates they have, none of them were Swedish. They were not Swedish entirely. So we didn't have any connection except for at home. We didn't. And I couldn't because... It's when... She is Italian. She speaks Italian fluently. Did you understand any Italian? No. I just learned a bit when I was down in England. I heard her folks speak Italian, but you don't learn too much if you don't get into it. How do you talk with your in-laws now? Do they talk Italian? No, they go on now, but they could understand me, sure. And if they didn't understand what we were talking about, Agnes interpreted it for them. Her mother was pretty good, but her dad didn't. He didn't learn English? He didn't learn too well, no. But that's what I listen to. There is a little friction between us two, you know. I'm Italian, you're Swedish. Italians are better than the Swedes. She is better than Italians. There is a little friction there, see. If she had been all American, that would have been a little different. But you don't have the problems like many have, too many in-laws and grandparents? No. You never had that problem at all? No. Well, they were together a lot with her folks before they passed away, yes. But they were older people then than you were? Older, yes, yes, yes. They were born in 1877 and 75, I think. So they were quite old when they came here? They were grown up, yes. They came over during the war. First World War? Yes, First World War. That's right. So, overall, you have done pretty good? Yes, I'm satisfied. I can live very comfortably with my income. I'm not rich, but we're pretty well. The nice is fairly nice. I belong to, you know, what I belong to. When you spent the time down in Arkansas, you didn't have a church down there, or no mosque? Yes, the Lutron Church built a very small church down there during that time I was there. What place was it in? Boonville. Boonville. It's right between Fort Smith and Little Rock on Highway 10. Forty miles east of Fort Smith. A little over 100 miles west of Little Rock. But no Wasillah store? No, no Swedes. So you missed 10 years of war? No Swedes, except, not any born Swedes there, no. But I think somebody belonged to this church, yes. That Lutron Church there, somebody came to the Lutron Church there. Their ancestors came from Sweden. But then you see it was very active in that church. They just built that and tried to build it up, started off with about 20 or 30 members. There's very, very few Lutrons in Arkansas. The majority are the Southern Baptists. Then it's the Methodists. That's the two churches. The predominant on there. One of the bigger denominations. So now you are trying to keep Linear Lodge going anyway? We have a hard time. The old timers are there. The old timers are there. It's hard to replenish. We lost four this year of our members who passed away. And we have two years. When we came back about three years ago, I got in 10 new members there. We're working real hard. But some of them are not very good members. They're not active. And finally, some of them got behind in dues. So we are really... Then it looks like it's going to be real good. We had one couple that came in, young couple. And he was... They didn't know anything about the Walsall Order, but here's the Finn. His grandfather came from Finland. And he was very active. But for a few months, it looks like we're going to have somebody to take the whole and help out. But he decided to quit his job and go someplace else to work. So, as a matter of fact, he went down to South Carolina, I believe. So now we just... You can say that it's not... My wife, she's been the chairman for 10 years, total of 10 years now. And I've been the vice, and I've been the coastal leader. And you see there's nobody to take hold and help out. So we are not... I don't know. We are just... And the members are getting too old. We have old ladies. It's up in the 80s. Some are 90, close to 90, 80 and 90s, you know. And so it's... We have 48 members on the list, but lately we get 20. That's a big meeting. If you get about 10, 12 now. So it's... Do you have some sort of programs every meeting? Well, we try to. We've been... There are a few members. I've been showing all the Scandinavian films that I've been getting, and been able to get at the film con. I have shown those, and then we play bingo, things like that. But I had this down at the shirts, and I put up a big poster, the Scandinavian films, so at 3 o'clock Sunday, we get one couple runs. That's all? Yeah. And we have a lot of second generation and third generation Swedes. We get quite a few second generation in shirts. But they don't show up at the... No. They just can't... I tried to talk it into them, and they just don't get that. They haven't been used to it. They never was used to it at their home or anything like that. But I know some of those people there, their sons and daughters, they belong to us sometimes. Before you pass away, but... So it's... So is that you think people are working harder nowadays, or you did? I mean, you worked overtime. Yeah. And still got time to... Well, they are busy, those people that work in shirts, but on a Sunday afternoon, they really could come. You know. So they're a little bit on the lazy side then? Yeah, they have no interest. That's what I... They have no interest. Some of them have some interest of their ancestors, and they've been taking trips to Sweden, and they look like they are proud of their heritage and all that, but when it comes to organize or come to something like that, they just don't do it. But if you have... It takes somebody that has a real force behind them, probably, to get to the people. Like in Indianapolis, they had nine members there a few years back. They got 150 now. Thanks to Svansvarsson and Victor Olsson. Victor Olsson, yeah. So they've been... Those two were the ones that built it up, and they got it going. But they have some Swedes coming in from Sweden, and that helps. That helps. So when they stopped, the immigration stopped? Yeah. It's like a vacuum. Oh, yeah. We don't have nobody that's come from Sweden to stop there anymore. So Studebaker and Bendix, are they still here in some sort of business? Studebaker's not. There's nothing there. They are gone. They are gone. They have no business whatsoever at Studebaker. That's all, completely gone. How many Swedish engineers do you think is... The ones here in the 30s or late 20s working for Studebaker and Bendix? Born in Sweden? No. None. None? What I know of. We have one. He was a designer, body designer. Yeah. He was the office of Studebaker. Yeah, that's right. Yeah, that's right. He was born in Sweden. So they didn't go here then? They went to... But he had learned that over here, what I mean. He learned the body design over here. There was no traffic in between South Bend and Detroit at any time that they... No....confronted the two. No. The only thing was two makers and two designers. Two designers. They traveled. They traveled. Especially during the war and right after the war, because there was more money out there. There was tremendous... Yeah, there was tremendous money in tool making out there, because everybody didn't work overtime like I did. And up there, everybody in any shop were working, and they got more money. But was it the same union, though? How come you didn't get the same scale there? No, no, that's not the same union. No, that's not the same union. We had our own here. Local? So far, wages and working conditions and that. We belonged to the international machinists. But... You said your own wages in these districts. Yeah, that's right. We had our own. We had to... Yeah, that's right. So in your opinion, the union was a good thing? Yes, it was. Like your uncle, he went there to this feed shop, on feed mill, day after day, and there was no complaining. No, that's right. So when you come along then and started to be a little bit undressed in your blood, what did your uncle say then? No, he didn't... No, he was pretty well... He was up in age. He was pretty well set. But did he say that you should be... Yeah, he recommended that. I know that. He said you should go into... He said you should go into a... Learn to run a machine. Work in a machine shop or something. Get a trade. He said that? Yeah, he said that. But it was too late for him. Oh, yes. He didn't want to. He was a bartender in his young days. Yeah, he was a bartender in his young days. So he didn't... And he stayed in Chicago then? Yeah, he stayed in Chicago. He died in Boston. Yeah. He was not an aggressive man. He was satisfied with what he had, and he had a real nice home, and he had two nice children. And he never had a car, and no expenses, but a real nice home, and a nice wife. She was from Birmingham. And a very nice home.