 This is tape number two, page number one. It's a continuation of the election for Gustafsson, Geneseo Illinois. Tape number two, page one. So, you haven't paid pension or anything like that before June, you know? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. No. Yeah. Uh-huh. So he was still in business then? Thirty-two. No, thirty-two I was farming. That was thirty-four. Thirty-four it was. So how did he fare now in Moline during the Depression? Was he able to get jobs or... Who? Carl Johnson, the contractor now. Oh yeah, he got jobs. Yeah, but they were hurting also though. No, he didn't work in the winter. No, he didn't. No, not the contractor. What was he doing then? Oh, they sit in the house. We were up in Chicago, we worked all winter long. Oh yeah, that's right. We worked... The brick in Chicago, they made it. They were warm when they come to the yard. They came right from the stills. So we worked all winter long. Oh, you didn't have to cover up or anything then? No. They were warm and nice, the brick. But in the Moline, one of the good contractors, he couldn't make it. He said, I'm losing money, I can't go and hit everything. He had a church when I left to build, but he said, I ain't gonna start there before the... in the spring. It was a nice weather. I said, I can't, I just... I just... come on, I can't sit here all winter long. And then we were gonna get married. I went to Chicago first, all by myself and another bricklayer. And then I come back a couple times and then she moved over. So then after you quit the farming in 1932? You quit the farming too? Yeah, in 32. Then we moved out of the big farm and just lived in a little place there where we had the cattle for a while. For a year, we moved around to small places till we moved to town. A couple of years. You mean here in Geneseo? Yeah, in Geneseo. So, did you go in often to Moline to Vasa and Viking doings? Yeah, we belonged to some of them. But we didn't. We didn't go there too often. Because it was too foreign to go back and forth? At that time you never had automobiles, see that? But how did you meet your wife and all? Oh yeah, we had automobiles then when we came back. Oh yeah, sure we did. We had... You had automobiles? You had bought your own? Yeah, in 1924 I bought an automobile. So how did you meet Hildur Larsson here? At a dance? Eh... You met her in Moline? Yeah, in Moline. In Moline. Vasa, Vasa Larsson. Yeah, we went to a dance there. A dance. On Fifth Avenue, 43. You had learned to dance then? Yeah. Who taught you to dance? You learned here in Moline? Yeah. Yeah, I knew some guys there and they wanted me to go to that dance. And my sister came up with her. I see. Happened to come in with her. And I got hold of her. And then you danced all night? Yeah, we danced until it was quitting time. So during the Depression a lot of people they just couldn't get married because there were so bad times. I have noticed that they held it off for several years. Oh yeah, I suppose. Because they couldn't afford to rent a place or work. That's true. So were there many people now in Moline that had pretty bad during the Depression? Yeah, there was a lot of people. Oh yeah, there were bad poor. And they came out on your farm you said, some of them? Oh yeah, some Swedes came out and wanted to stay with me. I couldn't take more than a couple. I had a couple, you know, and they didn't know anything about farming either. They couldn't plant corn or nothing. So they came from the city then? Yeah. So you had to be a teacher? Yeah, I didn't depend on them to plant corn. They didn't know anything about that. But wasn't it nice though, I mean, when people come in like that, you can sit and talk in the evening and you talk Swedish and reminisce about old times. Yeah. But it was too costly though because you had to feed them. I have to ask you then, how did you feel about that when they brought in people from Moline? I didn't like it. It was nothing handy. I didn't have running water. I had to run down a well and carry water. No electric light. No convenience at all? No, I had to have lamps. Oh, it was terrible. We had a fritter in the ground, a big hole in the ground. We had to wind it down. We had to put food down in a well. Like a coal well? Yeah, a big farm, 200 acres. I said, in Sweden they got electricity and everything, but you don't have it here. I told a lot of people when I came over. Who did you rent it from, Germans or? German people. German people. Yeah, she was a Swede, his wife. Oh yeah. So when did they get electricity out here then? 1935, ERA, electric rural? Yeah, then we got electric. Electrification? We never had electric light so long as we lived in the country. We got the town, then we got electric. That's wonderful, to get the town. So there was a lot of hardships then to be on the farm. Yeah, there was a lot of hardships. How could you keep things then in the summer, the butter and? We had to go down in that darn big well, you had to wind down way deep down the ground. Wind the thing up and put the food on a shelf down the well. So you kept the milk down there and the butter? Yeah, and everything. And the butter and the meat? Everything, we had to. That was awful. I'll never forget it. I had one hired man. His dad was a farmer out that way. He was kind of a little lonesome and funny, you know. So there was a house out there too for him to live in. And it was raining a couple days, you know. He said, what should I do? I said, you clean the chicken house. So he went out there and cleaned it, and he said, hit me on the head and kill me. And I walked right away. He was a disgust, and he just got married when he moved in too. Now they're both dead, see. He's wife and him. They both got married. They weren't younger than we are, but they're both dead. All of a sudden, you know. So some of them had to go back to Sweden though? No, they never went. They all stayed there? Yeah, they never went back. They just took so many years, you know. They got a job, see, a little here and there. Some of them got in the shop. A guy who worked for the Turkish Central, he got along. So that was hard for a bachelor, for instance, who didn't have any contact with anybody to get something to eat then. I mean, in Moline, if they lived in Moline. No. A young guy, for instance, if he wasn't married. I mean, where did he get anything to eat then? Did he have to go to Salvation Army or who fed him? I don't know. I just don't know how they got along. I just don't know. So you had two small girls though when you came out here? Huh? You had two small girls when you came to Chicago? Yeah, yes. So they went to school out there? They went to school in the country school. You want to go in and look at that show? Coming on now in one minute. During the war? Well, during the war, I was farming, see? During the war? I was farming a little bit. Here in Geneseo? Yeah. Feed my cattle, see, and my corn. I brought all the corn with me. Oh, I see. I didn't sell the corn. It was 12 cents a busser. And I said, I ain't going to sell the corn for that either. So I bought that with two. So I fed the cattle. So I made a little money that way, see, and kept on going. But then during the war, was it a better time then to be a farmer? Well, no. It wasn't just as bad. It was? Farming, yes. It wasn't just as bad for them. But there were a lot of rich farmers. They got along anyway. Why did they get along? Well, they had a little money, and they had cattle and everything, and keep on working, see? Yeah, but they didn't get more for the corn than you did, though. No, well, they could have stayed in it for a few years, you know. So they rolled off the straw. Yes, they fed it. Was it easy to get a job, though, in Moline during the war, at Jan Dier and Moline Pla? No, not too good anyway. It wasn't? See, there was—I worked in the shop 41. In Moline? Yes. What shop? 41, I started in the shop. There was nothing to do down there. There was a prison then, too. Which shop was it? It was Jan Dier Pla. It was Jan Dier Pla. I worked there for five years. I was over with then. You worked there for five years. What kind of—did you make plows or what? No, I did carpenter work there. Oh, carpenter. Yeah. I see. So they had—me and an other guy, you know, they had us—we know more than they did in the shop, but that— they didn't know anything about carpenter work, see? No. They did—they hired us for 80 cents an hour. Want that offer? 41. 80 cents an hour? Oh, 80 cents an hour. Did you have to belong to the carpenter union then? No, there was no union in the shop at that time either. No union? No. Well, the carpenters, they didn't care. And Bricklayers either—if we went to the shop, they didn't care, just so we didn't lay brick or anything or did carpenter work outside, scabbed and then— So what did you do after five years at Jan Dier? Did you go back to the farm then again? No, I started in here in Geneseo with carpenter work and built a few houses. I built in Annarvon, too, another town for the over, you know. Oh, you mean family dwellings? Yeah, I took the houses for so much and hired a couple men. Sometime I had three. And you did the bricklaying then? No, no, I didn't have—I did the carpenter work. Oh, you did? No, there was no bricklaying till here. You used the foundation. But I went—did pretty good. There's a couple houses here, not far away here, you know, I built. They had pretty good money, you know, them guys I worked for. So it worked out pretty good then? Yeah. Oh, yeah, I kept going till 1950. Then I started on Moline again. Let's see, yeah, I worked for a contractor there. They had a job here in Geneseo, a big school. So I was foreman there on that big school on the north of town here. So I worked there three years. You worked for your cousin then, Carl Johnson? No, there was another contractor. He was too old then at that time? No. He was still going? Oh, he had a little to do, but not too much. But not too much, they kind of split up. But that school, you know, I kept going. I had to be union though. Kevarnie, you know, I hired men from Kevarnie. And they were tough, you know. They were? Yeah. The contractor, he wanted me for foreman. And I took over the whole school. I did some carpenter work there too, you know. The oldie was mad, you know. One, he was foreman, but I took his job there. He wasn't too good enough. Yeah, but did you have to belong to the union when you were a foreman? Yes. You had to? Yes, I had my union card. The foreman had to belong to the union. Otherwise, they got after you. They got after you. So, it was 1960, or 59 or 60, I started for Ericsson. And Axel Carlson, I worked for them guys for a while. And I worked for Ericsson Construction until 1970, 49, 69. That's right. And then I quit them down there. Did you still have the farm here in Geneseo then? No, we didn't have no farm. No, we didn't have no farm then. No, we lived in town. No, I quit that farming business after I got done in 1935. 1935. Yeah. That was the end of your farming days. Yeah. I started in with the bricklaying after 1935, you know. I joined the union in the beginning. So, what year did you become a citizen? In Chicago. 1927? Yeah. So, then you were able to vote? Oh, yeah. Did you vote for Hoover? No. No, Hoover went in then, 1920. Yeah, you voted for him though. We voted for him. You did? We voted for Hoover. Oh, you did vote for him? Yes, but they didn't have anything to do with the work then. No, but we voted for him. Hoover, he couldn't. And he was a Catholic, and they wouldn't vote for that Catholic. Or Schmidt? No, they wanted Hoover. And he was the worst cook there was. Yeah, but could he really help though, the situation, you think? I think they could do. Can we really blame Hoover for everything though? Well, not exactly, but we don't know that. But he was a dirty devil. He was? Yeah. You never voted for him again? No. I don't think he run after that. The other one came in, see? Roosevelt? Yeah. So, you voted for Roosevelt then, after that? Yeah. We voted for this. We had Roosevelt. He was in court a while. He got sick in 1945. He died in 1945. But you voted for him three times though? Yes. So he was a good president? Yeah, he was with the Union and everything. But Hoover, he made everything depressing. Oh, it was the toughest depression. There'd never be a depression like that. They were all dirty devils. See, all them Hoovers, they were rich guys. He had a lot of money then. And finally, if it wouldn't be for the Catholics, he would never have had a job. But people didn't like the Catholics. And I don't blame them, but anyway, he should have had it. I would have voted for him. But we didn't know how it would turn out with Hoover. And they were even singing. His sister, a few people, you know, were singing, Hoover, Hoover, we're here stoned for you. That's what they did. Yeah. You had a choir, huh? Yeah, we were singing here and there, see? Advertising and, you know, and they helped him, too. Did people really know, though, if they were Republicans or Democrats? Like you now, for instance, would it make any difference if they were Republicans or Democrats, or did you vote for the man? I always voted Republican myself. Always Republican? Always did. And I'm more of a Democrat. Yep, always did. Oh, I see. She was still with Hoover. Yeah, she lacked my vote. Well, I thought he was the best. I didn't know he was going to be elected. How can it be different, though? Couldn't you explain to her what he did? No, I'll find out all over, you know. You'll see, it was Republican. It's a Republican town here. Oh, that was Republican, wasn't it, all over. But we lived in Chicago at that time, but we voted for Hoover. We lived in Chicago. How come you voted for Hoover now? Who told you that? Well, because the other guy was Catholic. You think that was the most important thing? Yeah, that's what it was. And we had a new bungalow we built in a Catholic neighborhood, and all of those had a smith, I think his name was, in the window, and we were the only ones that had a picture of Hoover in our window. And you were all singing for him there? Yeah. How did it go now, again? Huh? How did it go, this song for Hoover? Oh, he won, you know, Hoover. The first time, yes. Yeah, he did. But how did this song go now, you were all singing, you and your sisters? Huh? You were all singing as well? Yeah, we were singing about my sister living in Davenport, and she come to visit me in Chicago in the morning, and we're singing, Hoover, we are strong for you. And we were the only one in the whole neighborhood that had Hoover in the window. Sure, people were singing there all over. So he, like, he was out of luck. But you were not too sure of yourself, though. You didn't like Hoover? No. No? Well, then, I didn't care. I didn't know really Hoover then, but later on, you... He didn't know how he was going to turn out. I didn't vote. You found out? I didn't vote, yeah. You didn't vote then? No, I didn't vote that time. He didn't know how he was going to turn out, but we didn't either. Well, they said he's a rich guy, and he can do a lot of damage. We took him for better or worse, I guess. Yeah. And he got worse, huh? And the Catholics... Oh, they got up. They closed all the banks up. Remember, they closed all the banks up, and everything. Catholics are a funny religion, you know. Do you know if there were any other Swedish families that were foreclosures on in Chicago? They had to walk away from their house. Their bank took it over. Foreclosures. Yeah, there was no... Not too many Swedes? No, we had my mother's cousin, Andersson. They were not our real neighbors. They were a little farther away, but we were with them all the time. But they were Swedish, and we knew them. Otherwise, there were not too many Swedes. But Bofors had a lot of them, from Småland on the north side. They come and visit us. Yeah, they have... A lot of them on the north side, but they lived on the north side. I saw a couple of them when we went to the funeral of my sister's husband. The nephew. I met him there. I haven't seen him for years. I didn't know him. Three months ago, we were at Chicago for his funeral. I didn't know, but he said his name, you know. We went to school together. Arvid. I didn't know. Arvid... Is it Jansson or... Yeah. Arvid. Is it Jansson or Swanson? No, Jansson. Arvid Jansson. So you have lived here in Geneseo then for many years? Yeah, ever since 31. That's how long we lived here. And then your children, they have stayed here too, then. Your one daughter is a beautician. Yeah, my daughter... One girl lives here in town, and one lives in Princeton. Her daughter. So you had them close by, and you had grandchildren also? Oh, yeah. Great-grandchildren. We got a great-grandson. He's... I want to show him the picture. So, what do you think about the politics today? Politician? Yeah. The politicians today, no. I mean, 50 years later, after Roosevelt. Oh, I don't know, really. This is our granddaughter. So you don't pay attention too much to politicians anymore, then? Not too much, but... But you vote, though. That's a Republican he's in, you know. Yeah. He did a little trouble, too. He's in trouble. If he can get out of it, he stick up for them countries over there, and that's no good. So you are a lifelong Democrat, then? Yeah. I never did vote this one in. He signed the money over to the kids, 250,000 and 250,000. You still vote, though? No. No, I don't. No, he retired in 79. I know, but he's still voting. I mean, for... Yeah. Yeah, oh, yeah. I vote for myself, though, here, and I didn't... But you vote Democrat? Yeah. And Hildur, she votes Republican. Yeah, I vote Republican. Yeah, that's right. So you kill each other, then? Yeah, we kill each other. Yeah. How to vote. Do you discuss politics, anything, or how did you just... I think I vote Democrat next time. You think so? Yeah. After all these years? Yeah, I think I vote Democrat. Why? Well, because I don't think President Reagan is so good. You think so? So much unemployment and everything now. I think we try somebody else. Do you think it'll be like Hoover time again? Yeah, maybe. Oh, yeah. It'll look like it. They're big, them guys, you know. They ain't no good, them Republicans. And we had Democrat a long time after Hoover was there. But he got sick, you know, that president. Oh, Roosevelt? Yeah, he was sick for an whole time, and people didn't know it. I read in the paper the other day, and they said nobody knew he was sick. And they put it in the paper, and said, yeah, he was sick every year. But now if the president gets sick, you know it right away. Yeah, I know. Sure. You can see his inside and everything on TV every half hour. Yes. And this president we got now, you know, we've been sick. He's been sick twice, and they tried to kill him one time. Yeah, now they did.