 8th of October 1987 and I'm sitting together with Ruth Lobold, Omaha, Nebraska. She was born 1895, 2nd of April, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. So my father went to the United States. So his father was a tailor? His father was a tailor. He started out to travel with him on the road in Sweden. He was quite young too. And then he came to the United States and he got a job at that, oh it's a big famous shop on Michigan Avenue in Chicago. And he loved that because he was working, was busy. But then the doctor told him that he should never work with wool. It was bad for his lungs and he was having lung trouble. So he left that and went up to Minnesota and took a course in cabinet making and liked it so well he stayed there until he died. Your mother now, Minnie Samberg, she came from Årefors? Årefors, Sweden. And her background, her father, what was he doing? Was he a glass blower? He was the original Årefors Glass Works. He was? Yes. And we went over there to visit. And we visited Årefors Glass Works. And originally he used to make parts for a ship, but the boys when they grew up they started making Årefors Glass. And they're still in that business. So you have cousins over there or second cousins? Well I did meet them when we were over there in 1956, but oh we got some glassware and I had some glassware before I went over there. So your mother now, was she the only one that came over here to the United States? Oh no. I have two brothers, one is a judge in Kansas City, Missouri, and the other one was head of a gas company or something. That was a long time ago. They are both dead I suppose? Oh yes, my mother died, she was 80 and she died at 44. So your father and mother, they met in Minneapolis then? Yes. They both came there? Yes. They came along? They had any more sisters and brothers with them or relation? Yes, my father had a brother that was on a farm in Wisconsin and she also had a sister that was in North Dakota. But then they had these two brothers in Kansas City, they went down there to visit them. So you remember visiting those aunts and uncles then? Oh I visited them in Kansas City. But you don't remember that you went with your father and mother on visits? No. To Wisconsin on the farm there? No, on the farm in Wisconsin, yes. We went there. So how did you enjoy the life on the farm? I liked it, but my little sister that was with me, she was only a year and a half younger than I am and we were just like twins. She didn't like it. Why? Oh I don't know, she didn't like the farm and the animals and everything and she called up my dad to come and get her and he came and got her. But I stayed nearly all summer long and they taught me how to milk a nice big old cow and I helped them with little jobs on the farm doing this and weeding things, you know. How old were you then? Let's see. Oh I must have been about twelve, twelve or thirteen. So you didn't have anything against staying there maybe for a few months and help out? No, I liked it. Was that the other side of the border of Minnesota or where in Wisconsin was it? Ames. Ames? Ames, Wisconsin. And where is that located? Close to? Oh that's centrally located. So he had a farm. Amory, wasn't it Amory? Was it Amory rather than Ames? Amory probably was. Maybe it is Amory. I think it's Amory. Amory, that's it. Yeah, because Ames is in Iowa. Oh Ames is in Iowa, yeah. It's Amory, Wisconsin. Now there they had a Swedish church also. Do you remember if you went with your uncle to church? Yes. Was there a Lutheran church? Lutheran church. And how about your parents? Did they belong to a church in Minneapolis? Oh yes. They were the Manuel Lutheran Church in Northeast Minneapolis. My father was Sunday school superintendent for I guess about 25 years. So you grew up in that church and went to Sunday school and confirmation? Yes, confirmed and was married the first time. But the second time I was a member of the Episcopal church because I used to sing and I was singing in their church. Oh I see. How did you come to go to Episcopalians? Well this first husband of mine was Episcopalian. I see. So that's how you, was there different in the Episcopalian compared to the Lutherans? Well no. I think their services were quite a bit the same. About the same? Uh huh. They were not more formal than in Episcopalian you think? Well the Lutherans were probably as formal as they were. So then you joined that church? Yes. After your second marriage? Yes, I joined the Episcopal church. No for your first marriage, after your first marriage. Yes, the first marriage. Oh I see, you married in the Episcopalian church. The second time I was married, I was married in the Episcopal church, but the first time in the Lutheran. But you didn't stay in the Episcopal church, then you joined the Lutheran church? For about ten years. I see. After you were? Eight years. Even after you and Dad were married, you still went to the Episcopal church? No, we were married in the Episcopal church. But you immediately went to the Lutheran church? Yes, I went to Lutheran because I went to Spring Grove, Minnesota and everything is Lutheran there, norwegian you know. You had to. You couldn't take the Episcopal church with you. Hardly. And so you went through school and in high school? Yes. In Minneapolis? East High School and then I went to business college and got a job in a lawyer's office, two lawyers, and then I got married. What kind of work was your father doing now in Minneapolis? He was a... He became a big cabinet maker you said? Cabinet maker and he used to work for, made hearses and... For the undertakers? Yeah, not for undertakers, for the big company. For the big companies? Northwestern Casket Company. And they in their turn sold them to the undertakers then? Mm-hmm. And did you live in a Swedish neighborhood in Minneapolis? No. Predominantly Swedish? There were Swedes, but we had Jewish and German and Irish. We had nearly everything. So when you came out on the street then when you were a little girl, you spoke Swedish mostly then? No, we didn't speak Swedish at all. I said both your parents were talking in English to you? Yes. They very seldom used Swedish? They used Swedish together with them. When they didn't want you to hear or understand? Yes, not... We used to have, they used to say that our house was labeled because they used to serve so many people that came begging for food. And my mother always gave them something to eat. And one time when my father was home, I don't know what made him home because he never was home, but a fella came along and he had a pair of terrible shoes. They were all rags and torn. And my father said, my, haven't you got any better shoes than that? And he said, no, I haven't. My father said, I think you wear my size. Do you want to try on a pair? Yeah. So he went and got a pair of shoes and told his fellow to try them on and they fit him. And he said, you can have them. And my mother was sitting there and she said in Swedish, do you go to the Turkish school? It was a good thing he did it. And he said, that's all right. He needs it more than I do. So there were a lot of beggars going around. Yes, a lot of beggars. People used to come to sell things, little things, you know, but a lot of beggars for food too. And they said that, well, all the neighbors used to have them. But your house was well known then. They spread the rum, I suppose, that they were helpful. Your mother didn't turn anybody away. No, my mother would never turn anybody away. She'd feed them always. Did they come inside the house when she fed them? Yes, they come to the house and the kitchen. And we had a great big kitchen. It was huge. My father built this house and it was a nice house too. And she used to set them down on this great big table, make coffee for them, and soup and sandwiches. So you were used to that, then, a lot of strangers coming into the house. Yes. Nowadays, they wouldn't work? Oh, never. Never. Do you remember if there were any Swedes coming in, did they talk Swedish to your mother? Oh, I guess. There were Swedes. They'd come in and my mother talked to them in Swedish. So at that time when you were growing up, your dad didn't have a car then? No. A what? A car? No. Oh, no. And he said, one time, he said, when we were kids then, probably about 10, 12 years old, I think I'm going to buy a car. And my mother said, no, not as long as a streetcar is five cents. It was a better deal. And we lived right next to the streetcar tracks. So he could take the every morning then to work? Yes, five cents. And he could go all over Minneapolis with that one, I mean, in one direction? Yes. If you can't go on your car, you've got to transfer. And he went all over Minneapolis, 10 cents to St. Paul. And there was electric streetcars? Oh, yeah, I guess so. So did you go often on the streetcars? Oh, on streetcar, every day. You didn't walk? Yeah, but... Well, we walked to school when we were going to school. But when we got to work, we had to walk, we had to take streetcars. And the streetcars were packed. Then you were making money. So you could spend a nickel. Well, we had to spend it. But when you went to school, you had to walk? No school buses or anything? No, no school buses. Did you bring your lunch with you then when you went to school, or did you live close by? We lived close by when it was cold. Otherwise, we came home for lunch every noon. So you were that close then? What did you have to drink then to the sandwich you got as a lunch? Oh, let's see. We used to take milk. So and you were seven girls now in the family? Seven girls. And two boys. Were these boys spoiled by Dad and Mom, you think? Spoiled? Yeah, because the two boys and seven girls. Well, I don't think so. My youngest brother, the oldest one was an undertaker in Chicago. And the youngest one won a scholarship at Columbia University. And he was an architect. And he won a competition for the soldiers' field in Chicago. So he got a big job in Chicago. He made the drawings then for the soldiers' field? Yes, he made the drawing and it won. He was still in school in the last year. Where did he go to school in Chicago? He went to Minneapolis. So your dad, he could afford to send most of you to school and your two brothers went to... Oh, well, they got a course, this and that. And they'd go to MIT or one of the colleges in New York University or... Columbia? Columbia. Yes, yes, he won that. He won that scholarship. So they were gifted, the boys, then? Yes. But you went to business school? Yeah. And you took up shorthand and then typing and regular office, secretary of work? Yes, secretary of work. Was it easy for you to get a job then? It wasn't hard. No, that was during the war? Yes. No, it was before... Well, it was just before the war, about 1917, I guess, or 16. I see. So you got your first application and then you got a job? Yeah. In what company? Oh, I had these two lawyers I worked for, Anderson and Rauch. One was a Norwegian and one was a Jew. How did they work out? Fine. I had a good job. Who was the best of them, the Jew or the Norwegian? You were able to compare the two of them. So how long did you stay with them? Oh, I worked with them for about two or three years, I guess, or something like that. And it was in downtown Minneapolis? That was Minneapolis, a town in the New York Life Building, 5th Street and 3rd Avenue South. That's right smack in downtown. So after that you transferred to another job then? No, then I got married. You got married? Mm-hmm. And that meant no more work? No more work, no. I stayed home. Then I did, I used to do a little work too, not much though. But when my husband was out of town, I'd work here and there. How did you meet your first husband, Glenn Ellison? Oh, I don't know. I met him in Minneapolis, I guess at a dance or something like that. We used to dance an awful lot. Where did you go to then for dancing, the Danish Hall or? All over the city. You were a big dancer? All over the city. And then you were singing in the choir on Sundays? Yes. It worked out fine? It worked out fine. I wasn't the only one that was dancing. Do you think the Pescapadians were more lenient to dancing than the Lutherans? Oh, the Pescapadians never said anything about it. Well, they didn't mix? I know one time I was in the choir and we were going to march in, you know. We had a bishop there for the Sunday. And as usual, I was a little late. I'm always late, you know. Coming home late at night, huh? Yeah. And so I hurried and came in and took off my hat and coat. And the girl said, Oh, she's a soprano. She had to go up in front. And the bishop stood there and said, Soprano? I'd call her a blonde. So how did you know? That coming from a bishop. Were you able to sneak up then in the front? Yes, I had to get up and walk up in front. Sopranos walk first. You barely made it. Well, I made it. Those are nice memories, too. Yeah, I'm sure. So you went to many dances in Minneapolis? Oh, yes. The Seven Corners? No. On Cedar Avenue? I know I heard of Seven Corners. But you never went there for dancing? I don't remember. Wasn't that where Tommy had a jewelry store at Seven Corners and a bar? Probably so. I forgot. Do you remember there were some theatrical companies in Minneapolis? Uli Schratthult. Did you hear about him? It was probably after your time, though. You were probably too old for him. He was in his twenties, probably. We had the Schubert Theater there. And that did a show every week, a different show. But there were not any Swedish? No, no, it wasn't. It was more American and more refined. Yeah. So when you married for the first time, did you buy a house then or did you rent an apartment? No, we didn't. We moved to, we were in Omaha for a little while. You went to Omaha. There was your husband's work. He was in the moving picture business. He was? And then we went to Oklahoma City. And we lived there for five years and he got pneumonia and died there. And then I went to New York because a fellow that I had taken some lessons from asked me to come to New York and get me a job. So I went to New York that winter. What kind of lessons? Were they singing or? Singing, yeah. And I liked it. I liked New York awfully well. But there's one of the girls that came back that had been to one of the shows, and I know her voice very well. And I was there, we had the same coach, and I was sitting outside in the hall waiting for my turn, my appointment. And I heard that voice and it was just like brass. And she came out and she said, I said, well, I didn't recognize your voice. No, she said, I'm quitting that job. She said, it's the worst thing I ever attended in my life. So then I decided I wasn't going to go to those Schubert shows. So she scared you? No, she quit. She quit, but she also scared you then, too? She scared me. She said, don't do it, Ruth. She said, I gave eight performances a week. And she said, I just simply wore my voice out. Did they pay good, though, for the performances? Did they pay you? Yes, they paid pretty well, but I didn't get a job there. So you went back and— I finished in May because I had paid for my training until May, and then I went back and then I had a chance to get married. And his wife had just been killed in an automobile accident. And we were both alone. And we got married that year afterwards. So he was your second husband then? Yes. How did you meet him then? Well, I had a sister that lived at Sprigg Grove. And she was married to the banker there. And we went down to visit her. We had a lovely time, you know. So then I met his wife, too. I got to know her real well. And then after she was killed, well, we started keeping company, too. What happened when you brought home your first date here? First what? Glenn Ellison as a date, I mean, to your home. What did your mother say then? He was English in the movie business. That was completely new at that time. Yes. It was a risky business then. It was nice. Yes, it was nice. But at that time, though, were the old people a little bit reserved for the moving pictures? Oh, well, they didn't say much. They didn't ask you, why didn't you meet a Swede instead? Yes. Did they say that? No. No. No. They had seven girls. They couldn't keep track of them where they were. How did they marry, now your sisters, did they marry non-Swedes also? Yes, the oldest one married a Norwegian. The second one married the banker. He was Norwegian and Spring Grove. Then the third one married, I think he was English. He was from the state of Iowa. They lived up at northern Minnesota, International Falls. Then I married this fellow who was an Englishman. And the other one married a German fellow. And the other one married a Norwegian fellow that was from Norway. So there were a lot of Norwegians in Spring Grove? Yes. More Norwegians than Swedes? Nearly all Norwegians. There weren't very many Americans or any other nationality. A hundred percent. So your first husband's business, in the movie business, was he running movie houses? Yes, he had two movie houses and he also sold pictures for a big company like Paramount. Oh, I see. But he had these two moving picture deals. It was an interesting line then to work with. Yes, it was. You helped out too then? No, I didn't do very much. So after your second marriage, did you stay in Minneapolis then? No, I moved to Spring Grove. You moved to Spring Grove then with your second marriage? That's where he lived. And what kind of business was he in? He was a dentist. A dentist? And my sister lived there too, you know. So we were neighbors and we got along fine. And your parents, they remained in Minneapolis? They were in Minneapolis. Did you join any organizations of Swedish or Norwegian in the background? Oh, yes. Of course, the church was all Norwegian. They had English services though. But you didn't join the Sansa Norway or Vasa or Viking? No, no I didn't. So your only organization there was the church life? Mm-hmm. And the school there too. School also? Yes, we used to do a lot of school work. Were you or your husband on the school board perhaps? My husband was on the school board. So he was a dentist then in Spring Grove? Mm-hmm. And did you participate in any doings of Swedish-American or Swedish-Norwegian? I mean Norwegian-American. Yes, lots of things that were going on that were Norwegian. We joined and helped, you know. Like Søtun and I? Oh, yes. And I taught Sunday school there for 16 years. 16 years? Mm-hmm. Was they in the Lutheran church? Lutheran church. It was the Norwegian Lutheran? Norwegian Lutheran. Evangelical Lutheran church. ALC? Mm-hmm. Your parents now, when did they die? They died in 1944, I think it was. My father died about 10 months ahead of my mother. She was living in her house alone for a little while, and then I had two sisters in Minneapolis, and they didn't want her to be alone. So they sold the house, and she went to live with one of the girls. But she didn't live very long. She just lived less than a year. She died of pneumonia. And they called us up and told us that they'd taken her to the hospital, and my sister and I went up to Minneapolis. It continues next slide. Next slide. He said in Germany we had old people that would die with pneumonia, and we thought it was a blessing not to linger on and suffer for years. That's what he said? That's what the doctor said, and she got, and I went in to talk to her, and I said, How are you, Mom? She said, Hatton Comer snored. So she went back to Swedish then? Yes. So this doctor, he really actually told you that, that he didn't do anything for her then? Well, he took care of her, of course, but she got pneumonia and was very sick and was 80 years old. So she passed away in a few days. So your parents now never went back to Sweden again for visit? No, they never went back to Sweden. Did they talk often about the... They talked about it, but they never did go back. They had to raise nine children. I suppose they couldn't afford it. It was impossible. I don't think so many did travel in those days. No. It was probably impossible. We had some that came over from Sweden that visited us. Some of their sisters and brothers? Well, they were relatives. They'd be in Minneapolis and then they'd come over to see us. So are you the only one in the family that went over to Sweden and visiting? Let's see. No, I guess my sister Esther did too. What year was that that you went over there? We went in 1956. We stayed over there three months. My brother went with us and his wife. Harold didn't think he was going to stay that long, but he said, Well, we might as well stay if Dave is going to stay. We went all over Europe. He went to Norway and then to Finland? Yes, he went to Norway. His name, they took us to the place where his father lived. It was Lovoldstal. It was kind of like a valley, very pretty. He took that name when he went to America, Lovold. So your husband's parents, they were born in Norway, both of them? The father was, but the mother was born just about a half a year or so after they came to America. So she was born in New York. Did he correspond or keep contact with his ancestors in Norway, your husband? Well, no, we didn't have very many. Was he able to speak Norwegian when he came back? Yes, yes, he understood Norwegian. So quite a few up in Spring Grove, they spoke Norwegian daily up there, I suppose, at that time. Yes. Do you think they kept the language longer than the Swedes? Well, there's so much Norwegian in Norway in Spring Grove, you see. So many of them. And even though they hadn't been to Norway, but their parents had been, and their church and the school and everything was very much Norwegian. But on Minneapolis, there was a different story because it was so much mixed up with Americans. Yes, a lot of difference. Minneapolis is the United States. But up in Spring Grove, you could have lutefisk and torsk and torskesappar and everything. What? Torskesappar, what do you call it? I don't know. Lutefisk. Lutefisk, yes. Lutefisk, oh, yes. You all eat lutefisk? Yes, all of us eat lutefisk. So you're not Scandinavian? No, you didn't like, did you like lutefisk? Dad liked lutefisk, but did you like lutefisk? Yes, I liked it. How did you eat it, though, with melted butter or with the white cream sauce? We were both. Both? We'd sometimes fix one way and sometimes another. But most of the Norwegians like the melted butter, though. I think so. In church, they always have. They still have lutefisk suppers over there. Big dinners. Mm-hmm. So how was it now for a Swedish girl to come up in a Norwegian settlement? Well, there weren't very many Swedes in that town. What do you mean? You had to fend for yourself there? Uh-huh. But my sister Martha was there. She was a Swede, and I don't think there were more than a dozen people that weren't Norwegian in that town. I think Oscar Valentine was the other Swede. Oscar Valentine? Yes, Oscar Valentine was a Swede. Uh-huh. You were able to talk with him, then? He'd greet me every once in a while, how's the Swede getting along. So did you like living better in Spring Grove than down in Minneapolis? I liked Minneapolis better. Why? I don't know. I loved the city. You liked the big stores? Yes, uh-huh. But I liked Spring Grove. But wasn't that a familiar feeling, that a small town, you went into the drugstore and the bank and everybody knew each other? Yes, everybody knew each other, and they'd go into their homes and all. It was nice. I never was sorry that I went there. But in Minneapolis, people didn't mean too much with each other, and they kept separate? No, no. Very few knew each other on the street? You knew them and went with them at certain places and everything, but it wasn't like Spring Grove. They had one school there. They have a parochial school, and they still have their parochial school there. Parochial teacher. He's a musician, too, a fine one. He works in church a lot. The high school in Spring Grove, do they call themselves Vikings or...? Well, they do sometimes, but it's an American school. Yeah, but that is the nickname of the football team and so forth. Yeah, the Viking football team. So they like to bring back to their own Viking days. Did you celebrate Leif Erikson Day especially? What? Leif Erikson Day? No. No? How about Lucia? Santa Lucia? No. It was not celebrated in the school or in the community? No. Midsummer? No. How about Christmas now? When it was down in Minneapolis, your father, when did he bring home the Christmas tree? How long before Christmas? Oh, he usually put up the tree about two days before Christmas, and then all the family had to get around the tree and sing. Sing a Christmas hymn. He made a stand for it on himself? Yes, he fixed everything. What was the stand? Was it a tall tree, four or five feet, or...? Oh, it was... Up to the ceiling? Way, it would hit the ceiling. And it was light candles then? Oh, yeah. Real candles, not electric. Were they lit more than once? Oh, we used to light them every night. You did? Mm-hmm. And what kind of ornaments did you have in it? Oh, we had the regular ornaments, nice ornaments. Did you make those? Saved them from year to year, you know, took care of them. Do you have any flags in there? I don't think we had any flags. We might have. We had flags outside the Fourth of July. They were celebrated. Yeah. So how about Christmas, I mean, Santa Claus, did he show up on Christmas Eve? Yes, we had Santa Claus. So how long was he coming before you realized that he came from the lake? Oh, well, he came when we were little, but when we got bigger, he didn't come anymore. Did he show up anymore? Mm-mm. No. So what did he bring then for presents? Oh, he'd bring little things, dolls probably, and this and that, you know, to play with. Did mother and dad get presents too from him, or only the kids? Did your father and mother also get presents from him? Oh, no. Only for the children? We just got some. We had an exchange of presents, so, from the family. And the Christmas tree, what kind was it? Was it a spruce, a short-needle? Yes, it was a regular pine. And did you, how long was it standing up then, a couple of weeks? It would stand up until after New Year's. After New Year's? Mm-mm. And then you danced around it again, and it was thrown out? Then we took it out. Mm-mm. It was the end of Christmas. That was the end of Christmas. And how about the food now? Did the mother was able to prepare different things? Oh, my mother cooked three meals a day, worked hard. Have you wondered sometimes how she was able to do that day after day? I wondered, too, and just did the washing and ironing and cleaning and garden outside in the summertime. And mending socks? Mending socks and everything. Of course, we helped. We had to do the dishes and make beds and things like that. You had to do that? Yes, you bet. Did you help out to prepare the food, for instance, or bake? Well, sometimes we'd help her, like peeling potatoes or something like that. The potatoes, for instance, were they always peeled before they were cooked? Always baked potatoes. Oh, baked? Mm-mm. How about raw vegetables, like salad? Was that common in the home? Yeah, we used to have raw vegetables. Like we eat it today on a salad plate? Mm-mm. Lettuce and carrots. Even when you were a little girl? Yes. Mm-mm. And what kind of food did she prepare for Christmas now? Sylta? Sylta, oh, yes. Sylta, lutefisk, and of course, we'd always have turkey for Christmas. Oh, you had turkey? Always, always had turkey. And then she'd make great big beef roasts. We had to have beef. Of course, she had to make an awful lot for such a big family. But we were the younger ones in the family, and the older ones kind of left before we were grown up. They were staying outside the home then? Yes, they went here and there and got a job here, and a couple got married and so forth. Do you remember if you, on Christmas Eve at noon, dunked the bread in some sauce? Doppa i grytan, have you heard that? What? Doppa i grytan. Doppa i grytan, yeah, I know what that means. You remember that? Yes. Did you do that on Christmas Eve? No. I don't remember them doing that. But you know what it is. I know what it is. I know the Swedish language quite well. Yeah. That's an expression not used too often, so I'm surprised you know it. Yes, I know it. Were you able to have chickens behind your house in Minneapolis? Yes, we had some chickens. You had? Uh-huh, and we used to raise them and then eat them and then get more. Oh, I see. But no pig, though? No what? Pig? No. Oh. And most of the neighbors, they had a chicken coop then with the... Some of them had. Not all of them. Oh. When did they disappear? After the First World War? Oh, I don't remember. I don't remember. Do you remember now if the streets outside your house were paved? Or were they gravel, dirt roads in the city? There was no sidewalks at that time. Yes. There were sidewalks. Oh, yes. We always had a sidewalk. And paved streets? Not paved streets. They finally did something to the streets, improved them, but they weren't paved. They had sidewalks and boulevards. And you lived on the south side, you said? Northeast. Northeast. Northeast Minneapolis. Yeah, that was a big town already then, during the First World War. Oh, yes. A lot of factories and a lot of commotion going on there. Yes, I should say. Do you remember if there were... when you got old enough to work in the 1920s, was it a recession then, 1921, 1922, 1923? Do you remember if there was a slowdown in work? No, I don't remember. People laid off or unemployed people? I don't remember that. You don't remember? You were never laid off from your work? No. I loved my job and working for these attorneys. Real interesting. So you learned quite a bit there of secretarial skill then? I liked it. Secretarian then? Uh-huh. One Norwegian, one Jew. Yeah, that was a good combination. It was a strong team. Yeah. And you were married to your second husband in 1930 when the Depression hit? 1930, in the fall. You married? Yeah. So what happened then? Well, I moved to Spring Grove, of course. And his profession, dentistry, was that affected by the Depression? No, no. He had a fine practice. There were two dentists in Spring Grove. One Jewish fellow and then my husband was Norwegian. And they both got along very well. They had good practices. But could the people afford to go to the dentist in the 30s? Well, I guess they seemed to be busy all the time, you know. A lot of children growing up, you know, that needed work. At that time, your husband was a dentist. He didn't have any technician to make plates, and he did the whole work himself. He used to send them. Send them off? Yes, to Minneapolis and to La Crosse. I see. So he didn't do that kind of work then? No. He only took the pad and then... Oh, he did do plates, of course, but he'd send them there to be made up, you know. So you were not affected too much by the Depression then? Not too much. And you had your own house. What happened to the bank in Spring Grove? Did they fold it up during the Depression? No, they're still running. Still running? His father was a banker for I don't know how long, and he died. And then her husband and his brother took over. Onsgard State Bank. That was your sister's husband. That was Martha's husband. Martha's husband, my sister's husband. Dad's father was a druggist. Wasn't he in... Father's dad? Yeah, wasn't he a druggist in Adams? He was a druggist. Oh, yeah. My sister. So what kind of political affiliation did you have? Republican. Republican. Your father also? Always Republican. And you continue with that? Yes. And your husband also Republican? Uh-huh. What did they say about Roosevelt when he came in 1933? Oh, I don't know what they said about him, but they didn't vote for him. They didn't vote. Did most of the people in Spring Grove vote Republican then? Well, I think there were a little more Republicans, but they've got some Democrats there too. Minnesota is known to be a Democratic state, though, isn't it? I don't think so. In later years, I believe it is. Maybe it is. Hubert Humphrey and Mondale and... It's a long time since I've been living there, you know. Many presidents have served since then. The farming community was Republican, probably. Yes. They had a Democratic labor... what do you call it? Democratic... DL. DFL. DFL, yeah. So you became a Republican then from your father's you inherited. How about your sisters? Were they also Republicans? All Republicans. All of them. But this brother-in-law of mine that lived in International Falls, I think he was a Democrat. He was? Mm-hmm. He had to be very quiet about it all. Yeah. So he broke the ice. Yeah. So did you... well, you had the experience of the travel quite a bit when you were young to Oklahoma and New York and... Yes. You saw the world quite a bit. Yeah, I always did. You traveled alone then on the train to New York? Well, yes, I did travel alone there because I was... had this place booked for me, you know. It was called the... Well, it meant students. Students... It was a place where you lived, had a home. Well, it was like WYCA. Well, it wasn't WYCA. It was a private place. You had arranged it beforehand. You left and... Yes, we did. So you liked New York? Yeah, I loved it. I loved New York. I used to love to go out alone and do this. And one of the girls would go with me and we'd go to this place and that place and we just loved it. But then I was downstairs in the... that... where do you... below where the trains travel. Was it Central Grand Central Station? Subway. Or subway. Subway. And I told my mother I was... I was... had invited... been invited to a friend of ours to spend Christmas. And I was down there waiting for the train one night and they were playing Christmas carols. And I pert... near died crying. And I came home and called my mother and I said, I'm coming home. So you become homesick then? Yes, but I went home but I went back again. You did? Yes, I did. So holidays can be hard on you? Yes, they had played all these Christmas carols, you know, and it was just beautiful, you know, orchestras and singing and everything. So you don't think it was a good choice you made when you dropped out of the singing business? Well, yeah. Well, I sang afterwards too, always. You did? Yes, always. Sang in the choir for many years. I sang here and sang there and I'd sing places. But if you had signed up now with this theatrical company... Yeah, you'd have to go with them. You would have been traveling then. Yes. But she said she didn't like it at all and she said, oh, and her voice was... and she was a lyric soprano too. And I thought, that can't be that girl. It was just brassy. She said, I'm through. So they demanded too much? Yeah. So you came back to Minnesota and you married and ended up there? I lived there for about 55 years. How did you come to Omaha? How did you end up down here? Well... Your husband died in... Yeah, he died 14 years ago. 14 years ago. And then I was living alone in our house all those years and Yvonne and Cal said I should make some plans because it wasn't good with the winter coming on. So we just made plans like that. To sell the house and move down. And they come on, they came on up there and we moved a lot of the furniture down. And I've been here since July 1985. I see, so it's only two years then. No, 86, wasn't it? 86, because it was over a year. 86, because this is 87. And your father, now, he has a Norwegian background. Marshall. Marshall. He's Norwegian. Irish. Irish, too. So you came into the family through adoption? Yes. We were kind of distantly related, weren't we? Well, through marriage. My sister through marriage. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. And I prayed for her when she was a little, little tiny girl. And I didn't ask for her then because I thought maybe I'd have some of my own children. But I asked God to take care of her. And she came to our house to visit once. She was in—her mother was related to my sister through marriage. And, oh, I guess I shouldn't discuss it, but my husband got so crazy about her when she came to visit. You took her under your wings then, too. Oh, he was just wild about her. And before he had said, well, we both were married before, and our husband and wife died, and let's just make this the rest of our lives together. But when he saw Yvonne, well, that was a different story. He wanted that little girl, and that was it. Of course, I wasn't against it, but I knew I had to have his approval. So she came over there, and we were just happy like a bunch of kids. And now you are back in her home here in Omaha. Yeah, back in Omaha. It made it easier, I suppose, when you have the same bloodlines, having the same culture of Norwegian and Swedish, it's not too far apart. Yes. Your husband was Norwegian. Yeah, he was Norwegian. So it probably is easier to understand each other from both sides. So how do you like it down there in Omaha now, then? It's completely different from Sweden. Omaha? I like Omaha. But I do still love Minneapolis. You miss the winters? Miss the what? The winters up in Minnesota? It's cold up there. Yes, it's awfully cold up there. We used to skate. We used to skate a lot, you know. But you don't mind the winters and the cold climate? We didn't then, but I'm sure I would now. But you have a beautiful setting here, all the natural scenery. Yes, it's very beautiful. They have a bigger lot. It's about 147 feet or something like that, Ivan? Yeah, close to that. A lot of grass cuttings. And he works out there all the time, weekends, you know. Well, it was awfully nice of you to want to come over and talk to me about Sweden. I enjoyed it very much. I appreciate this. Do you still have contacts with Sweden? No. Do you like Christmas? No. There's nobody there now that can. No, no, no. It's broken.