 You know, we have 14th of October 1987, I was in together with Vivian Berglund in Omaha, Nebraska, and she was born 6th of January, 1950 in Chicago. Your parents, they both came from Sweden. Right. And do you know why they left Sweden? You have no idea, are they... No. They came from a nation, or... I suppose, but I really don't know. You don't know anything about... I think they came right to Chicago. Were they married in Sweden? No, no, no, no. They met here? Yeah. And you have other brothers and sisters? Just one sister living. And one brother that... No, no, no brother. Brother-in-law, I have a brother-in-law, but not... So you were two girls then? We were four girls in the family. Two of them are dead. They were all born in Chicago? They were all born in Chicago. And your parents, or did your father, what kind of work was he doing? He worked for Kimball, I don't know where he worked before, but I know he worked for Kimball Piano Company for a long time. And you went to school there in Chicago? Yeah. On the north side, or? No, kind of the west side. The west side. I went to school in Oak Park, or yeah, Berwyn in Oak Park, Illinois. And the Chicago area, too. And then I came, when I came to Omaha, I still, I finished school in Omaha. So the parents moved then to Omaha? Yeah. And you know, he got a job here, then in the same kind of profession? No, no, he retired. He was retired then. He retired? Yeah, yeah. So then you came to Omaha, and then you finished school here? Yeah, high school. Did you go to college, or? No, I never went to college. Took a job. Took a job then. Office? Yes. For the government? Yeah, for the Federal Land Bank, Farm Credit, Farm Credit Administration. So there would you be working then with, as a secretary, or? An accountant, really, or a clerk, yeah. In the accounting department, anyway. Well, I guess I kind of moved around. I guess I was in the index, I was in mail for a while, and then I was in accounting, too. And you joined the First Covenant Church down in Omaha? Yeah. And your brother-in-law was a pastor there? Right. And that was during the, there must have been a 30-some depression. From 1931 to 1938. The worst years of the war. Yeah, right. It was not easy then, too. No. So the whole family was in Omaha at that time, then, your father and mother? Well, not the whole family, but the one sister, and the two of us, and my mother and father. So your other sister, she married and moved to somewhere else? There were two others. One was, well, they were both in Chicago, and then they were in different places after a while. So were they active in the church, your parents? Yes. Well, you know, I mean, they went to church. I don't know how active they were. They were old. Old Swedes. Right. Did they talk any Swedish in the home, in your home? Oh, yes. They did? Yeah. Between themselves, you know, they always talked Swedish. Did you answer them back in Swedish? No, I answered back in English. I understood what they talked about, but I never talked. No answering back? No answering back. She was the baby. She was the baby, I see. Twelve years we had her in the next house. So that meant that they probably didn't talk too much Swedish to you. They raised her as much as the parents did. The sisters, yeah. The sisters. Yeah. I understood, but, you know, I didn't. My sisters went to Swedish confirmation, but I didn't, so. It was all English then. Yeah. Were you in the choir at the conference? Yeah. For many years? Still is. Yeah, I'm still in. I'm still in. You have to sing Swedish once in a while, though. We did, yeah, years ago. Well, even now, once in a while, but not too often. Not too often. But, yeah, they used to have one Swedish service a month. It seems like those Sundays, maybe I stayed home, maybe I didn't sing. So you were not able to understand the service then, I mean the sermon? No, the sermons were hard to understand. They bothered you, then, in other words. It was hard to follow along. Yeah, it was hard to follow. And then you got to know Edith Weston. Yes. How did you meet now, then? I was her Sunday school teacher. Oh, I see. So that's how it started. And then you... And then my brother-in-law and sister left in 1938, and I had a job, so, and, you know, still bad times. And your brother, you know, he died and... No, no. He didn't, he just moved away to another church. Yeah. He went back to Chicago. Yeah. He's gone now, but they went to another church, and I stayed in Omaha, and Edith's mother and father were still living, so Edith says, well, come live with us, we got a lot of room. I'm still living with her. Until she came up for mine. Yeah, she says, come live with us, too. I didn't even consult my mom about it, but they welcomed her into the family. My brother's kids didn't know the difference, Ann, Edie, and Viv, but then you know which one was which. And their family did the same to me. I'm invited to a wedding there now, next week. This week. So you've been very close then, over the years. Yes. And you still go to the same church. Right. And still sing in the choir? I still, yeah. Do they use still some Swedish singing at occasions, Christmas? Well, yeah, maybe not very often. A little, well, like Trigari, maybe that's... Even yet, if they sing Trigari in Swedish, Children of the Heavenly Father, they will have a fifth verse, and it's in our songbook in Swedish. Yes. So the Swedish heritage. Have you visited Sweden? Yeah. Together? Fifty-five. Together? Yeah, fifty-five. So were you able to see the birthplace then of your father's daughter in Iqbult? Was it right in town? Yeah, uh-huh. There was a store that my mother's parents had, Sandberg's Store, and that's still there with the name on it. And then we went in that store, and then the person that owns the store now... This is what... They lived in the place that just looked like this. We went through the store, and in the courtyard was this house there. Forskjällsgården. And they lived... This man, or the owner of the store, said that my mother lived in one of those places there. What kind of a place is that? It looks like a big, huge place. Well, it was in the... There was a store in the front, and then the courtyard in the back, and then these apartments kind of around the back there. This place of business that her uncle... Your uncle? Sandberg, your mother's... Well, I guess, yeah. Yeah, her uncle owned... It was quite a large building, and it said, Sunburst Aftertrader. So they still had the name there. It was on your mother's side of... My mother, yeah, my mother's side. Sunburst Aftertrader. Did you meet any cousins at that time? Yes. We were in... Oh, dear. Lund. Yeah, Lund, where I had an aunt and an uncle, and there were two cousins. How did you know that? Did you have contact? I had an aunt that still lived in Chicago, and my mother's sister, and she used to write. They had a sister in Lund, and we visited there. My mother's sister, yeah. That's the first time I ever heard kids talk Swedish. That's the college town, I believe. Oh, yes. No, university. Yeah, university. University. Uh-huh. So what did they say then? Were they interested to find out what happened to the family over here? Well, I suppose your aunt in Chicago had given you information what happened. Well, we were just in their home overnight, just one evening, and then overnight, and that next day. And then we went on. So we ate breakfast at E.T. Gordon. Her uncle worked for the railroad, so we got to be good friends, because I worked for the railroad. Oh, sure, you had something in common then. And he could say some Swedish, English. I know he patted Baby Northern on their knee and said, nice, very nice. Uh-huh. And of course I did most of the talking. Yes, you did, yeah. Because even the cousins didn't. They didn't know all that much English either, I guess. Were you able to understand the people in Skåne? They talk a little bit different, you know, the dialect. I know they do. They have a little twang. No, I had no trouble. No problem. I know when I went to the station, when we got to Bario, we were going to get our steam, we'd come back by steam, dropped in home, or Kungsholm, I guess. My papers weren't with the others, because I got rebate because I was a railroader. And so we'd spend some time in there, trying to get things straightened out. And the station master said, how can you talk Swedish? And I said, they have your dialect, they say it on your compete. He says, nah, I don't. So you had rebates on the travel in Sweden? Yeah. Through the United States? Uh-huh. So they acknowledged your long time of service. So how did you like the Swedish railroad now compared to Union Pacific? Well, we went from Oslo to Arvika on train. Yes. But we were there for a meal at one time. You remember they came in with a cup of water? I think it was breakfast, wasn't it? I think we were around for breakfast. We were in Norway, and then we took the train over. And it was different. It was. Because the Swedes aren't very sociable. But it was quiet. It was quiet. We were sitting next to people. I saw a cartoon of people were on this coupe. And somebody, there were two people that knew each other, and they told a joke. And the cartoon said, the third party says, For jag lovar skratta. Yeah, they asked for permission to laugh at their jokes. Now, do you agree with that? Well, you know it better than I do, because I'm too partial. I mean, I don't, you probably don't think about it. So you could notice that they were quiet and reserved. Oh, yes, very reserved. Yeah, but how were the Swedes over in this country? Were they the same way? Well, there was a little bit. But when over there I heard talk about Amerikansk kultur. I got the idea that you're a bunch of smart alecks over there. Amerikansk kultur. How about you now, Vivian? Did you see the Amerikanska kultur in Sweden? Yeah, I guess. Yeah, but the people don't laugh and talk as much over on the trains there either. If you sit in a city bus, for instance, they don't say anything to you. You just sit there. If I take the bus now in Omaha, they don't talk. Yeah, I read an article that they have a certain amount of reserve. Very seldom do they talk in an elevator. They say everything is quiet. Yeah. They wonder if it's going up or down. Yeah. But that's probably true, though, that the Swedes are a little bit reserved. They don't bounce in right away because it's supposed to be... Du ska inte lägga näsan i blött. It's a saying in Sweden. Do you understand that one? Yeah. Put your nose in... Put your nose in what, water or wet? Lägga näsan i blött. How can you translate that? It does mean water. You don't get mixed up with something you don't know. Yeah, there is. You cannot translate it literally. You can't, no. Don't put your nose in the water. The saying that my father used that I never forget, Den som i lik en gorska, lik en tola. We had to be good sports, and I liked that. No complaining. No. Just like Truman said, if you can't stand the heat, get out of the kitchen. Get out of the kitchen. You got to agree to that one. I certainly do. Even if it was Truman that said it. So you had a good time in Sweden then. You also... Oh yeah, I'm so sorry we didn't go back. We should have gone back. We talked about going back in five years, but we never did. See, I had an uncle living there, my father's brother. And he looked just like my father. And I could have visited more relatives there. I had some relatives in Stockholm. Was there also your first time? Yes. So they buried the second and third time, because then you feel a little bit better. Because then they know you. But I had correspondents with my cousins, so I had no trouble getting... Getting a question. Living in... cousins lived in Stockholm. And I talked to them, but they were sick at the time, so I didn't see them. But there were dentists that married, weren't there? Well, that was in Stockholm. That was that little island there off the west coast of Sweden. What's that little island there? On the west coast of Sweden? Uh-huh. They were both dentists. Sure? Well, I talked to all of them from the restaurant. Well, no, that was Stockholm, Edith. This is another... It's not yet a boy. Gothenburg is on the west side. No, not... well, there's an island that's off the west side of Sweden, and I don't know the name of it. And that's where the two dentists lived. Well, Stockholm is where this one that is SAS was with SAS, a pilot for SAS. You talked to the ones in Gothenburg? No, we never got over there at all. We never got to that island. Or the little... I don't know whether it's an island or a little piece of land that juts out into... North of Gothenburg? No, she said... No, it's down south and then off, you know, toward Finland, off that way. No, that's the east coast of Finland, see. Oh, that's east. Yeah. Oh, maybe that. Is that a little island there? Oh, that's east. Yeah, that's east of Stockholm. Oh, sure, that's what I'm... yeah, okay. Sweden and Norway and then... sure, it would be east, yeah. I don't know why I was saying what... east. Yeah, they lived there. Now, is that an island or is it just a little strip? It's an island. It is an island, see. They were dentists, both dentists, the husband and wife. But we never got over there at all. But we visited her... in Småland, one of the large cities, Jönköping. Jönköping. Oh, that's right. We visited a second cousin. And Huseqvarna. Huseqvarna, sure, they're twin cities. Yeah, a second cousin in both places. They were both living, both the husband and wife. So you saw quite a bit then? So it was, yeah, for the short time we were there, why we... End of interview with Vivian Berglund, Åmar Nebraska. End of interview.