 This is cassette two, a continuation with John and Rudy, The Green Blood, Fort Biden, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So if you... The whole thing has been moving, the rest of all my life, until I had to, I had to quit, because I couldn't make enough money anyway. But you've been doing alright though, in other words, you have got enough money for your subsistence and to live. We've had enough to first secure. You've been able to travel all over the place and see a lot of things that other people haven't seen. Yeah. And still you would take a lot of chances, you know, to quit one job and jump into another one. Well, we never go in debt. We've never had a debt. Our father always taught us, never buy anything unless you absolutely have to have it on time. If you have to have it, then buy or borrow money if you just have to have it. But never be in debt if you don't have to. Because a lot of times we could have made money by borrowing money, but we were afraid to be in debt. And you have seen this in practical life, in other words, you had a lot of depressions behind it. Oh yes, we've had that. And Dad was never wanted to buy anything on time. If he bought it, he said, paid for it, he said, it's mine. And you know, Dad was always great. Any new machinery or anything improvement, he always wanted to see it. He was always for everything modern. A new machine come out, he always wanted to see it and see it work. He had a young mind. So he looked into the modern plow when they come up with something new? Oh yes. Would he let somebody else try it out? Any other company or any place, anything new, he wanted to see it. How it worked? He bought it before it was satisfied? Yes. And he always had the money to pay for it. So he'd never buy anything unless he had just to have it and didn't have the money. Then he'd buy it on time. So when he came in from Sweden, he didn't have anything of farm equipment or anything? He didn't have anything but just his clothes. That's it? Yeah. So then he worked for about a year there at the... One year on the river. On the river. And then he got another job. Yeah, then he got work at the Mony Plow Company. Was he able then to save up a few dollars to be able to buy equipment? Then they built, saved up enough, they built a little house. And then he started farming, say, what on 48th Street where he farmed first? 20. 20. Oh, 20. Springbrook Court. Yeah. Oh, Springbrook Court. Springbrook Court. But then he had to have to sign a note or to get... No, they saved up enough. They had one cow as soon as they could. He bought a cow. Then they bought another cow. But how about plows now and harrows? Well, he bought one down there at the plow. Jim... I mean, what the... They should take that model. That's the model I have. They got that from Lebanon. Because he worked there and had a friend who worked there. He had to buy it and get it. So he was able then to get it very reasonable. Yeah. They paid for it 50 cents on the dollar. I see. He bought it. Then they made some more 13-inch plows. So he got a 13-inch. But he didn't have a 14. They didn't pay much more. They had to decalibrate them. They had to discontinue that model. They couldn't sell them. They couldn't sell them? They couldn't sell them. Why? They went off the market. Had to do on their own. You mean, they cut away their... Yeah. 13-inch. Then they went to 14. You see, that made them obsolete. Just that inch? Yeah. Made them obsolete? Yeah. So then he was able to pick up things like that. He bought that. He bought a cultivator the same way. One that was obsolete. For just a little or none. And they would do the same job for him as a 14-inch? Yes. They did the same thing. It was just the idea that made them obsolete. Yeah. And, you know, they made a right-handed plow and a left-handed plow. And I was in Ohio, and where I was around Columbus, they used the left-handed plow, where around here we used the right-handed plow. Why? There was a different feeling, though, to plow with the left. Well, I've seen it there. It took me quite a while. I've seen them plow, and they plowed all right, but it looked odd. They plowed the... The wrong way. They plowed the wrong way. And also the horses. You could never use the same team of horses, though, with a left-handed plow. Oh, yeah. You always had the horse walking the furrow. I know, but they were a different horse, though. Well, they know how to walk. They know that. Oh, yes. And the horses are pretty smart. So it must have held the odd thought to plow with the left hand. Well, you held the handles there, but they just put the dirt off to the left side and the plates to the right side. So nowadays they have a plow like that, you know, you swing over. Yes, they had them. You know, as a retractor. Yeah, yeah. That's a different thing. And that's the way he refurbished himself then with equipment and implements. Yeah. He picked up... Bargain equipment. And then he never bought anything unless he had the cash. No, everybody... How about the bank now? Did he go to the bank with the money? Did he trust the bank? Yeah, he trusted the bank. How about after 1930, though, when the banks closed? I'll tell you, we started farming, we got out of the bank about $60 we had in the bank when they closed. That's all you had in there? That's all we had in there. Did you lose that money? No, we got it all back. Yeah, yeah. And we started farming down here in Barstow on the 258-acre farm, and we bought a new tractor, had a bargain, plow, two-by-two plow, disc, cultivator, power lift and power tractor. The whole tractor was supposed to sell for $850. What year was that? 1932. He bought the tractor then in what year? In 1932. He bought the tractor? Yeah, we bought the tractor, we started farming, and then we bought the plow, the disc, cultivator, power lift for $850. It was supposed to have been the price of the tractor alone. You got the whole thing in... Yeah, for $850 cash. And there were a lot of farmers went upside down. Yeah. He started out. We started out. Wasn't that risky, though? I mean, did you follow the bank? No, we thought we were better off. Was John, was you two there at that time? My father, John, and me. You were three husky guys. Yeah, and we had rep going. What did you get for the corn in 1933, for instance? We didn't sell any. You couldn't sell it? Oh, yes. Well, see, 1934, that was a bad year. It was very drought. We sold them and we got a dollar a bushel. For the corn? It was a high price. It was because it was a drought. So then you made it pretty good then. We got a rain just when we needed it down there. That was that bug year. Yeah. Well, they had cent bugs, too. And what did you have against those critters? Well, they'd draw the sap out of the corn stalk. I see. How could you kill them? Well, they put creosote around to keep them from going in the cornfield. Around the field, you mean? Yeah. They wouldn't cross that creosote smell. I see. It helped. Yeah. So you got a whole farm equipment set up then in 1932 for $850. And no notes for signing anything? No. Cash? Cash. We bought them from a deer and company warehouse. You see, all this equipment had been out to dealers. And they couldn't sell it, so they brought them in here to Moline. And so they sold them at a bargain price. The tractor had been down to a later affair. And it had run, so it had burnt the paint off of the muffler, and that was all. Who was the bargainer in a deal like this? Your father? Was he a tough one to the— No, John Dunn. Oh, John was the one? Yeah. You were the hatchet man? I had been, yeah. So you know how to get the best deal, huh? So we went to International Harvester and see what they had. And, of course, I hadn't been working on the roads. I had never changed clothes, so I just went down there. He sat with his feet on the desk, and he didn't want to talk to us, so we didn't talk to the international. He didn't want to talk to you? No, he didn't want to talk. Well, we had overalls on. Well, didn't make a difference. Oh, yeah. Oh, it didn't make a lot of difference. With us? No, it had. Yeah, but wasn't he eager to sell? No, he didn't care. He didn't care. He was just sitting there with his feet on the desk. He didn't want to move. He didn't figure we had any money. He figured we didn't have no money. Oh, I see. But you never know. But you had cash in your pocket. We had the cash. But you didn't show them until you got the deal. Yeah. So let's... I went back down there, and I got the prize on it. I had to do what I was making. So I then decided. So he was a territory man, and he came up here. I told him we had to have this and that, and he said, Well, I got a plow. He said, I'll get you a disc if I have to take what I stock. He wanted to make a deal. And so he's a local agent. He's forsaking his commission. The biggest part of it, anyway. So make the deal. So we bought the plow, the disc, and the cultivator. What does that mean? The tractor. The plow and the disc. Yeah. For so much money. And for green on. And I wanted to talk about the cultivator. And then I used to get out of the warehouse. I found out about the ad. Finally had one. We had a potato bar. We had to buy the extra. And there was some. It was a little too high, but it was a big ad. Yeah. And I said, I'll tell you. I said, let me finish my deal up with Fredrickson. That's a territory man. And it was Christmas Eve. I met him in there at 12 o'clock Christmas Eve day. And Fredrickson said, if I ever leave your life, he'll cut down the next bone. I closed the deal. Paid for it. Oh, and you took it home immediately? Mm-hmm. Once you paid? Yeah. So they were eager to have the money in? They had the money to pay for it. We had the money to pay. No. But I mean, John, do you know, they were not afraid to talk to you, though. I mean, he didn't... They wanted to talk. Were they better or more eager to sell than the international? Yeah, they were. So, I mean, I'll tell you. All the time, I looked for bargains. Yeah, same thing. In 1929, John worked in the creamery, in the Fredrickson Creamery in Moldeam. And he had to deliver stores to the stores in there. He got acquainted. He'd buy a little bargain here, a grocery, a bargain here and a bargain there. He always bought bargains. Oh, you never paid the going price? No. I was like an albatross. That's what you had to do. 30, 31, 32. No, 30. Money was hard to get. Damn hard to get. But you had money in your pocket, though, during the 30s. Just, yeah. We always had enough to buy what we needed. Just enough. None that bad. Gasoline was 16 cents a gallon. And I had a Mountie Ford. He'd buy three gallons a week for that. And I had a Chandler car that we used to take the folks out once in a while. So they didn't have a car and your parents? No. You and John had the car? So when did you buy your first car, now, John? In 1923. Yeah, an old Ford. So before that time, you had to walk or take the train or team of horses? Yeah. We done a lot of walking nowadays. And the first car my brother Walter and me bought was in 1919. We bought a second-hand at Bailey. So here you are 98 years of age, John. You are 98 years of age, John. Yeah, I'm 98 years old. Yeah, you're going on the 99th. Yeah. How have you, what kind of diet have you had now? I mean, eating, you eat pork and salt and butter? Yeah, pork, salt, sugar and everything. Yeah, I eat a lot of sugar. A lot of sugar? Three big spoonfuls of sugar to a cup of coffee. So they put you up, huh? I don't know. Well, the pork salt was just... We always put in four spoonfuls of sugar in our coffee. And you drink of the sauces too? The folks did, but we don't. Oh, they did? Yeah. But you never started with it? No, they had coffee for a beat. Coffee for a beat, yeah. Yeah. Oh, we still got, we drink coffee with a lot of sugar. We still got some. I see. A lot of sugar. We don't eat much sugar, we don't eat much salt. We like our salt. You like the salt? Yeah. I see. Yeah, we made a lot of eggs. Oh. And when I worked on the road or in the shop, I always had four eggs a day. Four eggs a day? Yeah, I had always an egg sandwich. I liked that the best. And then we always had eggs for supper. How about bread now? Have you used rye bread or wheat bread? Wheat bread. Wheat? Never rye? No. Oh, yes, we did. When we lived in Barstow, we raised rye. And we ground our own rye. And a neighbor made sorghum. And then the mother and John made rye bread. And John, you mean you could bake too? Oh, yeah. I didn't bake until two years ago. Oh. I always baked sweet rolls. Sweet rolls. Mother was a good baker. John was a good baker. He made zilli. I'm strong enough to eat the bread. I'm strong enough for that. I'm out of breath. My lungs are bad. I see. I can't breathe. So you baked rye bread. Oh, yeah, I baked bread. Bread, bread, fresh butter, fresh buttermilk. And we made our own butter there. And we had that home-made bread. And then that homemade buttermilk, boy, that was delicious. Mother couldn't make hardtack. She made it in Sweden. But these ovens wouldn't work for her. She had to cuck a little and got it. I see. So she couldn't bake it here then? She couldn't bake it in the oven. But probably if she'd had the gas stove, she could have probably done it. So I says, I got my own. I got quite a combination. They were mixed together. I said, I'll make a loaf of bread to a party. They're trying to find out what it was. They can't. You should have started off with the bakery. Get it for firing. Oh, no. I'm not good enough for that. But then I can make a pretty good roll. And he makes the same mixture. He makes a loaf of bread. And then he rolls it out, puts his mixture in it, and then makes a roll and bakes it, a loaf of bread. And it's really good. Well, all in all, Johnny ain't a fancy cook, but he's good. So he was taking care of the cooking then? He made good pie until the war, when we couldn't get sugar anymore. He quit. Oh, we done our own canning, made our own gels? Yeah, we done our own cooking, we made our own gel, we picked our own berries, we've done all our fruit work, everything. So John, he picked this up from Mother Earth? Yes. He was observing. How about your sisters now? Did they take interest in doing as much as you? Well, my youngest sister, she done a lot of baking. But our older sister, we wasn't so much in contact. She done her own baking too, but her husband worked at the Rock Island Arsenal. And so, of course, in them days, we only had the horses. They lived in Moline. We didn't get in contact with them like we did our other sister. It was only at the big holidays and... Yeah, holidays, yes. We got to see them a couple times a year. How about Christmas now? You had a Christmas tree when you were growing up? Yes, most of the time. Father brought one home then? Yeah. The last Christmas tree we had was the last year Mother lived. Afterwards, we never had a Christmas tree. Before that, we always had a tree for her. I see. And she dressed that, or did you take care of dressing it up? Oh, yeah, we done the dressing. Did you put it in long before Christmas? Oh, no, not too long before. The last one we made, we went out in the woods and got an evergreen. It was frozen. We chopped the ice around there, and we carried about a half mile, a chunk of mud, and put it in a tub. So you had evergreens down here around this area? Yeah, there's evergreens, yeah. And it stood up about three and a half foot high, and we had that in the house all winter. What did you dress it up with now? Oh, we had regular ornaments. From Sweden? No, no, we got them here. And then you had live candles? Yeah. No, in the early day, we had candles, but later, when we got the electric, we got the electric light bulbs. So did you have Christmas now with Christmas juleklappar? Yeah, we did. That was Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. Did you have Santa Claus come, or anybody dress up as Santa Claus? Well, they never dressed up later years for that. No, but I mean, in the early years, when you were little, do you remember Santa Claus coming in? Well, no, I don't. No? Did you have a stocking then? No. How about lutefisk? Oh, yes. The last time folks made it was in 1916, when they could buy the unslacked lime, and they made their own lute and lute the lime to take it out. And we've been buying it. We buy it about five, six times a year. We buy it, and it's frozen, and then whenever we want some, we take it. So John prepares that, too? Oh, yes. You make the white sauce then? Oh, yeah. That's the main thing. That's it? You don't like it? Well, a good white sauce ain't no good. You all like that then? Yeah. And herring, too? I don't like the herring that comes pickled. I want to pickle my own. I like it. I make pretty good pickled herring. Where could you buy it around here? You can't buy this whole herring anymore. But back then you could buy it in Molina? Yeah, we could. I don't like the way they pickle it. In different ingredients. How about the church now, your parents, John? We never belonged to a church in this country, but in Sweden, of course, they belonged to the Lutheran. They didn't go to church here? No. And you didn't either? No. And John? No. So you were not confirmed then? No. Did you go to the Salvation Army at any time to listen to the Swedish music? No. When we could on the radio, we used to listen to the Jura Uta out of Chicago. But then they discontinued that up there on the radio. Then we didn't listen anymore. So you didn't go to Jura Uta here on Christmas morning? No. Well, that's early in the morning. Farmers are early risers, though. Well, we had that there, but I didn't like to sleep in the mornings. How about John? Is he an early bird? No. He likes to sleep in, too. Yeah. I got up at 5 o'clock every morning over about 10, 15 years. We had to have milk and done by 6 o'clock. So we had to get up early. We always butchered our own hogs and butchered our own beef, cut it up, took care of it. In the early days, we cold packed the beef. Mother used to fry the pork chops and the roast, or roast it, and then she'd put it in the coxswain and cover it with lard. And that would preserve it very well. And it stayed there pretty good then? Uh-huh. I see. And then she heated them up when she— She heated it up and put it back in the oven in the morning and got it hot. And then you said now your sister was married to Lough Eydon. Moline. Moline, yeah, and he worked at Lough Eydon Arsenal, too. Yeah. You came together then with the holidays and so on? Well, the folks would go to town, drive the horses down to Moline a couple times a year. And then they'd— But they couldn't come this way then because they didn't have any horses at the time? They didn't have any horses. And no streetcars going out this way? No, they only went to Watertown. How about the boat, though? Couldn't you take a boat up to Port Byron? No, at that time, the boats didn't travel. In 1903, folks lived in Cordova, and they had Boa Faggia boats then. I rode on the boat Wynona from there down to Rock Island. How long did it take? Well, I was five years old then. Oh, you could remember it. You mean there was no traffic then when you were growing up at that time up to this area? No, in 1910, they had them—St. Paul to St. Louis, and the Morning Star passenger boat. That's just like the Delta Queen and them. So this road now going into East Moline at 84, there was just a horse drawn— Yeah. When you come to Watertown, you drove the river road down. Otherwise, you had to go up to Warner's Cross and go down. So how about the traffic over to Leclerc from here? In the early day—oh, that was until sometime in the 30s—they used to have a ferry to go to Leclerc. From Port Byron? Port Byron, yeah. They had an interurban that went from Clinton to Muscatine, and that ferry would meet—it would take you back and forth. If you come up on the interurban, you'd come to Port Byron, and if you was going on the interurban, he'd have you over there for it. Because it looks like a nice tall air with the sun going up in the east and it's shining on the— Well, it is. I'll tell you, it's beautiful. But the trouble is we see it every day, and we don't see it. You know, you see it— You have to get used to it. You just have to get used to it. How about in the wintertime? Do you go on the ice over there when it's hot? Not anymore. Not anymore? Uh-uh. In the nuclear plants, the 3M and Clinton Corn, the water's too warm. It freezes over in a real cold, but a couple of days, it's all open again. In the early days, they used to drive the horses across from Port Byron to Leclerc. So you mean those factories, they affected the temperature and the outlet? Yeah. The water's so much warmer than it used to be. So it's not safe to walk anymore? Oh, no, no, no. The last one that I know of was George Wilkins. He used to walk over. He was the first one to walk over. And, no, they drove heavy loads over the ice in the early days. But there was a different—there were no factories and nuclear plants then? No, there wasn't. They say it's only the last 30 years that they've got that warmer water. So they changed it completely. How about organizations now like Warsaw or Vikings? Well, I belong to the Vikings. John belongs to the Switzer and the Vikings. Your parents, did they belong to them? Dad belongs to the Switzer and the Vikings. And John joined the Odd Fathers in 1919, and I joined the Odd Fathers in 1921. Was there a Swedish olive lodge? Yeah, a Swedish olive lodge. Do you still belong to that? Well, we haven't paid any—we don't hear anything from them. So I don't know what they're doing. And, of course, we belong to the Mason. Dad belonged 39 years in Colona. And John has belonged 37 years. You're all active then, more or less, I mean business. So we still belong to the Colona Lodge. And from the Switzer Lodge now you have some hospitalization if you get sick? Well, Dad and—they raised the rate on the old people there, actually high. And then John and Dad quit it. I don't know. I didn't like it, the rate. They'll do it to me next time then, or no. Insurance. I'm all done then. Because that's full? So it wasn't a lot. It was a little off. Big shots. I figured we'd make an insurance company. They didn't like the way the other guys were insured. So I'm just guessing at that part. And there's my father and mother sitting over there. That picture was taken in 1893. And that's my brother Walter and his wife. And that's our nephew, Walter Nordholm, and his wife Betty. And then you have a lot of wonderful wood carvings here on the table. This is your hobby? Yeah. To make tables? Yeah. And John, he wants to? I made this stand here. So you have picked up the raw material for all this work now? Yeah. I'll cut the tree down and split it down where I can handle it on the bench saw and then make it what I want. But you also picked up wood out in Oregon and different? Well, that part of Oregon, that part had been out there, so he gave it to me, the wood. Oh, I see. That's myrtle wood. Myrtle wood, yeah. Oh, I see. And only one place here by, one county in Oregon. That's the only place that grows. Oh, I see. You know, myrtle wood. And so this here table, that's the walnut, the butternut, oak, cherry, mulberry, ragnarok, glued together. Oh. So there. Takes a lot of your time then, since you retired as a farmer then. Well, I had to do something. I just couldn't sit around just idle. So I just picked that up as a hobby. So have you stopped your traveling now? Yeah, we don't travel anymore. But you still drive though? Oh, yeah. So you go into Moline once in a while? Yeah. And the 15th, next week, the 15th, we go to our doctor, Dr. Oppenheimer on 7th Street and 13th Avenue in Moline. Oh, so then you come into the old place. It's changed quite a bit since you started working there. Oh, yeah. Yeah, when I was born, we had Dr. Beal. Then they moved to Port Barn and had Dr. Bruner. And he got too old and then had Dr. Daly. And he retired. And then we had Dr. Strahl. He retired. And now we got Dr. Oppenheimer. And they're all fine doing good health. Yeah. Yeah, he told us from here neck up, we're young. He's from the neck down world. Those doctor roads, they're down there. I don't know if that end ñ Do you have any suites around Moline that you ñ No. You don't go to the large suites anymore? No. Because it's night. The only one that is a suite is Helma Thornblum in Moline. She has all the thornblums? Yeah, she belongs to this fellow's daughter. I see. And she can talk Swedish and read Swedish. Yes. So you see her sometimes? Oh, I haven't seen her, oh, I guess about six, seven years. But I call her on the phone once in a while. In Mississippi now, you mentioned earlier before that you were digging for clams. Yes. Did everybody do that on the river here, or were you only a few that did it? Well, in 1910, the river was low. Some of the farmers drove in with the wagon, where it was shallow, and their family would all pick up clams and put in the wagon. I see. But nothing in the clam was used for food or anything? No, it was only made for buttons. You couldn't eat the inside? Well, they tell me now some of them are eating it, but they didn't in those days. At the time it was just discarded? Destroyed. Could you use it for pig food? Well, we used to put it in barrels and let it rot. That way, after it rotted, we could wash the pearls and slugs out and replace it with a ditch and everyone. I see. So you didn't look for pearls then when you opened them up? No. If you'd seen one, why you took it, but otherwise you didn't. It was in the later stage that it dried and rotted and then dried. How about the fishing now? Well, we fished with hook nets, trammel nets, jump lines, and trap lines. We never used pole lines. My brother Walter, he used to set fish with poles, but otherwise we never done that. The jump line, you bait it and put it in the box and you bait it on shore and you can drop your weight in there and as you go down the river, it goes out. And then you let it lay overnight? Lay overnight and pick it up in the morning. And the trap line, you put that in and you leave it in all the time. I see. And then you... You run long, you bait it in the morning and then you bait it at night when you run it. What kind of bait you used? Well, we used crawfish most of the time down there. Crawfish? We got quite a few eel on them. I see. So you ate the eel then? Oh, yes. But Americans don't eat eel. Oh, yeah. Most of them did. They did? They did in them days. Oh. So you ate it cold? We cooked it there and then ate it or fried it. So there was eel then in Mississippi? Oh, yes. How about the catfish at that time? Did you eat that? Oh, you bet we did. They could be big. We never caught any extra big. We caught probably one eight, ten pounds. But in the early day, a fellow named Jim Vogel caught one between Fort Byron and Lake Claire. It weighed 100 pounds. 100 pounds? Uh-huh. And so he noticed he had a big fish on. He said that took him up the river and down the river. He said, that's the fastest I went in the rowboat. And so he sold it to a farmer out here. And so he rode with the neighbor downtown. And when he come home, he said, you go over to Schaefer's there and carry the hook up the mule and go to Schaefer's and get the fish. Well, he said, damn poor man, that can't carry a fish. So he weighed 100 pounds. His tail was dragging the ground when he would come carrying it. So they could not be used for eating, though? Oh, yes. They ate them. Oh, yes. I've had Brother Walt, when he worked down at O'Quokka there, the dam, he had a 50-pound one. We've had some from that, and that was good. And I made some spoonbill catfish, and that's good, too. So they was cooked, and there was a lot of, there was almost like half a beef, I mean. Half a beef, I mean. They were big. Oh, yeah. There was a big white head. The head weighed as much as the rest of the fish. You would think you'd be scared when you get those old robots. Well, you would, yes. Must have had good line. Oh, yeah, you had to have. Clarence Adams had one. He never got to see him. He used a five-pound perch for bait. He'd always break the hook, the staging, or the line. He never could get him. Five pounds of bait? Yeah, five pounds of fish for bait. And they'd raise in the bottom, then? Yeah. So he never knowed how big that fish was. But it was a catfish probably. Yeah. That's what he figured it was. But they go there in the bottom? They stay in the bottom mostly, yeah. How deep is Mississippi outside here on the channel? It wasn't very deep from, say, LeClaire down to about a mile and a half below Rabe City. There would be deep holes, but in places it was only when the water was low, it was only about four feet of water. But, of course, there was big cavities in the rock that made deep channels in there. But it's mostly sand bottom, isn't it? From Rabe City down for a mile and a half, that was all solid rock. Oh, I see. And we've seen the last raft. They used to float logs down the river and rafts of soft lumber. And we've seen the last one come down. They had one boat crossways in the front end and then one in the back. Sometimes it was pushing down, sometimes it was back. And the front boats stirred the raft in the channel. Why do the tugs push the barges instead of dragging them behind them? I cannot answer that. They must be for steering purposes maybe. I cannot answer that question because I don't know. And, say, my brother Walter, he was a lockmaster at the Rock Island Dam. And he had a book of the history of the Mississippi River. Of course, the engineers had that book. So he was employed by the government? The government, yeah. He started out as a fireman for the Burlington Railroad. And then during the Depression, the railroad business was very poor. So he took an examination at the Rock Island there for an engineer on the river. And they didn't have an opening for engineers, so he took the job as a fireman. And then from fireman, there was an opening to go on the dam. He went on to the dam. Then he was down at the Burlington Dam. And then later he went up to the Fulton Dam. He was a lockmaster up there. And then he come down here to Rock Island for a lockmaster. And that was your brother Walter? Yeah. He was the youngest? He was the youngest of the family. So he never followed the families then? No. Your family to SOC Center? No. Yeah, he was with the SOC Center. He was only about 11, 12 years old, 13, 14 years old. But then moving between the farms, he was not... No. In 1918, he started working for the Burlington Railroad. Oh. How about you now, John? Are you ever thinking about... You never thought about being a fireman or... No....to see the country, you know, from the train? No. No. One time, brother Walter, he noted when he come to get it, where he was going to lay it off. He was in Louisiana, Missouri. Farmers was putting in the grain, nice and warm down there. So when he got off the train in Port Martin, they had a snowstorm. So he lied it down there? Oh, yes. In later years, he spent time in Florida. And when he retired, he went to Florida. Is he still living or... No, he passed away two years ago. Oh, I see. So he retired in Florida? Yeah. How about you now, you and John? Have you been down in Florida in the wintertime? Yeah, we used to go down for a visit, either in the fall or in the spring. Oh. Yeah, we drove about 500 miles a day. So, but you didn't like to live down there all your life? Well, the last time we was down there, we liked it the best any time we was down. But the first time, I didn't like it. Was it too hot or... Well, I don't know. Wasn't used to the country. You know, every place you go, everything looks so much different. How come you settled here now in Port Byron? Well, we would have lived in Kelowna, but they were thinking about going together with Green Rock, and we didn't like the idea, so then we moved to Port Byron here. So you've been in this house now for how many years? 18 years. 18 years. Mm-hmm. All right, so here you can watch the barges on the Mississippi. Well, we don't see too many of them. No? Obviously, that gas tank's over there, and the tree's down here. And I see my brother, he stayed at New Boston. He had a summer home down there, and he knowed all the boats and everything. When he first moved down there, them captains on the boat, they also blowed the horn at him. So he enjoyed the river. Well, I did too. I never had no fear of the water. When we lived down there, I didn't care how stormy it was. If I wanted to go out on the river, I went out on it. I never had no fear of it. You mentioned earlier, Rudy, that you learned to swim. Yes. When you were digging clams down there. But could most of the kids swim in your days? Not the country kids, no. They couldn't swim? No. This man here, he was on the river all his life, and he couldn't swim. This trench though, you would think they would come here sometimes. He was a heavy drinker, and he never had no trouble. But you would think they would think a little bit about going out on the river without being able to swim. How could they rescue themselves? You don't think of that. No, I was with Clarence Adams fishing. It was stormy. The other fishermen wasn't out. He had better catch that day than the other days. He said the water got riley, the fish didn't see the net, they ran into it. Who taught you to swim then? Myself. I stepped in a nine-foot of water. When I come up, I could swim. Very seldom you ever heard anybody ever drown. The one man that drowned in Le Claire, they had a drinking party, and he walked out in the river and drowned. That was the only man that I know. Then a boy slipped off the rock, and the river was high. He drowned. Otherwise, very seldom you ever heard anybody drown. But the river is wide enough to... It's the same now as it was then. In fact, the current was swifter from RAB City down for about a mile and a half than it is now. Because I went over the rock. There's a 17-foot fall between Le Claire and Davenport. 17 foot? Uh-huh. That's a pretty good drop. You see, there's a rock here, then on Camel's Island, and then, of course, in Moline there. And John learned to swim in 48th Street and Moline. So he learned to swim, too? Yeah. Oh, well, I used to be able to swim across Rock River and back again, but I couldn't swim very far in the day. Did they have a lot of parties years ago? You said this guy was a heavy drinker. Yeah. They used to have quite a bit of beer parties along the river. Then they got rowdy and drunken. Oh, yeah, they got drunken. Had a fist-fight? Well, I can't remember too many about them. But they liked to...? They'd have a keg of beer. That cost a dollar. So they drank more beer than whiskey, you think? I can't answer that. I don't know. I don't drink. I'll tell you, when I was in Sweden, Dad had whiskey at home, and he'd give it to his friends there. So they'd set the bottle in there. I got in and I got drunk. I was four years old. So they had the bottle. So there was a bottle, and I took a drink of it. It was spirits of vinegar. It took the skin out of my mouth, and I had a sore throat there for a few days. How about your brother John? He's a little bit older. He used to drink, but he don't anymore. I won't even drink wine. I don't like it. I'm just an honest Swede. What kind of political ideas did your parents have now after a few years in this country? Well, Dad voted after every election and primary. So he became a citizen quite soon. Just as soon as he could. He becomes, September, I think, the 23rd. And your mother also. We become citizens with him. Of course, I was there, but the rest of the family become citizens at the time with the head of the family. That was in September 1898. So how did he vote now? A Republican. Republican. Uh-huh. What did you think gave him the idea of he was effectively working on oil to start with? Well, he said that was his privilege to vote, and he was going to vote. He always voted at every election. And he stayed Republican all his life. Yeah. How about you and John now? Well, we're mostly Republicans, but I'll tell you a lot of times we vote for the men, not the party, because both parties has got good men. So you had no trouble at the switchover? No. We won't vote on the primary because we don't need to tell anybody what we vote. Did you participate in the local election? Yeah, we have. You've been on a school board, for instance? No, no. No. We lived in Barstow. We know all that was going on in the rock town there because we lived neighbor to a guy that was in the racket. And so he told us everything that went on. So you were well informed then? We were well informed. We know both parties. Your parents, now, did they subscribe to any Swedish-American newspaper? Oh, yes. They had a St. Paul paper and the Svenska Tribunen. They had two of them? Oh, you bet. Were you able to read that paper? No, John was. Well, John, you could read it. Yeah. And their mother used to have a magazine that come out of Cedar Rapids. Oh, she had that one? Oh, yes. Just as soon as she got that, there were certain parts she had to read and that right away. I see. It came once a month? Once a month. You didn't read it either, though? I couldn't read it. But John could? Yeah. So he was informed then what was going on? Yeah. I'll tell you how I learned. Mother used to read the stories in there. And I used to follow her. By doing that, I learned to read. As she read the paper, I'd be watching over, reading it. As she was talking, I'd get the word. I learned to read that way. So you discussed with your mother then the story in itself? Yeah. Their story continued week to week. And she read that. She used to read, like the Bertolt Wilde and all of them. And so I liked the stuff, and I'd follow her up. So I got so I could read that way. Sometimes some words I had trouble with. But I could get it. Even I got letters from students, I just stumbled through them. You know what they were. So you got the drift. I got the full drift of it. I forgot that now. And there's a sweet book in my bedroom in there. I picked it up the other day. You didn't read enough. I couldn't get much out of it. I didn't read. And I'm going to get back. There were some people, some students, well, five or six years ago this year, and some of them, just some. I couldn't understand them. And they couldn't understand me. Well, I couldn't say much. One of them could talk American, that's true, but one couldn't. He tried to talk Swede to me, but I couldn't get it. Him or Norsen? No. His dialect was different. Dialect, yeah. I have an idea. They talk different Swede now than they did 50, 100 years ago. I'll talk the old Swede. And I have an idea the new Swede is different. I'm guessing at that. I know the language is a lot different. Words in the language, American, it wasn't when I was a kid. If it was, I didn't have them. Everything changes. Town, city, country, everything changes. If you see it every day, you don't see the change. But when you haven't been there for a while, you see the change. So when you go back to your doctor in Moline here, you see a lot of changes around the road. You come to Campbell's Island and Watertown and East Moline. We've seen a lot of changes over the... And they were farms years ago, weren't you? Yeah, they used to farm on Campbell's Island. So there were no houses on Campbell's Island then? They just... well, they built... they started right around World War I. Then they started to build up single houses? Yeah. The streetcar track used to go across there. They had a bridge there, the streetcars went over. It was nice in the summer there. Oh, yes, it was. In 1917, 1918, I don't know just what all was going on. I was out there in 1919, and they had a big doings on the Fourth of July. They had boat races. So they were big things years ago, the Fourth of July parade? Oh, yes. They had a big parade in Moline. We watched that, and then we went out in the afternoon, went to Campbell's Island. Prosper Park had doings. So there was doings all over. So are people different today, you think? You're talking about the unions now. You think they went too far over the years? Yes, they went too far. Your belief is that they should cut down? How is it to be a farmer today, for instance? Well, I'll tell you, a lot of the farmers are bringing this on themselves. In other words, they didn't have your father's philosophy about just as much money to have. Yes, and I'll tell you, so many. When we farmed, we ground our own feed, and we put up our own hay, and we picked our own corn. Today, they hire for their haul the grain to the elevator. The corn's got to be dried. They pay for the drying, and they pay for storage. We stored our own corn. We didn't pay for that. We didn't pay for drying. So that means the farmer is not doing too much himself today. Isn't that right? He fires all the feed. Today, the farmer will call up the feed and say, Bring me out a ton or two of feed. We ground our own. We had our own. Now he's sitting in the house when they're bringing that out and putting in the feeders. And we bought our tractors. We'd buy a second-hand tractor in the place there. Now they buy a tractor that costs maybe anything from $50,000 to $100,000. A combine, $100,000. Well, we bought a second-hand combine. We got along. Now they want to do everything today and set in the shade for them all. So the farmers are bringing it on themselves. They pay too much for the land. When they went over 400, we'd say the farmers were paying too much per acre. They couldn't pay the interest. And the cost of the feed, there's a seed, the fertilizer, and they couldn't pay the interest and come out on it. The seed corn today costs money. Well, when the hybrid came out, we paid $12 a bushel. Today, you pay about $50 for 80,000 kernels. That's not a bushel. And so much chemicals are used, but we use more cultivators. And everything adds up, runs into money. They could cost $100,000 an acre, an acre of corn there, with everything. Then we planted 8,000 kernels. Now they plant 25,000 kernels. This an acre then? Yeah. Now, you planted 8,000? Yeah. Oh, I see. So you could be able to cultivate them and water them. Well, the later years, we only cultivated corn. But when we first, well, in 41, no, 51, that was the last year we cultivated both ways. So otherwise, we just only, the later years, only cultivated one way. Why did you stop in 1950s then? It was more work with the checker wire. You see, you had a wire, had little buttons on the wire, and it dropped it every so many, say, 42 inches apart. How much longer did it take you to do the spring work when you had a checker wire? Well, that way, you had to stop on each end and move the checker wire over. And then when it come this way, you'd have to move it over. And then when it come to the other end, you had to stop and move it over. So you had to jump off the tractor then? You had to jump off the tractor and get back on. But it looked pretty good though. Oh, yes. It was nice, you could clean your corn. And no chemicals were used then? No, no chemicals. And not too much fertilizer either, ammonia and... No. Well, we started some hill dropping. That was potash, nitrogen, and phosphate. But you didn't use the tank fertilizer? Oh, no, no. No, we just put that on hill drop. That was every time the... That wasn't very good for me. That wasn't so much fertilizer use. No. No. But they put a lot on there, but not too much. Not anywhere like they use now. They didn't have enough to get weed, but they had enough for work. They got to get by on all that now. I don't know if you got to have it or shouldn't have it.