 March 25, 1986, and I was sitting together with Mrs. Eleonora Anderson, who was in Illinois. She was born on the 11th of February in Winnebago, Canada. And if we start now with your father first. Well, your mother came first to Canada. Yes. And there was Britta Matilda Elizabeth Olin. Ja, inte Britta, Britta. One T. Britta. She came from Rödön i Jämtland. Yes. 1902. And that's just outside of Östersund, you know, it's across the Stor... Okay, there was two, two lakes, Storskön. Did she come alone or...? Yes, she came alone. She didn't have any traveling companion. And I believe it was, times were hard in the old country. And there wasn't work and I guess, now I don't know if somebody had encouraged them to come, you know, a lot of the Swedish girls were maids in Canada. And my mother worked different jobs. She worked for the Deaf and Dumb Institute in the laundry room. And then she was a cook for a professor of the University of Manitoba. And I think she had other jobs too, because she was a maid at one time and she got typhoid fever and got terribly sick. But she got over it. And then, well now my folks didn't marry until 1908. And so, I don't know just when they met, but they met in the church because they both went to the covenant church, Mifunzvännen. You asked me some questions. Your mother's parents, what was her father doing? Well, her father was a sailor at one time because he had brought back some bowls from China. And I still have them, they're kind of cracked, but I still have them. And then I suppose that he actually had a small farm in... Oh, what was the town? Because we visited the house that he lived in, and I mean his home. She had, mother had sold it, but I think he must have been like a small farmer when he settled down. He was born, grandpa was born in Finland, outside of Vasa. He was supposed to have skied over to Sweden across the Gulf of Bosnia when he was 18 years old. He was actually a Swede, you know, Gustav Vasa settled the west coast of Finland. So grandpa was really a Swede, but he was born in Finland. And then he went to Jämtland. As far as I know he lived there the rest of his life. I really don't know, but I do know he was a sailor at one time. And how long that was I don't know. Because you see, we were so far apart. In those days, I mean when I was young even, communication wasn't as good as it is today. And so there was just letters written between mother and her father. And in 1936, mother went home and visited her father. And they hadn't seen each other for 34 years. Was she the only child? Yes, in two marriages. Her real mother died when she was born, and her father remarried. And there were no more children, so she was the only child in two marriages. And when she was eight, nine years old, I guess this was common practice. They sent the children to live with other people and kind of work for them and things like that. And my mother said she was fortunate because the people that she lived with and worked for were good to her. And she was able to enter the school and saw that she got confirmed. And so that she had, well she had like grade school education. She never got high school education. But my mother was a very bright person. And so she read a lot. And people would even ask her if she had college education because she just was bright and kept up with things. But, well, after my folks were married they went out on a homestead and you know life was hard. In Canada? Yeah. So you really don't know then how she got this Canada fever? No. Through ads in the paper perhaps? Well that's what I was wondering. I just wondered if there were ads, you know, come to Canada, there's lots of work. Lots of work because you know they really like to have the Swedish girls for maids. Because they were good workers, they were clean. Now when my mother was younger they took the cattle to Fjällen and well they curried the cattle before they milked. And they always changed their clothes. And you know they were so clean about everything in Sweden. What kind of work did they do when she came to Canada? Well because that's the only work they had in Sweden. I mean she had never had the opportunity to do anything else really. And I know she said she worked for a Bund. Well he made them all just work real, real hard. And my mother had to lift a big sack of potatoes and she said she could hear something crack. But you know they didn't take care of them. Nobody went to a doctor or anything like that. So she had a spot in her back that was kind of sore all her life, you know. But I guess we don't understand life like that. No complaints about it. No, no. But you know I just never thought to even ask her why she came. Well you know when you're a child you don't ask those questions. Now I would ask them but not at that time I didn't. So I honestly don't know if it was through... Well you know the Swedish American line, I think they do a lot of advertising in Sweden. I mean going around and trying to get people to come over. She went over Trondheim then of course when she emigrated. I'm not sure. I have her... She probably went to the Norwegian line. I don't know but she said the boat was an old cattle boat. Oh it could be. Yeah, it was you know very bad conditions for passage you know when she came over. So she had no trouble then to get the entrance to Canada there was. Well you know immigration was open in Canada just like it was here you know. So no I don't think there was any problem with that. And why she went to Winnipeg I don't know. Because like I say now there may have been some connection with the... No she must have come on the Swedish American line though because now there was an office in Winnipeg out of the Swedish American line. And I just wonder if they were the ones that sort of started this. Because there was a man in the church, Harlandqvist, that was part of the... I mean he was part of the Swedish American line there in Winnipeg. So maybe that's why she went to Winnipeg but she actually went all alone. And then your father Johan Andersson, he was from Ienviken. In Dalarna. Yes, they didn't know each other at all they met in Canada. Yeah sure. Well I think it was simply hard times. Now my father came from evidently very good circumstances. The farm was very big, I don't know how big it was. And it was a self-contained farm. They had their own granary, their own blacksmith shop, their own everything. So that they could take care of everything themselves on the farm. And it was situated on a little lake. And very beautiful place really. Because we saw it in 72. What was the name of that farm? Klockarnäs. Klockarnäs. And your mother's place was Nygården. Nygården, that's right. That was Aspås where you're from. Aspås, yes. I couldn't think of, well that's where grandpa lived. But mother was actually born under Edun. But they lived in Aspås then later. But I lost my train of thought. Your father's background was pretty good you said. The farm itself was apparently a well-to-do farm. But times were so bad and I guess it couldn't support everybody. And my father was, well when we were in Sweden even they had nicknamed him the inventor. He apparently had a very good mind and was trying to do, you know, to. But he went to, why he went to Winnipeg I honestly don't know. Was there a big family there in this family? No, he had a half sister. Now I don't know if it was his mother or his father had been married twice. And he had a half sister who was a teacher in Sweden. And he had a cousin that was a patrician. Patrician Val, he was, I don't know what you would call him. He wrote, well he was an author of teacher's books. He wrote ten books for teachers, not for the pupils. I mean the family was apparently pretty well educated. And of course the younger people now, he would be like a grand nephew of Patric. He played the organ in Domkirkan in, where? I Falu? No, I don't think it was. But I mean they were well educated people and my father came from that kind of background. And he, even my dad was so well educated he could do like double entry bookkeeping. They called it Italian bookkeeping but it's the same as we learn, you know, full accounting like. But when they went to Canada they didn't know the language. And people weren't, you know there was no such thing as a school to go to like it is now to learn the language. So they had to pick it up themselves. And so just to keep bread on the table he worked in a blacksmith shop. Which was unfortunate because he had a lot of education. But life wasn't always good to them, you know. So when he came, he didn't have any to come to? Not that I know of. Oh no, no relatives. No relatives at all. No, nobody that I know of. So he bought his own ticket then? How many cousins was he had? He had 42 cousins in Sweden. So they were other children too then in the second marriage maybe? Well, no. Uncles, his dad had brothers you see. Yeah. And now I don't know, in fact I honestly don't even know what my father's name was. Because you know he was Anders Søhn. And no. I don't know what my dad's family name was either until we went over there. Just before we went over we found out it was Bergeson. I wondered if my father's name was Ericsson. I often wondered about that. But you see those things, they go back so far and of course you know. Well I really didn't know how to ask people in Sweden the questions that I should have asked. Because I didn't expect to find anybody. See we took a trip to Envik when we were in Sweden. And we weren't prepared to find anybody. You came on the Nolsten. Well I didn't know anybody to write to see. My mother had been writing to some of my father's cousins. But they were dead so it was the children of these cousins that I met. The whole town was related to you. So you found a lot of relation there. Well but you see when you come like that you don't know what to ask. Now there was a cousin, now that old Ericsson he was a cousin of my dad's. But he was 85 when we were there. Did he remember then that your dad was the inventor? Oh he was the one that said it. So what did he do then? Well I guess different things. Well okay right there is the sugar tog in there. But where is the sketch for that gasoline engine? Oh yes I have a blue... Well show him how it's made. The house where grandpa was born was torn down. But the house next door they said was exactly like it. And so we have a picture of me standing on the ground. And then a picture of the house. Well you know they were those kind of square houses. Well they built them out in the east here. They really... salt boxes they called them. And then of course when we went from Vasa Finland to Sweden it took us four hours on the boat. Can you imagine him skiing over? Just think what a trip that was. But then of course my mother's home where her father lived we were in the home. She had sold it. But the people that had bought it they had kept the living room and everything the same because they liked old things you see. And grandpa had a beautiful birch desk. It was just beautiful. But it was too much to move you know. So the lady had bought it. But she was as proud of it as if it were her grandfather. And on your father's side now you found out quite a few things from this cousin. Well not really an awful lot of things except that there was a small house on the same property that my father lived in until he left for Canada. And now my father's parents were quite old when he was born he said. And so I didn't really find out a whole lot about it. But he... and why he left I don't know. I think it was like I say just hard times. And places couldn't keep everybody. You know because I really don't know. Now I didn't get into my father's home because the relative that owned it now was in Stockholm at the time we were there. So nobody opened it so that we could see what... Did they stay in the same relation though? Evidently yes. You see there was all these uncles and cousins and that. And one home that we were in was a new home. The lady said that it was part of Klockarnäs. And it seemed to me like it was miles away. I don't know because I guess it was a real big place. And she said that they had bought the land from an uncle. So I don't know what the relationship was actually. My father didn't talk much about it. In fact I guess a lot of them were unhappy when they left Sweden. So you have no idea when his father died or anything like that? No I don't know any of those things. In fact I think his parents were dead before my parents were married. In fact maybe the parents died and maybe that's why he left. I really don't know. But he had this sister who was a teacher in Sweden. And they corresponded with her. But now she was older and she died in the thirties I think or something like that. So you have really no contact after that. So your mother took on different jobs. And then she met your father. And they married in 1908. Yeah, so mother was 25 when they got married. Yeah that's right because she was 19 when she came and six years later they were married. And your father now, what kind of work did he get when he came? I don't know what he did at first. I really don't know. I know that after they were married he worked in this blacksmith shop. But he must have done something before that but I really don't know. He was a full fledged blacksmith when he came. Well he could, yes, he could do, I guess he could do most anything he wanted to do. They lived in a suburb of Winnipeg for a few, well I don't know, maybe three or four years. And then they took a farm, a homestead near Ericksdale in Canada. So they married in the covenant church you said in Winnipeg. And in fact the minister that married them, his daughter, was married to a funeral director that lived in Chicago. But you know what I say, as a child you don't really, these things don't mean anything to you and you don't ask the questions. You hear names and that. But of course I knew this lady in Chicago and it was her dad was the minister that married my folks. But well the homesteads, you know they weren't the best land and so things went bad there too. They started out with very few things there on the homestead of course. Well. And the clear land or? I guess, and I know my dad hunted game, birds and that even for food. They didn't just go shooting for pleasure, they hunted for necessity. So you were born on the homestead? Well they lived on the farm at the time I was born. But they went to Winnipeg, Canada, I mean so I was actually born in the hospital in Winnipeg. I think it was about 90 miles between Ericksdale and Winnipeg. And yeah let's see, I was, well they finally gave up that homestead, sold out and then my dad worked for a farmer in another small town, Minnadosa, which wasn't far away. And because I went to school, well I started school at Ericksdale because I had a brother four years older and we had an Indian pony and we had a, in the wintertime we had a sleigh and my brother of course drove the horse to school. And so when it was warmer weather we had a, I suppose, I don't know what you would call it, a little buggy I guess. And so I was about nine years old then when we moved back to Winnipeg. So you had started school in Minnadosa? Oh yes, I started school. Was there a one room schoolhouse at that time too? Well you know, I guess when you're little everything looks bigger to you. I really can't remember. I have some pictures and it looks like basically a one room schoolhouse because it's a picture of my brother. I don't think I'm on any of the pictures but when I suppose class or something. And yeah, they were small schools I'm sure. But we must have had good teachers, we learned. So you had no trouble coming into Winnipeg school system? Oh no, none whatsoever. Were you still speaking Swedish then? Well, see I learned to speak Swedish when I was a baby practically, you know, because my folks spoke Swedish at home between themselves. Well then when we started to school, both my folks learned English. In fact my dad learned English so well he was on the school board and things like that in Eriksdal. And my mother learned English also but she had a little more trouble writing it. But she learned it quite well. So that when we started to go to school they didn't really speak Swedish so much to us then they started to speak English. I guess they felt that if they were going to be Canadians they were going to speak English you see. And no, I had no language problem whatsoever because I had learned English at home too actually I suppose. Because I remember my mother said one time when I was, oh I don't know, I guess I was about four, she said I was standing on the road. Is this the vag I take to Eriksdal or something? I said it was half English and half Swedish. Because she remembered that and she always laughed about that. And I don't really remember any of my teachers or anything when I was that little. I remember them after I got older but in Eriksdal I don't remember much. Of course I guess when you're a farm child you learn. I can remember my mother taking me out in the woods and she showed me a bird's nest. She lifted me up and showed me a bird's nest with the eggs in it. And she said now don't you ever touch that because if you do the mama bird might throw the eggs out. And things like that I remember. And we picked wild cherries and well Saskatoons is a high bush blueberry. It's like a blueberry but it grows out of high bush. And in Canada we call them Saskatoons. Here they call them high bush blueberries. And we picked those things and they were good food. Yes. So those are the kind of things I really remember more than anything else. How many brothers did you have? I had... Well actually there was one boy born and he died when he was nine months old. And then my brother Ted was four years older than I. And then I had a... Then there was a girl born who just lived a short time. She had a physical problem. And then my brother George and my brother Roy. Six children. Well I was third in line. Because it was Martin and Gunnar and me. I was third in line. Yes I did because I was the only girl. And I did help my mother a lot. In fact sometimes I resented it. I used to think, well the boys always get out of it and I have to do the work. So the things you have now say from the time? That's from grandpa's. Well hi puss, what are you doing? Did your mother now, did she use some of those? Well I suppose they did. You know what I mean? When they were young at home naturally. What did she carry over from Sweden of cooking and doing things in the kitchen? You mean her ability? Yes I mean like baking and... My mother was a very good cook. She had, you see I guess these people she worked for when she was eight, nine years old. She lived with them. Now I don't think she lived at home, I don't know if she lived at home when she left Sweden. I think she lived with those people because she worked for them and they gave her her keep. She evidently had learned a lot about cooking and that. And of course like you know they made, like when they took the cattle to the mountains. Well I suppose she was 15, 16 years old when she did that and learned to make butter and cheese and you know all the things from milk. And I really don't know if she had special training in cooking or not in Sweden. But I do know she was a cook for a professor at the University of Manitoba. And she always was a very good cook. Did she have to learn to cook Canadian style? Well I presume you know because Swedish measurements have always been metric and Canada was like here. We didn't have metric system in Canada either you see. So we had to, the measurements and that you know. But you soon learn that. What was in your home now? Did she bake knäckebröd or tunnbröd? Do you remember? I think maybe they did a little out on the farm. But you see I was too small. But on the farm now they butchered and made all the you know head cheese and things like that. And of course smoked their own hams and did that type of stuff. And then of course they made that blue pot which I never liked. How about the rest of your sisters and brothers? Did they like the blue? Well of course you know we were small but you know I was only nine when we left the farms. And I don't know how old I was when they sold out the homestead. I don't remember that. But now I never liked lutefisk either but my oldest brother loved it. But I never liked it. So it. Side two continuation with Eleanor Anderson in Illinois. Side two. So some of that cooking have you carried on today? Well everybody says I'm a good cook. So you know how to do it. You've got all the tools for it. The old tools, I haven't used them. Well you see people don't even know that the sugar came in cones. And then I said they broke it up in the mortar and pestle to get granulated sugar. You know we're used to having everything at our fingertips. Do you remember that your dad or mother drank the coffee on the. Put beet? Yes. They did? Yes. You know I think that's why they learned to do that. Because rather than break it up they put a piece of that cone sugar in their mouth. And then when they got lump sugar to buy it was a little more natural to do it that way. I really think that was why it came up. So they enjoyed the coffee. Yeah. For me. Yeah once in a while but oh in the later years. Do you remember if they poured it on the saucer and drank it? Yes. Yes I've seen that too. But then for years my dad didn't drink coffee. And my mother wasn't one that had the coffee pot on all the time. She made fresh coffee and enjoyed that but she didn't have the pot on the stove all the time. You know even on the farm where a wood stove would be running all the time. She was not one like that. She wanted nice fresh coffee. And of course when you had a party you made it with egg in it and cleared it. Oh they would take it? Yeah. You know the egg coagulates and it absorbs the grounds and everything. That's why it makes the coffee so clear. It doesn't really do anything to the flavor I don't think. It just clears it. And food mother was fussy about. You know what I mean. It had to be good fresh things always. Were there other Swedes that came for a cup of coffee? Oh well yeah I suppose. Were you living on the homestead for instance? Were you isolated from other people? No they got together quite a little bit. Yes there were other Swedes around there. In fact for years I kept up with the children of the people that were on the homesteads there. And some of them I just remember the names. You know who lost track over the years. But I kept contact with a lady. I don't know if she's died now but she was getting old in Canada. That was one of the original neighbors on the farm. And then we had people in Chicago that had been on their parents were on the farm. And these were the children that had moved away. We kept contact with them. And they got together. I guess they had their fun when they were young. I know they were active in church. Like I said dad was on the school board. I'm sure that their life was happy in many ways. Probably they didn't have a lot of material things but that didn't matter so much I don't believe. And there they had the covenant church and the Baptist church and the Lutheran church if I remember right. Well in Winnipeg we had this was four corners. And we had the Salvation Army and the covenant church and the Baptist church. And I don't know what the other one was. But there was a church on every corner. Of course I was old enough to remember that because I went to Sunday school and that in the covenant church. You were confirmed also at the covenant church. But I was confirmed in Chicago because we left just at the time I should have been confirmed. I was like a year older than the others but I was confirmed in Chicago. Of course you see prior to 19... What I don't know what year. In Chicago they dropped the Swedish. You know the covenant church kept the Swedish language up until almost 1930. And now here in Moline I know it was 1936 or something before they finally dropped it all. But yeah so my brother was confirmed in Swedish and I was confirmed in English. But well I guess it's hard to give up what you came from you know. Your parents did they have any newspapers? They had my phone sending? Yes. So the covenant headquarters? Yes they had my phone to them. Mother of Austin? Yes and well let's see. What was this? Oh Swedish American. Well mother had that here I guess later on. Yeah. Swedish American Tribunen. Yes. But of course you see there again I wouldn't have been aware of what actually they had. Now I do know that my father's sister sent nice publications from Sweden. Beautiful little children's books and things to my little brother when he was old enough to start to read. And she sent lovely little things like that all the time. But you know as far as newspapers well you're not really aware of that until you're a teenager more or less. You know what I mean? But my folks read a lot and kept up with things you know. Well in fact my mother was 82 I think or something when my brother gave her a camera. Well anyhow the first flight that was I don't know was an Apollo flight. She took a picture of the television of that flight. She kept up with everything. She really did and even in cooking she was real modern in the things that she learned. She learned all the new things. She wanted to keep up with things. Did your parents belong to any Swedish organizations? No. My father had some objection to clubs or that. I don't know if it was it must have been a religious objection because I know even when I was in school I guess I just belonged to what was called the French club because I learned French. And he was very opposed to anything that was a club. Well you know there was a time when the churches were very strict about things. My father was a very strict man about upholding the beliefs and that. My mother was a little easier going you know. But dad was pretty strict so he didn't believe in clubs or that or organizations. He didn't believe in passwords and stuff like that. Yeah very much against anything like that. Even like the Masons. Well of course the Covenant Church itself even when I became a full-fledged member you took a vow that you didn't belong to any secret organizations. And so I presume that's why they never you know. Now my mother in later years belonged to the Women's Christian Temperance Union. But dad never you know just didn't believe in that I guess. Did they have any, how were they insured now in case of sickness and disability? Well that was another problem. Dad didn't believe in insurance. Because at that time we joined those organizations. I know they did and dad didn't you see. And so when he died there wasn't much for mother in a way you know I mean. But she lived with me for almost ten years before she died. Everything worked out anyhow. But no he, see that was one of the problems you know. But everybody I guess has their own beliefs. Yes very much so. So then the family moved to Chicago. Why did they? Well you know depression see because we moved. Daddy couldn't find any work in Canada and in the fall of 27 he went to Chicago. Now we had a lot of friends that had been in Canada that had gone to Chicago. And don't ask me what kind of work he did boy I don't know what he did. I guess he took any job he could get really. So hard times hit earlier in Canada than in the United States. Well it was getting tough in the United States. But you know the stock market didn't break until 29. And a lot of things were starting to tighten up I think even before that. But the ones that had money weren't concerned until that hit. But so in January of 28 the rest of the family came down. I remember mother had to sell everything and pack everything. And I guess it was quite a job for her. So dad left for... Well he left to find work see. And he had some kind of a job but I don't remember what he did. Oh well eventually he became a lathe operator, woodworking. And he worked for a company on the north side of Chicago for a good many years then. But I know during the depression he worked on a garbage truck or anything just to work. Because he was proud. He wasn't a man that wanted welfare. And he worked hard. He had no trouble coming into the United States and Canada? Oh no, no. Well there's never been any trouble between the United States and Canada really. No, you immigrated, you got a visa and went just like you do to any other foreign country really. And like I said we probably settled in Chicago because we had many friends that had been in Winnipeg and had come to Chicago. In fact we always had... We called them the Canada bunch because whenever there was a birthday or a party we had maybe 35-40 people that would get together. They were all originally Canadians. Well a lot of them were originally Swedes but they were Canadians too. So you came down then the year after? Yeah, see I was 14 when... Do you remember them when you... Oh yeah, well sure. You had to be one of the packers. You bet. Of course I was already in high school so I had to start high school in Chicago. I mean go to high school in Chicago. I had been going to such a wonderful school in Winnipeg. I really hated to leave that. It was a brand new school and it was called Daniel McIntyre Collegiate Institute. It was better than a high school. Well, I had so many credits when I came down to Chicago that they didn't know what to do with me because we took so many subjects and I had been good in all of them. So your education was far ahead then? Yeah, Canadian education was superior I think. I don't know, there was a different standard I believe. Were your big classes up there? Oh, well that was a big school. I don't really remember how big the classes were but I know we had fine instructors. And one thing I remember, we had two black students in the school. In the whole school. Were you right in Winnipeg? Yes. No, I lived right in Winnipeg. You had an apartment there then? No, we rented a house. You know, you could rent whole houses. I guess my folks never bought a house then because I guess rent was cheap in those days. Yeah, we had a whole house, downstairs and upstairs. But you know, things were getting rough. So your mother didn't work then after she got married? No, she didn't work out of the home. No, she stayed home. And of course, you know, there wasn't work available really that much for women in those days. And you know, that was before the ERA and all the stuff. You know, mother was expected to stay home and take care of the children and take care of the home. That was her job. You bet, that was her job. And other women did the same thing, I suppose. Well, as far as I can remember, my mother's contemporaries didn't work out of the home. Because we had one family, especially that was close friends of ours, that they had the same family set up as ours and they were about the same age and everything. I mean, there was three boys and a girl and the parents were just about my folks age. They had known each other in Canada and that, but they never worked out. The mothers, none of those women ever worked outside of the home after they were married. I have a friend now that I write to in Chicago who is, oh, I suppose, 86, 7. And she never worked outside of the home after, you know, that was their job. And of course I don't think people demand it as much as nowadays. You know what I mean? They're going to have their boats and their trailers and, you know, we didn't aspire to those things. And of course, well, people just couldn't afford any of those things and they didn't look for them. So, no, I think, you know... They say they can't afford to stay home. I know, I know. But Malvins niece, she has stayed home and she's raised two lovely young people. And she said, I think there would be less trouble with the children if the mothers were more available. And I think she's right, I really do. In fact, I think in God's plan it was that mother was around the children and that. I mean, sure, people have had to work, you know, just to get along, I mean, just to make a living. But somehow it seems more natural that the mother would be home and available when the children are there. So you took the train then from Winnipeg? Yes, we took the train. And you sold those? Well, yes, you know, when you think about it, you know, a lot of things that they had... Well, of course, you couldn't take furniture and stuff like that, you know. Yeah, you took your personal effects and that was about it. And I can remember we rented an apartment in Chicago and I guess... On the north side or...? No, we lived on the south side. And I guess the stuff hadn't all arrived and my mother didn't have a coffee pot so she cooked coffee in the frying pan. Well, you know, you just do things like that. Yeah, you just do things like that. Well, I don't know. I don't know if life was better because we came to Chicago or not. So all the children were along then? Yeah. No one stayed? No, nobody stayed behind. And your father, had he rented an apartment then or a flat on the south side? Yeah, he must have rented that. That must have been... Now, I really don't know if he stayed with somebody or not. Like I said, we had a lot of friends there and maybe he stayed with somebody and then... Did he get help from the church people, you think? No. Did you go to Grand Crossing area or Engelwood? We were in Engelwood. So the family joined the public church? Yeah, and we went there for... Well, of course Engelwood moved out south, you know, they became Redeemer Covenant Church way out south. You don't remember if they got help from... Oh, no, I don't really know. Of course, you know, unless you ask for help, I guess they don't know you need it either. You know what I mean? Or do you want to ask for anything, unless it was actually needed? Yeah, and like I say, he worked, but you know, also at that time the problem was that they didn't even want to hire people that were over 35, if you know, depression years. But they had already done that. Oh, you bet. They were... That was... You know, you were too old if you were over 35 to work even. So it wasn't easy to get work, but then of course my dad was a good woodworker, and so he worked for the Highland, Nordem Highland, I think they were called. And they made the plaques for trophies, the wooden plaques that trophies are put on. The stands, more or less. The stands and some of them that sit on a wall, you know, that they have like different shapes than that, and the wooden plaques. So then he worked steady then for many years until he retired. But before that, I mean right in the interim when we first came to Chicago, I'm sure things were rough for them. And I know, I don't know, I never was hungry, you know, because mother, like I say, was a good cook and I guess she could take anything to make it taste good. In fact, when I got out of high school, car fare was five cents in Chicago. We didn't have five cents, we walked. Us young people walked all over, you know. I remember one time we walked to 79th and the lake because I had a girlfriend that lived down there and we walked down there to go swimming. So I guess that's why I got strong legs to this day. But you know, I mean, you didn't fret about it, you just did it. That's all. We didn't feel sorry for ourselves. We didn't have anything, you know. Of course then after things, well, it was a good many years before things really picked up, that's for sure. So you spent the whole depression era then in... Well, I moved down here in 1950s, so yes, the whole depression time really was... In 1928? Yes, so I lived 22 years in Chicago. And how was the change now from the Canadian school system into the Chicago one? Did you... Well, I think that I've probably... The biggest change to me was that there was probably a little less personal attention to you as a student. The classes were so big in Chicago. And I think our classes were quite a bit smaller in Winnipeg because... Well, like I said, that was a very big school that I went to, but it was new and... We had a lot of teachers and I think the teachers moved from class to class. Now in Chicago we had to move to the teachers' room. And I'm not really sure, I don't really know that I remember exactly. But I think there was a more impersonal situation in Chicago. You had to work on your own totally. If you didn't do it, nobody cared. In a sense was the feeling I had. Oh, I'm sure the teachers cared about some of them. But then, of course, as I got more familiar with things too, it was easier. But I remember I had a teacher that... I think it was English class. I had a teacher that asked where I was born and I said Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. And she said, well, that's Manitoba, she said. I had only lived there for 14 years and I pronounced it the way we always pronounced it. And she tried to tell me. Naturally it disturbs you when you're young, you know. But now I laugh about it. I just think it's funny that anybody can be so cruel to a child. She knew better. But of course I was... I'm not bragging, but I was a good student. So it didn't affect you anything then because you were working your pace? Yeah, well, like I said, when I came down... See, I'd only been... I took grades four, five and six in two years instead of three. So I was younger too than the other kids. And then I had so many credits that they really didn't know what to do with me. I mean, because I had passed all these grades, you know, these subjects. And so I was just probably a little out of place, you know. And being a year younger in high school is not an easy thing. You do not fit in with the other kids. So socially I didn't have much social life in high school. But of course I had my church life, you see, that was the difference. But I graduated in the upper tenth of the class. And there were, I think, 852 graduates when I graduated. You know, schools in Chicago were awful big. So you didn't have to spend too much time in the Chicago schools then? Well, I graduated in June of... 30? Yeah, I was just about 16 and a half when I graduated from high school. Did you continue out of school then, business college or anything? Well, of course, you know, we didn't have any money and nobody told you you could borrow from the government at that time. But I went to evening school. And of course I got work. I worked for an outfit that packaged food. I could remember I had to pack pickled herring in a jar. But it was work, you know, and of course it was just a kid out of high school. And then I didn't last there very long. I guess I just didn't like that. And I did no office work, you see. So I could do typing in shorthand. And then I got a job. It was really a mail order outfit. And I worked there and I did mimeografing and everything there. But you see, we were so poorly paid in those days. Those years of depression, nobody would believe you. I was supposed to make two dollars a day. If I worked five days it would have been ten dollars. But half the time I only got three days in maybe, you know. But then I gradually got out of that. And then I went to work for what was called Sterling Fuel Oil. They sold fuel oil to homes and motor oil to companies and that. And gradually worked out of those things. But I went to evening school and studied accounting. In fact I went to Northwestern and studied cost accounting. And we were two girls in a class of 52 people. The rest were all men. Two girls. So they were not acceptable then? Well, you see... Why was it? Well, you see, it was just in the time when women were beginning to... Come into the workforce? Yes, to any great extent, I think. I really think so. I think prior to the depression women were more teachers and nurses. And that line of work. And so that it wasn't... So you would think secretaries... Well, yes. I suppose there were secretarial jobs. But you know, unless you had access to them you didn't get a good secretarial job. But then after I studied accounting I got better work. In fact I worked for an accountant and did auditing for him. Did you learn to type in high school? Yes, I did. No, I didn't take typing in high school. But when I got through high school they offered us a business course if we had good grades. And it was free. See, they were trying to do... Yes, they were trying to do things for the young people in the depression. You know, I suppose that the depression hurt the school incomes and everything too. But... So I took this business course after high school. And it was given to us free. And we learned typing in shorthand and office procedures. You know, filing and all of these things that are necessary in an office. So I learned all of that there. But then I took accounting in evening school and learned that. But... I had my... Now my oldest brother, he became a tool and die maker. And... Well, he was very bright in mathematics. No. Now he also took it in evening school. You see, we didn't have the money to go to college. And... But I found out later years that you could borrow money then from the government to go to college. But people didn't know it. Well, your school... How could you borrow money then without any collateral? Well, I guess... But I don't know. I guess that was... At least that's what I heard that you could. Well, of course. Do you think the students had any collateral that they borrowed that owed the government now millions of dollars? They didn't have any collateral. Listen, a fellow worked with me. I worked in the assessor's office here. I worked for almost 14 years in the assessor's office. I worked in Moline first and then I worked in South Moline. And... We hired a young man to take pictures of houses and that to see you have to keep up your appraisals of your houses and that. And he had borrowed money from the government and he had taken a course in dramatics or something. I don't know what. He had gone to college and that. So he filed bankruptcy so he didn't have to repay the debt. And you know, that makes me furious because, of course, I never borrowed from anybody, you know. You learn to be independent. You are, I guess. A different morale to that. I guess so. I guess so. But... And you are sisters and brothers now that followed... I had no sister that lived. The sister that...