 I'm sitting here in Tewsbury, Alabama on January 28, 1987, talking to Lloyd S. Howard of Norwegian background. Lloyd, could you tell me a little bit about yourself? First of all, were you born here in Tewsbury and when? I was born in Tewsbury on November 29, 1912. 1912. And who were your parents? Charles S. Howard, everybody called him Charlie Howard. And his father's name was originally Sven Hallverson. Sven Hallverson. He had it changed years ago. When and where was your father born? He was born in Manitowoc, Wisconsin. When? Do you remember when? In 1884. March 5, 1884. Do you know when he came to the United States? Well, he was born. He was born there, I'm sorry. My mother was born there. How about his father, Sven Hallverson, when did he come to the United States? I really don't know what year he came over here, I sure don't. But he was born in Norway. He was born in Norway, Kroger, Norway. Kroger, Norway. Do you know when he was born approximately? He was, I know exactly, I'll tell you, he died in 1916 and he was 65 years old, I remember that on the date on the tombstone. Okay, so he was born about 1851. Yeah, something like that. Do you remember the year he came down to Tewsbury? They came, the Howard family moved down here in 1900. 1900. That's right. So that was Sven Hallverson and his wife and son, or did they have more children? There was five children all together, but all of them didn't come down at the same time. No. There were, I guess just two came down. My dad had two brothers who stayed up there. I see. Fred and Louis. In Wisconsin. Yeah, and the sisters, Anna, she came down here, and I don't know about Ida, I'm not sure whether she came in at that time. But there were five children all together. Five children, that's right. My dad was the youngest. So how old was he then? He died at the age of 82. All right. Then your father married your mother here in Tewsbury. He met her here in Carsby and they were married of course down at her mother's home. They were living at that time in St. Elmo in Southern Mobile. Oh, I see. And that's where the marriage took place in October 11, 1911. And now you have to tell me a little bit about your mother then. When was she born, where was she born? She was born in 1889 in Sergeant Bluff, Iowa. And what was her name? Her maiden name was Husby. Some call it Husby. Yes, what was her first name? And my mother's first name was Inga. It was Inga Borg, but everybody called her Inga. And her mother's name was Bina. It was Yaka Bina and everybody called her Bina. Oh, I see. Yes. Bina Husby. And her father? And her father, my mother's father, was named Ivor Husby. Yes. And he came from Trondheim, Norway also, but they met, my grandparents met in this country. So both your mother... Both my mother's parents came from Trondheim, Norway. Trondheim, okay. You do not remember when. I don't know what year they came over to this country, sure don't. But they had settled in Sergeant Bluff, Iowa. Do you know what they did in Sergeant Bluff? He worked at a brickyard. Okay. Husby worked in a brickyard and carpenter. He was a carpenter also. Do you know what Sven Halvorson did in Wisconsin for a living? Well, he was a cobbler. Cobbler. He made shoes. You have probably learned that trade in Norway. Yeah, and he was, to start with, he was a sailor. I see. When he was 14 years old, he got, he was on a ship and he sailed the seven seas. He went all over the world. He was a cabin boy to start with. Have you ever heard that he came, worked his way over on a boat? I'm not sure. I'm not sure whether he worked his way over on a boat or just how that was. I never did hear. So your mother came down, you said, 1898 to Torsten? 1997. 1997 and your father 1900? That's right. Okay. And do you know what the reason was that they came down here? Yes, the main reason was to get away from the cold, harsh winters. It was so cold. That was the reason most all of them came down here. But they were used to cold weather in Scandinavia. Well, I know, but they were older then. They got older and tired of the cold winters and they got this wonderful literature that told about the wonderful climate. And J.O. Johnson was one of the Swedes that moved down here from Rockford, Illinois. And he told me that his farm that he bought was named Spring Garden. Spring Garden. Here? Yes. And he said, the literature said, it was a little different from this polar, he said, the literature he got said there was a spring on every farm. And he said you could grow peaches here. And that was not true. And fruit, he said, you could lie down under the tree and let the fruit fall in your hand. I mean, they painted it so wonderfully. Right. So he came down here, he said, he asked these people that owned this land company, where is the spring on my farm? Oh, he says, you just dig down a little bit there, you'll get a spring there. He says, every farm you dig down, you get a spring. You know, that's a well. They had to clear the forest. A lot of the land was not cleared at all. There were great huge trees, pine trees, most of it big. They had to clear it and they didn't know anything. They had a time, a lot of them. Some of them came down in the old, they didn't know the state. A lot of them just went back. Mrs. Howard is sitting here too and she has written a sketch about the history of the Scandinavians in this area. Would you tell me your name and your background? Are you also Scandinavian? No. I'm Scotch-Irish and English, I suppose that's what most people are. I don't think so. No, no, come back here Mr. Howard. We can still hear her. My grandfather, who was a blacksmith, and he had a shop right down here, right close to town, and that's where I lived. Now my other grandparents were farmers. They lived about approximately two miles down south of Poe's Creek. I was really born down there in that house. I lived down here in Poe's Creek until I was about six years old. Then my mother and I, my father left, and my mother and I moved back down into the country with my other grandparents. That's where I lived until I married them in 1935. Now what year did the first Scandinavians come down here, Mrs. Howard? The first one? Do you know? Yeah, 1895. That's when they got this thing going. Yeah, Contoria Land Company. Right. Where did that land company originate to? Well, they bought land from the railroad and the government. They came from the north, these men. Oh yeah. The federal government owned most of this land, and so they got it as a grant or something, I don't know the details. Do you know how much they had to pay for it? They got it, really I don't know, but these people bought these farms, I'm trying to think what the price they paid, but maybe $50 an acre. That much? $30 maybe. I'm not sure, but they bought 10 acres as a rule, or multiples of 10. So do you think they bought just 20 acres to start with? Yeah, 20, 30, 40. Some of them bought more, but none of them bought great big farms. Have you heard anything about what they said about the climate after a while? You said they moved back up north. Well, a few of them did. They came down here and saw that there was not enough cleared land, it'd be too much work for them to get it ready to farm, so they went back. Some of them did. And others stayed and liked it. Well, everybody that stayed liked it because it wasn't near as cold here. We don't have near as bad a winter. What about the summers, were they too hot for some of these Canadians? No, I don't think so. The summers are not as bad here as a lot of people might think. We don't have as hot a weather here as those that do in Mobile or coastline cities. It's drier here. Yeah, it's a little higher altitude. Our altitude here is about 800 feet above sea level, which is a lot better than being 10 feet above sea level. Okay, if we go back to this land company now, you said that there was a Mr. Peterson that was one of the driving forces behind it. John F. Peterson and T.T. Thorson were the two main ones that formed this land company. Okay, were they Swedes or Norwegians? They were Swedes. They were Swedes. Okay. Because you don't know where they, maybe where they came from in the United States or in Sweden. I'm not positive, but I believe they came from Illinois. From Illinois. So, when this land company advertised land down here, do you know if that was in a Scandinavian American newspaper? Uh-huh. One of them was in Decorah, Iowa. I see. Decorah, Posten? Yeah. Maybe. That's right. Uh-huh. And so there was no church involved. You don't know if they came from a Swedish Lutheran church, for instance, or a Norwegian Lutheran church, and had a pastor with them or something like that? But they didn't. It wasn't long until the churches were built. Until they started in 1900, I guess. What churches did they? The Norwegian church was built first. Was it a Lutheran or a? Do you know if it was a Lutheran or something? Lutheran. Lutheran? Norwegian Lutheran church? I've got the paper in there where my mother's was confirmed and written in Norwegian. Uh-huh. And see these pastors, these preachers, were part of the settlers that came down. Yes. And then the Swedish Lutheran church was built shortly after the Norwegian. So they had two. So they had two churches here and neither one of them were filled up, but after a while the Norwegian church later turned into the congregational church. Now it still stands in its Masonic form. The building is there now. It's a beautiful building. But not the Swedish Lutheran. No, they tore it down. The Swedish Lutheran was torn down much to our sorrow. Do you know anything about the old record books, if they remain somewhere? They were destroyed, I think. The Norwegian ones, too? This is an old brochure. I think they're all gone. I don't think there are any old record books from either. Now this is one of the things that helped sell our property. Yes. It says that the price was about $5 an acre. Well, some of it was. Yeah, I guess I was a little high on that. It wasn't. Yeah, I thought you were. Well, it went up. Five or ten maybe. Small tracts in town can be bought for $25 an acre and upward. And some quite good land not far from town can be had for $5 an acre. Yeah, it's a little further out. Now you see, this is a Swedish Lutheran church. Yes. Boy, that was a beautiful sounding bell there. Uh-huh. And this is a building that's standing right now. Services were held in that Swedish Lutheran church. Can you remember that? Oh, they held them for years after. For years, in the afternoon when they didn't have a resident minister, one would come down from Birmingham in the afternoon. Yeah, they had one coming down. They'd hold services and then he'd come down here. It'd be a small... And I went there a lot in the afternoon, Sunday. Old timers, you know. But that was in English. Uh-huh. It was in English. Yeah, they preached in the... Oh, I heard them preach in Swedish though. In Swedish when he was little. You did? Yeah. Did you hear Norwegian too? No, I never heard Norwegian, just Swedish. No, we had a Norwegian preacher preaching in the Swedish church named Bakke. Yes. But he didn't preach in Norwegian. He was 6'6", real tall. Bakke. We have a Swedish exchange student here in the... Is he Norwegian? Swedish. You sure? Yeah. Well, we never met him, but I was thinking he's Norwegian. He's going to the story of the high school here. Living with some family here, exchange student. Do you remember some old Swedes and some old Norwegians? I suppose you do. Oh, yeah. I remember all of them. Could you tell me some names? Can you remember some names? Well, we had one Swede by the name of Granquist. Granquist? He had the flour mill there. We had a flour mill that ground wheat into flour. Right down the river. He'd have grain shipped in. They didn't have enough here maybe. He'd have grain shipped in. All these Scandinavian women baked their own bread, you know, most of them. Was that wheat or? Yeah, that was wheat sent in. They didn't raise much wheat here at that time. No? But they had it sent in, shipped in. But you know, the Scandinavians didn't like rye bread. Could they raise rye here? Well, they never did raise rye here. It was too warm probably. Could they raise potatoes? Oh, yeah. They could. Raised a lot of potatoes. Sweet potatoes and Irish potatoes. Yams you might call them. They're not yams. They're sweet potatoes. Can you name a few other people? Christianson was one. He was probably Norwegian. I don't know. We had several Christiansons and several Andersons and several Carlsons. Well, the Andersons and the Carlsons, they would be hard to distinguish, you know, whether they were Norwegians or Swedes. But Christianson, I don't know, he would be Norwegian. Yeah, Carl, K-A-R-L, Carl Christianson was Norwegian. Or Dane, maybe he was a Dane. He had... Oh, there were Danes here too? Oh, yeah, we had Danes here too. Petersons, some of the Petersons were Danes. S-E-N, you know. Yeah, yes, yes. We had... What about Forsman? Forsman were Swedes. He had a brickyard. Forsman. I see. That's interesting. Tell me what kind of occupations they had besides being farmers. Yeah, he made a living. You're reading my little sketch there about the... I will do that....the wagon coming in and pulled by oxen with the brick that they made. The Forsman family moved in here. That was the Forsman family that did that. But they didn't come from the east. They came from the west. They came from Mississippi. Oh, they did? Pioneers came over here in a covered wagon and settled. Now, how they ever heard about Thorsby, I don't know. Well, do you suppose they came down on the Mississippi? I really don't know. I never did hear. They settled in Mississippi then, for the most part. They had several children and they had a brickyard about two, three miles out of town by a creek, a large creek. And one of them, one of the girls may be living yet, a girl, an old lady now, and some, she was a nurse. Didn't they build houses of wood when they had all the pine trees cut down? Well, they had a foundation and chimneys. Oh, yeah. That's what they used to build. They needed a brick. And all the town down here was made out of brick, the stores. Of course, there's a little history right there. Yes, you tell me. The town of Thorsby was built all out of wood. All the store buildings were built out of wood. There's some pictures in here that might show them. All on the west side of the railroad. See, that old railroad was the main thing. Yes, if the railroad was here, that was going to be a big attraction. And the railroad company helped the settlers by giving them a special rate to move down here with their household goods and their animals. We had a farmer, a good farmer, by the name of Carlson, John Carlson, moved down here from Illinois, maybe Rockford, I'm not sure. And he bought the finest piece of land in this area, level, real pretty. And he brought with him two large horses with the big feet, you know, they call those draft horses. But the people around here had never seen horses like that. They say, oh, how they looked, how they looked, those big draft horses. They were strong. They were big and strong. And of course, they ate a lot. They ate a lot of corn. You couldn't raise oats here. Oh yeah, that's right. You couldn't raise oats for the horses. My grandfather raised oats. Oh yeah. They used to cradle them by hand with a big scythe and a bunch of slats. Yes. Swing around, you know, I've seen them do that. And then did they put up, make sheaves and put them up? Yeah, that's right, stack them up. Sheaves? Sheaves, yeah. I've seen them do that. And they had the flour mill and they had the brickyard, they had a furniture factory here. They made household furniture here years and years ago. Who made the furniture? Do you remember anything? Some of the people that moved down here did. We had a canning factory years and years ago. Canning? Yeah. I don't remember. It was a little before my time. I was born in 1912, you know, so my memory goes back to 1917, though. I remember a lot of things. And two wineries, don't forget the wineries. Oh, yes. You said something about grapes. Yeah, let's see, they knew how to grow. That's what started the fruit industry in this county. This became a large fruit growing area, especially peaches. And they'd go and grow brookoo's and grapes, but there's no wineries so they don't need to grow them. What kind of grapes did they grow? Well, a lot of conchor grapes. Conchor? Yeah. And I don't know, there's some other varieties, maybe lutein. So they bottled, did they bottle wine, too, or did they send it away? They bottled it right here. They had big holes and regular wine cellars, you know, wineries where they made the wine had two of them here. Big holes were here for years late. They're covered up now. You mean holes? What do you mean by that? Basements like, you know, where the building built over. Wine cellar. To store it? Oh, yeah, it keeps the temperature better, you see. That's the reason they dug in the ground and then they were bricked up, I guess, like a basement, you know, in the building they built over. But they didn't stamp the grapes, did they? Well, I don't know. I don't think they did. Not like in Italy. I don't know how they squeezed the juice out, but they had a way to do it. And they got a German down from Coleman, you know, as a German settlement. Mr. Coleman. He helped them. He showed them how to do it, maybe. Well, he had, there was some wine expert that they got hired to come down here and supervise the making of this wine. Because the Scandinavians, they didn't know how to make wine, I'm sure, unless they had the... Well, that's more of a German. Oh, yeah. Well, anyhow, they got the German down here. And they made a lot of wine here and they sold it and shipped it off and stuff. So how many members do you suppose there were in the two Lutheran churches? It would sure be a rough guess on my part, really. I don't know how many members altogether. Can you remember, for instance, your confirmation class? How many were you in your confirmation class? Well, that class consisted of about 12 or 15. 12 or 15 in a year. So that's an indication about that there must have been a few hundred. Yeah, I imagine there were, well, I suppose 200 altogether. So was the Norwegian church larger, the congregation, than the Swedish church? I think the Swedish was. I'll start with the Norwegian was, but I think the Swedish, more Swedes came out. Some of them came here. This Arthur Nelson, father and his folks that your husband went out to see, Arthur, they came here in 1913. And Mrs. Nelson came from Finland. I see. Yes, she was Finnish. So this was truly a Scandinavian community. Oh, it was. We had a lot of bachelors here, too. Mr. Olberg was a Dane. Weren't there enough women? Well, they moved here as bachelors and they didn't find anybody they wanted. Would you say that they married Scandinavians rather than marrying outside of the Scandinavian order? Yeah, well, you see, most of them that moved here were already married. Except these bachelors that weren't married, and they never did marry as long as they had lived. We had Painter Andersen, he was Norwegian. We called him Painter Andersen because he painted houses. He was a bachelor, never married. And Mr. Olberg was a Dane. He never married. I don't know what he did. He farmed a little bit. Cobbler. Was he a cobbler? No, he farmed a little bit. He lived back over here, not far from the road that he went on a while ago. I can see all these people in my mind's eye as though they were right here. I can remember them just vividly. Yeah, just tell me about them. Just as though they were right here. And then, of course, we had Hans Dahl and his family. They lived east of town at the end, the very end of the name of that street that goes by the woodcutting. That looks like Dakota. No, that's going this way, Dakota. We had Airdahl's over here in Norway. Inga Airdahl was my teacher when I was little. Beautiful blonde. Landed up in California. She had a sister and had a brother named Tufti. Tufti Airdahl. How did they spell their name? Airdahl. E-H-R-D-A-H-L? E-H-R-E-R- It had an H in it, I remember. E-H-R-D-A-H-L. Airdahl. E-H-R-D-A-H-L. Deerhoof, too. Now we had Derhoof. What was that, German? No, that's Norwegian. What did you say? Derhoof. All the natives here call them deerhoof. Deerhoof is D-Y-R-H-O-V-E. D-Y-R-H-O-V-E. Deerhoof. I went to their 50th wedding anniversary years ago. And they were Swedes? No, they were Norwegians. They were Norwegians and Airdahl were Norwegians. And then another neighbor over there was a Suburbs. They were Norwegians. Maybe Soberg was Norwegian. I'm not sure about it. I think they were Norwegians. S-O-R-B-E-R-G. S-O-B-E-R-G. Soberg. S-O-B-E-R-G. They had quite a large family. That's what happened. I can tell you all about their children. They were very rich people and all that. One of the daughters, though, was my mother's best friend, Clara. Clara Soberg. She was a schoolteacher. My mother was a schoolteacher, too. Oh, she was? She taught school. Elementary school? Yeah. Well, she had all seven grades. In one school? Her and another lady taught the whole school and had two rooms, upstairs and down. Two big rooms. Two-room schoolhouse. And that's the way it was in those days. Back then, teachers did not have to have a college degree. No, they didn't. Education neither. A high school diploma. Well, you just had to be able to read and write good and be intelligent and know how to handle children. That's all they could get. I mean, there wasn't any college graduates around here. No. You have to tell me a little bit about what your father did for a living down here. Well, when he was a young man down here, there wasn't a whole lot to be done. He worked in a box factory, and he had a finger to show it where it got all cut and bunged up. He made wooden boxes? Yeah, they made wooden boxes. For shipping off food? I'm not sure. I guess so. They made for different purposes. But anyhow, they had a box factory. So there was a sawmill, too? Yeah, they had a planer mill. The sawmill was not at the same place where the planer mill was, but we had a planer mill here years ago. Did he continue doing that, or did he just continue? No, it was just part-time. Well, they did pick up jobs. Mr. Berlin, Gus Berlin, a Swede, planted a lot of pecan trees. He had a big orchard and planted a lot of trees, and they had to dig big holes, and he helped dig the holes. Fifty cents a day, all day long, fifty cents a day is how much pay they got. Of course, they were glad to get that, you know. Was it easy to grow pecan trees? Oh, yeah, this is a good pecan tree country. Good country for that. Did you plant enough first, and then you got a small plant? No, that would make a seedling. You don't know what you're going to get. It's like a peach. You plant a peach seed, you don't know what you're going to get. That's a seedling. It's liable to be little, green, big, or not have any fruit. So they're grafted. All pecan trees are grafted. I see. And they grow them. They plant the nuts to get the trees, and then they get from a tree like they want, the variety they want, and graft. Cut that thing off and graft it. Oh, I sold them here for years. I was in the nursery. You better get into the flower business. In 1907, Ernie Hansen, there's another Swede, Ernie Hansen, and what was the other man's name? I guess it's covered in here. They started a carnation farm. There's a picture in here that's showing about the carnation farm outdoors, and they had a shade light to cover. They grew carnations. I don't know who told them that. They got started outdoors with shade, and then Charlie Howard and Louis Howard and Fred Howard went together then in pooler money and built a greenhouse, a glass greenhouse down in town, a little bit. And they called it Howard Brothers Forest, and they started growing carnations in this one house. Then they built another one, and then another one, and they finally wound up with four greenhouses. In the same area? Four connected. They were all connected, four greenhouse, glass greenhouse. They were, oh, they were 100 feet long and somewhere about 20, 25 feet wide. Continued interview with Mr. Howard. You were telling me about your father's flower business. Yeah, that's right, and as time went on, one of the brothers decided to sell out to the other two, and a little later, the other one sold out to my dad, so my dad was a sole owner of them for several years. And that's when my mother started designing flowers, you know, funeral designs mostly, and other, but mostly funeral designs. Did they ship them out? No, they delivered them. Yeah, but the cut flowers, how did they ship? Oh yeah, the cut flowers they shipped all over, yeah, to DeMopolis, and Selma, and Montgomery, and Dothan, and they shipped to different places. They had veneer boxes, and they'd take them down and mail them by railway express in these veneer boxes. And they were that wide and that long, according to what size order they had. How did they keep? They kept real good. That's right, they had them in water overnight, and take up water, and they were good and fresh, and they didn't take too long to get to these places. But as time went on, my mother designed more and more flowers as business grew, and there was only one place that you could buy funeral flowers between Birmingham and Montgomery. And that was right here, in Corrisburg, in Howard Brothers Greenhouses. And so time went on, and the business got bigger. And then in 1950 they decided to retire, and they hired a man to come in and run the place. In other words, they got out of the business back in 1950. Is the business still here? No, the greenhouses, we tried to rent them out after the man that was operating it died of a heart attack when he was fairly young too. So after he died, his wife couldn't carry on that operation, it was too much, planting all the plants, the seed that gets the seedlings and the snapdragons. They went into mostly snapdragons because that was a more profitable crop than carnations. Like me, I started out with carnations here in my greenhouse. And in 1935 when I first started out, the first greenhouse, and then as time went on, we went to growing more snapdragons. Then I delivered by truck, our own truck, to Birmingham to the wholesale florist twice a week. We didn't have them in the hot summertime, we was getting our soil ready and getting our plants coming on their little seeds, the tiny seeds. And getting them on and putting them in the benches and growing them on then for fall, winter, and spring crop in the greenhouse. And the florists really liked to use those in arrangements for opening an automobile, anything, like a new bank opened up, anything like that, weddings, fancy things, balls and all that they had. So they'd buy the, we had them, I measured them, 20 inches long, all beautiful flowers, all of them down here, not counting the rest of the stems, they were light pink, they liked that light pink. So how long did you continue with that? Well I sold, I ran my business out in 1979, I believe it was. Well I ran it out one year before that to somebody, but I quit growing snapdragons about 1970. 1970, I quit growing plants, flowers in the greenhouse, but I brought in azaleas from Mobile and put them in there and they went, they bloomed earlier. And then I sold them to different florists, beautiful blooming azalea plants. Bushes. Yeah, in pots and then they dressed them up and sold them. And so then I rented to the man, I guess kind of on a trial basis in 1979 and then we bought it in 1980. And then you retired? I sold my business here and two acres of land. And that's when I retired in 1970. What kind of soil is in here? This is a sandy loam topsoil with a clay subsoil. And that's good? It's ideal for all kinds of fruits, vegetables, and flowers. It's just wonderful. Light soil to work with. Good sandy loam, it's not a heavy clay. Underneath is a red clay subsoil, which is better than not having it. In Florida a lot of places there's nothing but sand, everything goes away from it. Dries out. Yeah, you know, it dries out quick. The fertilizer leaches out quickly and all that. This is ideal here to grow the finest butter beans and vegetables. Do you have to water a lot? Or do you get enough rain? We had an extreme drought this past summer. Ordinarily we get enough rainfall to grow good crops outside without irrigation. But last year we had a very bad drought. One of the worst, the worst drought we've ever had here. What about cotton? I see in this booklet that they show a cotton field in Tushby. Did the Scandinavians raise cotton? Yes, they did. J.O. Johnson had a big field of cotton over there besides a lot of others. I picked cotton by hand in those days. You picked by hand? I picked cotton for several different people around here. My grandfather raised a lot and I picked by hand. But through the years, pickers were hard to get. Young people didn't want to pick cotton. Did you get migrant workers to pick cotton? We never had deer. No, it wasn't as big enough growing here. Did you have what they call sharecroppers? Yes, they had sharecroppers back when I was young. My grandfather had a sharecropper on his farm. Very common to have sharecroppers. So when you're talking about your grandfather, Mrs. Howard, how big of a cotton farm did he have? Oh, he had a total of 80 acres which included some forest. So back then, you know, the cotton fields were nothing like they are in some of the bigger areas. In the large cotton growing areas. Of course, it's all mechanical. And it's mechanical here. They still have cotton fields around. I saw some when we were driving in. I suppose that was last year's crop I saw. And of course, my grandfather raised corn and things like that too. It was just a big field to me back then because... A farmer did well to farm 40 acres of land with a mule or two. Two mules and 40 acres of land. And he had to work from sunup to sundown. And all the children had to have that. They had animals too, didn't they? Cows? Oh yeah. Pigs and chickens? Sure. Right. And their own smokehouses. They cured their meat. They're baking their hams and all that. You didn't buy anything from the store except sugar and coffee? No, that's back several years ago. So that means you had a dairy here too, making butter. Yeah, we had one dairy farm here, Mr. M.J. Barrett. And my Uncle John, my mother's brother, used to help out there. But not like in the... It's not like in the Midwest. He didn't bring the milk into this dairy. That was an individual. I see. It wasn't a great big dairy. Each individual had their own milk buttering. Some of the people here in town didn't have enough room to have a cow, so they invited him out. Is there more beef cattle around here now than daily? Oh yeah. Calf cattle? Much more. Almost all the beef cattle is now dairy. We used to have a few dairies around. They were pretty good sized ones. The big companies would send trucks around and gather it up in big milk trucks. But I think they're all gone too. One down below here and one about in Jemison. They're gone too. So they're importing milk, I understand, from other states into Alabama. So when did your mother die? She died on September 11, 1982. Oh, that recently. Yeah, she was 93. And your father? He died in October 16 or 17, 1966. He was 84 years old, I mean 82 years old. How many children were you in your family? Two, me and my sister. Did your mother live with you after her husband died? She lived by herself in her own home near where the greenhouses were. And she had pretty good health. And the latter years we got a lady to live in with her and take care of her. Did she talk Norwegian? She could speak some Norwegian and she could read Norwegian. Do you remember the ladies getting together for coffee talks? Oh my goodness. Ladies guilds, oh yeah. That whole room would be full. Do you remember them doing handiwork, sewing, embroidering, knitting, weaving, quilting? Not much of that in this particular... A lot of them did handwork. They did handwork but they didn't get together to do that. They just got together to talk and drink coffee and eat some good refreshments, cake and sandwiches. I got in on that too. The ladies' aide they called it. And they used to meet out here where your husband's gone now, Mrs. Nelson out there. Oh she'd have a buffet, a lot of good food, a lot of good cream and all go in the coffee. And you know the way they made coffee, they'd have a big kettle and get the water boiling, put the coffee in a bowl, the coffee grounds, and put an egg, raw egg in it. And then they'd put that in a cloth sack and put it down in the boiling water. And it would stay good, clear, hot and delicious. That was the healthy system. You could smile at it. It was good. And then they had lots of cookies and cakes and goodies. Those things that Irma Hansen used to make. The little brisket. Pepper cocker. I haven't heard that in so long. Rosette. Oh yeah. Kleneter, that was really Norwegian. Kleneter and the corn rosette. Her daddy's name was Erikson. Do you remember that they ate a special kind of fish at Christmas? Lutefish. We're going to eat lutefish tomorrow night with a friend. You are. You mean that tradition has been kept? I'll tell you, where he went to see this Arthur Nelson, one of my friends I grew up with, he's Scottish-Irish-English, just like I am, she married a brother of this Nelson. And he's been dead several years, but she remarried. Well anyhow, her son is a dentist in Birmingham, and he got on to the idea of sending for this lutefish from somewhere up north. I think now you get it in Birmingham, you know, this dried stuff. So he likes it, and he gets it, and then he gives his mother some. So his mother and father are good friends, and she just called this morning and said, well, we'll have lutefish tomorrow night. And you are invited? Oh, we're invited. We've been before. We eat it. You mean that even you like it? Well, I'm not real fond of it, but I can eat it. I like it. If it's fixed right, yes. My grandmother fixed it. See, my mother's mother and father didn't stay here all that many years. They decided they'd move a little further south. Where did they move to? A little town of St. Elmo, 20 miles south of Mobile. And there was quite a few Scandinavians down there too. Did they continue with this church down there, you suppose? I don't know. I don't believe. Do you think they did? Well, they had a church down there, but I'm not sure. It's not Silver Hill you're talking about. No, no. This is St. Elmo. Because Silver Hill was a Scandinavian settlement. Yeah, that's right. We've been there. We drove by there one time, and it's a small settlement, and they moved down from Michigan, as I understand. I see. And the people did. The fact is we were parked in a town in Michigan a few years ago. We were going into a place for coffee and donuts, and people saw the Alabama tag there, and he asked about Silver Hill, and he knew that some of the people there, the Swedes, had moved down to Silver Hill. Now think of that. Yes. Think of that. We were in Michigan, in Alabama, and he asked about it. That's the reason I knew there was some Michigan. Do you know if there is anybody left down there in Silver Hill? I really don't know, but I doubt it. St. Elmo. But they had a Lutheran church there, all right, because we saw it. Yeah. But you went in there. You saw it. No, I didn't, but my husband was down there. Yes. Yeah. It was the same thing. There was a land company that talked them into moving down there. Yes. And I understand it's really beautiful up here on the pine trees. That's Baldwin County. That's east of Mobile. Now is there a cemetery here where many of these old pioneers are buried? Yeah. Is it by the church? No. It's down below town, and it's called the Scandinavian Cemetery. It is. Are both Norwegians and Swedes buried there? That's right. Yeah. Are there a lot of stones? Quite a few. Not a big cemetery. But we got to Anderson. The town took it over to take care of it, you know, but we had had a lady here who just died, did after dying last year. Yeah, it was only a year ago. February. She was a real booster of this town. She loved this town. J.O. Johnson's daughter. My parents were the Johnsons who moved here, you know, and she had been to Sweden within the last... Yeah, the last four or five years. What was her last name, Johnson? Johnson. Her name was Johnson. Johnson. Do you remember Ed Tornquist? Tornquist? Yeah. Oh, yes. Miss Nymie lived over in Selma in a nursing home. She still lives. Oh, she still lives over there. In Selma in a nursing home. And what kind of nursing home? It's just a... Real nice... It was once... Converted from a hospital. And old-timey. You don't know the name of it. Dunn's Restaurant. Yeah, Dunn's Restaurant. D-U-N-N, Dunn's Restaurant on Lovery Street. Is she clear in her head? Mornings, we've been over there a few times and she knows all right. But she wouldn't volunteer much. She wouldn't... No, I see. But I think she knew who we were, that's for sure. Her niece, her sister's daughter, lives there and takes care of her. She goes every day to see her and take care of her and her wife and visits with her. Yeah, just looks in on her and talks with her and everything every day. She's the only one in her family that didn't marry. She had several sisters, only one brother, one Tornquist boy, Carl. And there were several other girls and they all had families married. Families with Niamey never get married. She worked all her life. Has there ever been any reunions? Yeah, back a long time ago, about 1930, wasn't it? We got a picture taken in about 1930. Back of the Lutheran Church. Miss Niamey Tornquist was instrumental. She loved to get all the old-timers together. Well, every Fourth of July we'd have a big picnic. We'd have a big picnic, you know, while everybody didn't turn out. People would come from out of town who used to live there and they'd all get together and have a big picnic. Fourth of July. Did you have a newspaper here in Tushput? No, we had one in Flint. No, well, they started a little paper here years ago one time. It didn't last any time. But in which paper do you suppose there would be a write-up, if any, about a reunion like that? The Union Banner. The Union Banner, it's not in existence anymore. It was taken over by the advertiser. But they have the records. Every once in a while they'll put in there looking back. And they'll take different things like 75 years ago and 50 years ago and things like that. It tells about who went there, where, and this, that, and the other. And before, it used to, the Union Banner would publish every week. Was the Union Banner published in Clinton? Yeah, and it went out of business. And the advertiser brought about it. Central Alabama Advertiser. Central Alabama Advertiser. And is that in Clinton? Clinton. Just north of Clinton, on the highway 31. Right in Clinton. Did they have any fraternal organizations? Well, they had... Like sick benefit societies or fire insurance? No, no, they didn't have any. They didn't? No, well, they had a Mason's, of course. That's a regular Mason's. But they didn't have any of these other things like you mentioned. Do you suppose they had some, brought some money with them when they came so that they could invest? Or do you think that they were... Some of them came down here pretty well fixed. They sold their farms and things up there. Some of them were pretty well fixed and then there were a few, some of them that weren't very well fixed. And they had the struggle, the worst struggle. They're your folks and some of them too, your best folks. Yeah, my folks. I mean my mother's side of the family, they didn't come here as much. They really had a struggle. Do you know how they traveled down here? By train. By train? Did they all travel by train? All by train. From north? The Sunbirds, S-U-N-D-B-E-R-G, they were a family that came, they came from Sweden. And when they, was it up, when they got up, when they... Well, they put them on the train, the boys. They couldn't speak any English. And they put their names, the name of the boys and the address where they were supposed to go. In New York, I guess. I don't know. Now how that ever came about. So they came directly from Sweden? I never heard how they got over here, how they, you know, who put them on the train. That was a long train trip. Yeah, and they came right down here. But they had relatives here, I guess? No. No, no relatives. Not that we know of. There was several children, there was... That was many years ago. And they moved down below where I was raised in the country down there. Yeah, they partied. They partied. Did they start it out by working for others? The sunburns, what did they do? I don't know. I was too little. Well, that was many years ago. And I guess they just farmed. Just farmed. But you, Mrs. Howard, do you remember that the Scandinavian, the young people worked for the original farmers around here to make a wage? Or did they... I don't believe so. They didn't. There weren't too many original farms here. So it was new land. It was new. A lot of it was just... So your grandparents, they came in as pioneers to them? No, my grandparents were here long before the Southerners came in. Oh, yeah. That's what I mean. Natives. They weren't right here in this spot. They were out west of Thorsey, out in the hills over there. And some of those, my grandfather came and came over this way and settled, and one of his brothers, but the rest of them stayed way over there in that same spot. Page Chapel. Page Chapel. See, our granddaddy was named Pate. Riley Pate. He was a good farmer, and first he settled over here east of Thorsey. Well, I think as a farmer, my people, the Husbys got a hold of him. Then the land company bought this farm from him, and he moved where I grew up down here, south of Thorsey. And he's going to have the 80-acre farm. And he worked hard. He was a real hard worker, and he had a nice house. He was a good farmer. He was a good farmer, and he had a house that was a little, it was much better than some of the little houses that the people lived in. Above average. Above average. My granddaddy, Husby, he laid brick, he went around and built chimneys and laid foundations and did carpentry work for people, and not just back here in Thorsey, but other places, Collins Chapel, other places. Now, they grew strawberries too? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Strawberries and peaches and... Yeah, and grapes. And grapes. Yeah. What about your classmates now? Did they stay in this area, or did they move away, most of them? Well, I'll tell you. In the grammar school, there were a lot of the surrounding people here that weren't Scandinavians that went to the grammar school, as well as some of the Scandinavian children. So, they mostly all stay around, and in high school, we had a special high school here. Tell me about it. We had a private school, Coresby Institute. Who founded that? Well, I believe that tells it in there, but anyhow, it was called Coresby Normal, to start with. It tells a man's name, I'll see what was his name, but anyhow, they had just a few students, but they got it going, and then the, Miss Jenkins came down from Massachusetts, and she really got it going then. And they had a boarding department, and they'd get students from different parts of the state, and not just right here, and they'd come and board and go, and then people around here. And they provided a little work for them in the dining hall, they'd work in the kitchen and all that, and have cook and all that. So, these students were from different areas, you know. Yeah, so... All the townspeople too. So we got some of them, well every year now, we've been having a reunion, a Coresby Institute reunion. We've had ten of them so far, and every year there's less, you know, some of them pass on. Did that become a college later on? No, no, never did. It was sold to the county for, we had the Coresby High School, and... Finally dwindled down to where it wasn't, couldn't make it. And then you got a public... Now it's the county and the state. But this was an outstanding school. Christian school. It was a Christian school, and we had real high class teachers. People came from different parts of the north. We had a man from Chicago, and we had a man from New England, and we had them from different parts, some from the Carolinas. But anyhow, they were dedicated, most all of them are elderly people. Didn't come down here to especially make any good wage or anything, because there wasn't much good wage. More like missionaries, see. They were trying to help young people. And they did. We had a lot better teachers in our school than any of the other high schools around. This is the highest rated high school in the state, for a while. Wonderful. And this Esther Johnson was telling about, you ought to hear her talk about it. Oh, and she was just living. She was a flamboyant. Oh my gosh. She was flamboyant, and she didn't care what you said. A little short lady with short cropped hair and kind of a gravelly voice, you know. She was some lady. She was a teacher for years, and she called her children tadpoles. What about politics? Did the Scandinavians take part in the town meetings and things like that? Yeah, the mayor, we got a picture here, well at that time most of Scandinavia, the mayor and the alderman, they called him alderman. Yes. So the town was run by the Scandinavians? Yeah, there's some signatures there. Is Sweeney Howard on there? Yes. Yeah, he was an alderman. He was an alderman. He ran there. But the mayor was in Swedish, so it looks like that's something else. W-Z-A-D, or what is it? Oh, E-F-M-E-A-D. No, he was not. He was not a Scandinavian. Did you at any time have a Scandinavian mayor? No. That you can remember? Mr. Soberg never was mayor, was he? Or was he? Seemed like Mr. Soberg was mayor for a while. I believe he was. That S, that's instead of Sweeney, it's S. Howard, that's from Grandad right there. Yeah. M.A. Magnuson, yeah. Come in! He's the one started with the carnation blowing outdoors. Now, by us, he's not a Scandinavian either. Did you get any information from Arthur? Come in. You got a pill? It's in the hall. Tell me a little bit about when they harvested the cotton. They had quite a lot of cotton grown here then, and they hauled it in wagons, and they had a big platform where they put it on, they had a roof over it. This wasn't even here on, but later it was. And they'd stack it on the platform and mail it in, ship it on railroad cars. And they did another thing with railroad cars, they shipped watermelons by the carload away from here too. Oh, I see. Yeah, good watermelons. And strawberries, they used to ship them in refrigerated cars, and they'd line up with those Model Ts and Rigs and horse and buggies and all, and ship the strawberries, crates of strawberries to northern markets. They used a lot of strawberries here too, I suppose. Did they make jams? Oh, everybody. Oh, just each individual household. Didn't have a factory to make it, but anyhow, they... How long was the season, the growing season? When could you start planting? March, I believe. March? Yeah. And then, when was it ripe? When were the strawberries ripe, for instance? Oh, April. April already? We'd pick strawberries in April. And now if we want strawberries, if we want some from around here, you know, not shipped in from California, there's one farmer here who has irrigated strawberries, and he lets people come in and pick, and he furnishes these plastic buckets, and you can pick one full, and does it hold about two quarts, maybe? Yeah, yeah. Three-fifty a bucket. More than two quarts. You pick yourself, they don't pick for you. They hold more than two quarts. When did they harvest the rest of the crops? Well, in the fall, of course, they gathered... Summertime, they gathered the watermelons, and then the grapes was in July. It was good and hot, pretty hot weather, and I used to help gather grapes myself. Not the original plantings, but anyhow, it was good.