 This is cassette four, side one. Steven Northsea, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette four, side one. This is cassette four, side one. Continuation with Steven Northsea, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette four, side one. I'm 35 years old and that's when I got this happen. But I got the first paper. First paper I had to have five years before I could get the second. Was it five years? Yeah. And I think I saw it when I had been here about a year or something like that. I don't know. Like I said. And my height was five feet and eight inches. And I was white. White. Blue-eyed. Yeah. Blue-eyed. So, let me say now, what I had there, the year I took it. I don't think I knew anything. Well, didn't they sign it on here? Oh, yeah. The ninth day of April, 1929. 29? Yeah. Right before the Depression hit? Yeah. They said, all you need. So, then you were able to vote for Hoover? Yeah, sure. But I didn't vote for him. You didn't vote for him? No. But you were in the management, though. You were one of the big guys. Yeah, I did make a difference. Smoked cigar and everything. Yeah, I smoked cigarettes. Cigarettes? Yeah. Here's the day when I left Sweden. Can you read it? You can't read Swedish? Naturally. Oh? Book number four, page 1008, from Engelholm's collection in Kvarnstadsvän, to North America, 8th of September, 1911. The year of the tree, Stefan E. Nordsjö. Yeah. And the priest, he wrote too? Yeah, sure. What was his name? Hannes? Hammar. Hammar. The postman, Hammar. Hammar, yeah. What did he say to you when you left? Did he warn you on the way? That you should watch out for... No. Indians and... No, no, no. He... He was just... A regular person? Yeah. A regular person. But if you go back then, you had one guy with you when you left? One guy. You were alone? No, my brother. Your brother was with you? Yeah, John. Albin. Albin, yeah. You left the same... Yeah. Same day? Yeah, I took my citizen paper before him. And it was on the Cunard Line? Yeah, so I told him, why don't you go down and take your citizenship? How about the... Ylja... Ylgrin? Yeah. She's not citizen. No, she isn't. Yeah, that's what she said. Yeah. And how is that, that she isn't a citizen? You don't remember where you bought the tickets in Sweden? In Engelholm? Yeah, in Engelholm. In Engelholm? Yeah, sure. And you don't remember the name of the boat, though? No, no. It was Gunnar Lindgren. It was Gunnar. But the name, I don't know. So I can't tell you that. Yeah, it was... It was a ship, I think, that was going to go to the Mediterranean or Mauritania. Yeah, there was... Pennsylvania. Well, there was some kind of name on that, so I can't tell. Oh, there was many years ago. They were just like the... They used it for cows and stuff like that ship did. So it was a bad ship? Oh, yeah. They have you... They lay you... to get all over. Before you know it, you couldn't put out your head before you didn't know if you'd get some... They burned it. And no toilets? I mean, there was only one common... Oh, there were toilets. There was a common one for all of them. Oh, yeah. All the guys. Do you remember if you had showers on the ship? Oh, yeah, they had it, too. They had showers? Yeah. Sure. Oh, they were... They were soaking it, but not... So you slept. Slept. And here you left the Jyllandskärnas for the surroundings. Yeah, sure. Vomiting in your face and neck and everything. Yeah. If you were skating at... Yeah. Outside Klippan. Yeah, Jyllandskärna. Jyllandskärna, who knew? You had a good time. What did Albin say? Now your brother, did he... What? Your brother Albin now. Well, he has come home from sea, you know. He went on sea when he was 14 years old. He was a sailor. Yeah. So he was able to speak English, then? Yeah, he understand a little bit. Because some he was with English boat, some the Swedish. My oldest brother, he speak English better than Albin can do. Oh. So he was not seasick, then? No. He was... I'm not seasick, either. No, I understand that you... No. So... So he didn't complain, then, about the ship you came over on? Because he'd been on many different... Nah, he had been probably worse than that. So... So you felt pretty secure in his company, in other words? Well, I didn't make any difference, because I took care of myself when I was 14 years old. I know, but the language, though, I mean, wasn't there... You didn't need to talk English, then. You had some... On the ship, too? Yeah. No. No, I don't think so. Yeah, there was Swedish guys there and everything. Oh. So there was one guy said to me, had a Jewish girl, you know. I didn't understand her, and she didn't understand me, but I could feel up there, you know. She said, let me know. And we were supposed to go in the boat, but it didn't hit nine o'clock in the evening. We couldn't stay up there any longer than that. So there was a Norwegian, he had one of the Jewish girls, I had one. So we sat there full of arms and kissed, and tried to feel the legs, and she didn't mind, I did. So then, a guy, he come. So he said, What's shipping you here for? And you girls, you're supposed to be home at nine o'clock. Get in and close, they'd be close the doors. They'd be iron doors, so that way you could talk to them. So you'd stand there and talk to them, so you could pet them, you know, and give them a kiss. Oh, yeah, I was full of the devil. You were a little devil, huh? No, I was clean and nice, but I was... Most of the guys at that time, weren't they shy, though, when they come off, like they... No, why should they be shy? Didn't they say that, some of the farmers boys come, you know, for the first time in the world? The farmers, yeah, I know. They were shy. Yeah, they might be, but I was not shy. Because you were trained by Britta. Yeah, sure. You were more than an apprentice. Yeah, sure. Absolutely. So, so then they come on the big boat. And there was a young lady. Well, they were a young lady. I don't know if she was older than that. So then, her mother got so sick, so sick. So I told her, well, this is what you ask one of the... The servants there, and ask her if she can get some kind of salt. You know, salt, bacon, anchovy, something like that. So she said, you think that's going to help? I said, yeah, that's going to help. And, he went and get it. So he gave the plate to me, so I gave it to the girl. So I said, you tell your mother to eat that. Then she get okay. She got okay. She come and said, oh, that was just wonderful. So salt is good then? Some pork and... Yeah, yeah. Do you think they will stir up the stomach? No, no. It doesn't? No. So then it settles down. My brother, he bought... Yeah, he bought some stuff, some salt, you know. So he said, and if I get seasick, you give me. He was experienced in that. Yeah. So he said, you might get seasick. Me, seasick? I said, no. I said, then a homer in the North Sea come in to Sweden. He called it the Kattegatsee. He was out there with a rowboat, up and down, up and down. They didn't bother to name them. They had one. Three guys had to hold them, otherwise he had jumped in the ocean. He was sick? So sick, yeah. So then he come to land and he was all right. So I said, you can never go unsea in the North. Of course, you know you know that, but get unshovis with you, and then you eat that, then you'll be okay. He said, you stay, you nuts. That was the truth? Yeah. Statement? Yeah, it was. Oh yeah, I had an awful good time. So when you came back to Rockford and you and Alvin, Yeah. You stayed and... With my sister. With your sister, yeah. How long did you stay there then? I stayed there until I got married. No. I stayed there... Alvin got married. First. Yeah, he got married first because I was younger than he was. Yeah, he was just 11 months older than me. So then he told my sister if she could stay there, they'd get settled and bought furniture and find a place where they could live, you know. So then I moved to another place on Broadway. You rented a room then? I rented a room, yeah. Yeah, they had rent and they sold dinner too and everything, so you can get your breakfast there and your lunch with you and so forth and so on. So I had a room for myself. They had a big room, I think there were four guys in there. So her daughter actually got to Chicago. So she said to me, Well, Steve, I'm going to call you. Yes, can you call me at 6 o'clock? Are you up that early? If I'm going to sleep over. Yes, I'm up before that. But she was not married either. And I lay there, you know, had no blankets and that, and that stand like that. So she called me. So then she said to me, Have you never blanketed? No, that's too hot in the summertime. So I used to have my shorts, you know, no shirt on. And then head coming out, you know. So she looked at it. Oh, she said. Oh, yeah. I was impassive. But I had a good time. Not doing anything wrong, right? Like Alvin? Was he like you? Was he more... No, he was more kind of... Quiet? He was... I was more like my mother. Oh, I see. She was a little bit... No, he was more quiet, you know. But he loved girls he liked. So he married before you? Yeah. And it was a Swedish girl? Yeah. And what kind of work was he doing? He was also working for Lansdorp. No. Yeah, he worked at Little Isle, I guess. He run the Korskesøra and I run the Repsøra. But then he left there, you know, and worked for a cement concern, you know. He ran Broadway, and then they make all the roads and that's where the solder come, you know. So he worked there when they had the flu, so he got the flu. Oh, the Spanish flu? Yeah. So... And then after, you know, he figured, well, when the winter come, you know, then you can't lay cement in the bark outside, so then he went in the furnishings, furnishings trade. So he start over till... till Amstrom's. Then he quit, and then he went to Emba and learned to be cabin maker. So he... that's where he stayed after that. And he stayed on there? Yeah, he stayed on there, and then after, so he went to another factory, Winnebago Company. They had lots of plywood for them, so I come up and saw them, then there was something wrong, you know, then they called me. Say, the better you come and see, because we don't like it. And I said, if you don't like it, you can dump it. So... So then, well, I said, I come over and see how it is. So then I always went up and talked to him. And then he was kind of some foreman for the other cabin maker. So, he had a good job. So when you stayed with your sister, then both you and your brother and I have been together, you went out looking for a job. Did you go by yourself then, or...? I went by myself. I told you, I start with a direction. Yeah, I get myself. And you said you were ready to work, and they gave you a job? Just like that? And Albin, he got a job there too? No, no. He went to, I think, to... Yeah, there's then, they had a fence effect there, I think. So, there was a Swede, you know, so he... I talk Swede, I couldn't talk English. So he asked me to come, so I went. And their company was called Piano Action? Yeah. Piano Action, yeah. And they made parts then for the piano? Yeah. Wooden parts? Yeah. So then I left. I left there. You didn't like the job then, or...? No, so then you know, then the Empire. I told you that, so you had that before, yeah. So then, the soup and I went kaput, you know, then I quit. I said, you can take your job, and you can take your boys, it don't matter, that guy from here, this here, and then here, two machines. I know he liked to have them back, see, because I make good money there. So I know everything else. Well, you take all of us, our boys, just because you pay the three dollars now. I said, that's my business, not yours. Yeah, that's not your business to take my boys that work for the Empire. No, you can hire new guys. Yeah, if somebody come in, then I hire them. So, then I went to National Arc. There I got another new school machine, see. So then, I started, what are they doing this for, man, there? So he said, yeah, but that machine, they're not really ready, so maybe you can, you know, the schools, there you all them done stuff in there, you know, then you have to clean them up with water, anything there, all. And I had a pair, nice gray pants, and yeah, well, then, darn thing. So I come home to my sister. I said, too hectic with this darn noises, I ain't gonna go down there. So the Danish guy, he come up to my sister, said, I'd like to talk to Stephen. So I said to him, well, what do you want? I want you to come back. You mean to that dirty place? I said, I should send $20 to National Arc to give me a pair of new pants. So did he give you an apron or something to hang? No. So he said, yeah, you should have an apron. Well, haven't you got the aprons? I said, I've been leaning the machines up, I did give them aprons if they needed. No, he didn't give them aprons. Then they have to buy them themselves. And then you have to buy overhauls. And it was dirty job? Yeah, I mean, I should have a nice job. You had to change pants every day then? No, I used to stay there half a day. Half a day? Yeah, I don't got paid for it. No pay? No. He said, well, he says, we have to give you pay. I said, you tell them to keep the pay. You were generous. Yeah, so then I went there to Empire. And then I get so tight with that suit, that then I went to that for cabinets, and then I stayed there to be liquidated. No, just, well, then you have to liquidate. And then they had 11 states. So then I, when they liquidated that, then I went down to Connecticut and stayed there four years. Then I ended up up in Lansing. So that was in between Lansing then, when you, when they liquidated that? Yeah, yeah, sure. How did they work now in the factory? When you came here in 1911, they had one big machinery and one big belt driving all the overheads. Yeah, sure. Was it the same thing in 1930s when you worked for Lundström? Yeah, sure. There was not one motor and then one saw and one... No, no, no. One just big... Yeah. They had one big engine, you know. And then a big... Big belt. Belt, the big wheels, you know. And there was one guy doing that job just to keep the... Yeah, there was a fireman, an engineer. And you see that big machine then it goes. But then after, when he come there, the Rector's Cabinet took over. That darn thing was out there, the thing went electric. All electric then. And there was about 19... I don't remember. 1940s? Yeah, there were. No, there were earlier than that. Earlier. Before the war? Oh, yeah, sure. They made us make china closet in oak. Well, they did all the make. So then he went out and sold off all the... and started with fancy furniture. But I mean, what on earth... Well, there was Landstrom's subnet. No, there were the old man Landstrom. The old man. He made center closets in the last couple of years. Yeah, no, he didn't. But then he took over, P.A. Peterson told him to take over. Because he was making the money there. So P.A. Peterson was in that factory too? Yeah, he was in that factory, Hathorne's factory. So then he told Landstrom, if you can make it go, then I'll give you my stock. And so he came down, P.A. Peterson came down. So he said to me, I want the machine that he cut the veneers of the snoot, where they glued them together. So he said, well, can't you stop it, lift it up the handle there, and turn it out of the way, so then you don't need to take it back. Go back. Well, how can you do that, I said. Then I figured this way, and if I go back... So P.A. Peterson, he was going to instruct you. Was he familiar with the kind of job that... No, I don't think so. No, I don't know. But how could it be done that way? No, how could it be done? I said, well, if I turn him around, then you can do it. Not that way. Oh, then he went. What kind of a guy was he? Was he a short stocky guy? Short, yeah. Oh yeah, he was kind of heavy. He didn't have any cap on. He didn't have just a little coat on. That's all? Yeah. And he walked all over? Yeah. He didn't have a car? No. He walked, yeah. He lived on 7th Street. But I don't remember the avenue. And he walked there in the morning, and he always said good morning. And then the Swedes go and take a trip to Sweden, and then he gave them $5. $5? Yeah. So his job then was to go to different places? Yeah. No, no, no. What was he doing then? I mean, he was an investor. Yeah, because he didn't do anything. He just, but he stayed up on Union. There he had his office. He had an office there? Yeah. Union Furniture? Yeah. So, but then he come down to me and said, country, take it back, and you have to dust up and take out the pieces. I said, yeah. And then I have to tell them all. So, oh yeah, he was, he knew all about the furniture. Well, maybe you and he can have invented a new idea. Invention by Nazi PAP, revolutionary within the furniture industry. I do lots of inventions in that landscape. I don't got anything for that. Was it backwards when you came in there in 1911, you think, or 1912? No, no, no. Did they use the same methods in the 1930s? Yeah, sure. Rip saw? Yeah. Planer? Yeah. Sure. So there was nothing, what did you make better now than, you said you had inventions, you said you... Well, you know the rip saw? You just had a little piece of steel on it, to hold it, see? And one fellow, he had a rip saw, and one of the slavers come and hit him right in the eye. That's a good thing, to just hit the right, if they hit right in the pupil then. So I think, well, I think I'm going to do something else. So, the fellow said, well, I kind of, if anything wrong with the machinery, so he always, I think I'm going to, I'll throw out like a sled, you know, and had my part that much, so then we make the wood. And just live about that by the way, see? So, he said, yeah, I said, I had brought it now, so now you can go up to the bandsaw and you can take any kind of plywood that this is made for, and take a wood board and drill a hole and then put it together. So, yeah, we had three rip saws, so he made four. So then, when Lanson came down, he said, most of it, I said, the guide for the rip saw. Yeah, but they used to have an iron piece over. Yeah, I said, I tell you one thing, that's no good. Then this one can take off that darn thing so they can see. Because that's, that's stuff you can't see any. Who made them? Was there any of them? No, I'll do the drawing and then I give it to the guys who take care of the machinery and so he put them together. Then I was out about the paper clipper. And so then, you know, he had a handle, put it over that way, or let it come down and then the knife come down. So then you know when you take out, but then you have to be careful not sticking your hands, because that hand can slip over, that bingo, then it went down. So I told the guy there, I said, be careful, don't go too fast, or take out the one near where you had, where you had cut off. What happened, that darn thing fall down, cut his finger over here. So I said, I'll stand and I'll see if I can do anything with that. So I called, now his name Anderson, he know my dad. So I told him, well it is, go, go meet me down there, I'm going to see if you can, if you think we can do, so we can stop that darn thing so that it never go back. So he said, well, what do you mean? Well I said, if you have a pin about that much, iron bit, a tight little hole, so you can get the screw in, or tie that in the clip, or so have a handle, put the handle in there, so you just can lift up and down, see. Well, he said, I think we can do that. So he did, so he screwed it in. So, then the darn company in, I guess he went over all over for safety, safety first, you know. So he come down to me, so he said, I understand you had to do some kind of patterns. But he says, I think what we're going to do, is we're going to, for the clipper, we're going to have the same thing that we had for the drill press. Well, I said, that's okay with me. So, they come in there, the hand was tied up too, for that darn machine that should pull the hand back. Oh, we had, well, I think I know about 75% in production. But when he got all that, I think there was even down to 60%. So we'd be way, way behind with the plywood. So, he come down to me. So I said, that darn machine that he had, what he had on the drill press, then you as well can take it and stick it. Because I told him not to worry about it. So he went to Lansdorpe, so I said to Lansdorpe, I don't want that darn thing. I said, we've got a hundred percent good. Now, we're down to probably 60%. And, but if you like to have it, that's okay, but you don't get your plywood, so we can't ship out in time what we're supposed to. For that machine, they do all this stuff. We didn't have to go through a yonk or anything, just put it up to the second floor, have it sliced together. And if you like, there's other goats. So he, he minded me too. So you saw the need when it was necessary to make some changes. I said, I had the safety up there. So when he put another back, then he just found that they can never go back. So I said, but he come with that down stuff. Now you can do what you want. Were the workers conscious about the safety of the fingers? Were the workers conscious to be careful? Yeah, yeah. But some of those tools, they were crude and dangerous. Yeah, sure. But that machine, they're not supposed to be dangerous. But you know, when the knife come down too fast, then you can go back, see? So then I found out that. But then he come with that down thing. So then, and then, uh, next time it comes down, he said, I have to take it off. And he have to put, he have to have it, kind of seal on his hand, so when he gonna take that down there, then to put his hand back right away to that stuff up there. So I said, no, you can take that down thing. So he took it away, I put it on the side, so then he come. Oh, you didn't use this? I said, no. I have plenty safety up there. That's enough. How about the planer? It was a dangerous tool? No. It wasn't? No. He just put it in. The planer going there, rolled and took all that. So you didn't have to follow with the hand? No, no, no, no. It went by itself? The bandsaw was more dangerous. The bandsaw? Yeah. The chaperone was often dangerous. Yeah, but they can't have any, they can't have any safety for that. Because it was open you said? Yeah, sure, yeah. There was one. You see, the only thing that he had to do was to type the knife real good. So I guess one, he changed the knife. They were close to the quiver time. So he didn't type so sharp. It was Saturday, so he changed the knife Saturday, so he can now chop knife Monday. And the rest of those, he didn't type that hard. You know, you had to type it, and they had the hammer to hit it, see? So that darn thing... Came loose? Came loose. So when the good thing, they went in the post, so they didn't wait on him. Like a bullet? Yeah. So there was... Oh, the same thing the casket saw, you know. But there was some kind of guard on it. Did you sharpen the saws every other day? No, no. They had a man doing that. It was his job? Yeah, his job to take care of the knives. That's all he did? Yeah. Did he do it by hand, the filing? Oh, yeah. All hand filing? Oh, yeah, after, you know, they had machines to detect the... But first they had the hand? No, no, first they put it in the machine. And then the finishing touch with the... Yeah, yeah, with the fine files, you know. Just, if there'd be some kind of... Well, the same thing as wood. Oh, he took the horse off, and then he... Yeah, yeah, sure. He didn't want to burn it. Yeah. Bernard Magnusson worked for Lansdorp's. Bernard, yeah. Magnusson. Yeah. He was there for many years. Yeah. What did he work in the... Finishing room. Finishing room. His dad was foreman there. Bernard's dad? Yeah. He was? Yeah. Oh, I see. He drank like a fish. Not at that time, though. Huh? Not at that... Oh, you mean his dad? Yeah. I have fun with... Did they come by the... Working in the finishing room, though, all those smell from leckers and... Yeah, well, I guess... Acetone and everything. They had to stand it. They had to stand it, yeah. Yeah, sure. So they were blue on the inside as well as on the... I don't know. They, you know, they're from, I see, up to... Lake Geneva. And pissing, you know. Yeah. So they went out and he drank like the dick. So he went in to a place there and he... Well, they had all kinds of drinks. So he drank and they had ladies, too. So... There was one fellow, he was kind of... he didn't have much hair in his head, you know. So there were girls come ask him if he liked to have a good time with them. So one come to me. I said, oh, no, I don't... I'm married, so I get what I want. Whatever I want, he was bald-headed. So the other lady said, well, as I tell you, if you go with me up, then you can go up your bald head on my cunt. So he was half-bunked, you know. So then... So I told them, well, they're all married, so I don't think they'd like to do anything with you anyway, so that's no sense to talk to them. And you know that Arne Magnusson, he come home. We rented a cottage there. We lay all together in. And he started vomiting and it smelled like the dick. So I went out and I sit up on the porch to sleep. I couldn't sleep in there. So then he went home. He didn't get any fish, you know. So I take Arne... I was going to buy a salt hanger and put it on his Indian. I did. And he thought, well, they got hot, and it smelled like the dick. He said, gee, what in the heck is this smell? In the country, he'd buy salt herring. Well, I guess, I don't know what it come from. I guess we just passed a restaurant, so I guess they... they fry salt herring. Gee, I still have that damn smell. Man, there must be something. You stop in the place and lift up your hood, see what I want with your Indian. Oh, he starts to sweat a little then. Damn it. Who put that salt herring on my Indian? Well, I said, who knows? There were lots of kids around there, so you don't know. So then he said, yeah, I ain't got any fish. So my wife, she always ask if I get any fish. Well, I said, the only thing, when you come to the Mississippi Park, go out close to the river, dip you... you stop in the river so to be wet, because I may fish him and he don't get any fish. So he did. Oh, I had that turned against him. He got skunked that time. What? He got skunked that time. He got you? They couldn't drink on the job though. What? They couldn't come to the drunk to the job though. No, no. They were sober in between. Oh, yeah, sure. They used to... and he would go out, you know. Oh. So, I was used with them once and they were the last one, so I think I know. It was the last flying herring. Yeah, so they'd ask me if I'd like to go again. I said no, I had not. I said if they can't behave themselves and have... drink so damn much and then can't go out, then they'd be in the room. There was almost like a custom though by the Swedes to get drunk. Oh, yeah. Completely senseless drinking. Yeah, sure. So how do people don't do that, like the Irish and the Italians and the Germans? Oh, yes. They do? Yes. The Irish, or they like the Swedes? No, yeah, but Germans, they drink more beer. So they don't get violent? No, but you take the Norwegian, he can drink. They empty the bottle first? Oh, yeah. I have seen that course when they have duelings, you know, before everything is over, then after the... No, I don't think. And Albin, he was also a... Yeah, he didn't drink either. A temperance man. He was a temperance man. He stick to the temperance, he passed away. But I didn't stick to the temperance. But you joined almost immediately with the VEGA, then you joined with... No, I joined with the Linea. Linea first, yeah. Yeah. VEGA. Yeah, the VEGA, yeah. No... And you were the secretary for some years too? Oh, yeah, I was everything. All the stations? Yeah. I have all the jobs there, the high jobs. Did you belong to the district large too, or the grand large? Yeah, sure. Why did you hop off the train then? Well, there was somebody do me something wrong, so that's why I did it. When you do something wrong with me, then I don't like to have anything to do with it. Yeah, but then they got away with it. Huh? Then they got away with it, they got rid of you. Why didn't you stick by and fight? No, I don't fight. Stand by. No. No, you just left. Yeah. Well, you have many years in there, or... Oh, yes. No, then they do something... me, with my family, you know, then. Because my boy, you know, when he were in... in Halston School. In high school? Yeah, in Halston. Oh, that's the elementary school? Yeah. They had a teacher, and he was smart, you know. So they had a Huckleberry Finn. Tom Sawyer. Yeah, Tom Sawyer, yeah. So then, they should have a teacher, and they got two, the young ones. And he got his role, you know, and he read it, studied it, and... So I said, well, I'm going to ask you some kind of question. So, and they better you take that. So he come home to me and my wife. So I said, no, you're not. Because there should be about a week and a half you have to learn all that thing. I said, you're studying, if you can't have that part, then you don't need you. So, she come and talk to Eddie. Your wife? So then, Eddie said, well, Stephen told me that he gonna, you can't strike him out. Not going to be in the VEGA anymore. Oh, no, he wouldn't do that. And he had her all the places in the VEGA. Even more, in the storehouse, he was, he took care of everything. You know what they do, they send them to the storehouse there, in Chicago. But he said, he mean it. So, so they couldn't have any. And the kids have any theater. Because by the time it was Sunday, then I said, no, no. We need it on Thursday. I said, no. Sunday, he can stretch me out. I stopped with the VEGA lads, and now, VEGA lads are gone for me. So, and he begged me, I said, no. When you do something wrong in a family, keep on with that, and learn it so he don't need to use the book and nothing. So then, and he worked more for that than, and he, and he's schooling, just to be real good. So then. So he left to them, your son? No, he was in Ball Ocean. He was just a kid. Did he drop off too, then? Yeah, I told him, you don't need to go there. What did Alvin, your brother, say then? He didn't say anything. But you were close together, though, you two were. Oh yeah, no, he didn't. I do what I would pay so he could do what he pleased. So then, I assisted soup for Lannister and me. I saw him on Broadway. Up here on Broadway and 11th Street, there was a place, a tavern down there, called the Fuddallkullan. So we stood out, standing out there and talking, you know, and had his car fired up. I had my hand out of sight on Broadway. So, that lady come, you know, she saw me standing there. And she stopped. So then, Oscar said, well, I think I have to go. I said, you see that lady standing over there? Yeah. What's she standing over there for? Well, she's looking at me. And you? You know what? He thinks I've been in the doll kullen and had a drink. So he told that to my brother. Yeah, he said, I saw Stephen, he's standing on Broadway, talking to another fellow, and he's standing close to the doll kullen there. So I think he's been and had a drink. So, my brother said that. So I said, well, that's okay. Next time I'm going to fool him. He served soft drink and everything, and navy beer, you know. So, I said, that's okay, huh? Then I go in there. So then, he can tell you. So then he can say, yeah, I know he went in there because he told me. So then he said, what he told you that for? Yes, because you stand there looking. You think he'll be in the doll kullen. So he said, next time he sees you, then he's going to win. You're not supposed to go stand close there. You're too close. Even standing close was no good. Yeah, but you have no good temple. Yeah, it don't belong to a good temple, then. But she thinks I've been drinking, see? So she meant that there was no big loss? No, well... You were from the fallen to drinking-skapen? Well, but she felt bad, because she knew that... And you never returned to vegan meetings, or anything? No. There came one, a man named Margaret Caesar. Near the fireman, he's named by Victor Caesar. So she came home, she said to me, Well, Steve and Eddie, why don't you join vega again? So they struck you out then? Yeah, I told them, yeah. You didn't pay the dues or anything? No, no. So I said, well, that's okay, we can join. Because I didn't drink. Yeah, I know that, she said. But I know that, but she said that. So I told the straight artist, Steve will never do that, I know that, because I know him since you first came over here. But she was the same age I was. So, there, one day, there was Mrs. Hawkinson, Hawkinson's wife. She was, she came out. Oh, she said, you're going to join again? I said, yeah. How many beer you had? I said, what? Come on, Eddie, let's go. So I went back. You would think they would come and get you and ask you to join, I mean. No, they didn't, they didn't. They didn't care? No, they didn't ask me. But you were a big larksman, you've been in all the offices. Yeah, sure. Yeah, yeah. The whole boomerang. Yeah, sure. But nothing, they didn't care then that you left. But they were too proud to come and ask you. Yeah, but Mrs. Caesar, she asked me. She said, well, you have worked so much for the good Pemperlarks, and we had a good time while you were there. You had always something to cheer them up. So, why don't you join again, you and Eddie? So I said, yeah. So, she said. So, she came with that paper to sign, so I had it, and I signed it. But then, then too, the Marshal came out to go and take us in, you know. And then she said, well, see how many beers have you had. I took my, no, it was summertime. So I said, Eddie, come here, we go. And she locked you down. So, that was. It was the last time. It was the last time, yeah. Was it after the war or before the war? It was after the war. I was there when the war was on. So. This caffeine audit was run by Vega. Yeah. But it was not the same one as Ideal, no? No, no, no. It was too different. No, it was Vega's restaurant. It was Vega's restaurant. It was not the model, good time. They were the owners of it. So, there was a good income then for. Oh, yeah. They made some money on that. But then the depression made it impossible. I remember one time, Alfred Lawson. He belonged to a church. And there was something he brought up that the church should do. Or they wrote against him. So he left the church. So he started to drink. And then they took him. So he owned Vega. He was a smart guy, you know. Wonderful to work with him too. So. And he gave them a contract. You see there, Vega. And the car now, that building beside there. By that time they had a restaurant too, you know. So. I don't know how they come from. If they fell on that little piece. He wouldn't sell it to Vega. And he had an artist on there anyway, see. So he took it up and discussed that we can buy that and move Vega to that building. You see. So they discussed about that, you know. And they went back and forth, back and forth. So then I was the chairman of Vega. So I just told them, well, I can't understand it. You keep going with that back and forth, back and forth. Why don't you make a decision what to do? Either take it, or else dump it. One of the two. The one guy who make a motion, we're not going to buy it. And then I was asking, is there anybody against it? Everyone said, no. We all in favor, so. Then I find out how many some. So he got more than two votes. He got mad, he start to think like a fish. Then he had a tavern up on 7th Street. You know. A North Western go. There was a big house at the tree. I think some kind of organization had rented upstairs. Lower there, there's a tavern. That's still there. So he won that. Start to get big fat like that. So. So you became the barman, huh? Yeah. How was the depression over the IOMG? Was there a blessing, or was it a... Well, there was. Was it good for the people, you think? No. Was there a push behind the back? No, I don't think. I think everybody has something to do, so they get some money. I know they cut me down. Under the depression. They did? Oh, yes. What happened then? Well, they were able to sell. So then after, you know, and they start in, we get all kinds of cabinets to make. And they were worse again, you know. So then I get my wages back again. So there was a good thing they released this? Yeah, yeah. The supervision. Yes, yes. Of the bars and the assessment rooms. Then they want me to lay off half of my crew. So I said, no. The soup, come. So he said, I better lay off half of them. Because you can't work more than four days a week. So I said, no. I'm going to split. And they won't work. Half of them work, have four days. Then they stay home, and the others are home. They come back because they have young, small kids. And I don't like to see any kids get big and starve. Or eat beans. There was a good proposition you made. Is that what they do today? Yeah, yeah, sure. They should work half the time? Yeah, sure. So then what happened? Yeah, it happened. He said to me, I guess I can't understand you can be like that. I said, why not? Were you the only superintendent that did that? Yeah, I was the only one that did it. The other boss. So the soup came down to me. He said, you're supposed to lay off people. What are you going to lay them off for when you split them in half? Half of them work so many days, and then the other half come back and work the other day. Well, so that landsome came down. So I told him about it. Well, you can do what you please. That's up to you. He confided in you? Yeah. He confided in you? Oh, yeah. I was a foreman then, so I could tell him that. So he said, it's okay with me. Because you know we can't have so many workers when we don't have very much to do. I said, I know that. I said, if they go farther down, then I split them in three. Because I don't like to see small kids can't get a bottle of milk. Well, he said to me, you're too soft. Yeah, I'm too soft. When I see somebody starve. Oh, if you come to me and say, can you give me five dollars, if you are that starved, then I'll do it. I said, I think so. Was this a common thing to do like you did now, or were people unacceptable? No, no, no. No, they were not common at all. They were not? No. So a lot of people didn't give a hoot, you know what I mean? No, no. When they laid them out, they kept so many, they could walk all the time. And some were evicted from their apartments and houses? Yeah, yeah, sure. So you had good ideas? Yeah. Why didn't you run for alderman or mayor of Rockford? Oh, I don't want it. You were not interested in politics? No. I'm interested in seeing if they write the paper. So now when you became a citizen in 1929, you had to wait until the next election between Hoover and Roosevelt? Oh, yeah. And you? Well, I voted for Hoover, too. Who gave you the idea, though? You felt like you were in the management. Yeah, sure. But I don't vote for him. But so, Haley said to me, yeah, but you should vote for him. He told them that they're going to get two Warrens and Dales, or two chickens in a pot. He actually said that? Yeah, he did. And people believed it? Yeah. So they voted for him. So then, well, he voted again, and then Roosevelt, he went to Democrat. And then after a while, then they got the Social Security. So that's a law, so they can never change that. Some say there was Hoover's idea, Social Security, was it? No. It was also? Yeah. 1936? Yeah. No, that comes from Roosevelt. What did the Republicans say then, like Lammstrom and P.A. Peterson, when the Social Security came in? Did they say they were going to be ruined? No, no. They paid him so much, the workers. Oh, but the management had to pay him too, though. Yeah, they had to pay him some, yeah. Like P.A. Peterson, though, he was not the Roosevelt man. Well, I don't know, I can't tell you. Because he never talked in the Parliament. He never talked anything like that with you? No, no. I used to talk to him once, that's all, though, he don't come down to see me anymore. You chewed him off, too? Yes, yes. You were probably known there in Rockford, though, as being a chewed-off man. Well, I don't know. But, you know, the assistant soup, Oscar Warburg, when he come down with Anton Larsen, the soup, and then he start to sweat a bit, the band, and howl. So I said, the mask on, what's the matter with you? Then you come down and have Selwyn talk to me. Talk decent. Did he talk in Swedish to you then, or? Oh, yeah, sometimes Swedish, sometimes English. You had no trouble to understand what he meant? No. So I said, just because Anton Larsen and with you, then you're just like a bull. He said, what's the matter with you? Are you into humans? Oh, yeah. I got him once. He make some kind of puddle out. I don't know if I told you that. And then we make, for the government, kratzmannhagni cases, bedramsute, and we had kratzmannhagni, and sat them with a boarder. In the inserboarder, see? Do you know what I mean? You have to put in between, see? In all around them. So he come down to me, so he said, Steve, one tap off and lost. I said, man, what do you mean lost? I guess you forgot to get one. What? he said. How couldn't I do that? I said, they were for the high dresser. I said, they marked everyone. One, two, three, four, five. So forth, so on. So how can they get lost? They were lost. The resort told me that. They were not there. So he had all the droppings there, and he had to get that in all around, see? So I said, well, that's what he told me, so you have to try to, I'll bring down another one, and see if you can match it up. Well, I said, I'm going to investigate first, before you come down here with it. So you, when I prove it, then you can come down, but not before. So I went up and talked to him. No, I wasn't missing. I said, well, the only result I can get, they go down to the firemen and ask in. So I said, I think he's talking about Charlie. Charlie? Yeah, Steve. What do you want? Well, I don't want anything, I just like to talk to you. Well, that's okay with me too. I said, a fellow come down here with a with a small, long piece of wood. Yeah, he did. I said, you put it in the fire? No, he opened the door, threw it in. But he said, what's the matter with that wood? It was just a regular board, I don't see anything wrong with that, but he put that in for. Well, I said, thank you ever so much. So I went up. So I said to him, I said, Oscar, come here, I'm going to talk to him. I said, that board you brought down to the firemen, and you let him throw that in the fire. He opened it, so he said, you don't need to do that, I can take it and throw it in. No, I said, I'm going to throw it in. So I said, when you start the fire, then you took the side three quarters, instead of an inch. Yeah, he said, I did. I said, then you damn fool come and tell me that we have missed one. So I said, bring that down now, and I'm going to tighten that, so I did. No, he didn't fool me. So this was the city of Brunnery Love? Yes, that's it. So then they made a cabinet for these machines, where they put records in. Beautiful. It was going to be in poplar, because it was going to be white, painted white, and then the difference kind of stopped. And what was for the radio cabinets? No, the music boxes. Oh, the music boxes. Yeah, they were going curved. No, they were straight. So it was going to be in poplar. The front was supposed to be hole, for the whole board, for the model you can put together inside. And Anton Larsen's, yeah, he was Anton Larsen's sister. So he was the foreman up in that cabinet, where they drilled holes and stuff like that, you know. So, they ordered for, I think they made over two thousand. So, I marked up the sizes of everything, and gave it to the office, to George Selene. He was the buyer. I ordered stuff and he sent in so we had it. So they all gave me one piece in front. So, they make all the plywood, and they went up to the cabin maker, and he's supposed to drill them holes, you know, so they can put them together, ends and ends. So I don't know how they did it, but the back one there, they were on the front, and the front one there were inside. So the suit came down to me. Oh, he was mad. How could they get that wrong? Well, he'd have watched. He'd have watched them. Yeah, but they worked with themselves, or something like that. Yeah, sure they should. The old Swedes? Yeah, well, I don't know if the old Swedes, no, I had a Lithuanian and I had an Italian, so they don't bother me. You would think they would have common sense, though. Yeah, sure. But they just put it together the wrong way. Yeah. So, then they come up to Magnus and to the Finnish department, and the lance had come down to me. So he said, Steve, you have to go get me up to the Finnish department. I said, what for? Well, you do something wrong. What do you mean I do something wrong? The bolt gets the bling. Yeah. I said, you had the back side, or you had the front side? Yeah, I don't know. The back side had two pieces, the inside had whole pieces. Well, tell your brother-in-law. Don't tell me. Because then they cut them up, everything, we lay them all in the front, and one top and top and the one. So they go up to them and build the holes and stuff like that, so don't come to me. And he was mad. So I said to Magnus, can I use your phone? What for? I said, never mind what for, but I don't like to use his phone. So I called up the officer, George, better you come up here. He said, Steve, what's the matter with you now? Well, there's nothing there, there's something wrong with Antonoff and Magnus. 500 kilometers the wrong way. Yeah, sure. So, he come up. He got mad too. He said, what's the matter with you? Well, would you blame everything on Steve? Then your own chalet, you can't watch the guys, they drill holes, they drill the wrong holes. They turn the drawing the wrong way. Yeah, sure. But he didn't say anything. So then I said to Magnus, well, I think you can fix it if you want to. You give them white and then you take the black. And you can see the little nuts, then you can put a little black under. Just jump something. So he said, yeah, you have all kinds of tricks. Then you sold them to a Jew in Chicago. Yeah, sure. Well, but they couldn't do anything else with them. If they put them in so you see the yonk in there, then they'd ship them back. When the buyer gets the ship like that, were they cautious to look for everything? Oh, yeah. They were. They would send it back then. Or did they try to do the price down? No, no, no. They sent it back. Yeah, sure. But wouldn't you offer them, like I said, a little bit cheaper, you know, so we don't have to... No, I wouldn't bother with that. It wasn't up to your department? No. Lansdorf took care of that? No. It was another guy. Well, I guess the... Lansdorf, he didn't need to do anything because then they have the office manager. He had to take care of that. And then probably Lansdorf come in and tell them something. Were people more cautious years ago, you think, with quality and everything after what we are today? Oh, they were just the same. But today, you know, you get a lot of cheap stuff. You know, you have those... Yeah, there, yeah....plywood planes and everything. No, no, they have to be just perfect. Right. So... Because if they have anything wrong with the plywood that we made for the company down in Iowa, then I went down the railway and see what the wrong was. You had to be on the toes all the time. Yeah. But talking about prohibition, are they started in 1917 or 18 or what? Yeah, they was, yeah. I think they was, yeah. So all the bars and the freshman places now serving liquor and hard liquor from 1917 up to 1930... Was it 1934 they went out? Yeah. They didn't buy any kind of equipment then? I mean, bar discs and stuff like that? No, no, no. They was completely... Yeah, well, if they need it, then they have to do it, see. Oh, well, you started to make new ones now? Yeah, yeah. Did you get a new design to work with then or did you... Oh, yeah, sure. If we started anything new, then we have one fella that do the drawing and then we go back after that, see. Was there any newer ideas then? Oh, yeah, in some of the cabinets and there were ideas in the regular bedrooms and dining rooms too. They was renewed, but I mean, the bar business now, they was dead, you know, for 15 years there. Oh, yeah. Did something... We don't do anything with that, but we serve liquor. Oh, you didn't make any equipment, I mean, interior facilities for them? No, but we make the plywood for the stuff. Oh, I see. We had... Davis cabinet. What? Davis fixture. Yeah, we make the fixture for the plywood and they can do with it whatever they want. Oh, I see. Yeah. So Davis fixture company, they made the board disks and... Yeah, sure they do, yeah. How about the plywood now? Were they using good glue at that time? Well, they... You had good stuff? Well, they had vegetable glue. Was it hot? Yeah, it sure is. It was hot? Yeah, it was. But then they have the animal glue. I guess ants and bats, they use the vegetable glue. Tapioca. Tapioca? Yeah. Tapioca, they... And then they have some kind of... See, they have some other stuff they put in there, some meat glue, you know, or flour. And they mix that thing. And then after they changed it... And then they had the animal glue. Then they changed it to, well, some kind of waterproof glue. Or then they had tega glue. Then you have to lay all that tega glue, they used a sheet of paper. And then you have the hot press, have so many degrees hot. And it was good stuff? Yeah. And you can take a piece of that and put it in the ground and lay it up for a year, and how long you feel like it. Would you mean even outside, it was good for outside, the exterior? Yeah. You can get your stuff raining and everything, and they don't bother them. The only thing probably the finish. But the plywood won't get loose. Without the loose vegetable, they're waterproof, see? If they get wet, if they have been wet, then you might take it off right away. Then it's just as good. So you and Albino, you were also interested in singing. Yeah. You stayed together in Sveasølund? No, we... Leirand, yeah. We started a good tempo course. Yeah, I guess we organized it too. Then all the three lasses went together, you know. But then when Sundstrand, you know, when they had them here, machine, you know. Heavy machine. Yeah. Then they went to, they sold it to... Frisbord. Yeah. So then they were half a day course, but what they say... They split it up. Split it up, yeah. So then we joined Leirand. How come people nowadays, you know, years ago you could hear people whistle and sing and do whatever working. You don't hear it anymore? No, no. Why? I don't know. It's like the birds are quiet. In other words, you don't hear anything. Well, but you know, you know down there that every year they are changed. Yeah, but you know, 15, 20 years ago, or 25 years ago, bricklayers in Chicago, in Cleveland, in Pittsburgh, they were standing on the scaffolds, throwing the mortar, you know, and whistling and singing. Yeah, well... They don't do that today. No. Why? Just because everything changed. How about them years? Where you go now, a little back for? They didn't know anything about dope. They didn't know anything about the cigarette, the rolling smoke. And there are people there, they didn't know anything about sex. They still didn't know. They still didn't know, but not in the open. But not the young ones. You don't know them years now, when you have a girl singing and everything, at 12 years old, pregnant. There you are. It changes every year. The generation changes. Doesn't it signify, though, when you are singing and whistling, you feel good? Yeah, sure. I do that now. I feel good when I'm singing. Yeah. But people today don't do that. No. Don't they feel good? Well, I don't know. Today they complain about headaches and backaches. Yeah, sure. Well, they... They're rotten. Yeah, sure. You see, at them time, everything was just... Hunker Dora, what you tell them, say? It was a more simple life then. Yeah. Everything was simple. You take now a 14 years old girl, up to 13. How you old-fashioned. You didn't know. You old-fashioned. That little girl tell her mother, you old-fashioned. And she put lipstick on her eyes. I said, Frissa, don't you think you're too young to put it on? Everybody do it. You, you, them, ladies, the old-fashioned. Well, I said, the funny man didn't put it on. I said, kid, listen, you have lots to learn. You wait when you be by yourself. Then listen. And the boys, the boys, oh, she said to her mother, we were at work, oh, I said, I like that boy. Oh, you do? Yeah, he's a good-looking, I just like him. Well, I think you're too young yet. Men already know about sex. What did you do when you were nine? Did you know about sex when you were about ten years old? Not very much. No? Then you are. So? Now they know when they are three. Yeah, sure. They are old, you know, when they are ten now. They are old-fashioned when they are ten now, you know. Yeah, sure, well. No, they don't talk so much about the old-fashioned. That'll be. So I said to her, how about the men in the dress? I said, they're not old-fashioned. You see, now suddenly they come with overhalls, with some other big hole on. You mean that's style now? No, she said, well, how's that, that the ladies are old-fashioned. I think your mother, she was wonderful. Yeah, mother, old-fashioned. Do they listen to you when you sit and talk with them? Oh, yeah. They do? Yeah, sure. I said, okay, you wait when you got five-seven. You don't need to, your mother can't tell you anything. Then you find out better. Now you see the other girls, probably, girls that are probably a year, year and a half, you know, older than you, and you see all this stuff that she put on, then you think, oh, I can do that same thing. I don't like to be old-fashioned. I said, that's not old-fashioned. I said, when I first got married, my wife was not old-fashioned. She just have you lipstick, and then you have blue, and eyes, and then the eyebrows you take off. She was not old-fashioned. And I said, I tell you she was dressed just so well for me queen. But not all that, and stockings put on your cheek and everything. And then the advertising of TV soap, they didn't take it off. And then you had to have something else. So then you can find out who is old-fashioned. So they all have to go a long way to be happy. Oh, yeah, well, I don't care because I tell you one thing. Kids, they don't care. No, they don't care. The kids before, they were happy, and here they just only think about sex. That's all. So when you were skating with Britta, home in Skåne, you didn't think about sex then? No. You were holding hands and kissing? Yeah, yeah, sure. Of course. And Countess Jyllandskjern, she was not afraid to let her loose? No, no, no. As a guard? Yeah, sure. She trusted you? Huh? She trusted you? Yeah, sure. So, no, I couldn't understand, you know, it was Sunday. Well, then I had to go see the hothouse, okay, and stuff like that. But I was free anyway that Sunday, and then they were up in the gorge, the girls, you know, and me. And there was a guy who brought milk to the girls. So then she always came up there, and we had a really nice time. Yeah, sure. Togetherness? Yeah. So we had a party, you know. So, yeah, there were boys, and they had girls, you know, and I took home one of his girls, you know. So I went to Englehorn, so they asked me to buy brandy. We did that because we had a brewery there, in Clippah. So I bought two bottles of whiskey. So the drinks, you know, there was another guy. Yeah, I had taken the best I ever could. I was a little pissy, too, with down too. I was in a good temper, that. He said, well, you took my girl. Of course, I'm my girl, but you took her, and he would have a fight. He was much bigger than me. So I said, I didn't take anybody. I didn't take your girl. So I went up to Clippah, and I kicked her off, and we just walked together till the place there. I had my vote.