 We talked about seeking a new director for the American-Swedish Institute, and you were on the board. Can you tell me now what really happened there? Well, as I remember, it was Gus Johnson, who was the president of the Institute at that time, him and I believe Nelson, they went to Chicago and approached Wesley Westerberg, trying to hire him to be the director of the American-Swedish Institute. They came back and they apparently had made arrangements where Wesley would come to Minneapolis as the director. They had a meeting of the board of directors, and they told us what had happened, that they went there. Gus Johnson, I remember, said that they felt like schoolboys going in the presence of this outstanding man. They went in with hat in hand and proposed this new job for Wesley. They were really ashamed that they could only offer him such a poor salary. How much was that at that time? We never did find out. But you were on the board. Yes, I know that. But you see, that board, with the possible exception of myself and maybe one or two others, they were the hand-picked choice of Nels William. He apparently had passed the word that this was nobody's business, what they offered. So when this explanation was over and there was some discussion, I asked, well, now it's too bad that you could only offer him such a pitiful salary. What was the salary that you offered him? Well, we just don't feel that that should be public knowledge. No, that may well be, but I consider myself as a member of the board of directors that I'm not just the general public. I will be asked by many people, because I'm probably as well-known or better known than most of you guys are. Well there was a fellow by the name of Dr. Lindquist, a moose of a man. From Minneapolis? Oh yes. He's a medical doctor. And he ballared like a lion, you know. And I don't know whether he thought by yelling real loud that he was going to frighten me, but he says, well, he didn't feel that that was any of my business or anybody else's business, what they offered him. Well, of course, I told him different. But you see, the other people, I'd say most of the rest of them, I don't think anybody else spoke up, because they were afraid of being chastised by Olson and Gus Johnson and of course Lindquist and a couple of others that were real close. But afterwards, several came up and said, gee, congratulations, we're sure happy that you spoke up. Well, so I said, well, if you believe that, why the hell didn't you say something? So I had at that time a real good rapport with the newspapers, not because of reporting scandals or anything, but we did enough things that were newsworthy that we always got good press, good press. Even for our Midsummer Queen contests, which there must be a hundred of them in the state of Minnesota, and they stay away from those. But we were always very fortunate, primarily because I knew people and they trusted me, they knew that I wasn't pulling any shenanigans, and so we always got good press. And of course they were jealous of that, and they figured that I would report that. I really don't know what they ever paid them. That never became available. Like at annual meetings, they would lump all salaries into one pile. They would never say that Joe Blow got so much, and so nobody knew what anybody got. You were the only one that questioned it. I was the only one that questioned it, yeah. Because I felt that was something very important. It must not have been very much. You would think the membership, though, would be a little bit suspicious. The membership never, you see, the membership, even at annual meetings, no, they were just pounded down, you know. The chairman, nobody had a chance. And this Lindquist, now he was almost like a former jury. Well, he was, you see, he considered himself a pretty important man. He was a physician, and he was a big man. He probably weighed 275 pounds if he weighed an ounce. And the mayor, his mayor size commanded respect, you see. And so he thought that by yelling at me that he would shut me up. Now, I've never run across anybody that was big enough to shut me up if I wanted to hear something or wanted to say something, because I had nothing to hide. But, no, there was, I will say this, that in the recent years, the Institute is doing a pretty good job. I feel they are. How did you come on the board in the first place? Because, like you said, he handpicked them. You see, well, he handpicked candidates. Not everybody, oh, no. But there were enough people that he could trust and would work with him. But after all, I was a hell of a lot better known among all of the Swedes than Nils Williamson. So your name probably came up very often then. Sure. Then you, as I remember, we elected eight every year for three-year terms. I mean, a board at that time of 24, and you had three-year terms. And so, I don't remember. I think I had the highest number of votes in that particular election. So there was no way for him to get rid of you then? Oh, no, no, no. No, no way. Did he try to persuade you at any time to change your mind on subjects that you were against? Oh, sure. He said, yes, he said, we should work real close. Well, I will say this, that we did. We did, until I found that he, in my estimation, he just wasn't being honest about a lot of things. Morning. I don't know if I ever mentioned to you about these instances where we chose Lucia to send to Sweden. Did I tell you about that? Yeah, I think you did. Sure I did. I mean, you know, you get burned enough times, and you catch them in just out-and-out lies time and time again, you lose faith. So going back now to Chicago then, that search committee went down there, and Lindsey Williams was one. That's right. Well, I know, I'm sure he was one. I think there were three, and I don't remember who the other person was anymore. If I had felt it was important, I probably would have remembered. But I know that Gus Johnson was the president of the Institute. So this sounds like they were crawling then for Wesley Westerbork. Absolutely. They went in to see him, to see this important man. Did you know Westerbork? Well, only by name. You never met him in person? I had never met him, no. So you thought there was a tremendous authority? Well, I've heard so much bullshit in my life that I don't, I just, I've adopted a long time ago that I only believe nothing of what I hear and only half of what I see. And I had no reason to feel that he wasn't a good man, but at the same time, the mere fact that Nels William wanted him, and because, you see, I felt that in my estimation, Nels could control him, until they had a falling out. But didn't you have a feeling that the sound of Nels William was even below Wesley Westerbork's statue when they went? No, I don't think so. I don't think that he ever felt that. But you must remember that all of this, during this time, Nels William was organizing the Swedish Council of America, all on Institute time, and used their facilities. He'd shut himself away for days and write stuff, and because of his position, he got the Swedish Council of America situated where they could accept, get money, and people can deduct it. And he had secured an office then at the American Swedish Institute, even before Westerbork came up. Oh, yes, absolutely. No question about it. So anyway, they came then to Evanston and saw Wesley Westerbork, and what did they report to you then? Well, that they wanted him, they wanted to hire him, of course. And you decided then at the next board meeting to? Well, the majority of the board did, yeah. I don't even know if I voted, but there was enough people, you know, after all, a 24-member board, you see. So he was... So he came up then? Oh, yes. And his wife? And his wife, uh-huh. It was a common saying that Mrs. Westerbork wore the pants in that family. How did you know that? Did somebody outside tell you about it, or did you know it yourself? Well, it became... She didn't have to be there terribly long before people realized that she was the... He could never make a decision. Well, I wouldn't say never, but any decision that amounted to anything, he would always say, well, let me think about it, and I'll let you know in a day or so. Always. Well, he discussed it with his wife. So you were still on the board then when he was the director? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. So you had weekly meetings, or? Oh, monthly, I think. Monthly? Yeah. Yeah. So what did he present now as the future of the American Swedish? Did he have any bold statements to make? Well, they were just trying to survive, actually. But I think their future is good now. Oh, no, it's good. But at that time, it was... Well, it was just come see, come saw, you know? They were keeping... Now, they have done much better under the direction of a person who is not quite as controversial at all. John? John, yeah. So when he came, one of his important points was to raise money. Oh, yeah. Well, that's always the important job of the director. So the... Delegate people to do things, and he, of course, his job was to raise money. But I understand that Nils William didn't give him all the insights or to get the money. No, I'm sure he didn't. You must remember that Nils William all of this time was working toward the goal of the Swedish Council of America. And he wanted... You see, you can't ask people to donate to two projects at the same time. You can... And of course, after all, he wanted money for the Swedish Council. And consequently, that's obvious. And you see, then he resigned. And then they had a woman by the name of Audrey Wareham, a very capable person, excellent background and very capable. And finally, things, in my opinion, things got so bad with Nils William that he talked westly into firing this woman so that Nils could come in and get her salary as... And to act in an advisory capacity. Well, of course, it doesn't make much sense when you hire such an outstanding man that you have to have the former director in an advisory capacity. If it weren't for the fact that the former director needed the salary. And... So he was going to work side by side then with Weston? Yes. And then it didn't take too long until... Apparently things didn't go well because then he... With so many opportunities, he started to find fault with Wesley. He was disappointed in Wesley. He thought that Wesley would do a better job. And he told people, I'm so disappointed. And would find fault with Wesley at every turn of the road. So he undermined him? Undermined him to a point where he became just about, well, worthless in a way because, you know, he had... He was spending full time defending himself. And they all sing about, a mule can't pull when it's kicking. And that was poor Wesley's position. How did his wife now, Lorraine, fit in here with Ms. William Olsen? Did they have any... Well, of course, at first......advice? First, of course, it was all lovey-dovey, you know. After all, they were indebted to Nels for getting there. But then as time went on, of course, they didn't get along. And she was a very difficult person to get along with. Was she present at the board meetings, too? Well, this I don't remember whether she was or wasn't. Probably not. Probably not. But she made her weight felt with the volunteers. One time I remember, purely accidental, I heard Wesley... He was not a very diplomatic man. You always find that ministers, school teachers, librarians, people like that are normally not very diplomatic. They have their own way. There's only two ways of doing things, their way and the wrong way. And she was very dictatorial. Even though she had really no official position, she was there all the time. And alienated a lot of people. You know, you can't talk down to people. The most valuable asset that that organization has are volunteers. So they started to drop off then? Well, a lot of dissension. But people loved the Institute as an organization, so they put up with a lot of this stuff. Even though they were criticized. I remember, as I started to say, Wesley one day ate a couple of women out. So I said, Wesley, that's the wrong attitude. These people work here for nothing. If all these people get mad at you and just stay away, you're going to have a hell of a time. Oh, he says, they won't stay away. He said, they should consider it a privilege to work for nothing for the Institute. And they did consider it a privilege. But you don't have to take a lot of tongue lashing just to consider something a privilege. I feel that the Institute now is probably in better condition than it has ever been, both membership-wise and money-wise, although they're constantly begging for money. But they're doing things. You know, the building is old, and they replaced the boiler, which was so not dependable at all. And they've done a lot of extensive remodeling. Money supplied by Swedes who have money, immigrants who have made money. But they are very tight with giving recognition. You know, they could do a lot better if they passed out a few plaques. Don't cost that much. You can get a pretty, in fact, a very nice one, anywhere from $50 to $75. The volunteers should smell the roses before they are gone. They should smell the roses. That's right. And you see the thing- Like, Nils William Wollstone, he is probably a person, and also Westerberg was the same way, that they don't want to belittle themselves to recognize- Oh, that's right. Because then they are- Then they're brought down to that level, you see. But they're, oh yeah, they're- I don't know what Nils, and I never bothered to ask what Nils William's doctorate is in, whether it's in- No, there's honorary. I was going to say whether it's in pool or what it is, but whatever it is, and the same with Westerberg, it- Nils William's is- Honorary. No, this doctorate, this real doctorate. Oh, Nils. In Icelandic sagas. Oh, yeah. Well, I was going to say, I was going to say- But Westerberg's is honorary. Yeah. Well, either one, as far as I'm concerned, isn't worth a damn, because when you talk about a doctorate, well, I'll certainly recognize if it's in something like physics or something that amounts to anything. But Icelandic sagas, I don't know what the hell that's going to- how that's going to improve the- But they always, oh, a doctor, so and so. See there are people, there are people who have little, virtually little education of their own, so they kind of like to rub shoulders with people who lay some claim. And I have several specific examples in mind where, oh gosh, oh, I saw Dr. So and So, and I saw Dr. Nils, and Dr., you know. Well, I have found that people should be judged by their deeds, I feel, other than some phony credentials. And I don't question that Nils has at all. I'm sure he has a legitimate doctorate in Icelandic sagas. But that doesn't send me very far. When it comes to human relations, in my estimation, he was standing behind the door when the Lord passed that out. And I think it was a good thing when they got someone like the present director. He at least hadn't risen to the heights yet. He was still climbing, so he could be somewhat subservient to these people that were big wheels in their own estimation at least. Nils William now, did he attend some of the meetings when Westerberg was director? Did he come in as a consultant as he had before? Oh, yes, oh yes, oh yes, oh sure. But he didn't have to keep, you see, you must remember that Nils had his office in the institute. While he was, when he was the director of the American, or executive director I guess it was, of the Swedish Council of America. He told me that he was going to establish, well I'll go back a year, a few years, the then current consul, Swedish consul general, I forget who it was frankly. Forchel? Oh no, it was before. Very nice, very nice person, very nice person. Forchel, by the way, was very capable, very capable. He was a little egotistical too, but you could put up with that at least because he was very capable and he did things. Forchel was here, you know, in 76 when the king was here. It was an excellent job that was done. But you see then, but it's always been the same. I'll get back to that other subject, but it used to be, you know, where Nils William was always in the forefront trying to take control of anything that came up. I don't know if I mentioned to you about that organization that put on, that really ran things in Minneapolis. Minneapolis, by the by, was the most successful, had the most successful affair when the king was here of anybody in the country. That was told by everybody, I mean out from other places, that we had, and we did have a very successful one. Was he the publicity director, Nils William? No. That's a long story. No, he wanted to be. He wanted to be the national coordinator. For the whole United States? For the whole United States. And he tried to set himself up as that. Did I tell you about that? Yes, a little bit. I know that. But I thought he was publicity director of Westerberg. He promised to take care of some publicity and he didn't do it. You mean Ford? No, that's another story. No, that happened when Princess Christina. Oh, there was the one, yeah. When she was here. And it was completely. Oh, a complete, well, he didn't do a thing. And he bragged about it. You see, the consul general called a bunch of us together, Sonskin's dog, and a few people, a few people ahead of it. We did things. We didn't need any money from everybody. We were self-sustaining. We made enough money to do the things that we wanted to do and we did a hell of a job. Nobody came close to us as far as getting public recognition for good things. It's easy to get notoriety if you want to do it on things that are not complimentary. So the consul general called, asked several of us to come to his house and then he appointed me as chairman of this committee that was to greet and take care of Christina when she came. Well, of course, Nils William, he was so mad you can't believe. Well, you see, everything that he could do enhanced his position as the director of the institute as well. And then he could brag to the people after all the institute was the head of the movement to take care of. That's the focal point. Absolutely. So then he volunteered to do the publicity. Do you think he was sidestepped by the consulate? Oh, there's no question about it. No question about it. Did he convince the consulate to do that? I think Nils William, by his own actions, you know, you get kicked in the shins enough times and you're going to be a little hesitant to deal with these people. And I'm the first one to say that Nils William is very capable. Ruthless in my estimation, but capable. But anyhow, he definitely sidestepped them. So he volunteered. Well, that was maybe like a month and six weeks ahead, or maybe even more. But anyhow, as time came closer and closer and closer, nothing was in the papers, nothing was on radio, nothing was on television. And of course, we had meetings and I'd ask, look, where's all the publicity? Oh, it'll come. Well, then he told me point blank. Oh, he says, I deliberately sabotaged it. But then it was too late to do anything about it. Well, finally, the last couple of days, then I went ahead. I went ahead then and we did get some publicity. But you know, the closer you get to an event, the more things that need taking care of. And if I had only had that job to do, just get some publicity, that would have been no problem. But you got a hell of a lot of other things. We had to arrange with the Radisson South. And so— How could he explain a situation like that? He didn't have to. But didn't you ask him why he did it? Oh, of course. Well, because he said, he said, I just felt that I should have been the chairman of that. Oh, sure. He was mad because he wasn't the chairman of it, so he was going to sabotage it. He didn't want anybody to get any credit. See, then we had the showing of the Moberg. Side two. And, but there was— Who was the chairman for that one? It was Westerberg then? For that film showing? For which? For that film, Immigrant? Oh, no, no. Westerberg had nothing to do with it. He was already out then? No, I just don't remember, but he had nothing to do with it. Did he withdraw more and more than Westerberg when he saw he had this agonizing— No, no. I think what he did, really I don't quite remember just what the circumstances were. I just kind of got so damn disgusted with the constant infighting. I think he had a chance to get back to Chicago, and he saw that it was a hopeless case in Minneapolis and he just went back. What did he say then at the meeting? I don't even remember. Oh, you mean— Yeah, Westerberg, when he left. Oh, I don't remember. I wasn't there. I couldn't care less. I had too much to do to waste my time dealing with what in my estimation were non-entities that I couldn't care less. What did Miss Williams say? Had he moved on to Florida at the time, or was he still there? I don't remember if he had moved on here at that time or not. But he was still around though in America, because of the office. Sure, sure, for a long time, a long time after that. And that's of course why his son is there too. They maintain that office. I don't know if they pay any rent or anything, but—and they use the mailing list, you know, Institute mailing list. How anybody justifies that, I don't know. I know that you and I couldn't get it. So he dropped down to Chicago then. He was completely out. Oh, yeah. Was he bitter about it? Did you talk to him personally? No, I didn't. He more or less felt betrayed in Westerbury, don't you think? Oh, I don't think so. In Nellis William, you mean. Well, also Westerbury. He felt betrayed? Yeah. Oh, of course he felt. It's pretty obvious. Because he understood every day he was in that office that more and more— Yeah, it was somebody picking on him all the time. And his wife couldn't take it either. And no, she was not very popular. As a matter of fact, when the king was here—Christina was here before that. But when the king was here, then the consul general appointed me—I fell by the name of Erickson—I forget his first name now—and another man, as the three people who had—we were the authority as far as anything that was done concerning the king's visit had to receive our okay. And frankly, we did a hell of a job. Wound up making money, brought in people from all over the state. Just a hell of a successful thing. A fellow by the name of Leonard Ramberg, he was the third person, very capable person. Used to be kind of on Nelson Williams. Nelson Williams always used the term of, well, I've got so-and-so in my pocket. Atencio That was Ramberg? Huckey Well, not more so than other people, but they got along pretty well. But the consul general was the one that appointed these three people. Only Erickson, I think, was the other guy. A person I could never understand why. Atencio He was for the bank? Huckey Yeah, that's right. Northwestern Bank, as I remember it. I haven't seen him much since. He never did anything. It was funny because—see, all that they wanted to do, you get an insight as to people's thinking. The first meeting we ever had, I came, oh, like five minutes before our appointed time. Well, then they had already decided, the two of them, well, the two of them had already decided who the chairman was going to be. Well, of course, it was pretty obvious. So I said, well, that's all right. We won't go through the formality because I'm sure that the results would be the same. But then they ran into trouble. They were going to run things. They were going to run things pretty much to the benefit of the Institute, which I could understand because Leonard was very active in the Institute, and Erickson also. Have you met this Erickson? Huckey Yes, I met him once in Sweden. Atencio In Sweden? Huckey Yeah, he came to the Institute one day. Atencio Is that so? I never knew he'd ever been there. Huckey No, he was in the Institute. Atencio So, of course, there are lots of Erickson's in banks, too. Huckey Well, this was Wallace Erickson from Northwest Bank. Atencio Oh, yeah, OK. Huckey I think he was the vice president or something. Atencio Well, listen, they give them titles instead of money, so that doesn't mean anything. Huckey It was an inducement to have an Erickson. Atencio Oh, shit. So they said, well, we're going to invite, we should invite, the Institute is going to be the focal point. Well, that was all right with me because it's a building, a location. And I'm not so certain that it shouldn't have been. I didn't object to that. But then they said, well, we're going to have so-and-so and so-and-so and so-and-so. So I said, well, you've got a lot of chiefs now who are the Indians. You don't do these things without help. Oh, well, we can do this. Well, it didn't take very long. They found out they couldn't do a damn thing. They didn't have any connections anyplace. So the consul, they apparently went to the consul general. They didn't want to admit it to me because he called me in and he said, I understand things aren't going too well. What do you suggest? Oh, I said, hell, let Ramberg and Erickson do it. Well, it came out that they—well, he didn't feel they were doing anything. So he said, what I would appreciate if you would call a meeting and invite the chairman or the president, whatever they call them, of every organization, all the fraternal organizations like the Vasa Order, or Svichud. So I asked—I remember at a meeting I asked, well, we've got so-and-so and so-and-so and so-and-so, and they're going to have Gustavus at Office College. Well, that's fine, but it's a hundred miles away, and, you know, they had their own water to carry. So I said, well, what about—I asked him, I said, what about all of these other Swedish organizations? And Wally says, well, what organizations? Well, I said, you've got about seven Vasa Orders, lodges, state, at that time four or five Svichud organizations. You have all the provincial societies, all the Landskapsföreningar. I said, there's just—there's the Gustavus at Office College. So he says, wow, I just mentioned that to you. Or, no, I said, Gustavus at Office Society. Well, I said, you're talking about the college. No, Gustavus at Office. But I said, you mean to tell me you've lived in this town all your life, and the Gustavus at Office Society has a building on 16th and Lake? They're nearly a hundred years old, and you don't know they exist? Well, then I started to eat their ass out, because I found that they didn't know anybody. And it isn't that you're the smartest guy in the world, but you've got to know people. Well, apparently they had gone then to the Consul General and had said, well, I never mentioned all these other organizations. Well, at that time there were a lot of them. There are less today, of course, because people are dying out, immigrants are dying out. But—so I call a meeting for a Saturday. It was a goddamned blizzard, and we had a packed house. Everybody that I invited, because I explained in the letter what it was all about, and the importance, the urgency of a meeting. What did you meet? At a church, a Lutheran church on—in the 3000 block, I think it was on 29th Avenue South. I forget the name of it. Well, and of course Nils William was there selling buttons. Everyone missed an opportunity to make a buck fee. I think he paid 50 cents for them. Yes, I had been told that, but you know, and sold them for a dollar. And those buttons were for the American Swing Institute? No, no, they were for the coming of the king, the anniversary of the— Well, from then on, things just rolled like hell. And just a hell of a successful from a standpoint of attendance, tremendous successful from the standpoint of making money. We have the—we have an organization now that was the outgrowth of the corporation that ran the event. The outgrowth of that is a Minnesota corporation, which—well, I suppose you can use the word inherited—the money. Oh, that's the one that's up in the— No, that's just—you're talking about Scandia. Scandia. Well, Scandia has nothing to do with that. Scandia was the recipient of some of that money. We started this—we gave enough startup money. In fact, we've been the biggest contributor for Scandia. So you had the profit then after this? Oh, absolutely, of which I am still president. And you had— We had complete control of the money. And you had made up beforehand who was going to be the recipient of the money. Was it done before or after? No, no, no, no, no. No, this is still—we still have money. Hell, we have—we had a meeting at the end of October, and I shouldn't even quote it because I'm not certain, but it must be around $18,000 or something. And they're still active then? Oh, absolutely. You bet, we—and we had given the hog's share of it, too. We had about close—it must have been close to $40,000 to start with. And we have given Scandia. I'm very knowledgeable about Scandia. And I have supplied their entertainment every year, all the Swedish entertainment. Yeah, I know that. I'm an Englishman, you told me that when I was a doctor many years ago. See, in fact, I'm corresponding now. I'm just busy in hell here, writing and telephoning. And this is absolutely—I'll tell you afterwards. We were the ones—we even—well, I'll tell you who decided on Scandia. It was Edgar Carlson, the former president of Gustavus, Leonard Ramberg, and I. We looked at a couple, three locations. One, have you ever heard of Jacob Falstrom? Oh, yes. Okay. You know where he is? Yeah. All right. Well, I dug that up out of—oh, hell, I want to say 30 years ago. There wasn't anybody that knew anything about Jacob Falstrom, of the current people. And I had heard about it, so I just made up my mind that here's the first Swede in Minnesota by 50 years. Have you heard the history? Oh, yes. I've heard it. Very good. Otherwise, I can tell it to you. Well, anyhow, we went there. We went to another place. Now, we finally—at the pretty much insistence of Edgar Carlson. I just don't really know if I've ever even heard or cared to know why he was so interested. But somebody told me, and I didn't bother to verify it because it's not that important, but that his father had been either a minister there up at Scandia or something. But he was very interested in—very interested in— In Falstrom's? No, no, in Scandia. Scandia, all of it. He was not interested in Falstrom. No, only in Scandia. He didn't have any personal interest in that, and I'd say that it was personal interest that led Edgar to willingly devote so much time. And, of course, him and Leonard were very close friends and still are today. And they're both—I respect both of them highly. So we went up there, and anyhow, I'll make a long story short. And there have been a lot of nice things done up there. Yes. But nothing. And there's a good—the pastor up there is a Swede. That is the Elam Lutheran Church. Elam Lutheran, right. And it's going to be even better. We will maybe soon give them some more money. They have a beautiful park around there. Beautiful park. And you see it now compared to what it was, a mud hole, you know. And then that Swedish fence that they put up. I don't know how recently you've been there, but— There was going to be a rector when I was there. Oh, yeah. Okay. But I was there very early in 1962 when I—you know, Haiti was— Oh, sure. Monumental, so I know about it. Yeah, yeah. But they've done a good job. So you supported that. Oh, absolutely. In fact, if it hadn't been for the organization that I'm president of, it never got nothing. And the name of the organization is— Minnesota. Minnesota Swedish Council. And it was—well, you see, it was before—what the hell was the name of it before? But we—you see, that's when it was more of an area encompassed this part of the United States, or that upper Midwest part of the United States. But then when that went out of existence, necessity—no more necessity for it, then we had to have something else that we could take care of, that we could take care of the money. And we are very tight with that money. We do support other things, other Swedish things, because after all, this money was not earned just to take care of something like Scandia, because Scandia wasn't even under consideration at that time. It was to take care—we have given money to—we have given money to Hoylund, for one thing. We've given money to—in smaller amounts, you know. In fact, they gave money to help get a float in the Aquitaineal representing the Swedes. You see, Svenska and his dog are mostly myself, frankly, because I've done most of the work, and one or two other people that have been helpers. We've had a float in the Aquitaineal for, I want to say, thirty years. And most of the time, I've had to pay for it, because while Svenska and his dog had money, I always felt that we should have about three or four times as much money in the Treasury as it might if we had a complete rainout, washout, so that we could protect ourselves for the future. And I never minded paying for most of it, because I was interested. But last year, we built a whole new—so they gave $2,000. The Minnesota-Swedish Council gave $2,000 toward that. Well, it wasn't anywhere near all of it, but it was a good help. And now I think that they may give the Svenska and his dog all-girl choir, we may give them some money for the next trip they take. There is an organization—did I tell you what Nels William tried to do to that outfit? No, did he belong to it at any time? No, no, no. I didn't tell you that, huh? No. You know, it's just terrible that you have to relate things of this kind. But sure— So it was against his grain, though? Well, he wanted to take it over. He wanted to have the money— Steal it? No, no, the girl choir I'm talking about. The girl choir. He did his goddamnedest to take over the—if I never told you, this is a— No, not that one. You better tell me. When he went to a meeting in Chicago and told the Chicago Central Committee, did I tell you that? Well, that's when this letter came out. No. What is it? I don't know much about that letter. I got a— No, but he was down there saying something anyway. Well, I'll tell you that story. You see, because of his position, he commanded a certain amount of respect until people—if you crossed him, Jesus Christ, then you're on top of his shit list, you know. And there was a thing he wouldn't do to you if he could. Well, the west—or the consul general—what's his—I'm trying to—I forget his name. In Minneapolis? Yeah, at that time. Well, I can't— You just mentioned it. No, you just— Forchel? Forchel. A fine guy, very accomplished, very capable, and he could get things done. He was a little autocratic, but you can overlook some of that when they do something. Well, anyhow, he called me up one day at work, and he says, see—well, hell, 10.30 in the morning—he says, see, can you have lunch with me at noon? God, I said, it's just absolutely impossible. I said, we've lost our warehouse man, and there are several of us that are trying to do our own jobs, plus take care of that, and it'll go on for a couple of weeks. We've got a new guy coming, but he won't be from another branch of the—I don't remember from where, but I said, I can meet with you some evening. Yeah, well, that's all right. You know, these people don't like to work at night. It's all right for you and I to work and make our living in the daytime and do other things at night, but not those people that get paid for doing this stuff. Tend to do. See, they're above that. Well, not to where I'm concerned, they're not. So anyhow, he said, okay, he said, why don't you—whatever the night was, I don't know. But it was like about a week, and I met with him at the athletic club, and we had dinner, and just him and I. So he started to tell me that Nils William had already been to Chicago, and appeared before the Chicago Central Committee. So in other words, I met him after Nils William had been to Chicago by a few days. Then they were weak, as I remember. In Chicago, he had told them, yeah, this, he want—and it had been suggested by people. He never named anybody. And people, with one exception, yeah, they've suggested that I become the national coordinator for the organization of the coming of the king. And he said, in Minneapolis, they've already got a committee of 50 or 60 or something. Did you ever, could you ever get a hold of that letter? No. I've never seen it. You know, I was so goddamn disgusted that I never got one, but I did read one. And I should have made a copy of it. It had a lot of information in it. And it was accurate. It only could have been written by somebody who was at that goddamn meeting. It had to—and this is where it came from. After that meeting? After that meeting? Well, it was sometime after. I don't remember. Several months, I think. So they had to be at that meeting to be able to write it? Oh, Christ. There was information that had to be received firsthand. There was no exception. So the information he relayed now to the—that they had a committee in Minneapolis, is that a lie? Well, an absolute outlie. So he told them, well, in Minneapolis, they've already got a committee formed, composed of—and this is the number I don't—but it was a good size, 50 or 60 people. And he said, Svenskene's dog in Minneapolis is very active in it. It was you? I was chairman of it. Well, and I—well, that dirty lying son of a bitch, there is no such an organization. There wasn't a thing that moved in Minneapolis where the Swedes were concerned that I didn't know about, firsthand. Well, as it turned out, I didn't have a chance to get to him and confront him with it. I didn't know anyone. But you see, the consul general was in on that thing, because I couldn't meet with him before Nils went. This is what he wanted, see. But I met with him several days afterwards. So it was after the fact. So he says, well, I understand that in Chicago—he says, you know, we've got to do something here about a committee. He says, I understand in Chicago, they're already gung ho, you know, they're going—Nils William was there, and—well, that was just all bullshit. He was just trying to just—trying to forewarn me or let me know that this had already happened. But it was all a bunch of goddamn lie, because he had told them, sure, in Minneapolis. And well, then I had—well, there were two people that called, and I don't know who. But you see, in this day and age, when you can sit here and dial direct to Sweden, how the hell do you know where they are? And it was very innocent, because I think I know who it was. But I don't care, and I certainly would never accuse them of it, because what they were doing was trying to verify a lie. So they called me one night, and says, Mr. Johnson, if you will, say, I understand that you're chairman of Svenskansdag. I said, yes, that's right. Now, I also understand that you have already organized a committee in Minneapolis for the coming of the king, that there's 50 or 60 members of it, and that Svenskansdag as an organization is behind it. I said, absolutely not. That was the first time you heard it? First time, absolutely knowingly. And he said, well, we understand that from a meeting in Chicago that Dr. Olson said that Svenskansdag is an organization, a part of this committee. Well, I said, that's absolutely not true. This is the first I've ever heard of it. Well, then of course you start putting two and two together. And I don't understand why they didn't—I didn't get one of them goddamn letters. Well, there weren't a lot of them, but there was enough so that people—I used to go into the Institute, I used to go by there a couple times a week just on business, and I'd kind of pop in there and just say hello, you know, and see what's in things. So I come in there one morning, and they had a—well, you know the Institute, as you walk in off of Oakland through the entrance there. Well, then there is another entrance in the back of it. Well, it's a main entrance. Do you mean the main entrance? No. The main entrance on Park, nor the office entrance on Oakland. I see. Well, there's—okay. Well, I think now it's blocked off pretty much. But it used to be that you could—well, you see, if you park in the parking lot and then jump into this, jump in through there, well, then you come in through what used to be a classroom. And it had two doors, sliding doors. So you came in there? I came in the back, and I was kind of in a hurry and opened the door. Christ here at a table sat, Nils William, and a half a dozen of his cohorts, and they all had a copy of this letter. Well, of course, he was flustered to see me, because it told a whole goddamn story. And I'm telling you, I think it was done by one lawyer and a couple of other people, because there was legal terminology there that you recognized instantly. So did they give you one copy? No. No, they just—so Nils, he kind of—oh, I said, I'm sorry. I didn't realize you folks were having a meeting. But I'll get right out of your hair, you know. No, no, no. I said, have you seen this? It kind of tossed the letter to me. Oh, I said, well, I'm going to sue somebody for slander or what the hell it was. And he pointed to one particular paragraph, and there were—Christ, there must have been a—