 We have June 12, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Ruth Vellander, Moline, Illinois. She was born 1914, the 26th of October, in Moline, Illinois. So if we start now with your father, Carl Erikson. He came from Kalskoga. Right. Kvantorpet. Right. Can you tell me a little bit about his background? Well, he had, there were four boys, I guess there were several, the boy, the child before him and after him died. But he had, so there must have been several more pregnancies, but my grandma and grandpa had one daughter and four boys that lived that I knew. And the two that came here to this country was, August was the oldest, and he was the oldest child in the family. And he came when he was quite young, but he was older than my father. My father came with him and he was only 18. And then my uncle, Olaf, his other brother, who took his mother's maiden name, Shepstett, because when he was going to go in the service over there, there were so many Eriksons that he took Shepstett. So they told him to take the name. And his brother in Sweden, I think his name was Albert. He took Shepstett also. So Nils, my cousin in Sweden who lives, and there's another one, Bengt, who also lives in Sweden. And then there's a sister, Gjellan, she lives in Sweden. And they live in Karlstad. And they are all Shepstett. Well, of course, she's married now. And then Stina was their, the one daughter, Christine. Stina, they called her. And she was married to a man, I think his name was Carlsen. They had no children. And he worked, he had worked for the electrical company there. He did, you know, with the power plant in Sweden, in Värmland. And she had a stroke when she was relatively young and was never really well from then on. So grandma took care of her. And Stina died. And ten days later, grandma died. Grandma was 88 years old. But she lived, you know, those years just to take care, you know, that seemed to keep her going until Stina had died. What was the reason of your father's departure from Sweden? From Sweden? Well, everybody was coming to this country. You know, they thought they were going to the promised land. Did he have any relation here that told him about this? His brother? No, I don't think so. His brother just was going to come, Gust, who was older than he. And so my dad went with him. So was he able to pay for his own ticket, you think, or he was to... I really don't... I imagine maybe... He was 18. He was 18. I don't know how much he had worked. I don't think they were poor people, you know. But they wanted to come to this country. And so the one... Eric must be the name of the one in Sweden. Eric. Yeah, that's right. It's Eric and Gust and Karl and Olof. And Eric was... And we were in Sweden to see them. Nils had a lovely home that he had built there himself. It was brick and... Mostly brick and glass. Very artistic people. He had beautiful paintings. And even out in his... Where we sat and had coffee out in the backyard, there was this... Everything was... And across the hall, you can't see it here, but he had made with little teeny weeny mosaic pictures of Tumtegubber and, you know, these little people that live in the forest. Trollen. Trollen. Yeah, Troll. And he had them. The whole back part of the house where we sat, this was really interesting. What year was that? 1975. 1975. Mm-hmm. And... And the other brother, Bengt, lives on Vannern. You know Vannern? That big lake. So this was his... That's his home. That was... He had a summer cottage around here. No, no. No, they lived there all year round. They used to, I think it's... And his name was Erik... No, his name is Nils. Nils? Nils Skeppstedt. Skeppstedt. And this was when we were to Selma Lagerløv's place, you know, where that, her statue. And there's a picture here also of the church where my father and all his family, they were confirmed and baptized there. Is that in Karlskoga? Mm-hmm. Well, I guess... Yeah, I think it would be. And this was out in their backyard. These were taken when we were there. So when your father came out, he came to Muni? Was there a special reason? He was... No, I just don't really know why they came here. I guess they must have known somebody here. Uncle Gus must have known someone. And they came here to work, to find work. Because, you know, everybody... They were adventuresome. They wanted, you know, to try something new. And my father was the only one in the family who had not been taught a trade, you know, a skill. He was young. Mm-hmm. Well, the other, I guess, Olof came later. But he did learn. They were pattern makers, Gus and Olof. So they worked at Deere's, for Deere and Company, all the years. And Uncle Gus worked even after he was... Oh, I think he was over 80 during the World War II. They needed, you know, a lot of the young men went to war. And so they called him back after he had retired, been retired. Maybe he wasn't 80, but he was in his 70s. And Uncle Olof was... He was superintendent of this particular department, the pattern making, in the harvester shop of Deere's. My father was a foundry man, you know, with Deere's. So it was a harder job you got then than... Yes, he had a hard job. And he stayed with that... Yeah, well, he stayed with that quite a few years. But I think from the time he was 40, well, he did work for them a little while after I was... When I was a little girl. Then he had a shop of his own, an aluminum, a brass foundry that he had. And he was very skilled at mixing metals. But he was not a very good businessman. So his, you know, his work was never... So he opened up his own little shop? Yes, he had a brass foundry, yeah. What was the name of that? Tri-City Brass Foundry. Tri-City Brass Foundry. And it was located... Well, it was in Moline. But it was not... It never really was a very great business. But he had to employ people then to... No, he worked alone. No, he did it all himself. Made the, you know, molds for... And I used to play down there a lot of times when I was a child. Was down on Third Avenue? It was down on Railroad Avenue. Railroad Avenue. And it's the same as Second Avenue now? Yeah, well, yes. I don't know. Railroad Avenue, see, is just down by the railroad. And he was between Eighth and Ninth Street. I don't even know if the building is still there. On the north side of the railroad then? No, south side. South side. South side of the railroad. And then later on, he left that place and moved over to near Fourth Street in another building and he was there. That's where he was when he died. And he shared a shop with another man. But it was never a very lucrative thing. You know, I mean, it was never very great. So it was a one-man business and he had to do the selling and buying and... Yeah, he did everything himself. So were you living close by then as you could go down there? Well, I used to go, I used to take his lunch down to him. My mother would make a warm lunch and put it in a basket and in the summer when I was home from school, I would take it down to him. So he had a hot lunch. And then I would stay there in the afternoon and play if I felt like it. Some days I'd go home, you know. So he was happy with his surrounding then? I don't know. Even if the business was bad? No, I don't think he was real... I don't think he was real happy, but I don't think he knew anything else to do, you know. Because at that point he was in his, you know, fifties and close to sixty, you know. He died when he was seventy-two. And my other uncle, Uncle Olive, died when he was seventy-two and I think Uncle Gus lived to be eighty-six years old. And he married late, you said he was forty? No, no, he had, they had me when I was, no, he was only, they were married twelve years before I was born. And I was an only child. So, but my other uncle, my Uncle Gus had eight kids and I used to play with them. And they lived nearby then? No, but those days you walked. You know, we didn't have a car to go every place we went. We would, we lived quite a few, quite a distance from each other, but I used to walk, you know. And then we were in church on Sunday together. So that's how, when we saw each other. And many times I would get invited to go to their house for dinner and sometimes I'd have my cousins, two that were my age, would be with me. And how did your father now meet your mother? In church. In church, right. And there was a Catholic church. Yes, right. And he was, yes, he was chairman of the church for many years and my mother sang in the choir. My father didn't sing, he could carry a tune well, but he said that when his voice was changing in Sweden, he sang so much that he ruined it. I don't know. And they were great ice skaters. He said his grandfather used to skate when he was ninety. They used to talk about grandpa skating, his agility, you know. And his mother was married when he, then they used to also laugh about that Gus was eighteen years younger than his mother. She was only eighteen when he was born. So. And your mother, now, she was Ruth Kram. Yeah. She also came from Wehrmacht. Yes. And she, her father was Erich Kropp. And he was an orphan. His mother had run away, I guess, or left when he was just a small child, apparently. And so he was, I don't know if he was raised in a children's home, you know, an orphan's home or if he was raised by several different families. But when he got married to my grandma, she was the first child, she was the first daughter after six brothers older. And they said, they thought Gude Himmlen had come because she was such a pet for the father. And they used to get kind of mad at her. But then she had a sister after that. So she didn't get to have that place very long. But anyway, when they got married and they had five children, all born in Sweden. My mother was the oldest, and then there were three boys and then a sister who was born almost on the same, I think she was born next, the mama was born the 17th of December and Lydia was born the 16th, about eight years later. And grandpa, according to my mother, said that to my grandma, all the young people were coming to this country. And he said his family was so important to him because he had been raised outside of a family. And he said, let's go over with them and take them while they're children and go over to America so that they don't go and leave us. And so mama was only nine and the rest of the kids were younger. Well Lydia was probably one when they came. And they had it good in Sweden. They were put, Hedeggård, wasn't it Hedeggård? Hedeggård, yeah. The old one? No, they worked. They worked on one. My grandma was a seamstress. She would go and make, you know, sew for people. And they had it good over there. So they came over here and it was just terrible. You know, they really had it hard. They came also to Moline? They came here to Moline because grandma's, I mean my grandpa's sister was living here at that time. So they came to Moline. Do you think they helped out with the tickets then because of the whole family? No, I don't think so. I think that they took care of themselves. So how many were there then? It was seven, the five kids. It's a big bill to pay though. Right. And they came, but they came the lowest, you know, on the steerage. And they must have come here nine years, oh wait, she said they must have come here in 1995. Yeah. Well it was before the turn of the century. And mama said, and it was really hard when they got here. It was hard. Grandpa worked for Deere's. He got a job with Deere's and I think he was a plow, he fitted plow shares or something, I don't know just what. And he only lived four years after they got here. He died of tuberculosis. See, I suppose they didn't get the proper food, you know, if they weren't, didn't have the money. And that left grandma with these five children to raise, because my mother was just 13, you know, when her father died. And she was the oldest and she tried to help, and you know, mother. And now my grandma's brothers, my grandma did not believe in having insurance, because she said that was not trusting God if you took out insurance. So she did not, but her brothers were astute businessmen. They're the ones that had the glass factory in Rock Island. They were here earlier, must have been. And they took out an insurance policy on my grandfather, apparently. Unbeknown to them, yes. So when grandpa died, they, grandma got $1,000, but apparently not right, you know, she got it, but she didn't try to spend it. She tried to go around and do dressmaking, you know, but it was not, it didn't work, and she'd leave the children. And I know my mother used to tell about her one brother, Gus said to her mother, to his mother, he said, you're going to see what's going to happen to us when you leave us with her all day. She doesn't give us any food. Well, they didn't have the food. So they had to go to the store and buy real cheap jelly, you know. So then grandma decided that she would have a house built, and the house is still standing on Fifth Avenue, between Fourth and Fifth Street in Moline. She had a house built, and she took in boarders and roomers. A lot of these immigrants, you know, boys coming from Sweden, lived with her, and that way, and ate, and that way she could feed her family. But in spite of that, my mother's brother, Simon, I think was next to her, died of tubercular meningitis. He went to Augustana a year or so. I mean, he went for business. And my Aunt Lydia, the youngest one, went to Northern Illinois University, it was called DeKalb, and she went one year, and the second year she contracted tuberculosis. So she came home in the spring and died in August. So it was a really sad time. And I know Mama said that when her father died, Grandma was so poor that she had to bury him in the pauper's field out here. But then when she got, you know, money, and she got on her feet financially, then she had him moved, and she bought a grave lot. In Riverside. In Riverside. Uh-huh. And that's where they're buried. Is there a stone? Yes, nice stone. It says crop. And so Grandpa and Grandma and Lydia and Simon are buried there. And then my mother and father. It was room for six. So with the small means, she had, she was able to spend money on the moving and the tombstone. And she even looked in the coffin to make sure it was, and became very ill. I mean, after she got– When they moved him. I wanted to see. A long time between the– Oh, I don't know. Several years, probably. But that was my– She wanted to make sure– That was my grandma. She was– She was a tough old– She was a character, yeah. And I can remember, she was a strong little lady. She was small, and always looked just so, because she sewed beautifully. Sewed her own–I remember it had beautifully tailored suits that she made, you know, as a– So you remember her then? Oh, yes. She lived with us for 24 years. My parents bought the house that they lived in from my uncle. Uncle Gus had built it, and it was a two-story house. Was it on 15th Avenue? No, it's on 13th Avenue and 9th Street. And we just–I just sold it a couple years ago to–or about five years ago to some Vietnamese people who had–because I had a Vietnamese girl living with me for a while, and it was her family. And they bought it. But other than–we always–I kept it after my parents died for a while. And your old grandma, what kind of impact did she make on you now? I mean, grandmas are always nagging. Yeah, no, she was–I liked my grandma, but I thought I could be mean to her. You know, I mean, I was– To test her. Right. Well, she lived upstairs, see? And for, you know, while I was growing up, almost the whole time. And so I, you know, and she–I'd say, that's not the way my mother does it. You know, I was naughty. But then I'll tell you what happened. Then she–my one uncle lived in Chicago. And he also died of TB, but it was late in life, after my–well, I think my grandma was already dead then. But anyway, she went up there to stay while my Aunt Lydia took the boys and went to Sweden. She had–her family still lived in Sweden. And so when I came home from school that day, I didn't get to go down to the train to see her go, you know, to Chicago. So when I–and I was disappointed, because I did like my grandma. And I came–and my mother said, you go upstairs to Grandma's kitchen. She has something up there for you. And I went up, and that was a–she had–she had dressed a doll for me, a little doll, and she had put it in a box, and she had a mattress and blanket and, you know, and fixed it all up. Oh, I was just–basket–kay. I started to cry and cry. I knew I was so rebuked, because I knew I'd been so bad to her so many times, been, you know, naughty. And from then on, that changed. I realized just how much–how important she was to me and how nice she was. So she knew exactly how to take care of you. Well, she did. And she had to take care of me a lot, because my mother was sick the first eight years I lived. She was almost 37 when I was born. And I think she was about to go through the menopause, and she–they thought she had everything from diabetes–from Breit's disease to TB. You know, she was sick all the time. But then when I was eight, she had surgery, and then she got better. So you were the only child now? Oh, yes. Were you spoiled any? Oh, boy. Well– But you noticed yourself, I mean. Well, I tell you, I knew I was well off, because I could see how my cousins, you know, they would have little problems sometime. And if a bag of candy came home, it was all mine. You know, I didn't have to share. But I had to learn after I got married things that I could have learned as a child, you know, because– So your mother, now, was she lenient in your– No, they had had–they had had 12 years to see what they didn't like in kids, you know, in other people's children. And I was not going to be like that. So they were very strict with me. But I never questioned, but I was the most important thing in the world that ever happened to them. But I didn't get by. And my father, you know, I didn't get many spankings, but I got spankings. I know one time I wanted water in church. It was a hot summer night. And you know, I want this. And I said, I want water. And I wanted to go home. That's what I really wanted, you know. The first step. Yeah. And so, I–and we always sat up in front, because Papa was the chairman of the church. And the preacher said, people come up and don't sit in the back. You know, every place else people want the front seats, but in church they go for the back seat, you know. So we always sat right behind the piano. They had a baby grand piano, and we sat–so we were right up in the front. And I was–I said I was thirsty. My father says, if you get a drink in church, you're going to get a spanking when you get home. He told me that. Well, I wasn't going to let him know that he had me. So I kept whining, fussing, you know. So what would my grandma–I was sitting with us, Grandma Crop. And she went downstairs and got a glass of water and brought it up to me in church. I tell you, I embarrassed my father. And so we got home. I can remember walking up the hill with my–hanging on to my mother. And I said, do you think Papa will give me spanking when I get home? And she said, I don't know. And I got it. So he made good the promise? Whatever he promised, I got. Both my parents. They were very, very good that way. But your grandma, what did she thought of you about– She tried to teach me how to knit. And she tried to teach me to crochet and to tat. But I always knew how before she got done. So I didn't learn. You know, I didn't want to sit and do that. I wanted to run. I wanted to be outside. But I've learned to knit. In fact, I'm knitting now. I have learned to knit. But I learned as an adult. Did she, as a grandma, have more time for you to talk to you and– Yes. Because my– well, yeah, because Mama was sick those first years. So Grandma and– I used to– she used to take me for walks, I remember. We'd go to the park and we'd walk. And I can remember when Grandma was 75, I can remember my mother telling– because we had a party for her when she was 75. And Mama was saying how the day or so before, she had walked– Grandma had walked clear down to Augustana to see– she was on the sick committee for ladies' aid. And she had been down to see a little lady that lived down by Augustana College. And then she had come home, 9th Street and 13th Avenue, Moline. Then in the afternoon, she'd walk clear out to Prospect Park to see some lady and walked home. So she was– she had– she was a strong woman, evidently. Not very big, but strong. A good walker. So this sick committee, now, there was an insurance to the church? That was for ladies' aid, yes. For ladies– only for ladies? Well, no, it was– well, it was for the church. Yeah, Community Association. Community Association. Yeah. And she was– she'd be on food committee and– So they had to check up on the– They would go and see the– –customers. Right, the little old ladies that were sick and, you know, older stigma. Yeah, did you go– older stigma. Did you go with her at times like that? Oh, I suppose I did. I went with whoever'd take me. So you wanted to be out? Yeah, and my dad would– you know, and I had kids in the neighborhood that I played with, and so I– you know, I always– mom always let me have kids there. I always had children. And the neighbors, now, were they also Swedish? No. We had– yes, we lived in a Swedish neighborhood, but our next-door neighbors were German. He was a chauffeur for Deere's, Wyman's, you know, there. And that– the Wyman house was just two blocks from our house. It was– So they were up around 8th, 9th Street? Yes, that's where I lived. I lived on 9th Street and 13th Avenue. And see, overlook of Wyman's house was on 11th Avenue and 9th Street. So it just had to go two blocks. The chauffeur lived next door. The butler lived upstairs. He was from England, and his wife was German, and I learned to speak English from her. And she said, treps, and, you know, talked like a German-American. So I learned English. And then the gardener lived in the next house, and he was Swedish, Anderson. And he had a girl, and I played with her. So we– and there were Swedish people across. Gustafsson lived across. Nelsons lived next. Liljebrands lived next. Nyquist. It was a whole– How long did it take to make a Swedish neighborhood right in Deere Wyman's neighborhood? Oh, well, this was up two blocks. No, that was not by Wyman. They were not– No, no, we were in an ordinary neighborhood. No, we weren't with them. No way. But we, you know, we were with the working people. Were the houses more expensive than when you moved on to the Wyman's or– Well– –did you live there? The Wyman's lived there in Hossford's. People who were affiliated with Deere and Company, you know, and Butterworth's, Hillcrest. And then there was– where the hospital parking lot is was Stevens. That was a big, lovely home. And Peaks lived down there. Was that considered as a Swedish neighborhood, two blocks away? Oh, yeah. The Swedish people were– and the Swensons lived across the alley, and the Turcells, and the Olsons lived down the street, the Bromans. Swanstroms lived on the corner. There were– you know, it was mostly Swedish. Then we went about– well, over to 7th Street, if you know that's the kind of business that– that was where the Belgians were. So there was a strict line there. Well, pretty much. So we thought they were real queer. I'm sure they thought we were. In what way? How did you– Well, because they came to the store– we'd go up there to get groceries. And they'd come in their bedroom slippers. And they had earrings, pierced ear, you know, and the little kids did. And they had lace curtains in their car. You know, I mean– In their car? Well, yeah, there were some– they had this crocheted kind of, you know. And they had their gardens out in the front yard. You know, everything that– you know, and then they thought we were, I'm sure, just as silly. You know, just as different. It was completely different than the Swensons. Yeah. And then they had their pigeons. Oh, yes. They had their pigeons, right, and roly-poly, the game. But they were– you know, and of course, that's long since been erased. We get– you know, it's– all the Swedes and they were all– But back then in the 20s, there were strict lines that– Well, although there were Belgian people that lived– when the Nelsons died– no, Nils– Nils– Nils Johnson– the Johnsons it was. When they both died and they moved, then a Belgian family moved in there. And then on the other side, when the Erlensons– when they died– when they left, there was a Belgian family moved in there. So it was a Swede and Belgian, Swede. And we all got along fine. We found out we were– they were okay. Yeah, but how did– there was no fuss about it when a Belgian moved in– No, no, no. It was just that– It was just fine. You know, we got along fine. But you see, as long as we were separated and we didn't know them, we thought they were different. You know, and that's been changed so much. And in school now, you had the Belgian friends, I suppose, or– Oh, sure. Not so much because the Belgian kids went to Catholic school. Most of them were Catholics. So they didn't go to public school? No, a lot of them didn't. The boys too? Mm-hmm. Boys– because Sacred Heart, they had school there. And most of the Belgian kids went to that school. So how did it affect the later years of their life, though? I mean, a little bit later in life, when they were 17, 18, to high school? Well, some of them– They had a parochial school, high school in Rock Island, St. Joe's. And St. Mary's down on Fifth Avenue and– Fourth Avenue and 10th Street, they had a high school down there. But more Irish went down there. Irish Catholics. But pretty soon, they went to public– There were a lot of Belgian kids in my class. Some very good friends were Belgians. Yeah. And they had foreigner descendants who were– Oh, well, yeah, they did. Because they wasn't experienced as we did in there. Yeah. Well, they were really very thrifty people. They knew how to take care of things. That's why they had their– This is side two, continuation with Mrs. Willander. Side two of cassette one. My dad hated vegetables and salads and that. He didn't want to eat that. All he wanted was meat and potatoes and pie. That's what he liked. And bread. But, see, when I came along then, I wouldn't eat anything that he didn't eat. So he had to learn– He had to start eating carrots. And– He made a mistake. He had to change the diet when you came along. Right. Yeah, right. Did you get the idea, you know, to eat different than him? Or did you like– I just– No, I hated him. Vegetables. Oh, I hated– I didn't like anything. I was a real problem. But, see, I could be, because I was alone. You know, I didn't– Nor does Grandma comes in there. Did she like the vegetables or– Yeah, she used to– She always had a vegetable garden. Grandma. But she cooked everything, though, before she ate it. Oh, yes. We had beans. Yeah, we didn't have raw– We didn't eat raw vegetables. But the Belgians, they ate it raw. I don't know. I don't know about the Belgians. But we– My grandma had– We had rhubarb, and she always had beans, and she had onions, and she had carrots and tomatoes. And they was canned, though, for the wintertime, too? We didn't do much canning. We ate it right then. Radishes, I think she had. Lettuce, always. My mother hated to can. But she did do it, you know. But, you know, I didn't have to do much, because my grandma lived with us, so I didn't, you know– How about the Swedish home cooking, though? Did you learn that from Mother or from Grandma? From neither. You were putting up a hand. You know, I used to ask my mother– I said, my friends were doing dishes, you know, and stuff like that. And I said, well, why can't I– You know, I wanted to do the dishes. My mother said, no, Grandma needs to feel that she has to have– that she's important. She has to feel– You know, she needs to feel that we need her. So you go out, and, you know, you do your thing. Oh, you were lucky in all kinds of– Well, I don't know. Then I know when I– after I got married, my father was sitting here one day– because we had this house built before we were married, because I was 27 when I was– when we were married. And he was sitting out in the kitchen, and I was going to cook something, and I took the cookbook out. And he said, do you have to use a cookbook? I didn't know how to start, even. And I know when I made my first pie, a friend of Grandma Wielander's gave me a quart of home-canned cherries. So I was going to make cherry pie. So I didn't, you know, bother to read about it. I just figured you just made the shell. I knew how to do that, the crust. And I poured off the juice, and I just put the cherries in, you know, there. Just put– And then I put a top on and put it in the oven. And when my husband came home and we had the pie for supper, you see, it was going like this, trying to get through it. And he says, what in the world did you use for the bottom crust, a paper plate? So I had to learn the hard way. And then, of course, we had our children soon, because we were old enough to start our family. And so we were married a little over– well, we were married in November the 20th, and our first baby came a whole year after that in February. And so I had to learn to cook fast. And you didn't have only your father and husband to cope with. How about your mother-in-law? Well, that was okay. She was afraid– I think she was a little afraid that I wasn't going to take too good care of Eric, you know, that I didn't– There's always grandmas worried. Right. But we always got along. It was okay, you know. And my father-in-law was very– he was a precious man. I really liked him. He was so nice and kind. How did you– there's always the question, you know, when a girl brings home a date, the first date or any date, the mother will look them over and see if they are– did you take any Belgian boy out for a date? No. Did they take you out for a date? No, I didn't, because, see, I was raised in the Covenant Church, and I came to know Christ when I was very young. And I– of course, at that time, you see, we didn't know the Catholics, people, and we, you know, weren't sure– I didn't think that that would be what I would want to have as a– you know, I did have that much sense, you know, and guidance from– Without the parents telling you? Right, no. Yeah, my parents know. They didn't– but, no, I only went with fellas from church that I knew. Oh, I think I did have a date with a Belgian boy once. Yes, I did, in high school, to a party. And you brought him home? No, we went to the party, and he brought me home, and that was– and I came– you know, it was nothing. No precious assets? No. Oh, no, they knew– no, and he was a nice boy. He really was nice. He just died about– within the last year. No, I didn't– and I knew– and also my– you see, with my father's poor– with his business not doing too well, he had been a foundry superintendent and had, you know, had a good– but then, when he took on this other work, you know, it was– so I knew my parents had problems, you know, with– economically, money-wise. And by God's grace, I had the wisdom to realize that I shouldn't cause any more problems, you know, and I did want to be a Christian. I did want to live to please God, you know, and so that helped, as– when I got old enough and had– After high school, then, did you take a job then? No, it was depression when I graduated. See, I graduated in 32, and I did not want to go to college. I had taken two years of shorthand and two years of typing, and I wanted to get in an office. But when I got out of high school, they wouldn't hire us because there were so many older girls who were out of work, and they took them, you know. We had had no experience. So my mother had– they had– Mama had saved, and she'd been a very efficient woman, housekeeper, you know. And she had saved, so when I graduated from high school, I graduated in January, I went back and took another course till June. And then, during the summer, she says, you're not going to stay home here and sit around here all year. She said, you have to go– you're going to go to school. I really didn't want to go to school, but I thought, well, okay. Your grandma was still living then? Yes. What did she say? Oh, that was okay with her. I– well, see, I think she thought that was fine because her two kids had been to college, those are the ones that died, you know. So anyway, Mama– I had signed up to go to Augustana. I was going to go down there, and then my mother just about– oh, I bet it was just not much more than six weeks before school was going to start. She said, I've changed my mind. She said, you're going to go down to Macomb. That was a teacher's college, you know, Macomb. For one thing, she said, you live– I lived on Ninth Street, we had no car. And she said, you're going to be so far away from college, from the school, that you're not, you know, and you're going to waste a lot of energy and time getting down there because I would have had to walk and home again. And she said, I think it would be better for you to go away. And she said, I think it's going to be good for you to live in a dorm. You've been with old people all your life. And she said, it'll be good for you to live– because when she was a young girl, she was a principal's maid over at the private school, St. Catherine's in Davenport. And she saw how girls lived there, and they had– it was a boarding school then. And she said, I think that will be a good experience for you. And it only cost, at that time, $27 a quarter down there, and there were three quarters a year. There was tuition. Yes, that was all. How about the board and– Well, that was $7 a week. And the first year, I didn't work, but the second year, I worked in the kitchen. So I made half of my board and room. And I enjoyed– I really enjoyed med school. And I only went two years, because that's all you had to do to go. Two years if you wanted to teach in the small school, where the little children– so I went just two years. And I came home in June, and then when fall came, there were no jobs. No people were dying, no teachers were dying, and if you got married, you had to quit. And nobody was getting married. Why did they have to quit when they were teaching? I mean– When they got married? Yes. Because that was their profession. You know, and you did– this was all you did. You did not get married, and you teach at the same time. So I got married on Thanksgiving Day, and I cleaned my desk out that morning. And I was done. That was it. When did they change their mind? Well, if Eric had had to go to service, I could have gone back. To teaching? Uh-huh. But because he was not in the service, he was subject to going, but he was a chemist with Dears, a metallurgist. And so because of his occupation– he graduated from Minnesota University. He went two years to Augustana and three years up to University of Minnesota. He had uncles up there. So he didn't have– so I was done. And that was fine. I didn't know how to keep house. So you didn't get to teach them on your– I taught seven years. You later– I taught– no, I taught seven years. See, I graduated in 34, and I taught from 40– from 34 to 41. Oh, I see. See, before I was married. While my husband was going to school. Oh. But you had met them– We met in church. We went together seven years. Seven years. But you couldn't get married then because then you would have to quit teaching. I'd have to quit teaching. And he didn't have anything because he was going to school. And then when he got out of school, he had to get a job. So see, we– So you couldn't live together at that time? You had to be separate. No, I lived with my parents. So you taught here in East Moline? Uh-huh. The school is no longer. It used to be in the hillside down there. It burned a few years ago. It was Irving School. And there were the first grades. I taught sixth– I taught third– first I started with third and fourth, and then I went up to sixth. And I was sixth grade. And then I taught for six years– seven years. Almost. Quite. And I really enjoyed it. I hated it at first because I didn't know how to make the children mind. You know, I was so young. But I was just 20. But then as soon as I learned how to handle it– about my third semester, I think, then I started in really enjoying it. So the small students, they are wisecrackers. Oh, yeah, they were. They were going to teach you the way they wanted. We had to learn how to– I had to learn that either I ran the room or they did. You know. It's just a thin line– Right. That's right. And I taught with the Rehnquist girls. Oh, I see. That's how we know each other. Oh, yeah. They've been teachers for many, many years. And the Francis and Noreen Johnsons also, they were teachers, too. Yeah. But they were much older in relation, though. Yes. Well, I think– I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. I think they were. Well, yeah, but they taught, though, while I was teaching. Yes. So I forgot to ask you here now about your uncle, Skeppstedt. They had a glass factory. Can you tell us a little bit about that? Oh, no, that's Österman. Österman. Österman, yeah. Well, I don't know. They didn't live to be too old. There were about three brothers down there. I don't really know how– man, I think they were– I don't know if all three of them were involved with this glass business. Did they have that profession with them from Sweden? I suppose, because they tramped the clay with their feet, and they got– and my grandma used to say that that caused them to get– they got tuberculosis. They all died of TB– apparently of TB, and there went the business, you know. So I don't remember when– if they had– I don't think they had the business after I was born. Could they have anything to do with the business? Did you think bad air or ventilation? Well, it could have been, you know. Well, grandma said it was because they tramped the clay with their feet, and they got cold, you know, and probably never got over it. I don't know. I have no idea. And the factory was down in Rock Island? Mm-hmm. But it was gone already when you were– I can't remember them. I remember some of the other people down there, you know, I mean, we would be together with my grand– with my mothers. And they had no children? Yes, they had children. The one, you know, Wiedeen's store? Have you heard of Wiedeen's Men's Store? Well, of course, that's the grand– great-grandson of Mrs. Wied– the old Mrs. Wiedeen was a daughter of one of those Ostermann. And then her son was my age. He took it over from his father, and then his son is the one that has it now. So you see, it's a long ways off. You are related to them? Yes, distant. Distant. We don't– you know how that goes. We don't have much in common. In fact, well, he– my daughter and this Chuck Wiedeen were friends in school. Long time ago since the Ostermann's tramped the clay with– Oh my, yes. That was– must have been a long, long time ago. It was, but I– you know, I just heard. And there was another sister who was married, and she had a daughter who was a teacher in Rock Island. So you didn't– you have no recollections of the Ostermann's then? No, well, it was interesting. Yeah, there was one Ostermann family. The cousin was my mother– lived with my mother when Mama got old. They were friends when they were children, Nellie. I don't think her father was in it, into the– I think he worked for the post office, if I'm not mistaken. And they had several children, Bita and Clara and Nellie and Elmer. And Elmer was press foreman at the Argus for years. Then– and Clara was married to a plumber, and Bita was married to a man who worked in the shops, you know. And then there was another Ostermann family down there who had two daughters and a son, Ray. Ray was president of one of the banks, Rock Island Bank Savings and Trust Company. And they used to tell– and then there was another brother who had– well, maybe that was Nellie's brother. Anyway, the one Ostermann was the president of the bank, and the other one ran the elevator. That was interesting, you know. Big step. Right. But they– you know, it didn't seem to bother any of them. And I don't know if Oscar was a brother of Nellie, probably was. And then there was a Carl Ostermann down there also, who was a cousin. I don't know where he fit in. Were they also Covenanters? No. They were Lutheran. So they belonged to the first Lutheran church in– They belonged to the first Lutheran church in Rock Island, and the Wiedeens belonged to the Trinity Lutheran church in Moline. I see. And my uncle Shepstead, he was Baptist. In fact, his daughter and her husband belonged to Bethany Baptist Church. But Gust and my father belonged to the Covenant Church. And the ones in Sweden I don't think belonged to any church. So your parents came over– now, your mother was too young, but your father– were they Lutheran then, or did they already belong to– No, they were Covenant. They were Covenant. Mm-hmm. I think so. They were Covenant. Waldenström from Sweden, I think he started. And I think they came– and they came to know Christ and came to grips with their relationship to Him in Sweden. So when they came here, they were already Christians. So they were very active, and your father was on the board. Yeah, he was– there's a miniscript. That is my father-in-law. That was my– when he was young. Oh, Villander. Mm-hmm. That was– see, that's 1926, that book. Much of that book is written in Swedish. And then– How did you learn Swedish now? You mentioned that you learned the German to pronounce– Yeah, right, English. And Grandma the Swedish, right? Well, Grandma spoke– talked Swedish. She never really could master the English language, my grandma Kropp. So she talked in Swedish to you then? Yeah, well, she would talk Swedish, and they couldn't say anything about me that I didn't know, you know. Did you answer back in Swedish? Oh, yeah. I– sure. And I can remember the first verse I knew from the Bible was– Herre, närmen her dem ikskallintet fattas. And I can remember saying– they said I said that at the first Sunday school program that I was in. And whenever anybody else didn't know their piece, I said mine over. So there was always someone talking– You were a good student, you remember. No. Somebody should be talking, I guess. And then– no, and Mom– that is a later one of the Covenant Church. My father is in one of these pictures. Yeah, here's my dad. Now, let's see. Yeah, that's the one. That's my father. Carl Erickson. And he was still living when this one was put out in 75– No, he wasn't. He was gone already. At 51. He died in 46. So in your home, now if you go back to habits and customs, you had to learn to eat and herring and kalisulta– I loved herring, and I liked pig's feet, and I liked sylta, and potato bloni, patateskorv, you know, all those things. But we hate– my father hated lutefisk. So we didn't– Grandma used to have lutefisk. She'd have it upstairs, and she had it every year. She'd go and buy and fix it. But your father didn't like it. My dad, he said that was the one time in the year that he and his father had problems. That was one time, because he didn't want to eat it. He hated it. And so we didn't have that very much. And Grandma would have it, and she'd eat until she got sick. And my dad would say the next year– he'd say, are you going to eat lutefisk again now? You got sick last year with it? Well, she said, how do I know I'll get sick this year? So she's going to try it again. She had no insurance. No. She didn't need it. Was she a healthy woman though? I think she just died of old age. She was 86. You don't remember her being at the hospital? No, 89. She wasn't in the hospital. She stayed with us, and she died in our home. She drank coffee and– Oh my, yes, and pulled beet. And I did too, because my dad– and on the saucer. On the saucer? Oh my goodness, yes. Poured it out, and then they'd put your sugar in the– you know, and I loved it. Of course, my mother would pour in a lot of milk, you know, but I liked it. And one of my friends, she saw her parents do that, and she thought you swallowed the sugar first. Then you need insurance. Right. And in those days, the Free Church and the Covenant Church and Bethany Baptist Church and Bethel Methodist Church were the Swedish churches that were, you know, fundamentally evangelical churches. And they were– we used to have union meetings together. So you had to change pulpits then? Well, they didn't change pulpits. We just would all– in the summer, we would go, you know, have one night, we'd be in one Sunday night in one church, and the next Sunday night in another church, you know, in the four, and we'd go around. I see. But the Lutherans were not in that circle? No. So they were too much different than– Yeah. See, we came out of the Lutheran Church, the Covenant. They didn't want all that liturgy, you know, we came out of that. But you were thinking of inviting Lutherans to find out, you know– Well, we used to– they used to have a Swedish Bible class in the First Lutheran Church when I was growing up, and I used to– I did a lot of singing. I studied voice for years. And I remember my dad and I going down there and I'd sing Swedish. Some of these fellas were at Augustana, and they were from Sweden, and they were studying there in the– you know, in the seminary. And it was quite a thing, and if you read these books, it tells how we came from the Swedish to the English. When I was a little girl, we went– we took Svenskola, you know, we'd go to school in the summer to church and to learn Swedish. But that was only a couple of years, then we started with Bible school instead. But it was in English, though? That was English. And Sunday school was in Swedish first. And then gradually they changed that into English. I can remember then they– for a long time we had Swedish morning service and English evening service. Then they changed that and had English morning service and a short Swedish– and a Swedish service after. And I was one of the– you know, that could sing Swedish, so I used to sing a lot in those services. And the Swedish services, then, you got thirsty? Well, no, it was a– it was summer night. It was in the evening. I don't know if it was English or Swedish. So you understand the Swedish service, though? No. Well, not really. I couldn't get the– I couldn't get the gist of it. No. I don't think I was working at it either. Was it too long-winding, you think? Well, I can remember sitting waiting for the Catholic church bells to ring at 12. Then I knew the service was soon over, because it would be from quarter to 11 to 12, you know. But, you know, when they started– well, I think I can understand a Swedish sermon. I can read Swedish. I don't speak it well, you know, to carry on a– when we were in Sweden that summer, my cousin Nils would not speak English in deference to his wife, because Elsa could not– had never learned English. So we spoke Swedish. And I said, well, when I started to pray in Swedish, then I knew I'd really made it, you know, because then– and I had to speak Swedish so much those days that it was great. You had to hang out. I had to speak, you know, I was– and they would smile at some of my, you know, words because I spoke the way I remember my parents speaking. And I used some of those words that they don't use anymore, apparently. So but what's your parents not coming from Värmland? They spoke with the Värmland– Oh, sure. –Värmland. Värmland, yeah. How about your table prayer, you know? Did you say that in the grace? I Jesu namn går vi till bords, etter dricker på uts ord, Gud till ära, oss av gång så får vi mat, I Jesu namn, Amen. That's what we said. And after the dinner, did you say any thank you then? And tack gud, Gud, for maten, Amen. And it was done all the time when you were in your home? Right. And when I was growing up. And then we had, and let's see, how do you say, what's that evening when the Swedish one, I don't remember saying that so much because I used to, my parents used to encourage me to pray extemporaneously. But Gud som haver barnen kär, se til mig som liten är, vart min väg i världen vänder, allt det står ut i Guds händer. Lyckan kommer, lyckan går, men dem som älskar Gud, lyckan får. Isn't that right? I can't remember because that one I didn't say. But I. You learned in Sunday school then? No, I learned that at home. At home? Yeah, my mother taught, they taught me. And Grandma used to sing a lot, I remember that. And I remember one song I used to cry when she'd sing and was about this little girl that went out into the woods. I don't know, anyway, it was a storm, you know, and she told me the story about it. And she also told me the story about Lena Sandell's book, Kommer du snart, that hymn. Herre för döljade dansigt för mig. I think I've got it. I think I've got the paper in there. I can walk over that red book. Anyway, she told me how Lena Sandell wrote that. She said that her father was out in a boat and, I guess I took it out of here. Anyway, her father was out in a boat and was drowned in a storm. And Lena Sandell felt, you know, so bad after her father's death and she wrote that. Herre för döljade dansigt för mig, kommer du snart, kommer du snart. You know, I mean, it was a hymn of prayer, you know, of prayer to God. This is a testament, Nya testament och salteren. That's from my, I guess it was my dad's. Till minne, glömmen ej Gud, Oscar Andersson. Must be. And this is a book, I don't know if you are interested in it, Min Faders Testament. By Nyval. Nyval, yes, the founder of it. And of course this is Sion Spasun. President of Norfolk College. Right, at one point. How do you know so much about them? Well, I read a little bit about them. Oh, I see. And here's Sonderskolsonger by Hultman. Did you know? Solskjönsånger. Yeah, right. And here's his book, Solskjönsånger. Yeah, so you probably learned a lot of Swedish from singing. Oh yes, I sang a lot. Because you practiced then once a week or twice a week? Well, I used to have to sing, practice to sing, because I was taking lessons, you know, and when I sang these songs in church. But taking lessons, you didn't take them from the Swedish? Yeah, the man that I taught. And I really enjoyed singing Swedish more than English. It's easier to sing. With the pronunciations and you get more time on yourself. Well, and you had the way that the words stod, I remember good, I remember we say, skönt. I used to have the soprano solo, skönt, mothöjd, skönt, mothöjd, röstr sig, det berget syon. You know, and you get skönt. It was easy to sing. And I enjoyed singing. Is it easier to sing Swedish than English? Yes, I thought it was. It's more melodic? Well, and the consonants, yeah, not so hard. You know, skönt, skönt. You get all the soft sounds. So your father, he appreciated your knowledge in Swedish singing, though. Yes, well, I got a piano when I was, they bought a piano for me when I was seven. But I wanted a player piano because the neighbors had a player piano. And I thought that was great. You could just sit and pound, you know, pedal with your feet. You didn't have to learn anything. But he wouldn't buy it. You had your time. Right. But he wouldn't buy that because he said he wanted to see me play. And so I took lessons from the time I was seven until I was ten. Oh, and that was funny, because at Christmas one year, when I was seven, I started in the fall, and so at that Christmas, when I was, they asked me to play Stila Natt, Helage Natt, you know, the hymn. And then I sang it in Swedish, and my cousin sang with me. And so then after that, my dad went down to Wydeen's store and was bragging that I could play that song and that I had sung it, you know, at the Christmas program. So about in February, Mrs. Wydeen came over to check that out to see if it was so. To your home? Yeah, no, to my home. She probably came over, you know, for coffee in the afternoon. You know, we used to visit. And so Mama said, well, now Ruth, you going to play Silent Night for Mrs. Wydeen? I sat down at the piano. I didn't even know where to start. I had had other songs after that and forgotten that one, you know. So my father got so mad at me. He was so embarrassed that he locked the piano for six weeks. I couldn't play. So then when I got to be ten, my dad wasn't well.