 This is Cassette News, I won continuation with Mildred and Edlund Dell in Rockford, Illinois. If we go back now a little bit to your childhood, Mildred, what do you remember now? You were the only girl in the family. What kind of responsibility was there on your part then? Did the boys lay shards over you, what to do, or your mother or your father? Oh, we always had to go by what our parents told us to do. Who was the boss, your father or your mother? No, I think it was half and half. I agree with you on that. So they were diplomatic. I think the rest of them had to take what was coming, or so on and so forth. We did as our parents told us to do. How old were you, do you think, when you started to help out with something that... Oh, I suppose I must have been about six, seven years old when I started drying dishes. Oh, I imagine. I imagine I was. This was what you started off with then, too. Sure, I got ten cents a week. Oh, I see, you paid for it. Big deal. And no breakage. No, no. What happened then? Did you get scolded then if you broke something? Oh, I don't think we would get scolded, no. We would maybe be corrected, but not scolded, really. And then when you started to learn to cook and prepare like for baking, did you... Oh, I don't know. I really... You probably watched Mom do it. I watched my mother. Oh, as a little girl, Thursday was baking day, and I would be given a little dough so I could bake a loaf of bread. And may I add that she has become an excellent cookie maker. She used to make dozens and dozens at Christmas. That was a hobby with me. And they came from your home? Oh, yeah. Was your mother... Yeah, I made lots of cookies. Were they Swedish background cookies then? Oh, a lot of them were. The kind that melt in your mouth. But I don't do it anymore. I don't have any boys running around eating them up. Well, it was fun when the three nieces were small. They could all... We all could come over, be together, and bake cookies, you know. Of course, sometimes we had more flour and sugar on the floor than we had in the dough. But it was the way of conducting the business. And the four boys, now, they didn't help your mother in the kitchen or anything with the household chores? Oh, yes, they did. He and the boy that was older than he, every Saturday they had to do the vacuuming. Oh, yeah, we all... I had to... In the woods? Yeah, I had to go and shovel the walks. Shovel the walks, and pick the cherries, and do the lawn work. Oh, we all had to do certain things. We had certain chores. What year was that when they were... Did they have vacuum cleaners then in your home? Oh, yeah, we had an installed one in our home, a great big one. Oh, you mean you had it through the walls, then the hoses? We had a big motor and container in the basement. Then we had outlets on the baseboards, upstairs and downstairs. And it was a great big long hose. And the boys did the vacuuming. It must have been very unusual for their time, though. Well, it was. We were way ahead of it. So your father, he saw to it that your mother had... Oh, he had to......mechanical help, like... Oh, yes. Mm-hmm. You had wall-to-wall carpets in most of the house? Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. No? Mm-mm. There was straw rugs? There would be rugs, scatter rugs here and there, you know. But they installed... Did you have a pump like this? The what? Didn't have the pump? Uh-uh. I used to pump the... No, this was one that was installed after the house was remodeled. Then J.P. put in this big one. And I suppose you would classify it like a commercial one. However, in Zita's home, she has one like it out there in Mercer Rockland. You know, in later years, they had it, you know, in some homes, but very few, though. And you would think you would have wall-to-wall carpet to have called for a vacuum cleaner like that. Oh, no, we had big rugs. Throw... Loose rugs. Big rugs with pads underneath. Mm-hmm. I see. So they were vacuumed, and then there was the... Their work, you know, the work. Now, Saturdays, he and Ray had to... I imagine you would have been about 13, 14 years old. Mm-hmm. Every Saturday, then. Yeah, that was their duty. How about the washing day, now, on Monday or Tuesday? Oh, well, that was usually sent out. It was sent out? Mm-hmm. It was never done in your home? Not too often. I see. So you were well-to-do, then, in other words, to send out... We sent out the laundry. Not many families could do that at that time, I suppose. So they were sent out? Yes, mm-hmm. We had... You had some higher-help girls help you? Oh, yes. We had... When we were kids, we all... They had higher girls, we called them. Mm-hmm. So she helped out with the cooking also? Mm-hmm. Oh, yes, and the work. And even the ladies that used to live upstairs. Yeah. Is he thinking of his aunt up there? No. Oh, well, Mother's aunt lived with us. That's what I'm thinking. Yeah, Mother's aunt, after she became a widow, she was the aunt who took care of my mother and her sister when they were little girls. And after she became a widow, and it must have been at the time that J.P. and Mother were going to go to Sweden and Europe, that she came and lived with us, and she stayed with us. Mm-hmm. You refer to the J.P. as your father? Uh-huh. John... John Peter. John Peter Lindell. So you called him J.P.? Between ourselves, we did. Oh, I see. So I identified him. Otherwise, he was Pa. Pa. They called him, and I called him Papa. Oh, I see. You used the whole thing. Mm-hmm. Papa and Mama. Were there expressions now in Swedish you used quite often, like a table prayer, for instance, sitting down to eat? Did you use a table prayer? No, we did not use Swedish in our home at all. Uh-uh. Mm-mm. Both our parents spoke very good English. See, my mother had to go to Swede school to learn Swedish, and she spoke beautiful Swedish, too. Uh-huh. So there was no stress then, is there? No, no. Uh-uh. I think maybe the only time our mother and father would speak Swedish would be if they didn't want us to know what they were talking about. Uh-huh. Here's one of your little listening in underneath the table came in handy. Yeah, up in the stairway. So you were... That was interesting to sit up there and listen, because these different men come to visit, to see my father. They would tell about their childhood in Sweden, you know. And even as a little girl I thought, how did these men dare at that young age to come to this country and didn't know any English, had nothing to go on? I just, I marveled at it. So they told about their experiences. Yeah. And some people are doing it today, too, but they, the majority of them have somebody here to sponsor them or help them in some respect. Because at that time it was more... They were on their own....a loose adventure. Yes. All trying to better themselves. America was becoming the country to come to. The land of milk and honey. Yeah. And then in your home you had an icebox. You didn't have any refrigerator at that time when you were growing up. No, we had an icebox. The iceman came once a week and... Oh, once or twice a week. Twice a week. And he put a card in the window telling him how many pounds to bring. And our house was made so the front part of the refrigerator was in the pantry and the back part where they put the ice was in the back hall so he never had to come in the house. Was that box or the compartment where the ice was dropped in, was that isolated in some ways? Oh, yes, it was insulated. So it didn't melt away from the... Oh, no. But it usually was twice a week when he had to come. And there would be 25-pound blocks? Oh, I imagine 50. 50? Well, you know, maybe it would be 100 to begin with and then as it would melt down you could get a lesser amount. And they kept the food cold? Well, sure. Well, then they used their basements. And window boxes in the winter. Well, I guess some people did. But we had one room in our basement was very, very cold. I'm sure it was. Oh, you didn't have to worry about anything spoiling down there. That's where they used to keep the lydfiske. The lydfiske. They bought the dry stuff? Oh, sure they did. And did you learn to do that, too? Well, we all had to help with it as we grew older. We had an old wooden tub and about two weeks before it was time for the fish to come home, my father would fill it in water so the cracks would swell together. So it wouldn't leak water. They've been dried up over the... That's right. It was just one tub that you used for lydfiske. Anything else? No, just one wooden tub. I can still see it. And then he'd bring home the fish and he and my mother would go down and work with it. And every day that water had to be changed. That's correct. You remember. So how about you kids now? Did you all hate it or like it? Hate it. Hated it? Ugh. All of you? Oh, no. Pete and Ray liked it. I don't remember about our brother Arthur because I was so young then. Why did you dislike it? I don't know. And I love fish. I'm a good fish eater. I don't care for lydfiske. Is that a smell you think? I don't know what it is. I have fixed it, but... No aspirations, though. Oh, and our father would, you know, this way, would be heap and eat all that melted butter and eat salt and pepper. Did he use melted butter? Well, he put butter on it that would be melted and there was always a big gob of butter in the gravy, the white sauce, you know. White sauce. Yeah. But your parents, they both... Oh, our father especially loved it. So the preparation for Christmas, now if we are at that time, did you have any meat brought in to make sausage? Oh, our mother made presswilte, weelswilte. Did she call somebody in then to help her or she did it herself? Well, this aunt, or she had a hired girl, would help her. And Mrs. Carl, a neighbor would come in and help, too. And then as I grew older, I wanted to help so I could learn how to do it. And in those days, they put them in a cheesecloth. You know, they'd line the cheesecloth with the rind and then press the meat in. And then you had to go like this in the brine to get it together. And then you had to put it in a solution of hot water and salt and cool that. And then you had to put your head cheese in there and every day you'd give it a couple ups and downs. And hoping it would stay real cold so it wouldn't spoil. That is the weather. And this was done once a year? Yeah. How did mother remember this? Now, if it's done only once a year, you happen to... Well, how did she know how to do it in the first place, not being born and not being raised in Sweden? An uncle taught her. An uncle? Mm-hmm. Oh, I see. Because after she married, she knew that she was going to have to have all this Swedish food. And an uncle taught her. And that was used in most of the families and all the relation and all the people that visited your house. They had the same kind of... And then you'd cook that ham and then she'd buy what we call rullsylta. We had pig's feet, rutemus. You had all the goodies. She never made krapkakor because we never cared for them. You didn't have that? She never made... She made koldamer. I see. And then a blood sausage. Do you remember that? Yes. And I brought a bread, a real dark bread, blood bread. Paltbröd. Paltbröd. You had that too? Well, I never liked it. Did you ever eat of it? What about the polstoy? Did they eat all this? Oh, JP would buy that poltbröd. Poltbred? Paltbröd. Paltbröd. Down at Globe Grocery. Was it soaked and then fried? I can remember that. Well, that was on the menu in Sweden some place. Yeah, but I never liked it. Oh, and I can remember our father telling us that we should eat it. It was good for us. Who said that? Our father. He'd say, you should eat that. That's good for you. Well, it was easier to gag. I thought that was horrible. You know, the Germans did something similar. Yeah, and it's made from the blood of newborn calves. Is that it? I never heard that one. That's what I thought, yeah. Well, it was the afterbirth. Afterbirth, yeah. Because on the farm, that was all we had. And then they used the dark flour. Isn't that it? Well, I think it's... It's terrible. I'd rather eat bird's feed. But you see, you didn't have to buy any vitamins in those days. No, no. I think we lived on carrots and parsnips all winter because our father would, like everybody else, get home a lot of it. And you'd put it in sand and keep it in sand in the basement. Oh, the carrots and the... And parsnips. And rutabagos, too, I guess. He kept it in sand in the basement. In the basement, mm-hmm, he had boxes. How about vegetables now? Did you use a lot of, like they use today, salads, for instance? On Sundays, we'd have salads and holidays. Not on the weekdays? No. They started later? Yeah. That was just ordinary work. Ordinary, yeah. Thursday was baking day at our house. Well, that was the baking day? Mm-hmm. The iron day, now, that was taken care of by... Tuesday. That was Tuesday. So you ironed your own clothes then? Sometimes they were ironed and sometimes not. You mentioned that the wash was sent out. Did you have a Chinese laundry here? No, there were women who did it in their homes. I see. So, and they... And the boys would have to deliver it. Go and pick it up, I guess, too. You didn't have any mangle? No. You don't remember any houses like your friends told you? Yes, the woman across the street had a mangle, I remember that. Did you think it was lethal to do that instead of ironing it? Well, I suppose it's what you get used to. I don't know. Do they still use mangles, I wonder? I wouldn't even know. Maybe in laundries. But most of the houses at that time, there was iron everywhere. Oh, yes. Handkerchiefs. And to begin with, they had no electric irons. They'd have to heat the irons on the stove. How about handkerchiefs now? They were used extensively by everybody. Oh, gosh, yes. Like the boys now, when they went to work, did they have handkerchiefs with you? Oh, sure. That was handkerchiefs. Yeah, a lot of handkerchiefs. All the men had that? Oh, yes. Excepting the ones that did this. Yeah, P.A. Peterson. That was the one you said with the shiny coat. He didn't have a shiny straw. So add your brother now. He didn't have any shiny. No. He used handkerchiefs. On the farm, none of them used handkerchiefs. So that was depending on the custom. That's right. But like in your home now, you were brought up then with what you call a little bit of a style there, a little bit more refined culture compared to the rest of the house. Well, I'm. Because you could send out the wash. That's right. You had somebody that waited on you and helped you out. So, yeah, Wednesday and Thursday, what were you doing then? Thursday was baking. Did they ever kick you off Wednesday and Thursday? Well, no, I'm just speaking as I remember as a child. Thursday was baking day at our house. Thursday? Mm-hmm. Did your mother have an oven in the basement where she could... No, it was all in the kitchen. In the kitchen. In the kitchen, and she made her own... She made all kinds of bread and... Coca. Yeah. Her own was? Yes, because I still have, you know, the wooden thing that you... And coffee cakes and pies and cookies and... And we had a couple of crops in the basement. And she'd fill those with cookies, ginger cookies, which he loved. And oatmeal cookies, you know. So they could all sneak down there and take a few. Yeah. He remembers that. I can see that. His conscience started playing out. My father tells about when they would buy a barrel of cookies and they had it sitting in the stairway upstairs. They ordered them. Uh-huh. Like Linden's. His mother would wonder why the cookies went down so fast because they'd take a handful when they went upstairs to bed. To bed, yeah. Well, don't you remember, Ed, the Lindens always ordered a big barrel of ginger snaps? Yeah. But they kept them a long time, the ginger snaps. Oh, yes. Pippercocker, you know, anything like that, with molasses. They do, they hang on a long time. So, but now the cookies, they didn't get old anyway because you ate them up. Well, when you have kids. It grows fast. That's right. And then you get some neighbors and playmates and everybody like that. Well, that was one thing, especially with the boys. They always had their friends over. You know, all you kids had boys over. And my mother would rather have them there than she knew where they were. I see. There wasn't a blade of grass in the backyard. How could you expect grass to grow with all the kids running around? So your parents rather raised boys than grass? I think so, for a while. But all the boys, including myself, we all loved to work in the yard. So you had a vegetable garden to them? I think I raised radishes and lettuce once. You didn't have a chicken coop, though, either? Oh, no, no, uh-uh. We had a garage. Nobody at that time had chickens in Rockford, Clark? Oh, yes, yes. People next door to us had chickens. Why didn't you have any chickens, though? I don't know. They didn't care for it. We had a big garage. We had an egg man who came every week with eggs. We had a butter man, had a milk man. It was a commotion almost every day, somebody delivering something. Never a dull moment. So Mother, when she relaxed, what did she do then? Knitting or...? No, she was doing some handwork. It was always something to keep you busy all the time. She liked to hem table linen. When they were in Sweden, she bought quite a bit of it there and hemmed it. And you got to know... And, of course, she had lots of socks to darn. And stockings to mend on the knees. You had to help out with that, too, though. Oh, heavens no. I don't even know what end of the needle to thread. Well, you never learned that. I don't like to sew. Why did you stay away from that one? I don't like to sew. I'd rather go and dig out in the yard. And boys, could they mend some clothing? I don't know. I think... I don't know why we used to do a little of it. Yeah. Our oldest brother, after his wife died, well, even before she died, he'd sew in buttons and things. You were all handy then with... Well, J.P. used to sew buttons and, of course... But you stayed away from it. Oh, I can do some, but I never cared for it. I can do it, but I just don't care for it. I'd rather go out and dig in the yard and get dirty. So, after going to school, you went through high school then? Yeah. And confirmed in the... In the Trinity Lutheran Church. Trinity Lutheran Church, yeah. We were all confirmed there. And that was in the English language. Yes. And our mother was confirmed at First Lutheran, and our father was confirmed in Sweden, in the Lutheran Church in Yerbro. Oh. And neither of your... your grandparents, no? I don't know anything about them. You never met them or have anything? Oh, no, no, uh-uh. Just met our mother's stepmother. That was all. They was the only one then. Mm-hmm. They were all gone. You have a vivid memory of her. Yeah, she was a witch, I told you. But down there on your father's side, you never... No, no, you see, the father and five of the children in that family all died in a cholera epidemic. But my father went over to see his mother, and I remember seeing pictures of her, and she was a little short woman. And she lived in, I presume you'd call it an apartment over there, and had a companion living with her. Was it in Yerbro? Yes, it would be in Yerbro. Mm-hmm. I can remember seeing a picture of it. It was a long house with, I presume, many apartments in it. It had two floors to it. She lived on the first floor in a corner. I can remember hearing that. Did you ask your father any questions about his mother and father that you remember? Not particularly, no, uh-uh. See, I think he just, when he left Sweden, he broke all those ties. He came to America, and that was it. What year was it he came here? Well, he was 16 years old, 1856, and add 16 to that, it'd be 1872. Mm-hmm. Approximately. So he had, uh... He came early, 1872, that was when Rockford was sprouting up. It was a smaller town than I remember. It sure was. All the Swedes were on one side, and all the Irish on the other. Oh, no, there were a lot of Germans. Oh, well... On the south side. The Germans were on the southwest, weren't they? Yes. Yes, mm-hmm. And then Lithuanians and Polacks, and they were spread in between. Well, South Main Street, that was a beautiful area at one time, and very few Italians living down there at one time. Who lived there at that time, then, when it was beautiful, South Main Street? Oh, the Jesus Grims and the Savages and... Oh, Tinkers and... English people, you mean? Yeah, they were not all Italians. On the west side, wasn't it? Yeah, down in South Rockford, southwest Rockford. But very few Swedes wanted to live on the west side in the 1900s or before that. No, there were not too many. They stayed on this side, though. Well, you see, all the Lutheran Swedish churches were on this side. The Baptists, the Methodists, and... You don't remember any Swedish church on the other side? No, I don't think there ever was a Swedish church on the other side. No clubs or lodges or anything? No, they're all on the east side. Salvation Army, of course, now there's a Salvation Army unit out on West 8th Street. But everything was on the... The Swedish was on the east side? Yeah. When you went to school now, did you notice anything about the Irish and the Italians and the Swedes? Frictions or... How did you distinguish between the... Well, of course, when we grew up where we grew up, out on 15th Avenue near Black Hawk Park... What avenue is that, 15th Street? 15th Avenue. It would be the next street south of Broadway and off of Kishwaukee Street, west of Kishwaukee Street. There where you lived? No, no, no. We lived north of Broadway, on 12th Avenue and 6th Street. But Black Hawk Park was off of 15th Avenue, west of Kishwaukee Street. And to go there, you'd walk through an Italian area. Well, they lived down there? Oh, yes. That was all Italian there. We called them dagos and wops. Wops. Yeah. I see. And we were afraid as kids. And there was nothing wrong with them, but you know, you build up that... To watch out. Yeah. Were there a lot of them? There were not as many as the Swedes, though. Oh, there were a lot of Italians that lived out there on 15th Avenue, yes. We had Italians that farmed out near us, at Kishwaukee, too. Uh-huh. And did they go to schools? Oh, there were Italians, some Italians, who went to Brown School, where we went, where the boys and I went. Oh, in high school you had every nationality and blacks as well. But there were not too many blacks at that time? No, no. Uh-uh. Very few. There was a brother and sister, the Andersons, Robert and... I can't remember the sister's name. Gee, they were nice people. Well, they were... Blacks. And they came from... Anderson. Anderson. And they came from... Right on the east side, then. Yeah, and they came from South Rockford. But my, they came from a lovely family. What kind of work were they doing then? I mean, they were going to school. They went to school, but I mean, their parents, you know... Oh, I don't know. I have no idea. There was one that sold, a black man that sold farm machinery. Remember that place off of South Main Street where they sold farm machinery? I know he was a salesman, a black man. Oh, yeah. And then, remember Bill Garrett, who was such an athlete? Yeah. He came from a black family. I mean, they were all blacks, but they were a wonderful family. You know, in every group, there are the good and the bad. So you should not... But it's very easy then to get the stereotype. Yeah. When I graduated, there were only five blacks in our class, but the thing was, they all quit school before they would graduate. I see. Oh, so they didn't go to the last day, then, they dropped out before. But how about school place, now? Like football and basketball, were there any rivalry between East and West? Oh, sure there was rivalry. Well, there was only one high school. There was nothing on the West side? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. Only the East? Just on the East. I see. So they had to come here in the West. Oh, yes. They pushed them over. Yeah, she had to come from the... We walked. They walked. How long did you walk that time? She lived out on North Central. I don't know how many blocks that would be. How far did you have to walk then? You had to go across the bridge, then. Well, in the 1600 block out and north, that would be 20, would be about 30 blocks. Yeah. It was a long walk. Well, we all walked. Nobody... We weren't bussed. Kids today don't know how to walk. Later, they started putting an urban car on the State Street line, and it would pick up high school. Casa II, Sight II, Lundell's Rockport. You didn't have to walk so far to high school. No, not as far, no. So the Swedes were lucky, then, how they were able to put a high school on their side. Yes, that's right. Gee, they didn't have a high school on the west side for... When was that, was high school built? Not me. Well, it was long after I graduated. Oh, yeah. That... Oh, it was when I first started teaching. That would have been about 32. Mm-hmm. Maybe. Thirty... In the early 30s, it seems to me, that's when they were building it. In sports now, like your brothers, were they interested in athletics, running? They enjoyed watching the games. Basketball? Yeah, I watched the games, but not... You didn't participate in it? Not too involved in it, no. No. In fact, I think art was the only one. Yeah, our brother who died when he was quite young was interested. He liked to play monkey run and football. Mm-hmm. But the Swedes, did they have their own soccer club, a good one, they said? I guess they did years ago, yeah. They did. And then they had the... What's it called, the AACs? That Pete belonged to. Yeah, AACs. And that was a baseball club, wasn't it? It was an athletic club. But they played mostly baseball. Yeah, mm-hmm. Then in 1916 or 1914, you got a Swedish mayor here. Hallström? Oskar Ågren. Oh, I... He was running and lost. Yes, that would be Margrethe's father, Margrethe Andersson's father. Yeah, but he lost. He was a socialist. He was a socialist, Ågren? He lost to Bennett, I understand. Yes, that's right. Eleanor Bennett's father. Then Hallström came in right after, in the First World War. He came from Sweden. Yeah. And started to join the movement. And he was also a socialist. Yes, but he... He walked with the Swedes on Main Street or whatever it was, or 7th Street, and told them not to go to the draft or anything like that, and then they sent a bunch of Swedes to Chicago. Do you remember about that? No, I don't. You don't remember either? No. But it must have been in the papers, though, because... Oh, I suppose it was, but you know... I remember some of that, because they were recruiting the farmers down on the farm, and, you know, the help. And my Uncle Charlie... Oh, yeah....was one that... Well, he had to go in and have tests. And he would have gone into the service, but because he was farming with my father... Farming, it kind of relieved him, didn't it? It relieved him. And I know that the Johnsons who lived up the street from or up the road from us, they had two sons that went in, and the Condon boys... Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah, there were a lot of them. So there was a whole time... Well, you see, the only one who was of the age to go into the service was my oldest brother, Paul. But he was doing what they called at that time war or military work out at Rockford Milling Machine in Sunstrand, so that's why he was not drafted. But it bothered him because... So he was deferred, in other words, he didn't have to go out. Yeah, he was, that's right. But I know, I can remember my mother saying it bothered him because he felt he should have been out with the rest of them. His friends were all in, the friends were all in the service, and he just felt like he should be there too. But Halston, he came in as a socialist on that ticket. Yeah. How was he elected? I mean, there was not that many socialist friends. Well, I think that people as a whole must have taken to him. I don't remember because I wasn't at any age to be voting, but I suppose that the Swedish people as a whole must have... Because he was a Swede. Yeah. I don't think they took sides as much as they have because I remember hearing my grandfather talk about it, that they voted more for the person than they did for the party. For the party. For the party. They meant it was insignificant. That's right. And Halston was a worker. You remember him later on, though. Well, I mean, hearing about him, he was a worker. And he was liked as a good mayor. Well, he was in a long time. He was not a socialist later on. He became a Republican. That's right. So he was elected first as a socialist and then as a Republican. Yeah. Well, I think a lot of them were socialists years and years ago. Was it because of war times, you think? Well, and if it was a carryover from the old country. But 1917, was it really tough times, then, you think? Oh, yes. Well, that was during the war. Unemployment. Sure. And during the war, and it was hard to get things. So people were laid off, then. Gee, in foodstuffs, anyway, it was hard to get coffee. I can remember that. And your flour, you'd get it and it would be buggy. It would be old stuff. Oh, I see. You had to delouse it. You'd have to delouse it, that's right. Throw it down. Put it through a strainer. I remember at that time when the farmers would have problems with people stealing their grain. I see. Because I lived on the farm. So they came from the cities, then, and went out on the farm. Yeah. But then you got old enough, then, in the 20s. You remember when you started to work with your dad in the factories. You had two factories. Yeah, but they didn't have him right away. He worked out at another factory, Rockford Desk. Rockford Desk. Rockford Furniture. Rockford Furniture out by Fairfield. Was he on with your father, too? Well, he had a great interest in it, we'll put it that way. So he had interest in many businesses, then, like P.A. Peterson. Oh, yeah. He divested himself in several. That's right. He was always wanting to help the Swedish people. He stuck to his Swedish heritage very much. I probably walked by you there at Rockford. What? By Fairgrounds Park. We used to cut through there to come downtown or go to High Street. Oh, yeah. She was checking you out very early. I didn't know him, then. So were you old enough, then, to leave your home? I never left home. I stayed home. Oh, you never left home, then? No. I was too good. They kept me. Too valuable. Yeah, they kept me. Yeah, but you know very much about your father's business. Well, I always listened in. Did you help him out with the office? Yeah, later years I went out to Colonial Desk Company after our mother died. I see. I took care of hers. I see. So then you helped your father with the... He was dead. He was dead, then? Yeah, he died in 1938, and our mother died in 1953. I see. Fifteen years later. So you were not that much involved, then, with the business while you were still on the... Well, I always listened in, so I knew what was going on. And you told the boys what to do? Oh, no, but... How could you do that? No, no, but when they would come home from work and we'd sit at the dining room table, then they would discuss business, and I always had an ear out, so I could hear and learn. So they couldn't fool you, then, if they... Well, maybe they fooled me, but at least I was learning something. I see. So you came home, then, to your parents' home, in other words? I stayed there. I never left. I mean, by the boys. Oh. Did they come home, too, very often, then, to... Well, before they were married, sure. Well, they stayed at home, then? I mean, before they were married... Yes. No one left home until they got married. I see. So then you had your meetings and discussions. Oh, they'd come home for lunch and they'd talk, and they'd come home for their evening meal and they'd talk. And then after they got married, they'd probably be home for dinner, and maybe they wouldn't, and they were back. I said the first ten years we were married, I don't think I saw him evenings for half that time, even when the girls were little. And they were staying late at work, then, or...? They would go. They would go to one factory or the other and meet. And meet. Night after night. So who was groomed not to take over your father's business? The oldest boy, or...? Well, he, our oldest brother, worked down at Scandia Coal Lumber Company for a while, and then he went out to one of the furniture factories. So no one, we just kept our interest in Scandia Coal after our father died, and then a few years ago it all dissolved. Because that business, like every other business, no coal, no... No. Yeah, they did sell oil, but there was no call for lumber, you know, and furniture factories were then going out. So, like everything else, it just dissolved. What happened really with the furniture industry? Was it the... Well, you could get cheaper......loss of raw material, or was it...? Well, you could get cheaper labor down south, and you could get all your lumber was down in that area. The material for... Yes, yes. So the union didn't play too much of a part in that? Oh, yes. Union. There were other unions during the early 30s. Speak up, it was the union that solved your problems. The unions. Yes, it was, basically. Yeah, but did they start up before the Second World War, though, in the 30s? Yes. Oh, yes, the unions have been in existence for a long time. Did they get any foothold, though? Oh, they've always had a foothold. But you have a lot of industries, you know, that... Swan Hillman, Rockford Screw Products... Of course, that isn't......and you have......Furniture... Well, that......and Republic. Oh, they all had to have their unions. I don't know about... But that was not the National Union, that was the Workers Union. Yeah. I don't know about Swan Hillman's or Screw Products. No, they were not unions. I didn't think so. Of course, that isn't anymore, either. It was gone. Well, it's taken over. But this folded up completely, though, or... Well, Rex... the Rexnard Corporation took it over. But now the people who work here are buying it back and are keeping it as their own again. The workers? Yeah. I see. So there was a battle between the management and the union. Always has been and always will be. I thought, you know... They had furnishes that they had to be fired, you know, and started up. And Ed would go out there in the mornings, and he was in management, but they had to do that. Fire up the boilers. And then when it was real cold, many times at night, ten o'clock, you'd go out to see that everything was all right. So you had a long day's work. Well... They did everything. Everything that you're supposed to do, I guess, and get involved in. And that's true with most people that have some interest or anything like that. That's where they work and so on. They all took an interest in trying to maintain things in a decent manner. But the union, there were not any outside instigators that came from Chicago? Oh, no. Local unions. Not like UAW, for instance, Sunstone, the big one. They were never in here in the furniture industry. Ed, you had people come from Chicago for the union thing? Sure you did. Well, Miss Gifford did. Yes, you did. So you had to sit down and discuss the thing? I didn't. That was the boys who did that. You didn't have to... I know that you were having a union meeting one time when Cynthia was very sick, if you remember. Just a baby. I know you had to go to that union meeting. But did they close up then, most of the furniture factories? They all... There aren't any. Lansdrum, they sold out? Well, they sold out and Wyman took them over. Wyman took over, yeah. He was a Jewish fellow. And he didn't succeed either. Well, he has plants in other areas. So he dissolved them and moved the machinery somewhere else. But it's interesting, though, like Lansdrum, he went into different... diversified himself with the free sawing machine. Oh, yeah, and then he made radio cabinets. Well, we did too, as far as that goes. We made radio cabinets and we made... All those things became somewhat competitive. Yeah. Oh, I see. And we made... TV cabinets, do you want to come in? Oh, yeah, beautiful television cabinets and radio cabinets and desks for offices. For a glass concern, where they make glasses, House of Vision, we made things for them. Somebody came up and he said he remembered that you were the one that got him started with the cabinets for glasses. Oh, yeah. House of Vision. The House of Vision in Chicago. No, he wasn't. Well, that isn't anymore, I don't think. So did you supply like Marshall Field? We sold furniture to Marshall Field. On wholesale basis. How about Grand Rapids now? How hard of a competitor was that? Well, we had a showroom in Grand Rapids for a while. Well, sure he was. Yes. Were they competitors to you here in Rockford? Grand Rapids? Oh, yeah. Oh, you bet you. They did the same kind of line you were? Oh, sure. Well, in some respects, in my opinion, they made some better stuff and a little different type of thing than we did in Rockford, because they were kind of a snooty bunch of people up in Michigan. In Michigan. They knew the routine and the design and so on perhaps more than some of the Rockford factories did. Oh, I see. Were they more modern, you think, in their fabrication? Well, I don't know when you say modern. I was a little more advanced in different ideas that didn't exist here, because they had been in business a longer time. In Grand Rapids? In Grand Rapids, yes. And there was Dutch people, though, in Grand Rapids. Yes. Not too many Swedes. No, no. No, no. How much of that? Many of the craftsmen were of Dutch ancestry, too. You had a Dutchman that did some of your designing. Oh, you hired people from Grand Rapids, then? No, not necessarily. No, we didn't hire any. You had a contract on the... We had local French designers. Sure, we had... what's his name? Frank I. Frank I. Johnson. Phil. Did you have any cooperation with Jamestown? That was too far away. No, but I remember as a little girl, our parents went to Jamestown to a furniture show. Because it was Rockford, Grand Rapids, and Jamestown. They were the three... They seemed to be the main ones. Yeah, of course, there were a lot of big ones down south, in the southwest. Oh, but they didn't... Southwest, I mean. Did they... were they competitive with you up here, too? In other words, were they hard to... Some of those down there? Yeah, only a degree, yes. That was a little later. Yeah, it was later, but I mean, if you always thought of from down in the southeast, they were supposed to make better furniture than they did up in Rockford or north or something like that. At least that was the gossip and the feelings. Was the quality as good down south as it was up north? Because years ago you used solid wood, most of it, you know, hand carving and all kinds of different stuff. Nowadays they have pressed... Plywood. Plywood and everything, so it doesn't mean anything with quality. But years way back, you were more quality-minded up north than south. That's what we used to think, yeah. So you could sell your product that way, maybe, to a discriminative buyer. Well, we used to sell a lot of stuff, ship stuff up east. It was made here in Rockford because it was presumed to be a good product and so on and so forth. But then in the late 30s, everything went belly up. The Depression hit. Do you think the war now, everything during the war, of course, there was metal. There was lathes and planers and drill machines all over the place. Do you think they took over completely then from wood? In other words, the war material demanded steel. It had a lot to do with it. They became more aggressive, yes. So they took over the whole thing then. Well, that was the need for a war machine. That's what you'd have to have. You couldn't use wood for... So that dropped off, then, the demand of furniture. Well, I don't know if the demand of furniture dropped off. It was just that it was better in the southeast because of the labor and they had the products there, the wood. But in other factors, also the Depression, people couldn't afford to buy too much furniture. Well, how well we know that. Very few people married during that time. That's right. And a lot of people, after they married, moved in with the family and lived right at home with the parents. They didn't have the furniture because they couldn't get room for all of them. Well, what I mean was people didn't go out and move into a home or an apartment. They got married and had to live with the parents. So there was a different lifestyle then. That's right. We didn't. You stayed on the... We didn't move in with the parents. How about the hard Depression? A lot of people foreclosed and they lost money in the bank. Security was one on Broadway. Truman Johnson, Engstrom, Gustafson and all. Were people afraid to put money into the bank again after that happened? Yes, I think they were. You can't blame them. No, because they lost... some people lost... Some people lost everything. I was telling you the other night how the neighbors were so afraid of a savings and loan. Oh, yeah. And they were. People where we lived on the west side were very dubious of banks and savings and loans. And they lost... They were the ones that went first. Because the Swedish bank here was all right. Nobody lost any money in that one. No, no. It started out as a very... The west side was wonderful. Yes. People's Trust, was it called? I can't remember. People's Bank. People's Bank. It was the one that carried the school funds. That was the first one to go. I mean, they started having kids save money, you know. Oh, I see. Small savings. Yeah, and we had to collect money every week for each kid to put it in the savings. And those kids lost it all. They never got back anything? I don't think they ever got anything out of that. So that was... That was when I was in grade school. So then people started to have the money under the mattress? I guess so. Or in the coffee can. I don't know which. That was the second deposit debacle. You didn't put anything into the bank that you lost. No. Did you start to save anything? Oh, sure. I had to save my dimes. How about your father now? What did he instruct you to do? Oh, we were instructed to save our money. Every week? Well, sure. I had to save my dime every week, and he had to save his quarter. He was paid a quarter? Yeah, he and the other brother were paid a quarter, and I was paid a dime. Why? It was discriminative. Well, they were older. They needed the money more than I did. But none of us spent any of it. We saved it. He saved his quarter, too? Sure. Sometimes if he didn't save you, you were... He knew. Our father knew. Knew it. From September to June, when you turned your money, your bank, he knew exactly how much we should have. Oh, he kept track of it. I recall a little bit. We used to say, wondered, what are you doing with your money? You had to explain that with your boss. I don't know what explaining was done, but anyway, that was... And then he would show us, when we would get interest, he would bring the bank books home and showed us our interest and how much money we had made. But we could never spend it. He would take care of it. He didn't encourage you at any time to buy anything that you liked? No. Well, we were well taken care of at home. I know, but you know, a girl going walking the street on 7th Street, the Broadway, there were always things in the windows. Well, you just didn't have them. You couldn't buy it. No. Even if you had money in the bank. Oh, well, I would never dare to take the money out of the bank, because he knew. Never. But what did he say when this bank closing happened? You didn't lose anything, you said? No, no. We were at the First National Bank. Or Third National, it was called. Third National down on East State Street. And it was a safe bank. Oh, yes. Very safe. But you think the parents are not telling the children to save in this people's bank every week? I don't know. That must have been through the schools. It was. Yeah. It was through the schools. I just remember that I bought war stamps every week from grade school. My father would, I don't know, what were they? Thrift stamps or what? You'd buy thrift stamps for a quarter, and then you could turn it into something else. What kind was it? Stamps? Yeah. You would fill a book. Fill a book. What was it called? They were called thrift stamps. And they'd be a quarter. And I remember he'd give me a quarter or two every week to buy these stamps to put in this book. And then when the book was filled... You'd get five dollars or something. They had five dollar books. Books, yeah, and it would go into something else. Was there from the bank, then? Well, I could buy through the government, and I bought my stamps up on Broadway or 14th Avenue, as it was called, at the bookstore. You didn't get them at school? We bought them at the bookstore up on Broadway. We always bought them at school. No, I had to buy mine at Standard Bookstore. And most of the kids did that? No. No, uh-uh. We had the quarters. But it was for a good cause, and you weren't spending, throwing your money away. So you were taught early on to keep watch of the flow of the money. But like your dad now, he was handling money in the thousands. Well... How about you and I? When did you start to learn about the flow of money for your father's office? Buying into land tracts down in Arkansas and factories, payroll? No, I wasn't much in that stuff. You were later on, though, after? Oh, sure, he was later on. Did he tell you, for instance, when you started to work with him in the factories? On the management? Well, he... Did he tell you? Our father didn't spend time at the factories. He didn't? No, he was down at Scandia Cone Lumber Company. That's where he spent his time, and he got these factories for the boys. He would go out occasionally, but that's when they would have their meetings at night. I see, so that's how they operated. So there was only investments or... Yeah, that was the boys to take care of. Scandia Cone and Lumber, that was the main... That was his....main line. For him. And there was big business in the 20s, of course, with the coal and... Oh, gosh, yes. Everybody used coal first. And then when you think of people were building homes, you know, and so that was a good business. But how did they affect the business during the Depression, though? People couldn't pay for coal and people... People, well, they couldn't. No. And you had to carry them on the book. I suppose they did. And some of them were risked to never... Some of them, they'd pay 50 cents a week and maybe a dollar a week. So you had to go out there and talk to people every... No, no, we had nothing to do with that. That was our father and his business, and he had people there with him. You would think he sent his boys out there to learn how to... Oh, no, because they were in another business. In another business, yeah. He didn't want them there. I mean, he wanted them to be in the furniture business, and that's where they were. It was their trade, and they stayed with it. How long did they operate in the furniture line? Oh, Rockford Desk you must have sold in the early 50s. It must have been something like that. And then the Colonial Desk would have been in the 60s. I see. And you sold it out then to other interests. So your children didn't take over? Oh, no. They wouldn't have been old enough anyway. I see. I thought they were married and settled. No, the oldest niece was married, but she was living in Sweden. And she had no interest in it. She married a Swede? Yeah. However, that was the man she married at that time, because she has remarried since then. But he had been born in Chicago, and when he was just a few weeks old, his mother went back to Sweden with him. She was divorced from, or separated from her husband at the time, and then they were finally divorced. And the mother ran a hotel in Stockholm. So she married the hotel owners, I mean the managers? No, no, no. The hotel was from her side of the family. And they had a big place up in northern part of Sweden, lumber. A great big place up there. Lovely. So she is in Sweden now? No, this oldest niece lives out in Seattle. She's divorced from that man and has been for quite a few years. He's back to the United States, I'm told. He works for SAS, and right now he's over in Hawaii. But he's at the age where he's going to retire now, and then he's going to go back to Sweden for four months. See, he doesn't have an American citizenship, so he has to spend, you know, some time there and some time here. So he's going to go back to Sweden for four months. He died last fall, or last summer I guess it was. So he's going back, and they have to settle things. So you have connections with Sweden that way then? Oh yes. Through the family.