 I'm sitting together with Henning Olsson in Moline, Illinois. He was born 1909, 10th of August in Bjerrerud, Skidstock and Värmland, and came to the United States in 1929. And we have today 13th of June, 1986. So if we start now in Sweden with your father, John Olsson. Was he a farmer up there or what kind of living? No, he was sort of a lumberjack. He traveled a lot to Norway and up in there. How big of a family were you? Many kids? It was three of us. My brother, brother Ragnvald Olsson. He lived in Skattsjär up in Värmland up in Karlstad. Was he an older one? No, he's younger than I am. You're the oldest? No, my sister was the oldest. Edith Sundling, your name is now. And she's in Sweden? Yes, she's still in Sweden. She lives in Skattsjär. So your parents didn't have a farm or anything then? No. He was a moving lumberjack? Yes. So you went to school there in Bjerrerud then? No, in Forshaga. You moved after you... Yes, it was maybe five or six years when we moved to Forshaga. And your father still works in the forest? Yes. And you went to read the priest in Forshaga? Yes, I did. My mother died when she was 39 years old. What kind of illness did she have? She had lung cancer. So she was at the sanatorium then? Yes, that's where she died, in Arvika. The sanatorium in Arvika. How long had she been there before she died? Not that long. They took her from Forshaga. She wasn't there that long, but she was well and sick. So you remember... Yes, a little. I was maybe seven years old when she died. So your father was alone with two boys? No. I don't know. He was... He was flying around a lot, so I don't know. Who took care of your child when she died, mom? Did you have to move to your grandparents? No, a children's home. He was in a children's home. And the other two? All three of us. In Forshaga? Yes, Forshaga or Skived. Forshaga is on one side of Klarälven, and Skived is on the other. So we were on the Skived side. But mostly Forshaga. How long were you there? I was there until I was 15 years old. I went to school. I was done with school then. Then I went out to work for farmers. And your other siblings, your sister and brother, were they also at home for as long? No. My sister's family was a nice family that took care of her. They didn't adopt her or anything, but they just took her and raised her. And sent her to school, to college, and she got to be a real good schoolteacher. She lived in Värmland then? Yes, she went to college at Kristinehamn. So when you came out to a family in the country, were you sent down to Forshaga? No, it was down around Grava, the Grava thing. At Grava church, there was a man named Johnson. I worked there for a couple of years. Then I got a letter from my aunt here in Molin. She wanted money, and wanted me to come here. So I came here. What was your aunt's name? Anna Andersson. She was married and lived here? Yes, she married Edd Andersson. Was that your mother's sister? No, my father. And your father-in-law? Yes, my father-in-law. So she found out that you were working for them? Yes, I was on a poor farm. How was it to be at the orphanage? Was it hard? No, it was the best part of my life. Oh, the mother. They were strict with us, but that's what we needed. We were raised real good. I have nothing to say against that at home. Were you many? Oh yes, must have been 50, 60. There were quite a few kids there. You didn't have a school, a regular school. You had to go to the outside. A regular public school, yes. Outside? We all walked to school, and one of the bigger boys carried a lunch, one big rig sack for the lunches. At lunchtime, he just doled them out to us. Then we went home, came home around four or five o'clock, done our lessons, and done what we had to do. There were ladies that ran the children's home. Just ladies? Yes. No male person at all? No, just ladies. They were nurses, really good people. Did they have a farm to the home? Well, this was in connection with what they called a fatty gourd. They were older, but they were away from there a little bit. The children's home was brand new and beautiful. How was the food? It was tough during the war. It was tough times then? Very tough. What did you get to eat, for instance, for breakfast? We had... Oatmeal? No, no oatmeal. We had rye flour, rye flour mush. It was real dark. And then bread? Not too much. And they didn't have milk enough. That farm, they were supposed to provide us with milk, but we didn't get no milk to speak of. It was wartime, they went somewhere else. It was tough, yeah. So when you were at this home now, you didn't have any of your relations that you could write to or visit you or anything like that? Yeah, I could write to them, and I did write to them. I had some relatives away from there. I wrote to them. Did they visit you? No, no, they didn't visit me, but they wrote back to me and maybe sent me en krona ibland. Oh, ja, som røste pengar. Ja. So, but this aunt, Anna Andersen, in Moline, she sent you a ticket then? Sent me the money, ja. How old were you then? Ah. You were 10 years. I was 19 years old when I first started. Were you drafted into the army before that time? No, no. No, you were not drafted? No, I fikk upp skov. Upp skov? Ja, because I was too little. I didn't weigh enough, I guess, or something. Oh, I see. So they passed you over then? Ja. But you still had to write them to the... Oh, yes, I had to get permission to leave to the king, ja. So how did you buy the ticket now? Were they sent for you? No, I went to Gøteborg. Gøteborg. Gøteborg. To the consulate? Yes, and got the visa and everything, and paid for the ticket. So, it's... So what boat did you go on? Kungsholm. Kungsholm? Ja. Oh. And then went straight to... Moline. To train to Moline then. Was it in the fall or in the... It was in the spring. In the spring. The eighth day of May, I landed in Moline. I left Gøteborg the 27th of April. And you were alone then from Forshaga? There was nobody else that you knew on the boat? No, I had a cousin that was already here, called Larsen. He was home visiting, so I went with him. So we traveled together. He had been there a few years then? He had been here a few years, ja. So he was a real jenky? Ja, ja, that's right. So he could order food and coffee for you and everything on the trip then? Well, we... How was the trip? It was fine. It was a good trip. No sea sickness? No, no. Not really. And we danced on the deck and we had all sorts of fun. Beautiful trip. So when you left, you didn't have any... You said goodbye then with your sister and... That's right, ja. And brother. Ja. And your father, where was he at that time? I didn't even know where he was at then. No contact with him then? No. After you left. And then you came into New York. Did you go through Ellis Island? Ja. So how was that? Oh, what I remember, we were, you know, standing in line and everything else now. Just standing in line. And as I imagined, it hadn't changed at all. It was the same. You had no trouble though? No. You showed the papers and... Showed the papers and just... You had $25 with you to show... I don't remember that. You don't remember that? No. No. And your cousin, he had to wait for you then? Her? Your cousin. No, he was with us on a boat. Ja. Did he go through Ellis Island too? Ja, he came through too. He went to wait for you? Ja, he never left us. Oh, I see. Ja. And then you took the train? And we took the train. And that was, we went through Buffalo, I remember, and we even went up into Canada. Into London, Canada, I think it was. And then we came down pretty close to Detroit, I think, and into Chicago. And then from Chicago, here. I remember it was early in the morning when we got here. So you came then to stay with Anna Anderson? That's right. She was married and had children too? No, she didn't have no children at all. And they lived downtown Moline, or where did they live? They lived on 4th Avenue and 9th Street, Moline. 9th Street. Ja. All downtown then. Ja. And her husband, was he working with the... Ja, he was retired, I think. Retired? Ja. Oh, I see. Ja. So, then you took a trip on town the next day, or did you go to work immediately? No, I was here later on, probably, you know, change of climate and everything. I was kind of tired, so I laid around probably a week. And I went down to Deer, and I got on right away. In 1929. And I was almost ashamed of that, but I think about it now. You know, in the employment office, a little bit of a room, with a little door opening and a wall to the other office. Well, we were sitting there, and there was a guy sitting next to me there, and he said something, and I remember I said, I'm sorry, I can't talk English, because I couldn't talk anything. I'd only been there a week. And we sat there, and there was middle-aged people, and some young ones, and you could see they were working people. And the door opening opened up, and a man stuck his head through there, and he did like that to me. To you? Yeah. All them people in 1929, imagine that. Why did they pick you up? That's what Deer and Company did. See, my cousin had been down there and talked to them about it. Oh, I see. Yeah. So you used the finger? Yeah. So I got on as a sweeper, and I don't know, I kept sweeping there, and I remember my boss's name was Hugo Walgren. A Swede? Yeah, I imagine he was a Swede. Did you talk to him in Swedish? No, uh-uh, no. You didn't have to talk much then? No, I didn't. There was a few Swedes around there. There was another guy there. He'd been here before, but he was working alongside of me there. Jansson, Nels Jansson, his name is. Oh, Nils Jansson. Yeah. He was there, and he remembered me. I'd see him once in a while. He belongs to Vasa Club. So you got a job then? Yeah, got the job. And how long could you stay on this now before the hard time hit? Oh, that was a hard time already. People were being laid off all the time, and here they hired me, just to sweep. And I don't get a little money, and I, at first I quit. I quit after a while. Why did you do that? Were you not satisfied with the wages? No, I said I didn't come here to sweep. I said, yeah, I was kind of young and full of stuff, you know, and wanted to be. How much were you paying now for this sweeping job? I think it was 35 cents an hour. That was almost like the regular work then, on the assembly line. Yeah, 35 cents an hour I got. And then I quit, because I didn't want to sweep for nobody. Then I got a job at Eagle Signal Corporation down there. Lud Anderson, he was a superintendent there, and he was a Swede. Because I remember I went into the employment office, there was a girl there, and I said, is there anybody here that can talk Swedish? And by that time I could talk a little English, you know. So she got Lud Anderson, and he put me on right away. And I did a little better there. In the factory? Yeah. What kind of work were you doing then? Eagle Signal Corporation, it was just small stuff, assembly stuff. I worked out pretty good. And then I got this letter from my aunt out in Montana. You had another aunt out there? Yeah, on my mother's side. What was her name? Amalia Oster. She was unmarried? Yeah, she was married to a Norwegian, so her name actually was Amalia Hagen. H-A-U-G-E-N. And she had two children. And her oldest child, no, she had three. She was married first in Minneapolis to a Swede. And she had two children, a girl and a boy. And she was up there in Minneapolis. This Norwegian guy, Ole Hagen, came up to St. Paul with a load of cattle. So he had a sister up there in Minneapolis. So when he was visiting her, he met my aunt, and he talked her into going out to Montana with him. So she went out to Montana with him. She left the Swede out in Minneapolis? No, he was dead by that time. Oh, he was dead? Yeah, he was dead, that's right. So she picked up the two kids, and they all went out to Montana. So when you got this letter, how long had you been in Moline at that time? When you got the letter from your aunt? Well, I don't know. A year, two years? No, about two years, I don't think. Around 1931, I believe it was. Maybe close to a year and a half, probably. Did you join any church or any Swedish organization, anybody? No. You didn't go to Vasa or Viking? I went there, but I didn't join. You didn't join. No. So how was this change now of coming from Forshaga or Värmland to a town like Moline? Did you feel... were you homesick the first time? No, no. I was a little bit homesick at first for Sweden. Not from Forshaga, just for Sweden, you know. But that went away. When I went out to Montana, that's where I started living. So you picked up your suitcase then? That's right. Were you rooming then with somebody or boarding at the time, or were you living with your aunt? No, I lived with my cousin then, a brother to the one that went to Sweden to pick me up. He lives down on Fourth Avenue and Sixth Street right now. Albert Larson. He is related to you? Yeah, he's 97 years old. He's my cousin. I see. Yeah. So you stayed with him then? Yeah. He had a rooming house, you know, so I roomed there and then I left. So you took the train then all the way out to... Out to Montana. You had saved enough money, so you could... Oh yeah, I had some, yeah. You had work most of the time? Yeah, that's right. Was there a bad time, say, in Moline? Yeah, I started getting laid off. I believe they laid me off in Eagle Signal, too, then. Yeah, I remember that. They laid me off and then my aunt, Aunt Moline, said, Do you still want to go out to Montana? And I said, Yeah, I might as well. Because that's what inspired me to go to the United States in the first place, to go out to Wilder Western. Oh yeah. You read about that? Pardon? You read books about that? Oh yeah, I read books about Montana. So that's what I wanted in the first place, to go out to Montana. And I got out there. So your aunt out there now, she was married to this Norwegian? Yeah. And they had a farm, or ranch? Yeah, they had a big spread. Big spread. Yeah. Well, they called it ranch out there, I suppose. Yeah, most of it. You took the train then, and it took you a couple of days before you came out there. Yeah, it was a long haul. Yeah. You bet. And you were alone then? I was alone, nobody with me. Nobody with you? No. So then you came out there to Lewistown? Lewistown, Lewistown, Montana. Yeah. And then they come and— And picked you up? Yeah, well, from Lewistown, I took a—they got a spur line. Milwaukee rode at a spur line going up to Winifred. That's about 50 miles north of Lewistown. That's where I landed, in Winifred, Montana. And there's just probably 400 people in there. Small town. What time of the year did you go there? It was in August, around my birthday. And I remember my aunt—it was her birthday. She was only 51 years old then. She was in Winifred. And when she died, she was 90. 90? Yeah. She was a tough old lady then. Yeah. So what did you think, though, when you sat on a train there going up to Winifred, with the big blue sky? Oh, gee. When we got up there, up towards Winifred, I saw some hills on the side. And I asked a man sitting next to me— he was the conductor— he said, Rocky Mountains. And he laughed. He says, no, they were little hills. Yeah. So they picked you up then at the Winifred railroad station? No, nobody picked me up. There was a salesman for tractors and stuff. He wasn't down. He was down on Main Street. And I asked the guy if he knew Olly Haugen. Yeah, everybody knew him. So then they arranged it so I could ride out. They said there's a salesman there for a GI case company. He's going out there to see Olly about— Olly has a case tractor. So maybe he could pick you up and drive you out there. So they went over and asked this guy. His name was Davis, I remember. So I rode out there with him. And the further out I got, the lonelier it seemed. It was a big, quiet country. There was open spaces then? Open spaces. Prairies. Of course, they raised a lot of wheat out there, a lot of big wheat fields. A hundred-acre fields, you know. A couple hundred-acre fields of wheat all over. Beautiful. So you came into your aunt there and your uncle Haugen. Yeah, that's right. And they had a son. He was only 12 years old and I was 20. So they had a son between the two of them, a Norwegian and a— Of course, the other two were grown up. Mamie and Edmund, their name was. Mamie is still living out in Vancouver, Washington. And I got a daughter in Portland, Oregon. And a son in—oh, outside of Los Angeles somewhere. He just moved out there from Minneapolis. So they got their Western fever too. Yeah, well, they were working out there, so yeah. So when you came into your aunt there and your uncle Ole Haugen, you got a job immediately, of course. You stayed then with him? There was no job. I just worked on the ranch there. And then I hired out to somebody else. I see. I hired out to a family, a couple. They were a lot older than me, not too much. She was a schoolteacher from New York, and he was from South Dakota somewhere. And her name was Trotter. So there was nothing Swedish there at all. And she was the best, the smartest lady I ever saw in my life. So you learned to talk English that really fast? That's where I learned it from her. And they were pleasant people? Pardon? They were pleasant people, helpful? Oh, just so helpful, so wonderful. Her and I used to sit up evenings, you know, and she bought a lot of good magazines and books because she was an educated person. And I used to sit there and read, you know, and then I'd ask her about what I read, you know, how to pronounce words and stuff. She was so helpful, wonderful. And she had the ranch there then by herself? No, her husband, Al Trotter, was there. He was a... I don't think he went over out of... I don't think he finished eighth grade even. He didn't know too much, but he was good. But he never pretended to know anything either. Yeah, he was... So they had a big ranch too? Oh, they had a lot of cattle. They had probably about 300 head of cattle. So your job now was to take care of the cattle? Yeah, that's right. Plow the fields and getting it ready for planting and harvest? Harvest, yeah. But it was a tough job though, wasn't it? Were you used to that kind of work? Oh, no. It come... You grew into it, it seemed like. You liked it? Yeah. And after a while, I went into Winifred and I stayed there and got to know people, you know, and I went into a garage there. There was an Icelander there by the name of Osbjörnsson. So I chummed around with his son. And I don't know, it seemed like you made a living wherever you... whatever you done. So you took a room then in Winifred? Yeah. And you stayed there? Yeah, I stayed with maybe my buddies. And then I... Oh, I went out combining for people, helping work for somebody that wanted to combine. Oh, you followed the combiner with the harvester? That's right. Yeah, we done that. And then I worked on oil wells. There was a roustabout on the oil wells. We were drilling for oil up in there. And then I even worked in a restaurant one time as a short order cook. So you tried everything in the wine west? Yeah, I ran poker games in the saloons there. One thing I didn't do was ten bar. I never tended bar. But I ran poker games and done anything. It seemed like out there when we were young, you know, you try anything and you took it for granted. You'd have done it, that's all. But there's a lot of misconceptions, though, about the west. They are so rough and... Ah. It's completely wrong then. There was nothing rough about them people. In fact, I remember I went to... I was a taverner. No, they... Side two, continuation with Henning Olsson, side two. So there was the prohibition time then? Yeah. And they had a side bar, you said? Well, yeah, they had a bar, you know, where they were selling the hard stuff and beer. Could they do that? No, it was illegal, but everybody done it. The sheriff didn't say anything? No, there was no sheriff around. There was one in Winifred, though. No, there was no sheriff there. He just had a town marshal there. But the sheriff, he was down in Lewiston. And it was too far away, 54 miles. Oh, yeah. And if the government people, if the... the prohibition people, you know, from the government, if they were on the way up there, there was always somebody on the telephone that called Winifred up and says, hide your stuff, they're coming. So they could spot them. Yeah. But I remember there in this saloon, Burt Fuller's saloon, I think it was. They had two or three in that little town. There was a farmer, a big farmer, a guy, he farmed about probably 5 or 6 thousand acres of land. That's an awful lot. And his name was George Scharf. And him and I got to talking, standing by the bar, talking. And instead of him bragging about what he had or what he was doing, he kept asking me questions. Asking me, how do you do this? And how would you do this? And I don't know, it was so different. Nobody was bragging or anything like that. Just asking me questions, you know. Where I should be asking them questions. It was really wonderful. So you were still learning and picking up. You bet. But you said you were running a poker game. What was involved with that? When you were running a poker game? Well, you would deal out the chips. Was that what you did? Yeah. So there was a little bit of gambling going on. Oh, yeah, gambling. Sure, they gambled all the time. It was illegal to do? No, no. Gambling was not illegal. It was for the bar owner, you did that? Yeah, sure. Was there profit in that though? I mean, couldn't they clean the whole house out if they were lucky or cheap? Oh, yeah. Sure, I remember. There was a guy there. He lost his whole tavern and everything. One night, but they gave it back to him. They wouldn't take it, no. They were friends, local people, yeah. But if outsiders come out, they wouldn't do that? No, I don't imagine so. So he lost his shirt? Yeah, he lost everything. And I remember we had these rallies, political rallies. And, oh, they come in there and they were... and people, you know, they gathered, generally in these saloons, you know. And, of course, the candidate, he was buying for the house, you know. Oh, that was wild. Wild times. A lot of drinking going on then? Yeah. But were there rowdy and a lot of fighting? No, no. No? Good behavior? Good behavior. How about the young people now? How old were they when they started to drink at the bar? No, they didn't start. The school kids didn't drink, no. They didn't? No, they were 20, 21 and up, you know. And no beer drinking by the young ones either? No. Like they do today, you know, they start? No. Oh, no, no. Uh-uh. But that's one thing about Montana and the West like that. They don't make a difference who you are. They were cowboys and sheepherders and senators and lawyers and newspaper publishers. They were all together. They stood there and shot the breeze with one another. There was no difference like it was in Sweden. In Sweden, you had to tip your hat at the member of the school board. Yeah, a lot of times you had to tip your hat at the member of the school board, even if you met him on the road. So that was... So you knew all the big guys in Sweden, though, you had to do the right thing? Sure, you bet. How about the pastor? You didn't talk to him on that survey? Who? The pastor, Kyrko Hedin? Oh, yeah. I had... Tipped your hat there, too? Oh, yeah. Oh, I mean the cap? Everybody. Yeah. Yeah, but that band had it. It was really something. But you were talking about the cattlemen and the sheepherders. Don't they usually talk a little fun about the sheepherders? They smell wool? They did. The cattlemen are supposed to be a little bit more about the cattle. Oh, yeah. Sure. Well, they did it sometimes in a joking way, but when it come right down to it, they were just like their buddies, you know. They weren't, though. So they helped each other if somebody was in trouble? Yeah. You bet. But I understand now, while you were living with your aunt there in Olehagen, in the wintertime, it was okay. But you were alone, though. I mean, wasn't the winters cold? Oh, yeah. Very cold. What were you doing then? Just... What could you get anything to do then? The organ rings? No, there wasn't much. There was not much to do. We'd go out and take care of the cattle. We had a lot of milk cows around and do the chores. That's about all we had to do. We had chopped wood. Oh, it was wood. That's all we were burning, you know. We even had kerosene lights. We didn't have no electricity out there at all. And wood stoves. So in the wintertime, you stayed on the farmstead? Yeah. Oh, a lot of times I'd go into town. A lot of winters I stayed in town. And you worked at the tavern then? Yeah, I worked anywhere. You were a cook, you know. How did you learn that? I just picked it up. Somebody would need it, and you forked in there. Yeah. When you have to, you can do anything, I guess. You greased a lot of spare ribs. Yeah. So how about now working with the cattle? Were you actually on the horseback too, like a cowboy? That's right. I got bucked off a lot of times too. You bet. And branding cattle. Because you were not used to this kind of work now. No, that's right. So you had to learn the rough way, the hard way. But you were not afraid to tackle it? No. That's branding. Branding was kind of rough. Before I got used to putting the brand on. You know, a red hot iron. Sometimes the corner of the, like an E or something. Oh, they got to be perfect. And it goes in, in too deep. A lot of times, you know, it went in too deep. When the cattle lay down, or a calf lay down, there was a lot of magpies out there, birds. And they kept pecking at this sore. And there was infection, so it was kind of dangerous. But after you... You mentioned magpies. No, they're the same as we have in Sweden. No, skater. They're skater. They're sheep. They're the same bird. I was out there trapping for coyotes. And the magpies, they always tried to get out the bait, and they sprung by traps for me. So a lot of mornings I'd get out there and run by traps, and the traps were full of magpies. Yeah. Terrible. So they were out there, yeah? Yeah. They were skater. Yeah, they were skater. They're pussies in Missouri. And they sounded just the same, too. Skrattar som en skata. So you tried trapping, too? Oh, yeah. Yeah. How many lines did you have then? Oh, I had different lines. You started in November, December? Yeah. No, it was not steady, you know. Just go out and maybe catch a coyote or two, maybe a whole winter. So it was not too profitable, I'll tell you that. But it was easy to sell the kelp store. Oh, yeah. They didn't pay too much, though, for a coyote pelt. They didn't have any beaver up there, if you can get a picture. Oh, yeah. They had beaver, but not where I was located at. They had beaver dams. And the hard, rough blowing in the winter, did the body go? No. Oh, I got cold, of course, but I was well protected. I had good clothing. You were not on a horseback in the wintertime, though? Oh, a lot of times I was on a horseback. To round up the cattle? Yeah. And then you had to feed the cattle in the wintertime, too. A lot of times they wouldn't even eat. Too cold? Too cold, but boy, they had to drink, so we had to pump water for them. Pump by hand, too. Boy, I was mean. Well, you didn't have a windmill. Were they frozen, I suppose? No, they didn't have no windmill at all. I thought they all had windmills out there. No, not where I was at. So you had to pump by hand? Had to pump by hand. That was a lot of work. Oh, a lot of times we had, some places they had a motor, you know, a regular gas engine pump. So this Hogan, he had tractors, you said? He had a Case tractor? Yeah, uh-huh. And combine and such. He had a Case combine, too. Of course, that was later, after I first went out to combine, I don't think I'd heard of. It was only binders then? Binders, that's right. You had to shock it together? Yeah. Oh. And then they had trash and crews. They were a lot of fun, trash and crews. You'd follow the trash, but you'd go to different farms, you know, and trash. And they were good eaters. Yeah, and the women, you know, they seemed like it was a contest about who could cook, put up the best meals. So it was... And you were just shoving it in? Yeah. Good appetite? Good appetite, that's right. When you were out there, you didn't have any kind of insurance in case you got sick or so? No, no, nothing. And you were healthy all the time? I was healthy all the time, no. You never had any trouble with your health? No. So there was a good climate out there then? Oh, yeah, wonderful. Wonderful climate. You felt good? Yeah. And you stayed there how many years, you said? Ten years. Ten years? Yeah. See, my aunt and Moline wanted me to come back because her husband started getting sick. So then I came back in 1940. And then I got drafted into the service. And they took you into service too? Oh, yeah. I was spending much of my time out in Texas and Oklahoma, or... Well, in Oklahoma, Texas, and Louisiana. I never got across the pond. And you were out there for about three, four years? Huh? How many years were you out there in the service? Three, four years? No, only 18 months. 18 months? Yeah, that was during the war. I got drafted. And then you came back to Bolivia again then? Yeah. Went to work for John Deere again. Oh, I see. And you got around there, and by that time you could speak for yourself? Yeah. I got married while I was in the service. Got married out in Texas. So you met your wife there? No. No, she was from Moline there. So you were home then for some furlough or vacation, or how did you meet your wife? No, I met her before I left. From Montana? No, before I... Left for the draft? That's right. And then... So you were married in 1940? In 1943. 1943? Yeah. Uh-huh. So when you came back, did you buy a house then, or did you rent an apartment? She was still working here then, I think. Yeah, I lived... We had an apartment, lived on 10th Street. Then I decided to have this one built. Built this one here. This house here? Yeah. So I moved in there in 1951, I think it was. Been there ever since. So this was a new area then? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Nothing was built here at all. That house was still there. Oh, this is an older house, yeah. Yeah. But Nels built that one, and he built that... Well, he built that yellow one first, and then he built this one here. Yeah. And you stayed on then at John Deere? Yeah. At the plow works or the combine works? Plow and planter works. Plow and planter. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And you retired from there then? Yeah, that's right. I had 31 years. 31 years? Yeah. So when you came in there, the union was already in there at that time. That's right, yeah. So you automatically had the young... Oh, yeah....job in the union. Yes, uh-huh. And that was a good job, you... Oh, yeah, assembly. Assembly job, that's all it was. But was it hard work? I mean, were you tired after a day? Oh, yes. It was... It was... All factory work is tiring. It drags you down. Yeah. And you still had this Montana sky in your head. Oh, yeah. You never thought of packing your suitcase and take your wife with you out there again? Oh, we've been out several times. We were taking trips. Oh, for vacation, though? Yeah, vacation. But you never planned on settling? No, no, no. Because then you got the family and children coming along. That's right. So then it was better to have the security with John Deere. Yeah. And you had two children, one daughter and one boy? Yeah. Boy is 41, I guess. And the girl is 38, I think it was. Uh-huh. And they are out west? Yeah. Did you join any Swedish organization after you came back from Montana, then, on the service? No, I... Second time? I belong to Vikings now, but I hadn't been there too long. Oh. Belong to Vikings. So how about the church now? Do you go to church? No, I don't belong to any church. You don't belong to any church? No. When were you married? I married in Temple, Texas. Temple, Texas? Yeah. Oh. So your wife was living with you down in Texas, then, when you were in service? No, no. She went back to Moline? She went back there to Moline. She just came down to get married, and that's... And she came back to Moline, and then I eventually got out of the service. Oh. So what kind of work was she doing then? Oh, she worked for the soldiers and... Office work? Yeah. Oh. Now she's working for J.C. Penney's on the salt park. Oh. So she continued to work then? Yeah. And she continued to work then after you moved back? Oh, yeah. Yeah, she's still working. Oh. Yeah, she took off several years in between there, you know, with the kids. With the kids and stuff. So have you been back to Sweden since you left? In 1966, I went back. It was the first time? Yeah. So your brother and the sister... Still over there. Still over there, yeah. Yeah. They got families. Her son was there to visit me once. My sister's son. Oh. So what kind of changes do you see now in Forshaga and around there? Is the old children's home still there or...? No, no, that's all gone. All gone? Yeah. They discontinued that altogether. Oh. And what did they say about you? What kind of questions did they ask you about the United States? Oh, just ordinary questions, you know, how things are. Of course, they read a lot about, you know, how it is. Yeah. TV. They got TV shows over there. They got the same shows that we have. Dallas and all those shows. Yeah. So about what you read now about the Wild West and the Indians when you were a little boy, did it jive now with what you saw in the real life out there when you came there? No, not really. Not really? Of course, they dramatized them. Books, you know, a lot. No, not really. But the nature, the beauty. Yeah, the beauty. And the people. People were the same as they were in the books. You know, they were congenial people. They are more easygoing. Easier going, yeah. And I imagine it comes from them people out there came from somewhere back east here. And they dropped out, they drifted out there, and they took up homesteads. And everyone needed help, so they helped one another. And that's how they got to be so friendly. And they knew that everybody needs help. And you need it and there is no question about it. No, you just do it, that's all. Do it, yeah. Yeah. So were there any churches out there your aunt belonged to? Church? No. It was too far away? Yeah, it was too far away. How often did they go out to Winford, for instance, for buying groceries? Once a week or? Yeah. No, no, not once a week. They go into Lewiston and they stock up for half a season. I like it in the fall, they go and load up a truckload of groceries. Then they don't go to the store anymore all winter. Oh, I see. Yeah. So they stayed put then? Well, they have to almost. Oh, once in a while, you know, if the roads are good. With cars now, they go in and pick up a few things maybe that they have to have. But as a rule, the main stepples, they go down and buy in the fall or early spring and that's it. Do you think that people will get a little bit weary or afraid to be isolated, like in the case of sickness? Because it takes a long, long time to get in there if you're in the middle of a blizzard. Have you ever felt that you are boxed in? No, no, I never did feel. I don't know, you never give it a thought, I guess. But it's awful long days to go when it starts blowing and the... Oh, it's terrible. So you had to stay put then? You bet. Drink a lot of coffee? Drink a lot of coffee. Right. But back then there was no TV. Did you have a crystal set or radio? We had a radio, yeah. We had radios. And you got good... The batteries, battery radio, yeah. So you could listen to Franklin D. Roosevelt's fiery shouts then? Yeah, yeah, we listened to that. Did you hear him on the radio? Oh, yes, yeah. Were there Republicans out there, the people, or were they Democrats? They were a mixture, like here, different, yeah. Did they discuss much politics out there in the barracks? Oh, yeah, they talked politics all right. You said that when they had those gang... Rallies, yeah. Rallies. Yeah, they was a lot of fun. And then they had radios in December? Oh, yes, you bet. Young ones and the old age. Yeah. Two-parter. Boy. You didn't join any radio? No, no. I kind of worked in one time. A couple of friends of mine and me started. We put one on. Oh? Yeah, whatever. Didn't about to not. But they had radios all right, boy. They are great out there. Wild west shows. So they are special companies and they run around and sets them up, or are they stationary radios? It comes on every year in every town? No, no. We never had... In Lewistown, they had the traveling shows, you know. There is a bigger one, yeah. Yeah. You would think they would get afraid to get the partakey stuff like the young ones, the break bones and the shoulder blades and... Nah, they never think of that when they are young. They never think of it? Nah. Because they can be laid up there for a whole year? Oh, you bet. And kill themselves too. Yeah, that's right. So you never tried the bronco riding? No, not... You had enough on a daily order? Yeah, that's enough. I wasn't much of a cowboy in that respect, breaking horses and stuff like that. It's a tough job. Yeah. Sometimes a horse bucked me off. I remember one time I was running after a cow and I ran through a patch of rose bushes. A new one was fenced and it was sticky and the horse, he started bucking and he bucked me off and bucked me right into a patch of the rose bushes. Oh boy, I had stickies all over myself. Oh. Yeah. So it was like a... Then he shifted gear? Yeah. You bet. Well, there's not much to do then when they start to buck like that, I suppose. Huh? Well, I suppose there's not much you can do when they start to buck like that. No, not a thing. Unprepared. That's right. And then when they rounded up the cattle now for slaughtering, they wasn't the fault? Not for slaughtering, no. Well, when they shipped them, yeah. They shipped them? Yeah. What did they ship to Lewiston? No, mostly to either Kansas City or most of them from out there where I was at went to St. Paul. St. Paul? Yeah. That's a long haul though. You would think they would lose a lot of cattle or... No, no. No? A lot of them went to Chicago and they had stockyards open, you know. There was nothing in Sioux Falls at that time, Sioux City? No. No stockyards there? No. At that time, there might have been some. St. Paul was the closest for them. Of course, they went on Milwaukee Road, you know, it was straight run practically from Montana up to Minneapolis for St. Paul. You mentioned that your uncle now, Hogan, he went into St. Paul with one load when he picked up his... That's right....your uncle, your aunt. Yeah. Did you go with any load of cattle to St. Paul? No, never did. No. I never went. Did he continue to do that when you were there? No, no, he never went while I was there. So they sent them without shepherd on them, the cattle? Yeah, well, somebody... Had to be on the trail. Yeah, well... Because they got to be watered and... Yeah, it was cattlemen, you know, from four or five different ranches shipped cattle, you know, so... Together? Yeah, together, see, and so one or two guys always went with the load. Okay. Yeah. Well, that's... You never thought of starting to rent a few acres out there and add more and more? I thought I was going to take it up a homestead, but I just didn't get to it, that's all. So you had it in your mind? Yeah. Yeah, there was some vacant land there if I could take it up, but I just didn't have time to mess with it. I couldn't be doing right in case they hit oil on it or something, you know. Oh, so the oil there was good business. Yeah. You could take up 140, 360, or a 640. 640 is a section. It's a section, yeah. Yeah. I never saw a section, though, that I could take it up. Maybe if I'd seen, found a section, I would have proved up on it, but... It was generally small spots, you know, 140 acres or something like that. And the land was not tillable, in other words, it was grazing land. Yeah, it was prairie, yeah. You never plowed it under or anything. How much was it per acre then at that time when you were out there? Oh, gosh. A dollar an acre, I don't know if it was sold for. Even cultivated land was sold for a dollar an acre. They had a bad time during the Depression, too, out there. You ain't a kidding. That was tough. They were dry. Very dry. And blue. Yeah, it's a high blue sky. So you've been out there many times then with your children? Oh, yes. Take your wife out there. I got out there and I parked the car and I went in there and into a saloon. I hadn't been there ten minutes before. About five guys asked me to come out and stay at the ranch. Come on out and stay with the ranch, he said. Oh, so they recognized you. Yeah. How about your aunt? Was she still living when you were out there? No. Only once. No. She moved to Vancouver, Washington, so I've seen her once or twice after that. I've been taking several trips out to Washington because that's where all my relatives went from Montana. So they retired out there then? Yeah. So I'm supposed to be old out there on the ranch like that. It's not too good. You're all alone. No, you're all alone. That's right. But when you are young and strong, then there was life.