 Cassette 2, continuation with Eric Andresen, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 2, side 1. So in 1932, when you bought the house then, did you buy it on the east side? No, on the west side. Close to the factory? Yes. And you were still working? I was still working. And a lot of people were laid off? How come you could keep on going then? Was there still sale of harnesses and things like that? Yes. There still was, but it was going down lower and lower. How big of a factory was it? How many were employed there you worked now? Oh, I'd say it was around 100 people. They also made their own leather and everything, everything they made on there. You mean you tanned the hides too? Oh, yes. You took it from scrap? Yes. Oh, I see. But I didn't work on the tannery, no. You were on the finishing product? Yes. Oh, I see. So you were still working in 1932? Yes. But when you bought this house, didn't your uncle tell you, told you to hold off a little bit? Was it a rough time coming on or anything like that? Well, 1932, the roughest time started to be better. It started to be better in 1932. Oh, I see. So you have already ridden out the bad times then? The worst part, yes. I see. So you took a loan then at the Swedish American Bank? No. I had little money to pay down. And I borrowed from my uncle, the rest I could pay it off. You didn't lose any money in the bank? Not a thing, because I had spent. You had to buy a lot of furniture and... Well, heck. When I come back, I bought me an automobile. It was not a new one, but it was a good one. And then furniture and all that stuff, so I didn't lose no money in the bank, no. So you were lucky then? Yes. If I had gone to Sweden, well, I maybe would have lost the whole thing. So it was a great idea. You made a good decision there. Yes. No, I was... Oh, I saw so many people that had lost their money in the banks. I know one time I was walking across the river on the bridge. And there was a fellow walking, he had on me. And he was talking. He was talking to himself. And he had lost money in the bank. Yes, to give the goddamn country back to the Indians. He was really mad. So he had lost all his... Yes, he lost money. Some people had to walk away from their houses too. Oh, yes, a lot of people. In fact, the house I bought, there were people that had lost it. You bought it from the bank then? Yes. So it was easy to buy a house at that time? Oh, heck. Three thousand, I think it was $3,150 I paid for it. It was a two-bedroom bungalow, double garage, big lot. So I sold it. I had it for a few years. I sold it for $10,000. So I made the money there. And then you bought another house? Then I bought this house there. You see part of it. I bought that house. And it was on the east side? No, it was right up in here on 26th. But it was on the east side of the river though? Yeah, on the east side of the river. Why did you move from the west side then? Did your wife want to live around here? Yes. See this? My daughter here, you see her? This one, yeah. She was small then. She was only about, I think she was eight years old. She had bought a place next to a school. School in Rockford. So she had it pretty handy, just half a block from the school. So you didn't want to send her to school on the west side then? No. There was not too many Swedes living there at the time? No. And I thought it would be a nice place for her to be and it was a nice place. So and you were still working for the Hauners company? No, no. No? What happened there then? The last 23 years I worked for Sonstrans. You quit Hauners making completely then? I was working for Sonstrans when I bought this place. So what happened with this Hauners factory? Did it discontinue? Oh yeah, that's not there anymore. That's all torn down. Could it survive the depression? Well they weren't doing very good. People that had money invested in there, well they lost it. They lost it? Did you invest any money in it? No, no. I didn't. How about your uncle? He had some in there. But he was old enough to retire when it closed up? Yes. Yes, he was. So what do you think made it going bad? Was it the depression or was it the time? In other words, there was less horses and less demand for that kind of product? That's right. The time was gone? It was gone. They were gone and done. So you didn't see any chance of starting up your own business like that? No, I never. You never thought of that? I never even thought of it. So but here you had a profession, I mean, it was in your blood and your fingers and your hands and everything. How did you feel then to go over to Sundstrands and do a completely different thing? Well, I don't know. I felt like I always got along pretty good. It didn't make any difference what I took up, I had always luck with it. I had Sundstrands, it was really the thing that set my neck. So you started after the Second World War then at Sundstrands? Yes. And then you came into the Union? Yep. I had Sundstrands. For 21 years I've been retired and they paid me over $300 a month all those years. And good hospitalization? Yes. You don't have to worry about being sick or anything? No. Get sick, take care of it. I've been lucky. So when you quit now, did you quit at the harness factory or were you laid off or what happened? No. I quit. I quit and I went to Rock Island. Rock Island? Rock Island Arsenal. I was there working for 18 months. There was no interwar then? Yes. As a harness maker? There was no, but I was working on leather. I was making the alter for machine guns and revolvers and different kinds of things I was making. And that was because of your skill? You were hired there? Yes. I see. For 18 months? 18 months. How was the pay there compared to the factory you worked for in Rockford? I got more pay there. I think it was around $95 an hour I got working down there. And 18 months, then I quit. You stayed there alone then? Your wife was still here in Rockford? You moved the whole family? We had this place. Let's see now. I look at this. No, this was not the place. This was the place I had. I rented out to a couple of people. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. I had a house. And my first boss, a salesman. He was selling automobiles. But during that time, during the war, when there wasn't any car to be sold, they didn't make them, and he didn't pay his rent. So I thought, one day I thought, why should I be here and work and pay rent and have someone living in my place for nothing? So that's the reason I quit. So I went on back. To Rockford? Yes. Could you get him out then? Oh yeah. I gave him, I gave him I think three weeks notice to get out and then move back home. So he was not able to pay you anything then? No. In fact, he declared himself bankrupt. Was he a Swede? No, no. You didn't know him? So I lost a few months rent. Yeah. Well, you lost 18 months. You lost 18 months. No, no. Well, he started to pay in the beginning. Oh yeah, yeah. Well, from beginning it paid. So what kind of work did you get then after Rack Island Arsenal? Did you start at Sundstrans then? No. Not right then. My brother and another fellow had started, started to make what they call magnetic chucks. So when I come back from Rack Island, well then my brother wanted me to come and work with them. And he was making those magnetic chucks. And, and it was there for a while. Do you say- And then they decided that Sundstrans wanted to buy their business. Sundstrans wanted to buy their business. And when they bought the business, well then I got, went along with it. I see. To make that stuff. So those chucks, they were for automotive use then? Magnetic chucks? They were for a whole, tool, it's like, well steel. One much for steel. You can put the steel rod or whatever you had to grind. Oh, I see. Yeah, we made a lot of chucks. So there, there we got to be starting for Sundstrans. Numeric chucks. Chucks. This the one that holds the steel? Yeah. Like a drill bit. There's also a chuck, isn't it? Yes, that is. Something similar. There's a whole part you can hold it for grinding or milling and whatever. And from that day on, you stayed with Sundstrans then? Yeah, 23 years. And your brother, did he follow along too? He went along too. And he got married too during this time, I suppose, during the 30s. Your brother? Yeah, my brother, he got married 1930. 1930. How did he fare during the depression? Was he laid off and had a rough time? No, he was working all the time. All the time? Oh yeah. He was working all the time, but there wasn't so much pay. But he could keep on going. But then after he started making magnetic chucks, he made a lot of money. He put a lot off. So he... He put a lot off. I don't know, but I'm pretty sure he had about a half a million. So he invested in the... He got a good pay when he sold the business. Oh, I see, so he was a part owner of it then? Oh yeah, yes. Him and another guy. Oh, gee. So he panned out pretty good then, at the end? Oh yeah. But he had a rougher beginning though than you had. Oh yeah, he did. But when it started to get tough for you, you were experienced in the language then. You didn't have any problems. No, I didn't have any problems. But my brother, he got to be a good experience with the electric. So he got really good. Of course, I can't kick, I'm satisfied. So he married a Swedish girl too? Yes. A farmer's daughter. From Sweden? From Sweden? No, she was born in this country. She was born in this country. And she's still alive too. In fact, she had her birthday a couple of days ago. And she get to be 86. Oh, so she's a little bit older. Yeah, a little bit older, a few months. Well, but your brother is four years younger than you though. Oh yeah, yes. So my brother's wife, she's eight year older than my brother. No, four years. Four years older. I see. So and your daughters now, you had two daughters. How did they marry? Did they marry Swedish? Yes, they married Swedish. Swedish? Yes, Swedish. Swedish? Yes. Did they marry Swedish? Yes, but they were born in this country. Born in this country. Botterham. How did they meet, in high school or? Yes, they did, yes. In fact, Botterham did. Oh. They didn't join any organizations like Switzerland and Voss? No. So you joined Switzerland in 1940? 1940. Why did you wait so many years before you went to a Swedish organization? Did you? I don't know what the reason why. You were busy with other things, with your family and your work? Like my wife and my two daughters, they belonged to the church, the Swedish Free Church. The Free Church? Oh, yeah. No, they were pretty strict. They never smoke or drink or anything. No, but you were not that particular though, you know? No, I didn't care. You were not the church goer? No, no, I used to go with them. Once in a while, but I didn't go like every Sunday and so on, no. That I didn't. Do you remember now during the 30s, there were tough times for a lot of Swedish boys here in Rockford? And they had a socialist club here in Rockford. Do you remember that club they had here on 7th Street? A socialist club? Oh, yeah, yes. I know all them clubs. Yeah. But it didn't work out so well. It disappeared. Oh, yeah, yeah. Why do you think it disappeared? Did they get too radical or? I don't know. Our club, no, the Switzer club, we got, well, I would say, I think we got one of the nicest clubs in Rockford. Oh? Yeah, a really nice place. But you didn't talk any politics there in Switzer? No, not very, very seldom. You had to speak off the records and speak. So did you become a Republican or a Democrat? I've been a Republican all my life. Republican? Yeah. How come that, I mean, you, you want to be with the upper classmen then, in other words, businessmen? Well, I don't know. I wanted, yes, but. Who gave you the idea? How did you read about it? Or how did you come to that conclusion, to be a Republican? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. How did you come to be a Republican? Well, I, I think it was just my own idea. Either one of them. I don't think either one of them is right, but I still think Republicans live better. But during the 30s now, Hoover was blamed for a lot of different things. Do you think that was unfair, the treatment he got, or? I think so. He couldn't help it. See, those days, like Hoover, when he was in, sure, time was tough. It was really bad. And then Roosevelt got in after him. Well, those days, they had a lot of money. They had money to spend. So, so it was easy enough to do this and do that, and all that. Well, now there's this, after all this war and stuff, they have spent so darn much money. And, They overspent. They overspent. But I still think that Hoover, if they had just taken a little bit more easy, well, I think they would have been better off. But Hoover, he didn't start any WPA, you know, for the workers. Well, that was Roosevelt's story, that. Yeah, he started. Why didn't Hoover think about that, you think? Or was he a little bit slow coming on there? Because it was really bad, though. Well, there was bad times. There was bad times. There, I saw Hoover. I saw Hoover right on Summit Street, on railroad station, there was a little railroad station there on Summit Street. Came there for a rally. Yeah, I was there, so, a little short, short guy. What did he say, though? Do you remember what he? Oh, that I don't remember. Yes. But there were a lot of Swedes voting for Hoover. Oh, yeah, there was. Were you able to vote for Hoover? Were you a citizen? No. I wasn't a citizen. I didn't get to be a citizen until after I got back from Sweden. Well, 1920? 29. 29. But you voted for Hoover then against Rothschild? No, I didn't vote. You didn't vote? No. Why? You had the- Well, I didn't have the voting right. I wasn't a citizen then. I was after that. You took out the first paper in 29, or 28? Well, I had taken out the first paper before I went to Sweden, yeah, but I didn't tell them, no. So you waited another four or five years then before you became a citizen? Yeah, I had to wait a few years. So you became a citizen in 1934 then, or something like that? Hmm, yes. Yeah, I think it was 33, I think it was. 33. So you didn't have the possibility to vote. So then you have been back to Sweden several times after that? Oh, I've been back to Sweden four times. Four times? And you had your wife with you then? Oh, yeah. She went to her birthplace, Storke. Yeah, my wife, she been over there three times. What do you think about the unions now? You came in with Sundstrand, and you joined the union there. I never did belong to a union. You didn't have to? But Sundstrand, they had a big UAW, though. Yeah, but I couldn't join the union. Why? I was a foreman. Oh, I see. So you came with the Chuck company that was directing the support men? Yes. So you didn't have to belong to? No. No? I have belonged to a union in Sweden. There's a shoe factory there in Sweden. Now, I did belong there. I see. But not in this country? No, no. Do you think the unions been good for the workers, or I mean, for everybody? They've been good to a certain way, but they went too damn far. They're going too darn far. They did like the Democrats. They overspent. Yes. Because you were like the pensions, and vacation, hospitalization. Do you think they would have come on without the unions? No, they wouldn't. They wouldn't. I would say that's good. But after they got that, they want to keep on getting more and more. I got to have more. I got to have more. I've not seen enough of them, god darn it. And they want to, they're all little monsters. They want to, don't deserve to have a raise. No, sir. No, sir. Do you think the job quality has suffered over the years, compared to years back? The worker was more honest about it, and good days work? Yes. They have lack of integrity, you know, for the company? No, no, they're getting so god darn big. So they would think up to have their foreman or their company don't got no right whatsoever. In order to keep peace, they have to give what they want. And I don't think that's fair. You being a foreman, it was hard to be a foreman, to keep order on the job floor? Yes. It was hard. That's for sure. What was the hardest part? To keep the different nationalities apart, the Swedes? No, no, not that. But they're getting so god darn independent. You cannot, if you see anything wrong with it, you can't have any right to do anything about it. No, I don't like it at all. So the foreman and the management, they have to crawl then rather than the? That's right. And you can't do anything about it? Not, let me, being in a lot of trouble. You would think there would be a happy medium there, or they will understand each other? No, well, there are always some in the branch that stir it up. Were they outsiders, you think, that came from Chicago or bigger cities? Or were they bred here in Rockford, those union organizers, the spokesmen for them? Well. They always say, you know, there's an outsider coming in. Yes. Was that really true, you think? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'll tell you, I'm sure, Grant, I'm true about it. It's 21 years now I haven't been working in it. So you had done your work day? Yes. Yes, 21 years. It's a long time to. Well, see how much money they have now. I saw over 300 a month for 21 years, a month, for quite a bit. So if you take the difference in your uncle, Oxley Erickson, he came probably in the early 1900s to this country. 1905, 1906, something like that. And he worked. There was no union. He became a supervisor, of course, so he could make more money than the people. But if you saw the people up in the 80s, 85, like you now, during the 1920s, they were not able to live like you do today. No, no, no. They never saw that silver lining. They worked all their life with very small benefits. So you came in at the right time, then you saw the benefits after the Depression, of course, and the Second World War. They kept it going. And do you think the war was a necessary thing to get them moving again? It seems that that was the turning point. Because it was a very slow time in the 30s, all the way up to 1939. To that point, they had their, their workhorse broke. There were BFD all over them. Yes, because they took the women into the factories. National Lock employed hundreds and hundreds. Yes. Full production. Were people more happy then during the war years, you think, than after? In other words, they were happy to work. They didn't complain about no more. Cassette two, side two. Rick Anderson, Rockwell, Illinois. So what was your hardest time then during the Depression? You still had a job. And you bought a house, 1932. You didn't lose any money in the bank. You could still, did your wife work then at any time? Or did you stay home? My wife never had to work. She never went outside the home? She, the only work she ever, ever done was some good friends to like help with the different things, you know, around the homes. But outside of that, she, there was no reason for her to have to work. So you built up your equity, and you sold the house for $10,000. You made a little bit of money there, quite a bit of money for that time. And you invested that in another house. How much down payment did you pay then? Did you borrow most of the money, or did you through the whole bundle between $3,000 and $10,000? There would be $7,000 profit into the new house. Yes. You did? But according to the bankers, now you should have borrowed more money instead and kept that cash, you know, so you can buy some other things. No, not. I never borrowed any money from the bank. Never borrowed? The only time I borrowed money from the bank was the same year I retired from Sunstrance. So you- And the reason I did that, I wanted to buy some stock in Sunstrance. And I knew I had some money coming from Sunstrance. So I borrowed money from the bank to buy the stock. And I paid them back as soon as I got all the money off from Sunstrance I had coming. And it was a good investment? Oh, yeah. I made enough on that to buy a mega-trip to Sweden for my family and me. So you had the confidence in Sunstrance at that time? Oh, yeah. I still have. Still have? I think it was the nicest place I've ever worked. But nowadays, you have to be a little bit scared about a lot of companies. You know, the National Lock, they closed up. Oh, yeah, yeah. A lot of companies are- You know, I was up to Sunstrance plant. Oh, well, last week, I had some paper that I want to straighten. And I hadn't been up around the area for a few years. And then I finally got lost when I come up there. And there'd be a lot of dirt and mud in there. Who gave Sunstrance all this job? Was there politicians? Well, there was- Like John B. Anderson, for instance. Do you think he had something to do with the progress of Sunstrance? Oh, yeah. Maybe he had some. John Thompson, of course, really had a lot to do with it, too. He had a lot of government jobs. Yes. They got a lot of business from the government. All kinds of stuff. So the politicians, they've been- Oh, yeah, God. It's a big place. So this business, though, with aviation, that was the one that put them on the map? Yes. They have cornered the market. And every year, then, you can go down to a big dinner at the Metro Center in Rockford. Well, it would not be exactly there. This is the first time I went to this place. The Metro Center? Yeah, that's the first time. So you are treated for a big dinner, then? Oh, yeah. Do you get any special stocks or dividends extra? No, not unless you- No, they didn't do that there. We're just there for dinner. And a little show on site. So how many retirees are coming to doing like this? Well, on this meeting here, it was 1,006. 1,006? Yeah. There's a lot of people. So that means they are paying out a lot of retirement money. They are. Just here in Rockford? They're just for Rockford area. And there are some other people that have been working there for 45 years? Oh, of course. So this is the biggest company in Rockford? That would be the biggest. That's the biggest. And the best. And the best. So they have United Auto Workers Union in their company. But Ingersoll, Barber, Coleman, they have no union. How have they been able to keep the union up? I don't know. Because they pay almost as much as Sundstrand. You mean those people are not as radical as the Sundstrand people? Yeah. Yeah, they've been lucky. So Sundstrand, they have really been the trendsetter of wages in Rockford? Oh, yeah. Yes. That was the case. So we have to say that the United W has done a lot of work there to get this. Oh, yeah. But you think they've gone a little bit too far? What do you stop then? Another depression. Do you think it's needed, another depression, to stop it? I think so. You can't sit down and reason with people that this is the way, because nobody wants to give. They like to have more, more, more, more. That's right. So the depression then will automatically make a stop to it. Yeah, they're going to get it. You think so? You think they're going to run their heads against the wall? Well, if they don't got the sense enough to stop now, well, they're going to get it. So when you are talking with the Sunstein worker, the one that's been in the Union, how can you talk to him? Does he feel you as a freeloader? Here you are sitting with a tremendous good pay, and there's things to, the way he can reason, there's things to order a hard job, you know, to strike, put on pressure on the people. And you can't talk to him. You can't talk to Sunstein. You can't talk to Sunstein. You can't talk to Sunstein. You can't talk to Sunstein. But you have led a strong organization, right, down, down, down, up, up we have come so far. When you get stressed, what does it say about your activities? When you're financially authority has theー Oh, that you took care of the way pay, didn't you? Doesn't look like that. And what kind of credit you got back? You didn't take the credit? I brought a new bank. The second bank didn't have my name, and I had to live on my on the wall. Yes. Because during a lockout or during a strike the management can work. They can work overtime. I tell you, it make me It make me almost mad a lot of times. I know years ago even When you meet somebody that's sitting half way and tearing down this country. I know one time, many a few years ago, I was in a tavern one time. And a Swedish guy, he was there talking. He run down this country and said Sweden wasn't much better, it wasn't much better than this and that. And I was listening to him for a bit. That time I said, don't you got guts enough to go back to Sweden when you think this country is so god damn bad you can't stand it? What did he say then? He said if he was able to come to this country, he ought to be able to go back home where he come from. What did he say? He didn't say anything. He said it's already done there. But I don't think that's fair. I don't think that's fair to keep on running this country down. And if you think Sweden is much better, well, Sweden got it good now, yes. That's for sure. But you still run this country down, you should go back where you come from. This is probably a hard subject to discuss though, you know, because Yes. Because there usually will be, if some individuals are running, like the unions now for instance, then they will blame America for it, rather than the union or the management. So there will be the Americans are bad. But it, there's been an interesting time for you, you know, in other words, you were just coming from Överboda to Rockford, new language, but you had a good skill. You were a harness maker when you came. Well, I was a shoe maker. Yeah, you transferred over to that specific line. And became a harness maker. So there was your title then, when you worked for Hessen. Oh, yes. Harness maker. That's right. And after you quit there, you never touched a knife and a sewing kit again? No. Did you do something for yourself, like leather belts and the belt you have on yourself? No. No, that, that, that's different. But I got a belt, I got a belt that's made in Mexico. So how are those products made in Mexico? Are they as good as what you could make? Would you say they have good quality on the job? Some of it, I think they're doing very good. Because they use a lot of leather. Yeah, I gotÖ Your brother in Sweden now, did he continue with his shoemaking business then? Until he retired? Yes. Well, he was, of course, he'd been retired many years. He was much older than you were, soÖ About six years older than I was. He lived to be 90. I guess I did now. So you have all high age possibilities then? Yes. Like your brother is still living andÖ And no one has been over here to visit you in the United States? No one of those in Sweden has been over here? Oh, yes. No, they've been. Your brothers? Not my brother. But your sisters? My one sister has been over. She was older than I am. She was a year and a half older than I was. But she's also dead. She's been dead, yeah. So if you sum it up now, what was the hardest time here in the United States, you think, in Rockford? The hardest time? Yeah. Well, I don't think I can think of any. You never thought of it that way? You took one day at a time? No, I think when we were just married, too, it was a tough time, yes. But we had a lot of fun just the same. I had more fun then than I have now. But here you lost your wife how many years ago? 75. 75. So you've been with her then for 11 years? 11 years, yeah. But here you are almost daily going downtown Rockford with an old friend, Victor Peterson. He's going to be 100 now. Almost daily. I'm 86. You're 86? Yeah. But I mean your friend now, Victor Peterson, he's going to be 100 here next month. Next month. And you are going downtown almost every day of the week? We've been doing that, but now when winter comes and it's snowing and cold, he likes to stay in bed late in the morning. He's getting lazy now, huh? Yes. But he has had a hard work day, too, in the hard factory, planer and everything. Oh, yeah. He's been a strong guy. He's been a working fool. Working fool? Yes. But it doesn't seem to hurt him, though. No, it doesn't. His head is clear? His legs are good? Yesterday. His heart is good? Yesterday he didn't want to go anyplace, so he wanted me to come up there and we had a steak dinner. In his place? Yeah. He fixed it himself? Oh, yeah. We both worked on it. I mean, here you are living alone now. Yeah. He is living alone. Yeah. You're 30 years of age. You have no nurse coming to visit you or anything, but you have people coming in to check you up, cleaning and so on. Oh, I do. I do it myself. You do it cleaning yourself? Oh, yes. And you're cooking? Yeah. But I make it kind of easy with the cooking. I buy a lot of this tea with indish. And they're darn good, some of them. And you haven't been sick or any health problem? Well, I have, yes. But all these years I haven't had anything to do with the doctors at all. The whole year. But see Victor now. He is using quite a bit of snuff. Oh, yeah. He's been doing this since he was a little boy probably. And it doesn't seem to hurt him? He's used it darn much. He's used it darn much and then he gets to run over. I use snuff myself. Oh, you do? Yeah. And I got snuff in there now. Yeah, but you use it a little different way than he does though. He uses too much. He uses it. Yeah. Yeah. When did you start to use snuff? Oh, when I was about 14 I think. And ever since? Yeah. Never quit? No. And never smoked? You never smoked? Yeah, I did smoke some. But I didn't know better. But you quit? Oh, yeah. I haven't smoked for many. I used to get, like when I was working, I used to get a cigar once in a while for somebody who got a baby. But I never smoked a whole cigar. Never. Snuff chewing, no. Was there something that went with the shoemaking business? Most of the shoemakers? No, I don't think so. How about your father? He didn't smoke and he didn't chew snuff, even though he had a pipe. But I never saw him smoke it. It was one of the longest. Oh, the fancy ones? Yes, one that was really fancy. How about your brother in Sweden? Did he use snuff? No, no he didn't. And he didn't smoke. How did you get started with it? In school or...? No, my older sister, she was married to one that was a furniture and stuff. He smoked snuff and I got the start from him. I see, and you caught on right away. Yeah. But it never bothered you? You never had any stomach ailments or anything? No. And you don't have to spit often too? No, I never spit. I just take a little bit if you... Why do some people spit so often when they use snuff? They have to spit all the time. Those guys that put in so goddamn much, heck, I know in Sweden I saw guys that had a little snuff in there and then they... So you can see the snuff. Damn, me frogs couldn't even sit down and park on the snuff. It's a little bit too much? Huh? It's a little bit too much? Yeah, that's awful dumb. No, I was going to quit when I got married. My wife, she didn't like it. So I was going to quit. Then one day she said, why don't you go ahead and have your snuff? I was going to quit. Well, I suppose it's a habit that's hard to get rid of, like smoking and... Yeah, I imagine. And drinking. Still, when I go, if I go out for dinner or something and so forth, well, I never bring the snuff box with me. You can wait till I get back home. So it doesn't bother you then? No. Some people, you know, are getting crazy if they don't get it. Oh, yeah. But you saw now during the Depression, a lot of Swedes, they drank themselves to death, as they say. Oh, yeah. They had no way to quit. They just continued and continued and went under. Oh, yeah. Why was that, you think? Was it the hard times they brought on more than... Well, people that get away, well, don't give a damn. Sure, but you know, people today, though, they are using drugs and alcohol, too, and they have pretty good. They make a lot of money, but still they have to use it. Yeah. Is that to get away from it, or the pressure is too hard? Well, of course, it's such a thing that maybe if they have it once or twice, well, they get stuck with it. It's contagious, in other words. Yes. You have to hang on it. But you are Victor Peters, and you are still going on. Yeah. I might take a walk up to Lederan today. Oh. You didn't belong to any of the singing societies or sport clubs here in Rockford, the Swedish soccer club? No. You didn't play soccer? No, I didn't. No, I didn't. And you didn't box or lift weights or anything like that? No. Oh, I've been through that. I've always been through that, basically, working. Well, like, when I was working, maybe 10, 12 hours a day, and then you got home to take care of, do this, and always, I've always done a lot of improvements in my homes. Like this place, when I bought that one, I've done a lot of different things, like in the kitchen. Then I got all the new stuff I put in. I put in some rugs and fixed up the basement. I put in two new furnaces in the building. It was wonderful when I bought it. So when did you buy this then? About 11 years ago. 11 years ago. Well, this was after your wife lived there one year then? No, no, no. She died? Yeah. So why did you move up here? Was it more convenient in this area? I lived in Wisconsin, and then I... So you lived in Wisconsin then? Yes. For how many years? Well, almost 10 years. And there was the place to retire in other words? Yes. And where in Wisconsin was it? Montello. Montello. It was my intention to stay the rest of my life, but my wife died, so I sold out and came back. Was there nature up there that reminded you about the home in Sweden? That nature up there in Wisconsin, was there something that reminded you about the... No, not really, but my wife and I, we always wanted to do a lot of fishing. And this was right by the lake, you know, that's why we wanted to have it. My wife, she was crazy about fishing. So she liked the water? Oh, yeah. She was born on the water? Yes. Yeah, even when I was working, I always, in the summer, I always took a week off and go up north fishing. And later years, of course, I worked with the Sunshine, so I had three weeks vacation. So we had a lot of time to go fishing. So she died up there then? Well, she died in this hospital here in Rockford, Sweden somewhere. Oh, I mean you were living up there? I was living up there, yeah. So then you didn't feel to stay on up there? You didn't care about the place anymore? No. No, I didn't. And I wanted to get back to my club and... Meet the people? Well, I felt more at home here. So Victor Peterson, now that you show him around with every day, you knew him since many years back? Oh, yeah, I knew him since he was working on Sustress. I see. He was working on Sustress. He's been there many years? Oh, yeah. Yeah, he got a good pension from Sustress. He gets around $500 a month from Sustress. Oh, you know, heck, he worked till... Well, I guess he was almost 90 years old when he quit working altogether. How could he keep on going like that? Sustress, he had to quit. He had to quit when he had so many years in. But then he got another job, a friend of mine. He had a shop. His name was Eric Anderson. He had a shop. And he worked with him till he got put... Well, he must have been 90. Yeah, about 90 years old when he quit. Does that mean he was so darn good at what he was doing? Yes. So they could still have him on? Yeah. So the age didn't do anything in his performance. He could still perform? Yes. This is remarkable, though. Yeah. He was tough. He kept a lot of young people away from the planer. Yeah. Yeah, that's one thing that I don't see or see right, though. To a person get so old, 65. Nor they tell people to retire when they are 50. Yes. But still they want people to keep on working as long as they want to. But you just wonder if they can perform satisfactorily, though. It really depends on what kind of work. Yeah. Now, after you get to over 90, well, I don't think you should have no business of being in a factory whatsoever. Could you do your harness work, for instance, today as good as you did when you were 30? No, I could not. Your fingers are not that... Well, I wouldn't be fast enough. You never had arthritis in your hands, for instance, from this hard pulling the... No. Oh, shoot. You had strong hands. You never had any aches and pains? No, I haven't. But you used to play Santa Claus, too. This Carl Brusenaar, he was a comic. Yes. He went to different clubs and lodges. Yes. So what did he do then? They call him Kalle med Lappen. What did he do then? Well, you know, he always had stories to tell, and then sometime he used to have the träskuna på sig, and dance around. And he used to do painting, pictures. Oil paintings? Yes. Oh, I see. Yeah, that's what he used to do, too. And sell? Did he sell those? He maybe did, I don't know. I know he got down at our club. He belonged to our club, too. Richard? Yeah, and he got some pictures down there that he had painted. But he didn't travel outside Rapford, though. That was just local. Yes. Was he funny, in your opinion? Was he funny? In other words, did he make people laugh? Oh, yeah, yes, yes. Oh, yeah. And it was all in Swedish? Most, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he got a son. Well, Burj is dead now. Oh, but his son is still living? I don't know if he was just down there, he was a Christian. So, but you remember him. Do you remember if Ollis Grathud came here to Rapford? Oh, yeah, yes. They had performances then? Yes. So, he was more professional, though? Oh, yeah, yes. He had a whole ensemble with him. Oh, yeah. So... I guess Burj, he was pretty well known around Rapford. Pretty well known. To local talent. Yes. Yeah.