 We could not have made the gut up for a little fund, you know, for pension fund, but they didn't agree with it, so. So what happened then? You quit that after 23 years. What happened to the public? They also closed the doors. Oh yeah, he sold it to, first he had, yeah he cut the business completely. Then he sold, had a sale on the machinery and sold everything. And Lumber and Arnson, so that's in the building he sold the whole thing. How did he come out then? Did he become a millionaire? No. Then he sold the building to, oh what the heck is his name? He's a contractor. Roy Freed. Roy Freed, yeah. He sold it to him for $15,000. And one day I was down there, I had met Roy Freed's father, but I had never met Roy Freed, but I met his father so I didn't know him when he was, so I was down there and they was working and tore down stuff inside the old factory, you know. So I walked in there and there come Freed. Then I told him, he asked me if I know anything about the factory. Sure, I've been here for 33 years, so I know. So he said, let's go upstairs and you can tell me things about here. And you know the office up there, the whole thing, you know. And so we went up and looked around there and we went up floor after floor him and I and then I told him where it was. He wrote it down. And then I didn't see him in the meeting, but then one day we had a Swedish culture society and he belonged there too. So he was there and though they had torn down the factory, he was there so I asked him, I said, do you remember me? Oh yeah, I said, I remember you, sure. He said, how did you come out? Oh, he said, I come out pretty good. He said, I sold all the flooring, all the casing, everything in the office. I sold that to a farmer up in Wisconsin. So I'm going to have that to fix up a barn for a recreation house. And I sold all the wiring in the whole building. And that, I said, that old wiring is as old as my t-shirt now. It was just as good noise when they put it in, he said. And I sold that, he didn't say how much he got for it, but I sold it at a good price and that too. He was thinking on to, he told me though first when I met him, he was thinking on to straighten up the, make the office building out, you know, but then he couldn't get no, what do you call it? He couldn't get no permit for it so he sold it and tore it down. So he made more money than the owner of Republic? Oh yeah. I don't know, I don't know the good or the bad, but he borrowed it from a guy, what was his name, he had been dead for years. Gunny was, he didn't pay much for it either. Who was the owner of Republic then, the last owner? George Peterson. George Peterson. Yeah. But he must have made money though, you said you made more money. Oh yeah, oh yes. He was, he was a vice president, owner, Gunny was, you know. So when Gunny died, he took over. And then, and Gunny, it was Gunnar, Gunnar Anderson, yeah. Then he took over, and he run that, right through up to, he quit. Now they all gone, Gunny, George, Hildenstark, they all dead. So what happened then to the furniture industry? There were so many of them, and then they suddenly. Yeah, they died one by one. Did they sell off to other people, so they tried it on for a while, or what happened? Did they just close up the doors? No, he, Peterson was the last one. He sold it to the contractor. Yeah, he closed the doors then. He closed it and tore it down. So he owned a lot of Jetta sports, I don't know. But Landstrom, what happened to him? Who? Landstrom. Landstrom. Landstrom furniture. Oh, I don't know. He sold that plant on 11th Street, and then he bought one on 18th Avenue. And then he died, and his son took over. Yeah, he took over before. And he didn't run it for a couple of years, and then he went broke. I don't know what the hell out there now. So they just didn't work on it? No. No, I never worked for him, and I never was in his plants. I don't know how they. So that was the end of the furniture era? There was, I come here in 1926, there was 23 furniture factories, and they run. 23? Yeah, they run 24 hours a day. Nowadays, none. Not one. And they produced everything from the living room, personal, bedroom, office. Oh, yeah, office. Tables like that, and chairs like this, and everything you can think of. And the set you have here is made in Rockwood? Oh, yeah. I don't know. We made. What is that made of? We made them up in Republic. Up in Republic, we made them. Carl Carlson, I think he made a million of them. You mean tables and chairs? Mm-hmm. So that's a good, good sounding model. Yeah. So what did you do after you finished with the Republic? Did you retire and go back? Yeah. First, I didn't quit altogether, but I worked about half a day, a couple of days a week. But then, when I was busy, it would be the whole day. And then one day, my wife was going home, I was all alone, and then one day, I was up there, I was working, you know, and then I told Peterson to hell with it, she said, I quit. I ain't coming back. And I never did. So, I went home, took the toolbox and the whole brain thing and I went home and never went on ever. And every morning before I come up, about 6, 7 o'clock, 7.30, the telephone rang, you know, every morning. So, I answered. And that was Peterson. Oh, why didn't you come back, he said. I have a bunch of hillbillies, he said, and I'll get everything that he sent out, I'll get that back. No, I said, you know me, I said, you know I told you, I said I quit and I quit. And when I told you, I said I'm not going to take back. I know that, he said. So, for now, I'm Peterson, I said, leave that telephone alone. Don't call anymore. And he never did. Never called you back? No, sir. I told him that. You leave that telephone. Were you tired of it then or why didn't you want to go back? He wanted me to come back, you know. Why, were you tired of working then or why didn't you want to go back? Well, actually, I go, well, actually, all we had to do was just go over there and we didn't do, the last few weeks I was there, they didn't do a brain thing except run from one hillbilly to the other and tell them what to do. But it was an easy job though, you were a foreman. Yeah, I got tired of it. So I sent them, I told them, I said, Doug, one day I told Peterson, I think it was Peterson, I told him, take them Doug and hillbillies and send them down south. Get rid of them. But they were impossible to... They didn't know a brain thing. They were just complaining blank. They didn't even know, for example, you had them, you had them to sand a piece of the sandpaper. You had to turn the sandpaper and took the smooth side down. And they were paid the same wages as you were. Sure, and you couldn't tell them, and ten minutes after that, you turned around. Were they paid as good as you were? I don't know. Well, I got tired of it. There was a couple of war guys, did the same thing. They had some, they had, oh, I don't know where they got them from. So there are only three people living now that worked at the Republic? So far as I know, but I can't remember who the third one was. The Maggie and me, and who in the heck was the third one? There is one more I know, but I can't remember who he is. The rest of them are gone? Yeah. How about the old Swedes now, they came here in 1910, 1915, they were still here when you came then. Oh yeah. How were they to work for? Were they hard on you? They worked in the furnished factories most of them. They did? Yeah. They knew what to do with all the sand and... They had all kinds, one day we had a superintendent, he died then afterwards because he didn't listen to the doctors. And they needed cameras makers, you know, and up there in the Republic. So he talked to the guys about it and they come over to me. And he asked me, he said, say, he said, do you know anyone who is a half decent cabinet maker? Yes, I said, I know all kinds of them. Good, he said. Where is them? He said. Up in Scandinavian Cemetery, there is them all. Every brain one lay up there, I said. No one was walking the streets. But they were good craftsmen, those old Swedes. Oh, boy, yes. You could depend on them. There was the one who started the furnished factory here in Rockwood, it was the Swedes. How could they survive now without the pension? Well, you have, in other words. No. Now they say you got to have a pension and vacation and everything. They never heard about the pension before the steel industry came in, machine shops. That was the one that brought it in. The furnished business, they never heard about the pension. They never complained about it? No, no. So long as they got the job, they didn't care. They were happy to work. And only I come here in 1926. There were ten wars every brain day. They said they cut it down to eight and a half or nine hours. There were 12 hours before? Yeah. These long days. Oh, boy, yes. I don't know what happened to them. There are so many people here, so many old from old countries. What about some of the older people that had trouble, you know? They started drinking and things like that. Do you remember Vildsvinet? Who? Vildsvinet. No. You never heard of him? I never heard of him, no. Vovin? Huh? Vovin? No. You never heard of him either? No, no. Nektargalen? Yeah, I heard of him. You know him? Yeah. Oh, I think he come from Västergötland. I don't know for sure, but I think he come from Västergötland. Why did they call him Nektargalen? I don't know. He may have talked and sang and stuff like that, you know. I don't know. Maybe it was Duncan's in the choir. Albin Pedersen, though, you remember him? Oh, yeah. Bys Albin? Oh, yeah. He was a strong guy. Yeah, I know him, yeah. He been dead for quite a while now. Oh, he came long before you came? Oh, yeah. He was an old man. Oh, yeah. Well, there were a whole bunch of them, you know, but they all, they all gone. Well, I suppose it was a tougher time, though, before the First World War. Yeah. There was more fighting going on between the Irish and the Swedes. Oh, yeah, sure. But when you came, they was gone at that time. Yeah. You didn't see any of those fights on the street? No, no. Across the bridge? No. I never saw that. I heard about it, but I never saw it. You never saw it? No. That was before I came here. But 7th Street, they was still Swedish? Oh, yeah. Snusgatan. Snusgatan. Yeah. Did people chew a lot of snuff then at that time? There were very little smoking. Oh, yeah. No, they didn't smoke so much, though. There wasn't so much as there now. It's still related. Yeah. Well, you know, that, first night I come here, you can go up from 7th Street, you can go into any store there, you know. There were all Swedes. They talked Swedish. You never heard the English word on there. There was a, what was his name, who had a grocery store on 7th Street? I forgot his name now. He had a couple of bags to go outside the door with, with lutefisk in the door. Lutefisk. Lungfisk. Lungfisk was his name. And I went in there, I'd never seen no guy before. I went in the store and I don't know, I should buy something or something. And he talked Swedish, you know. So he asked me, he said, he said, Oh, yeah, I said, And you can go in there, you know, I don't know, I don't know if his son have it now or who have it now, he's been dead for years and years and years, you know. And he said to me, you know, And he said, you know, I keep it on the tale of Swedish, because I don't like English. It sounds so crazy to him. I never learned my English, I talk Swedish. So one day, I went into the bank. There was a Friday night for us and I should cash a check, you know. I used to go, there was an old Swede there, I always went to him and always cashed check with him. I come down there that Friday night and I went into the bank and I went over to the old guy. That was where they had the old bank, you know. I went over to the old bank, the old guy, and put the check up there. He looked on it, he was old, and he said, You have any identification, he said. He said, what do you mean by that? I said, I cashed check with you for the last 20 years. You never asked about it. He said, I'm sorry, I have to have identification. I said, give me the check. I took the check back and I went over to another guy, a big heavy set guy, you know. I asked him, I said, what's the matter with the old guy? I cashed the check with him for the last 20 years and now he wants identification and everything else. I said, what's the matter with him? And he said, his mind don't work anymore, they have to take him off. And they did send a couple days later on. And this guy, I can't remember his name, but he went to Central Florida. I think he died down there. So I asked him, I said, do I have to have any identification with you? No, he said, give me the check. And he asked me if I was Swede, yeah. And he talked about the Swedes and I did. And I said, were you born in Sweden? I'm born here, right here in Rockwood, he said. I got my education in Zion Church, he said, in the Sunday school. And he talked to the good Swedes. I always went to him and I couldn't go to the bank all the time afterwards. But then he retired and I think he went to, he said he should go to Florida. I think he's dead now, I don't know. I can't remember his name either. Oh, I know lots of them old guys who were here when I came here. So they had lute fish, you said, in tunnels outside the store? Yeah. Why were they standing outside? You know, they were dry, you know. Dry fish, you know. Yeah, not long like that. He always had a couple, I don't question, he always had a couple of bands outside and they stood on the sidewalk. But they don't have that anymore, you know. Now you get them already fixed. Was there a kind of danger of the dogs coming sniffing on them and so on? Oh, yes. But they didn't do anything? No, they didn't do nothing bad. You went to Sweden now, you had two brothers now and two sisters. One brother was here. Yeah, I had two sisters before Biden and she was 17 years old. They didn't want to come over here? No, no. Did you go back to Sweden at any time? I've been there four times. Four times? The first time after you came here, what was that? No, wait, wait, three times. Three times. Isn't it three times? What? Since I've been home. Three times. Three times. So when you came back the first time after you came here? In 1947, my wife and I went home for three months. Three months? Because we couldn't get a boat over there for the government had the boats for the war. I see. So we didn't leave here from the last of July. And we went home, my folks lived over there. We was there till the 7th of December, we went home. And your wife, she came from Pearsons? Yeah, we come back here the 13th, I think we come back here. And there was an old Druttingholm, the one that had come here. And we didn't think that we should ever come to New York again. Because as fast as we left the pier in Gattenburg, the storm started. It went right through till we came to Newfoundland. He went more underneath the water than he went above. And there was waves, 20 feet high, straight as this wall. Just like that, and he went right through them. And he went this way for the old Druttingholm, you know, he was long and... And small. Small, and went like that. Narrow, narrow. Long and narrow. And then he come up on the top of the waves, you know, the front was no water and the back, and the propeller went in there, and he went like this. But my dad, it was the last trip he did too. And we had a bunch of Italians with us, they had bought the boat and they should take it when they come to New York. So we was the last ones on. So there were a lot of seasickness then on board? Oh, boy, some of it was. Even the girls who work on the boat. So you couldn't eat too many meals? Oh, they didn't bother me and they didn't bother my wife anything either. Of course, she laid in the bed, and I had to go down in the kitchen because she couldn't go down to the dining room, so I went down to the kitchen and got a little bit, you know. And they bring that up, you see. They had a rail there and a rail here, and you come and hold that and then you hold on the railing. And one day, and I kept on a couple of days like that, a couple of days. But then one day I come, there come a guy who walked down and said, say, where do you get the food? And he hang on to the railing all he could, and I didn't. And I said, I went on, I go down to the kitchen to get it. I said to my wife, you see, she stay in the bed. Now my wife, she said she got seasick when he left the pier, and she haven't left the bed since. They take her out, she said. I don't know, he said, he can't go to the dining room. Could I go with you? Could you help me? He said, I can get a little bit for her to eat. Sure. And I didn't know. He was from Chicago. He was a train engineer. So I said, sure, you can go. So we went to get him and I, you know. I was on one side and he'd be up in the railing, and hang on to the railing. And we kept on, you know, till we come to Newfoundland. Till we come to Newfoundland. The wind was down and the sky was clear, the sun was shining, and of course it was a little bit sea yet, but. So they opened up the whole brim boat and we went up, and I took my wife and went down and had breakfast. And we went up on the deck, you know, and sat there. Beautiful. Wow. So we sat there for a night and do this. Do he come, his wife, or walk by. And he saw me sitting there, so he come over to me with her. And he said, this is the man, he said, who helped me so you can get food. They took her out over there, they took her out, you know, and walked around a little bit and then they took her back. And he said, this is the man who helped me, he said, so you can get food. And now they come and walked out on deck, and we walked on deck, you know, for the boat was still and went slow. And she was all dressed up, you know, and I got mad. I said, you know, he said, I'm going to tell you something, I said. And she said, your wife was more sick than you and I, I said. But I blame things. It was in her mind. She just lay there. And now I said, now the boat is still and you can go. Now he can come up, all dressed up and everything. There's nothing wrong with that whatsoever. If I were you, I said, I would take one hand here and one here and over the railing with her. In the neck and in the butt. One hand in the neck and one in the butt and over the railing. Did you really say that? Yeah, I told him. I got so mad I had to help him, you know, to try to get the food for her. She was in the same hit as my wife. You know what happened. So when you were home then for three months, what did you find then in Sweden? Did you, I'm sure you enjoyed it, but what did you see different now between Rockford and Pearson? Oh, there were. What did you do? There wasn't so much change, no, in 1947. There wasn't? A little bit, but not much. When I was home in 1966. Then it was different? No, there was a difference. No, in 1956. Could you have thought of... You wouldn't even know. The only thing a man knew was there was a Kenoscon flex. That was the only thing. You mean it was easier to be on Seventh Street than in Föra? They have such a name in the stores and on everything else. You can't even... Yeah, but you knew Swedish. No, but you see they have people from every country in the world. And there is no Swedes who talk Swedish anymore. Pearsons now, at night. You mean on Öland? Yeah, Pearsons at night, 5.30. The Norse command. And they had a good television. It was black and white, but it was a good one. And my brother-in-law sat there and I sat right behind him. I didn't understand one single word the girl said and the man said on the Norse, not one. I said, how come? And he said, there is no old time, my brother-in-law said, there's no old time like you and me anymore. Some talk Swedish, Swedish, Swedish, Swedish, Swedish, Swedish. We have people from every country in the world. And they're all mixed up. And they don't have no Swedes anymore. I didn't understand a word. I said, you can shut the brain thing off. I don't know what they talk about. How about the newspapers now? Were you able to read them? Yeah, they I could read. They were better. Yeah, they I could read. So you didn't feel at home then? Huh? You didn't feel at home then, the last time you were? No. No, I couldn't. I couldn't. If I go home now, for them to say I have to go home now. Just for the visit? You have to start all over, completely. So it was easier to live in Rockford then? Oh, yes. But the language has changed on 7th Street too now. Huh? There are no Swedish spoken on 7th Street anymore. No. Oh, you can find one once in a while. Well, you see, kroppkakor here on Thursday and on Friday. No, it ain't very often, but you can find one once in a while. How about kroppkakor now? Do they taste as good here in Rockford as in Föra? It depends on who make them. For instance, if I have a wife make them, and I have a lady friend who make them. From Öland? No. Your wife from Öland? No, but she is from, she's up in the northern Sweden, Hennesand, and she can make kroppkakor. Tillie Gustafsson? Yeah. But that is her sister, Jurgis. I don't know Tillie, I don't know if she can cook kroppkakor or not. I don't know, I never heard. She never done, I don't know. But her sister knows? Oh, yeah. And that is half a dozen around here sometimes. So it's got to be done just right? Mm-hmm. My mother was a real expert for it. Did they learn from the whole country how it was done? And you know, for instance, you go home, yeah, my sister, she cooked them once in a while, but before she cooked them all the time, now they don't cook them so much there, because they had them in Övre Gråsjö store, if you go into the store, you can buy them, any place in Sweden. The week round, not on Saturdays. Before we used to cook them on Saturdays afternoon, you know. When you were home? Yeah. Was it Saturday afternoon? Yeah, Saturday afternoon. It was a day? Yeah. No other day in the week? No, if I wanted, I could even cook them too. My uncle, I have an uncle out here, out in the home, he is 91 years old. He used to cook them too. And I have a cousin in Sweden who was here, or vis-a-vis his dad. He cooked them when he was here. So, there are a lot of Ölanders here in Rockford? A lot of them? Not more, not now. Well, there is a few. There is a few. Do you gather together, you don't belong to Ölandsklubben? No. But do you come together sometimes and talk about old times? No. Not anymore? No. The only one I see who is Ölanders is Big Eddo up on Trondheim Street and like Mattie Johnson yesterday. And then when we go to service in the army for the Swedish Cultural Society, there I have a couple of people who are from Öland. I have one cousin, one second cousin and his wife down there, whom I talk to. And do you still correspond with Sweden? Oh, yes. I sent two letters yesterday. And I have two sisters and brothers over there. So what does she like to know now? And I have two cousins over there. What is she asking about when she writes to you? She doesn't ask about anything here. She has ten million watts and goes on there. She had trouble with her eyes and her hands. And my brother-in-law, he had trouble with his legs. And she lives on Öland? In the summertime. So now they are up in Stockholm. They have an apartment up in Stockholm. So they are there now. They left about the first of October. But then in April, the first part of April, they go back home to Öland. Stay there. So they have the kids over there in Öland. Yeah. No. They are up on Kalmar and Rån there now. The kids. So is this something that you, you know, moving from Öland and come to Rockford, it's not the same landscape as ours. You had the water around there and the beautiful blue sky. No. Sun. Don't you miss that? No. You don't have any... We was born and lived down by the Baltic Sea, you know. Yes. Because I mean, Kishwaukee and Rock River is not the same as... No....Baltiska Viken. They used to have a sweatshirt. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It is. You should have it. It's a Baltiska Viken. So, but you don't feel homesick about that? No. It didn't bother me. You never did? No. Man, you know, when I come home there now, like, I was 66, I didn't dare, but they told me. They told you what? So I didn't dare go walk around. They had signs all over. And they didn't know where he come from. And that night when I come home, there were two girls who had been bitten on that snake. It was a black snake about that size. Oh, good. No, there wasn't. They never seen it before. They never been on an island before. And it was all over. And there were signs all over. And they told me not to go out where there was no grass. So I didn't walk around much there, except where there was a way, you know, where you could see everything, you could go. And that's when I come home, for example, that's where I went out in the fields and all over. I used to be, you know, looking over and... Shelter home? Yeah. When I was thinking on to go home once more, but now first... First last two years ago I had... I was in an accident and... And I was in the hospital, and now again I was in the hospital. So I don't know if I'll ever be able to go home anymore or not. I don't know. And I gone over the ocean five times. And... The boat. And then one time the plane. The last time we took the plane, because they don't have no boats anymore, you know. End of interview.