 I'm sitting together with Jenny Ekedahl in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 1897, 29th of March, in Marinette, Wisconsin, and we have today the 14th of October, 1986. We start now with your father's side, William Lundin. He was born in Jynsker in Sundsvall, in Sweden. Yes, that's right. Can you tell me a little bit about his... Well, his father and him came over to this country, and of course, they were used to living where the lumber and things were, and so of course Marinette was a lumber town. What was the reason they came to Marinette? Did they have a relation there, or... No, I don't... They must have had some friends that they knew of that, when they went there, because there were a lot of people from that part of Sweden that came to Marinette. And of course, it was the sawmills that attracted them. So his dad and your grandfather, he was a sawmill worker? Yes, both of them. So how old was your father then when he came with... Well, he must have been in his early 20s, I think. How many children were there, actually? Well, the other children were young children that came with the mother, so he couldn't have been more than about 18 years old or so when he came over here with his dad. So they came first then? Yes, to make money for my grandmother and my three uncles that came, and a little baby. And they had a terrible time on the boat, because of the food. They had to bring their own food. And then, of course, when they... After they had landed and they had gotten them on a train and they were going to go through Canada to come to Marinette. And I imagine they had a change in Chicago. Did they land at Ellis Island? Yes. They didn't tell you anything about that when you were growing up, about the hardships? No. They had this little baby, and when they were on the train, the baby was sick on the boat. And, of course, they couldn't speak, couldn't get anyone to understand them, you know. And my grandmother kept the baby in the shawl. She got on the train, and the baby died on the train. But she still held the baby in her arms as though it was sleeping, because she thought if she could bring it back to where her husband was, they could bury the little one. But there was a lady on the train and wondered why that lady was holding that baby and never cried. She went over there and looked at that baby, and she saw it was dead. And, of course, she notified the people on the train that what happened. And my grandmother and the children had to get off and bury that baby, and she didn't know where, because she couldn't talk and nobody to talk for her. So they put her back on the train, and she came to Marinette, and there's where she met her husband. And then, of course, they settled there in Marinette. They got a home, and the children, my three uncles grew up there in Marinette. How long did your grandfather and your uncle, I mean your father? My father and grandfather. Yeah, ahead of the rest of the family? Many months or? I think it was almost two years. Two years. A year and a half or so, because the baby was, you know, she was pregnant with the baby when her husband left. And so the baby was born over there in Sweden, you know. And my father and grandfather, they kept working at the sawmill. My father used to work right in the sawmill. And in the wintertime, then they went up into the woods, you know, where they would cut, and then they would send all these logs down the river to the sawmill. And my mother, do you want me to talk about my mother? My mother came over here because she was engaged to be married. And when she got here, this friend of hers was in the hospital sick. And it finally turned out that he had TB or consumption, they called it in those days, and he died. So my mother had to go to work and find a place to work. And she worked in a hotel or a boarding house, I think, more or less. And all she made was two dollars a week. And she had to get up about five o'clock in the morning to get all these lunches ready for these people. I imagine they were mostly people working, had come from maybe Sweden and other countries, and were working in these sawmills. And she had to get all these lunches ready and then besides take care of all the other work in the hotel, never got to bed till 11 o'clock at night. They was also in Marinette? Marinette. But they didn't know each other, your father and your mother? Not then, no. They met later on. They came from two different parts of Sweden? Yes. No, they didn't, but it was not, it was far enough anyway so they couldn't have met in Sweden. No. Very likely. No, they never, they met in Marinette. And did she come around the same time as your father, you think? No, she came later than my father. Later. Uh-huh, yes. And of course she never got back to Sweden. She always wanted to go back because she had her father, her mother died when she was only maybe six or seven years old. But then the father married because he had, you know, these children. He had another daughter and a son. And so my, at the time when my mother's mother died, my mother tried to keep house when she was only seven years old. And how many was in the household then? Huh? There was a father? The father and a sister and a brother. A brother. So she was in charge of the whole thing? Yeah. And then the father later, maybe my mother was about ten years old when he remarried. And that mother was very cross because I imagine my mother wanted to do things the way her mother had done, you know? And so then my mother left home and went to work in some family or something back there in Sweden. How old was she then? When she was about, when she came to this country, she was about eighteen. Eighteen. Yeah. So, and when both on your father's side, no, on your mother's, did they join the church in Marinette? Oh yes, they belonged to the Lutheran Church. Lutheran Church. And we all, children all went to Sunday school. And of course I was confirmed in Swedish at that time. Swedish was used then, you know. And so I started with a, of course when I went to kindergarten I could only speak Swedish. Because my mother and father only, they hadn't learned English, you know, yet. And so then, like I say, they just talked Swedish to me and when I started school I couldn't speak nothing else but Swedish. So did you grow up then in the Marinette? Yes, I grew up in Marinette and I was there until, oh, 1915 when I went to Chicago to work. And I worked there for, oh, maybe four years, five years. And then I was married when I was twenty-two. So how many children were you in the family then? We were eight. Eight children. How many boys and? There was three boys and five girls. And we're still four girls living. And you are one of the oldest? I'm the oldest. You're the oldest. So you had a lot of responsibility. Oh, I did. I stayed home, you know, a long time to help mother with all the children. Did she expect it of you? Because she had a pretty hard upbringing herself, I mean, to take care of the family. Oh, everything, yes. Did she teach you? Oh, yes. I knew how to bake bread, Swedish rye bread, set the bread and did help with the laundry and everything, you know, because mother had just too much to do. So you had to learn to do that when you were seven or eight or nine, ten years old? Oh, yes, that's right. I always said I didn't want to, because I always had to take care of the children. I always had a role in children. And I couldn't play, you know, the way the rest of the kids. And I always said, when I get married, I'm not going to have any children. But you decided then and then. But I did, which I was happy for. But when you're a child, you know, you like to do things with the rest of the youngsters. But when the next one in order came in, couldn't you tell her what to do then? Couldn't you pass her on? Well, I imagine I did. So you could get some time off. That's right. Yeah. So you went to school then in Marinette? Oh, yes. And in your family, did you talk Swedish all the time? No, my mother and father, by that time, when they, because none of the other children really can speak Swedish. The youngest one, they can understand a little bit, but they can't speak it. So my sister here can, she understands pretty well and can say, you know, if somebody's Swedish, she can get around to tell them. But when you were growing up now, being eight to ten years of age, you used Swedish then with your family, are you sure? Yes, I did at that time. At that time. So they answered you back in Swedish and you answered back to them in Swedish. Because you didn't have time to play around. No, I had to be around my mother and that's how I learned to drink coffee. I used to have coffee with my mother. Well, you started there. This sister here, she never drinks a cup of coffee. So is your sister here now, how old is she then? She's eighty, eighty, I think she's eighty, she will be eighty-three, I think. Oh, so she's much younger than that. Oh, yeah. There's not a difference. And I have one sister eighty-six and I had one little sister that died when I was only about three years old. So your father now and your mother, they learned English pretty fast then. Oh, yes, you know, when the children spoke English, you know, they... They learned faster then. Yeah. But you being unable to go out and play with other children, you didn't learn English as fast as the... Well, as soon as I got to school I did, you know. Then you had no trouble. No, no, I had no trouble learning. Did they, did they wish you to continue to learn Swedish through church? Well, because... Did you have summer school in the summer there? Oh, yeah. In Sweden? And you got your ABC, you know, you started with the ABCs and went all the way through, you know, and so of course I went to Swedish school until I was about, in the summertime, you know, until I was at least ten years old. And there was the Swedish Lutheran Church? Because I was confirmed in Swedish. And the school was handled by the Swedish Lutheran Church? Yes. Who was the pastor there at the time? His name was Reverend Carl. Reverend Carl. So he was fluent in both Swedish and English? Oh, yes. So he had to preach one Swedish German and one English? Well, at that time it was all Swedish. All Swedish? All Swedish. And at that time it was also a quite large congregation? But during the latter years when he was there, then it got to be, you know, English. He spoke fluently English anyways, so... How many of your sisters and brothers took the Swedish confirmation lessons? Were you the only one? I think I'm the only one. I see. And then you started to change your own? Yeah. That was during the First World... Before the First World War. You were probably confirmed... I was confirmed in... 1912? 1912. That's the year my grandmother died. Yeah. So you remember your grandparents? Oh, yes. Very much. They never spoke English, though? Oh, no. It was all Swedish? All Swedish. So, of course, I had... Did you live close to your grandparents? Oh, yes. We always lived close. Uh-huh. You didn't live in the same house, though? Oh, no. No. My grandmother, even after she was alone, she lived alone. She had a son that lived home with her, the last son. He was just a toddler when he came to Sweden. So did... From Sweden. Did your grandparents, your grandpa and grandma, did they tell you anything about Sweden, how they had it over there, or if they were homesick for Sweden, or did you notice that? Well, my grandfather and grandmother, they seemed to be happy, but what they missed, they had a daughter that was married over in Sweden. And she stayed behind? No, but she wanted... They wanted to come, but her husband wore glasses, and because he wore glasses, they wouldn't let him come over here. They thought he'd get blind. I was over there when he was 82 years old and was still working. So he was refused admittance then to the United States? Yes. So she was the only one. She had never seen any of her relatives until my husband and I were over there in 1923, 24, I think, of course, 24. She had never seen any of her relatives, so she was so happy to see... What happened to them and find out. So you could tell her then about that? Oh, yes. So your grandma, she wrote to her daughter then, of course. Oh, yes. She got news from Sweden. From Sweden, yeah. So she came over to your home then, I suppose, and read the letters and the shares. Oh, yes. And what happened to the people left over there? That's right. Were there many from the area in Marinette at that time working in the sawmills? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There was a lot of Swedish people working in the sawmills. Of course, when their children got grown up, you know, and they were maybe like even 16 years old, they had to go to maybe Chicago or Milwaukee or other places to find work because there wasn't anything but sawmills. There was a paper mill up there, but that's about all. And so there was no place for the young people. So many of them, the young people left Marinette and went to other cities to work. So your grandpa, he stayed behind in Marinette? Oh, yes. He's... They are buried. They're both... My grandfather is. My father came here to Rockford when he was over 50 when he came here. And work was getting... That sawmill had shut down because all the trees and things further north, all these big lumber company had taken all the trees. There wasn't any more lumber to be shipped or cut in the sawmills. So of course, those sawmills, they were done for a lot at that time. So my husband wrote to him and told him to come down and see how he liked Rockford. Because at the time, my two sisters were in Chicago working because they couldn't find work. And then another sister came out here and she stayed and went to the lock company here to work. And so my folks were there all alone except the youngest children, you know. And so he came down and he said, oh no, I can't come and stay here in Rockford. I got to get back to Marinette and find something. But then there was a friend of my husband that was a superintendent at a furniture factory here. And, because we used to have a lot of furniture factories here in Rockford. And so he said, yeah, maybe you can help them. We get lumber here and we have to use lumber. Maybe I can get them a job working the lumber here. So my father went down there and he started working there. And he kept working there until he was over eighty. He was eighty-two years old when that factory went out. And he got to be, at first he was, I forget what he was in the factory. He used to be a watchman for one thing. And then he got to know all about all the furnaces and all the water pipes and all these different things. So he got to be a, what do you call, engineer. Well, an engineer that takes care of the furnaces and water pipes and all that stuff. So that's what— Maintenance engineer? Yeah, maintenance engineer. And at eighty-two, you would see him climb up the stairs like nothing and turn these valves and everything. And he felt just terrible that when that place shut down that he couldn't go to work. And so I had a brother-in-law, one of my sisters married, and he had a grocery store. He'd had it for thirty years here in Rockford. And so he said, well, maybe Grandpa can come down here and put up some of the stuff, you know, get it from—he had upstairs, he had a lot of boxes and things that had to come down in the basement. So my father went down there and worked until he was, oh, eighty-six or eighty-seven when my brother-in-law got worried that maybe he would fall in the stairways or something. And boy, he felt just terrible. But every day, he'd take—he never owned a car. And when he was working at that factory, he would walk—he lived up here on Prospect Street, and that factory was way across the river. And walked five o'clock in the morning, he would go to work to start the boilers going. What do you think made him shudder away from Rockford when he first came here for Marinette? You mentioned that he didn't want anything to do with Rockford. No, because I suppose— What do you think it was? Was it the nature? I imagine because— Or friends? You know, he had the lake back there in—and his friends, you know, Lake Michigan, you know. So there was something that was— Because he liked to— —left in Sweden. Yeah, he liked to go fishing. The nature was kind to him, that's what. Yeah, yeah. But here, Rockford was no good then, was it? No, but after a while, after he'd been here, and he went back to Marinette, and he saw, you know, how hard it was for people to get work and all, well, he said, I guess I got to thank my son-in-law that he did see to it that I stayed in Rockford. And of course, the girl and all the family has settled here in Rockford. Did more people leave Marinette for Rockford? Oh, yes. Oh, yes, quite a few people. Came from there? Yeah. Because after he stayed, he came to Sawmill with his dad in the 1890s, or maybe even before. And there was his work as long as he stayed up there. Yeah. That was his line of work. Yeah, that line of work. So he had friends there and everything, and it was probably hard to leave them. And I know my mother, when I was just a little bit of a girl, maybe two years old or three, she used to always go up with my father when he went to work up there in the woods, you know, I don't know what you call it. And so she was cooked there in the camp for all these men. I don't know, maybe about 20, 30 men. Yeah. And she'd be there all winter, and I would stay with my grandmother. And she stayed there all winter? All winter. How was she able to, well, I suppose there was practical housework, in other words. Well, cooking, you know. Cooking. Cooking, you know. And doing it from home. Cooking, because I think some of the men had to do the hard work, you know, but she did the cooking. Because those people had a tremendous appetite. Oh, yes, working outside, yeah. And I know I went years after, many years after, maybe I was 13 or 14 years old, I went up to visit one of those camps, and it was interesting to see all these, a lot of them I think came from other countries like Finland and different places. They couldn't speak English, you know. And she was the only woman around then up there? Up there cooking with all those men. What did she do to do that? My father was working there, yeah. That's remarkable. They wouldn't work today, though. You would think it would be a danger, you know, to go out like that out in the woods. Yeah. With so many men. Yeah. But there was... Well, the men had their own barracks, you know, to sleep in and everything, you know. So that, and how long did she do that for, one winter or... Oh, she did a couple winters, I know. And of course I loved to stay with my grandmother, I didn't mind that. And I had my... What did you learn from your grandma? What did she tell you about the different things? Did she learn you more than your mother did, for instance? Well, I think both of them, really. Because my mother used to tell me about all the different things that happened in Sweden, you know, and her church. Were they religious people? Well, my mother was very... Yes, because my father at one time, he was a bartender at one of the... In the marionette? Yeah, in that. But he believed in church, he would go to church, you know, but... He was a very, very good bartender, he wouldn't let anybody drink more than they should. Did they belong to any Swedish organizations? Oh, yeah. Oh, I see. And I forget, different Sons of Sweden. My father was a great one for Sons of Sweden. They were both in Menominee and Marionette together, with all the Swedish people. And they used to have their picnics together in the summertime. And my father was always the one that always used to fry the salt herring, you know, wrap it up in paper and wet the paper or something. And they used to have their big picnics together, most of the time in Menominee. And I think there was more of members in Menominee. And I remember that well, they used to, at Christmas time, they'd have a big Christmas party and all the kids would be invited, you know. Yeah, there was a booming community of Menominee marionettes. Oh, yes. A lot of trade going on there in the summer with the traffic from boats and... Oh, yes, the boats and everything. Were they fishing quite a bit too, there? Oh, yes. I know my father, sometimes he used to go fishing in... And they have like a canvas thing, they'd be gone maybe two days on the lake in the wintertime. Oh, they had those small huts then, they used to have ice fishing? Yeah. And I know one of my younger uncles had an ice boat and, you know, that was just for pleasure. With sail on it? Yeah. And of course, we had a lot of fun skating in the wintertime on the lake. Because we could go quite a ways out to the lake, but then when it hit the big lake, you know, then there was a great big... Opening. Opening, yeah. It was dangerous. You didn't know where you were going. And of course, the marionette was a big fishing place, because I know when I grew up, there was a great big, like a... I wouldn't say, I don't know how large it was. And we kids used to love to go down and watch all these men fixing the fish and putting it in boxes and they shipped it all over the country, I imagine. You don't remember taking any trips in the winter or summertime down to Door County, to Silver Bay? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. My sister here, she used to go picking cherries every summer. She'd take her suitcase and go on the boat right across from marionette, you know. Because it was not too far. No, no. I see. So you had some correspondence with them then. Oh, yes. Because they were also Swedes living there. Oh, yes. A lot of Swedes living there. Yeah. And this organization, Sansa Sweden and also Vasa, they had the hospitalization. Well, I don't know about Sansa Sweden, if they had a hospitalization. But of course Vasa did. They had, yeah. So there was a security then to belong to that. Because we all belonged to the Vasa. You know, my mother and father and all. And you also became a member? Oh, yes. And still am. And so is my sister here. Here in Oxford. I see. So you belonged then to the hospitalization program. Yeah. If you get sick, you get five dollars a week or six dollars a week. I was too old to join that because I had belonged there years ago. But then, you see, we moved out east in 1933. My husband worked for Sunstrands. And that part of Sunstrand, Oscar Sunstrand, who had the... Adding machine. Adding machine. That division was sold to an eastern concern. And they said they were never going to move when they bought it here. I don't know how many years you were here. But then during depression, they decided to move out east. So we lived in Bridgeport, Connecticut for ten years. And so then when I came back, so then I didn't go join. But then when, I think that was 1969, when the Vasa was going to have a special trip to Sweden. And so a friend of mine said, well, why don't you join the Vasa and get on the same trip with us? So that's what I did then. But then I'm only in the social part now. But my sister here, she's in the insurance and all that. So but you did belong up in Marinette then? Oh yes. Were they active, your parents, in that? Oh yeah, very active. So they didn't collide then with the church life or anything? No. The pastor didn't put up any restrictions? No, no. I think the only thing that the church at that time was the Masons more or less. But my husband was a Mason. Oh, he also belonged to that? The Mason, yeah. So there was not too many Swedes that belonged to the Masons though, was it? Oh yes, here in Rockford. No, but I mean up in Marinette. Oh, Marinette, no. He didn't belong in Marinette. It was because we moved here, you know. I moved here, he was working here in Rockford when we were married. So you moved away then from Marinette when you were 17, 18? No. When I was married, I was 22. Oh, I see. So you met your husband... So when I came here, yeah, I met him in Marinette. In Marinette. Because he came from Sweden to Marinette because he had an uncle living there. But then when they were building this Swedish hospital, he had a cousin who was a carpenter from Sweden. And he was working there. And like I say, work wasn't too good in Marinette, so he told him to come out here to Rockford. So that's how he came to Rockford. And boy, there was a lot of people that came to Rockford afterwards through him when they found out that there was work here in Rockford. So the word spread fast then. So then he started Sunstrands and he worked for them all. Side two, continuation with Jenny Ektahl in Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So Sunstrands, they were already active then in Rockford, 1915? Oh yes, way before that. He started there and like I say, he worked for them. And we were transferred then to Bridgeport, Connecticut. What year then? That was in 1933. So he continued then from 15 to 33? Yeah. So he was a supervisor then. And he took care of all the moving and all, everything that had to go back there. When he started with Sunstrands, what kind of... He was doing, he worked on the screw machines. So he was a toolmaker then? Oh yeah, he was a toolmaker too. From Sweden or... No, he learned his trade here. At Sunstrands? Uh-huh. Yeah. And then he rose to supervisor and took care of the bigger part. Yeah, he had over, when he was in Bridgeport, he had over a hundred men working for him. So but he was never laid off then during the Depression here? No. But they started to get slack during 33 and... Oh yeah. It was bad, I know, for my father and, you know, not so much for my father as my brothers because they were, couldn't get work. How about your father now? Did he live with you then when he came down from Marinette or... Yes, uh-huh. He stayed with you? Uh-huh. Yeah. So, and then Sunstrands, they split the factory. Oh yeah. And what was the farm part of it? Well, they sold the cash register thing... The adding machines. Adding machines. Why did they sell that? Was it to get fast cash or... Well, I don't know why they sold it because it was here quite a while, quite a few years. I don't know what, in the 20s something, you know, that they sold it to this company and they had all their people working here. But then they had this, I can't think of the name of them, of that concern, and they had another factory out in Pennsylvania. So then they decided to take this branch and the Pennsylvania branch and bring them all out to Bridgeport and make it one there. What was the name of the company then out there in Bridgeport? Well, that's what I think, I can't think of the name right now. I just can't think of it. So your husband, he was the supervisor already then? Yeah. Oh yeah. So he moved with that company. Yeah. Why didn't he stay? There was quite a few people, I think about 300 people. They moved? They moved, uh-huh. From Rockford? From Rockford. A lot of them didn't like it and went back, but there was quite a few still people living out there, but the factory is now sold to some Italian company or something. Oh, I see. So and a lot of Swedes then, I suppose, among those? Oh yes, a lot of Swedes. Because there mostly were Swedes working out there at some point. Why was it easy though to be so many moving at one time? I mean, it was just like moving a part of Rockford with you. That's right. You had your friends? Well, I didn't know too many of the people, but it didn't take long because they all stuck together when we got out there. So they found out, you had to... Yeah. Of course, all the men knew one another, you know, but the women didn't, you know. But before you know it, we were just a happy family, all of them. So how was the move now from Rockford to Bridgeport? Was it different out there, to live out there? No, the Pittsburgh people moved to Bridgeport too, you know. So they were both... Mixed up there. Yeah. But now when you made the move from Rockford, did you take it in a stride, so to speak, or did you like it, or did you hesitate to move out there? Well, yes, and even my people, you know, I had my mother and father and my sisters and brothers all here, you know. It was a little strange, but we never sold our place here. We just rented it out because we thought we never knew if we were coming back or not. And like I say, they... pretty soon, it's a beautiful part of our country, New England, all the way from Connecticut to Maine, and I really loved it. I didn't care about coming back to Rockford. Oh, I see. Even though I had my family. But my husband had a heart attack out there. That was in 1942. And I think he kind of thought maybe something would happen to him because I had the children small, you know. Were they born here in Rockford, or were they born... The daughter was born in Rockford, but the son was born in Bridgeport. And so he decided to go back. And then there was another friend of ours by the name of Augustuson. He still went back and worked for Sunstrance when he came back because he had a supervisor job too. And he worked there until he retired. But my husband... So I've been a widow for 32 years. Oh, I see. Yeah. So he died a little bit too early, then, he... Yeah, he was only 60 years old. Was the work too strenuous, you think, to... Well, it must have been, yes. And he was heavy. You know, he was real slender when he was a young man, but he put on weight. He just loved anything soft. Well, he would take a slice of meat after he was through with his dinner and put just salt on it. So he had high blood pressure then? Yeah. And at that time, they didn't know the salt was... No. They didn't know much about the heart in those days to what they do today. Yeah. So he didn't watch himself then, too. How were the people out there in Connecticut? Were they friendly? Very friendly. At first, they... What did they call us? Foreigners. Well, they did. Yeah. They expected us, they said, people that would be coming on horseback, thought we were Wild West that we came from. And they were very, at first, you know, didn't like the idea of us coming because I know people who had children. It was hard for them to rent a place. So but finally, they had to do it. They had a... Yeah. How did they find housing now for about 300 people coming in there? Yeah, that's right. How did you find housing? Did you rent then at first or...? Well, my husband was out there before I came because he had charge of the moving and that. And so he had talked to different people and we got to find a Swedish family, a couple. They didn't have children. And they had an apartment. We got to rent their apartment downstairs. That's where we lived. Very nice people by the name of Hammerstrom. I think Mr. Hammerstrom was born in Sweden. So they were helpful to you then? Very helpful. And there were quite a few Swedes out there with organizations, Vasa was also out there. Oh, yes. Seeming societies. That's right. Temperance and all kind of... Yeah, yeah. What do you call it? Good... Good Templars. Good Templars. IODP. Yeah, we were... My husband sang with them there because he had a very good voice. All of the... there were six boys in the family and I wish you could have heard them. We were in Sweden and they were all singing these Swedish songs. But they were very good voices, all of them. So one of those that moved from Rathbun at the time was Levine Brothers, weren't they? Oh, yes. They were also singers and... Yeah, they had their own... They worked for Sunstrands when they came out there. That's where they started, Sunstrands. My husband helped them a lot when they were beginning their factory there. Oh. Yeah. So... but you came though right in the Depression. Was the Depression more visible here in Rockford compared to Connecticut? Yeah. Well, yes, it must have been because they seemed to have work out there. But here was... Oh, yeah, very bad here. So your brothers didn't have any job then when you left Rockford? No. And then... Because the one, my older brother, because he worked for Sunstrands, he'd been working in those screw machines since he was about 18 years old. Oh, I see. That's the senator's father. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. So he was also a Sunstrand employee then, yeah. That's right. So then he came out there later. And then I also had a younger brother that came out later because he couldn't find any work here. Oh. Yeah. You are talking now about your niece there, Mrs. Joyce Holmberg. She is politically involved. Yeah. Were people in your family also politically active back in Marinette and when they come here to Rockford in the early 30s and early 20s? Were they active within the politics? No, not back in Marinette. No? No. They didn't take part. How about here in Rockford? Like your brothers, for instance? Well, yes. Like I say, my nephew, my sister's son here, he was an alderman here in town. And now he's working for the city too. I don't know what it is. He has a big job down in the... Sara? I guess she's downstairs. And they were Democrats? What? I was going to ask you... So their political activity came later in the family then with the third or... Yeah. Second generation or third generation. Yeah, because my nephew was more in politics and Joyce was at that when he... Because he was an alderman for many years. Yeah. I see. So they started on the local level first then. So how about your father now? Was he a Democrat or a Republican? He was a Republican, so am I. Republican? Yeah. Yeah, but how come now? They came from a working territory up there in Ungermarlanden, Sundsvall and those places and saw work. How could he be a Republican and be a sawmill worker? I don't know. Hang on. Yeah. So he didn't belong to any unions then? No. He didn't believe in unions. And now, like my husband, when he was working for Sons of United States, he had a union and all. Well, he didn't like it at all because he was a Republican too. He was a very strong guy. You could hear my husband, he could really talk. I see. He was a good... He was a Republican. He was a big reader too. But he didn't have to be... He could talk to you on any subject. And he only had a few years of schooling over in Sweden when he came over. That's right. But he went to night school the minute... the first year he came to Marinette, he went to school. To learn English. He spoke perfect English, writer too. And then he became a toolmaker and he learned the trade from the beginning. That's right. But he didn't have to belong to the union because he was in a supervisory position. That's right. Afterwards, he didn't have to. But he didn't like the unions. No, he didn't like them. But now Sons of United States have one of the strongest unions in the country. Well, they had the union when he worked there because I know one time he was on a strike, he was working here and he came back to Marinette and stayed while the strike. And my brother was also working there. They both left Rofford and went to Marinette because he didn't want to be bothered with it until everything was over. So there was a long strike then. It was in the... Yeah, it was quite a while. In the 20s then? Yeah. So Sundstrans, no, they were all Swedish people that started... Oh, yeah, that started. All Sundstrans, there were several brothers, you know. They were the ones that started it. Yeah. And most all of them were Swedish people there or of Swedish descent that had the higher jobs. Because I know the superintendent, his name was Munson, and he went back out there, out east. What happened to the rest of the people? You came back, you said, because of your husband's illness. You liked it out there. Yeah, I just loved it. So... I thought there's nothing prettier in the fall and... Yeah, I really loved it. I loved all the people in the church or wherever I went. But you came back then to settle in Rofford? Oh, yes. And how about the others? Did they also... Oh, yeah. Did they stay on out there or did they come back? Some stayed back. Some are still living out there. Oh, but some retired back in Rofford. Oh, yeah. How about the children, though, that were born here in Rofford and went out there? Did they come back again after a few years when they got old enough to look for a job? Well, no, they seemed to stay back there. They stayed there? Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah. So, and then you had one daughter and one son, you said? Yeah. Yeah, my son was only about, oh, seven or eight years old when he came to Rofford. My daughter went into junior high school. She was about 12, 13. Yeah. Were they interested in... So they graduated from high school here and Bob went to the University of Illinois and Joanne graduated from Northwestern out there in Evanston. So they have... Because my husband really believed in education, especially when he worked out there because he said, if I only would have continued, because he was thinking of going to Beloit College when he was here, and he said, I can see what and how education helped because he took quite a few college courses when he was out there. So he died in the late 50s? 54. 54. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So he was not able to enjoy his retirement? No. But he was still working then, or did he retire? Oh, yeah, he was still working. He was still working. So he worked for Sunstance here then? No, he was, went back to toolmaking. Yeah. So he was working for Nylent tool company or whatever you call it. So there was an easier, more relaxed... Yeah....life, so you didn't have to... Yeah. So your son, was he interested in what your husband was doing? Well, like I say, he was in the Air Force and he was there for quite a while, and then after that he was working for a big airplane company back there in California for years, and he was a, I don't know what. Well, anyways, he traveled an awful lot for the company, you know, business. I don't know what you do call it. You know, when you get older, you kind of forget some of the words. That was one of the many new terms to his heart to remember which one it is. Yeah. And he's always had a higher job, you know, position always. He was a manager in the last place he worked at before he bought this business. The business on his own? Yeah. And that, you think, was too little bit, too strenuous for him? Yeah. And they were making, and they still, of course, they're still going, these pressure vessels that they have, you know, for... I know he sold to Sweden and all over. They sold all over the world these things, you know, for the firemen and the people working in mines and people diving and all that stuff. Some were great big like this, some were about that big. Those are the tanks, you mean, they have on the... On the back. For oxygen. Your son and daughter, were they interested in the Swedish background? Were they listening when you were talking to them? Yes, yes, they were. I know my son, he saw a picture of his great-grandfather's family years ago. He had a picture frame hanging up, and yeah, he was very much interested in a lot of Swedish things. Yeah. And they also remember your dad? Huh? They remember your dad? Oh yeah. Because he was still living when they were small. Oh yeah. So they had a chance to... Oh yes....grew up with him. He told them a lot about Sweden and the Swedes and the parents and all those, yeah. And when he grew up. You know that the people that came from Sweden, most of them, they came alone. In other words, they left the parents behind in Sweden. But you were fortunate enough to have... Yeah, when we went over to Sweden, I was going to tell you, when we were leaving, two brothers came back with us. One was only 17 years old, and the other one, well, maybe he must have been 20 or somewhere around there. Well, they was your cousin's children then? No, they were his brothers, my husband's brothers, younger brothers. Were they that young? Huh? How could they be that... Oh, you mean when they came... From Sweden. Wow. I thought when you went over. No, not when I went over. This was not 1923. And the one stayed here, they both stayed here for a while. And the younger one was only 17 years old, and boy, because he stayed with us, we lived over on Fifth Avenue at the time. And soon as he got a Swedish paper, he would just sit there and read that Swedish paper. And he couldn't wait until the Swedish paper, I don't know where they got them, but he'd always go and get that Swedish paper. And he was so lonely, I could just see how lonely he was. He was homesick then? Homesick, well, you know, 17-year-old. I'll never forget when we left, his mother and father didn't come to the station. They didn't want to see us get on the train. But they walked down about, oh, maybe I would say two blocks, and when the train went by, they were standing crying, you know. Yeah. Touching moments. Yeah. And so then it wasn't, gee, two years later when the only girl they had, because they had six boys in the family and one girl, and the daughter and her family came over here and settled here in Rockford. And the one that came back with us, the older one, he used to have a Swedish bakery down here on Charles Street. What was the name of that bakery? Well, Lincoln Bakery. Lincoln Bakery. Oh, I see. Yeah. Both him and his wife worked there for years and years they had that bakery. How did they learn that? Did they learn it here in Rockford? Oh, yeah, they learned it here because his wife worked there at that bakery and knew all about baking and all that. And then her husband worked in a furniture factory when he decided he was going to learn to be a baker. And he was, they had a wonderful baker. So they baked Swedish... Bread and all that, yeah, coffee cakes and all that. And then his son got in there, his younger son, and so he got to be a baker. So he took over when his father moved out to Florida because he had a heart attack. So it must run in their family, I think. And so he had that bakery, but then he opened a larger bakery out over in that, off of State Street. There's a bakery there. Fairview. Fairview, yeah. And he had a big bakery. And finally, he had it there quite a few years, and then he gave up and retired when he was only 50. Well, it was good business, then. Yeah, it was good business, but I suppose he put his money into something, you know, so we could make more money than that. For a nest egg. Yeah. You mentioned how this boy was homesick when reading the Swedish newspapers. Did your family have a Swedish newspaper? Did they have that? I know my folks had it when we lived in Marinette. Used to have the Swedish paper, because I remember I used to like to read the stories they would have in the Swedish paper. You always took to Svenskammerkronen. Yeah, Svenskammerkronen. Yeah, they used to get that. So you were able then to read the stories there? Oh, yes. I used to just love their love stories. Yeah, I couldn't wait till the paper came. You were just like the Swedish boy then. You couldn't wait until the paper came. How about love stories now? Like your grandma and your mother, did they warn you for what kind of boys you were going to date? Oh, yes. That was important. Oh, yeah. Very important. You couldn't come home with an Italian or a Polish? No, no. Wasn't that, no. They were odd. Yeah. We all married Swedes. Were they also particular about what kind of religion they had your boyfriends, for instance, if they were Baptists or Methodists? No, not that particular, I don't think. But they wouldn't think of that. They had to be a Swede. Oh, yeah. They couldn't marry a Jewish guy or anything with a door, no. Yeah, we all married, my other sister was married to a real Swede, too. Name is Peterson. And, of course, this is Momberg. Yes, that was a Swede, too. And you all found them up in Marinette or? No, I met my husband-to-be in Marinette. How about the rest of your sisters and brothers? They found their husbands here in Rockford. In Rockford? Yeah, my youngest sister's name is Anderson, so we all got Swedish names. And they all still belong to the Lutheran Church, all of them? Yeah, different Lutheran churches. We belong to Zion here, my sister here and I. The other sister belongs to Trinity, and then the Petersons belong to Alpine Lutheran. How come you joined the Zion Church, though? Well, my father and mother went there. I see, so they were Alpine while you were living then. Mm-hmm. Because they belonged to the church in Marinette, but they just transferred when they moved here, you know. And so all the children were confirmed at Zion. How about your grandpa now, on your father's side? Did he come down here to visit you in Rockford at any time? Oh, no, he was gone. He was gone then before? Oh, yeah. Because they were old. Yeah, they died younger, you know, years ago. My grandfather, I don't think, was born around 16. I don't think my grandmother maybe was between 16, 75 or something. But you must be a hardy stock, though, on your father's side because all your sisters are intact. Well, the boys didn't live as long, you know. No? No. Joyce's father, I imagine, Joyce's father could have been 160, I don't think, or somewhere around there. And then my elder brother was 54. My younger brother was only 40 or something. How about customs now, you know, from the area where your father came from, up in Ungermeyer and Sundsvall and around there? They like shoestirming. Oh, yeah. Was there ever used to shoestirming? They used to get up and marry that. Oh, yeah. They made their own? No, they bought it. It must have come from Sweden. We always had lutefisk, you know. How about shoestriming? Did you eat it? No, I couldn't stand the smell. How about your brothers? No, none of the kids would eat it. None of the kids? But my father and mother, they liked it. No. But there was no way to introduce it to anybody else. My mother used to fix her own lutefisk, you know, buy it dry and go through the whole thing. Well, I suppose every Swedish family had their own lutefisk. Oh, yeah. There was a common thing on the coast. Oh, yes. Because I know when we were out in Bridgeport, Swedes there had the same thing. You didn't change the customs then from Marinette to Rockford to Bridgeport? No. They stay with you? Yeah. And the same... And now my daughter, you know, she lives out there in Ohio and all her... In Kenton. Because he's real English, you know. And I've gone out there every Christmas and, you know, made rye bread. They don't have lutefisk because my son-in-law, he had one before they were married at my place, you know. And he didn't like that. So we don't have that, but we have rice and ham and she's got all these Swedish candles and she has real Swedish. Everything is Swedish. And she is married to an English. And they just love it. Her family, they can't wait till Christmas comes and they can come over and taste all that stuff. And we make sota and all that like my mother did, you know. So you have your own... We still have....cut out for you then in December. Yeah. We have a salt herring and all that, pickled salt herring. They all love it. Brown beans and the whole thing. But no lutefisk. No lutefisk. How about herring? Yeah, pickled herring. You pickle herring. Yeah. How about the custom of julklappa, you know, Christmas gifts? Did you receive them from Santa Claus on the Christmas Eve or on the Sunday morning? Sunday morning or Christmas morning. Christmas morning. They do have Santa Claus come on Christmas Eve when they have all the people there. You mean your daughter now? Yeah, my daughter. How about in your home? In my home, we used to get it on Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. Yeah. And then you went to Yule Hotel on Christmas morning. Yeah, then we went to Yule Hotel. We still used to, you know, come here in Ralford. When we got to Ralford, we always went to Yule Hotel. Yeah. So there was the commenting years ago. Yeah. I remember when we lived in Marinette, we would have to walk to church in that crispy snow. It was really Christmas out there. Yeah. It's cold out there. There was very seldom you didn't have a white Christmas, I suppose. It was always white out there. White Christmas, yeah. And cold enough. Cold. Oh, boy, you just crack when you walk. When you think back about that time, was it really hard, or do you don't long back to that cold time? No, but when we were there, we sort of was... When you think about it. When you're young, you don't. Because I used to go, like I say, when I was a young kid, ride down the ice boat with my uncle. Thought that was a lot of fun. Yeah, that was probably good recreation and healthy. That's right. You don't remember being sick from colds more than you have been living in some other place? No. Because you were often... I think back there you were so used to the cold that it didn't bother, because you were dressed for it. Oh. Yeah. You took a lot of stockings and mittens. Yeah, heavy things, yeah. And scarves around your neck for the dread.