 Arthur Berry, Lapeer, Michigan. So you have bought your skis in Sweden? What? You have bought your skis in Sweden? Or have you bought them here? Yes. And maybe some come from Sweden too? I don't remember. They used to bring them to me because I like them. And they thought they'd be a nice present, you know. And right now I wish I could get some gamla dragspel musik. So you play music? Swedish songs, Hamburg, Polish panflut. And your dad plays music? Yes. Does he play the violin? Yes. He's from Vandsbro? Yes. He's from Vandsbro. Immanuel Berg. My mother is from Småland. I don't think there's even a town there, is there? Yes, there is a village. They were farmers and they had twelve children. Sandals. Yes. Eagle children. Yes. And so they were twelve. And Minn-Mor, she lived longer than all of them. She did? Was she the youngest? No, she was the oldest one. And they come to America and work for all the Jewish people. There's maids and cooks and so on. And six of them left, or twelve? Nothing in America. Six of them left for America. Nobody here left in America. The other ones are over in Sweden. She and five others came to this country. And six stayed in Sweden. Yes, that was Uncle Emil. Did Hazel tell you about Emil? No. Uncle Emil had a butcher's. In Detroit? Yes. And then your mother? My mother came from Sweden first. She came first? She came first, yes. Then came Emil. And then came Hilde and Esther. And... Oh, I can't think of anything. But she came to La Porte, Indiana first? Yes. She stayed there a short time? Yes. La Porte, Indiana, yes. She stayed with my mother, yes. Yes. Yes. I'm trying to think back. And then she met your father, Simon Emanuel Berry. Berry, yes. They call him Berndo. They call him Red. Red? Redhead. He had kind of a reddish hair. Do you have any red hair? No, I don't have any red hair. I have a kind of red like yours, you know. I'm not red. What are you talking about? Well, a little. Boy. But they call him Red. But you are dark hair, though. No, I'm blonde. Blonde? Very, very, like the ceiling hair. Oh, no. Yes. But it's almost like... Well, now I'm old. Everything changes, you know. Well, yes, I had... Oh, I got to show you. If I can find some pictures. So he was a steel worker in Detroit. Yes. Hopping up and down. He was on the big skyscrapers, too, big buildings. Oh, yes. And what he had to do then was to rivet together the steel beams. He did everything. He did everything. You got to hook up, you got to raise the iron, and you got to connect it and rivet it and climb, you know. Well. What do you mean by climbing? They had to climb on the beam step. Oh, yes. No ladder or something like that. Oh, no. I never had no ladders. I think they do today. They do? I think for safety. But did you have any steel helmets on like your father? Well, we got them in 1960. 1960? Seventy, maybe. You mean you were... No, then they said you had to have a hard hat, you know. And before that, no. So your dad never had a steel helmet? No. And you started off without a helmet, too? Yeah. Well, wasn't it bad? No, well. What? There was not much steel helmet. You never thought about that, you know. You didn't think about getting hit in the head. Yeah, but it was hard to rivet, for heaven's sake. They could go right through you when they dropped them. Well, they could, but then they sling them up and somebody catch them. But there was nobody working alone over you or anything? Sometimes it could be. But everybody was careful. They weren't going to kill nobody. Every once in a while somebody might fall down and get killed. Then we knock off. We quit the whole job, you know. And what happened then? I think that only happened to me once or twice. I worked at General Motors. You worked for Jones & Laughlin? Oh, that wasn't ironworking. That was in the steel mill. In the steel mill. Yeah, into the summer. There was a special steel fitting company that your father worked for. What was the name of it your father worked for? Oh, heck, man. Arlen Armstrong, Bryden Detweiler, Kinsey Iron. Oh, I can't even remember. See, you never worked for one outfit over a year. If you lasted for a year in one company, that was a long time. It was? Oh, yeah, because the job would top out. What we called top out would be finish. You finished the job, you know. And then you were laid off then? Yeah, then you go to Union Hall and find another job, you know. But to do this kind of job, not like your father and yourself, you had to be skilled at it, though. They couldn't hire you as anybody off the street. No. No, I don't think so. Well, if you were a squirrel, if you could climb. Yeah, but I mean to get those rivets in and rivet them and back them up, there's got to be some speed to it. If you didn't get the right drive, then you had what we call a... A reamer. A red cap. That was a trade name for a beer. But the rivet wasn't perfectly round. It was no good. Then you had to burn it out and drive a new one. A red cap was one that was flattened out on one side, so it didn't make it perfectly round. So they had to burn those out. How long were the rivets, four inches? It depends, three, maybe three. Sometimes only two, four. It depends on how much you're putting together, you know. So you buckled them over about half an inch? Well, you had a buckle guy. Half an inch? He had what they call a... A back dropper? Yeah, but they had a bad name for him. Well, anyway, he had to back it up. You drove it and... And the other guy had to drive it on the other side, holding it, you know. How much did it buckle over, a quarter of an inch? Oh, yeah. At least? Oh, yeah, at least. And they got to be red hot? Oh, yeah, sure. What the hell you can't... So you had a special guy then coming with the bucket. That was his job to run with the rivets. The guy with the horse cock. Horse cock? We called it a horse cock. He was a bucker-upper. Well, you drove it, you know, with the driver and the horse cock. But there was one guy that came with the bucket of rivets. That was his job. With the heater. The heater. He ran up with the bucket. And I couldn't sling. Just one at a time? Well... How did you catch it? In a coffee can or anything. Yeah, well, you were a... I mean, you missed sometimes, I usually... Oh, yeah, didn't I? Oh, no, you sling up another one. But there was always a bunch of them in the furnace, you know, in the fire. Yeah, but the dawn you missed. I mean, they could hit somebody in the head downstairs. Well, luckily it never happened. There was no netting or anything underneath? No. No. Well, I mean, chicken wires, it was... Yeah, that would be good. But there was no time to put up. See, they never had that safety, government safety. They was never thought of. If somebody got killed, there was just another one waiting. That was right. Plenty of people. Well, it's not nice to say, but that's true. If somebody got killed on the job, you just knock off for the rest of the day. Probably we went to the bar and soup, you know. It felt very bad, but... And then there was many times when I was too cout to work. To work? It was like five below zero. You couldn't work in that kind of way? No, then we went ice fishing. To the bar? Ice fishing? But you were a high... It was easier than we took it, yeah. But you were a very high pay scale though. Oh, yeah. It was the highest in the construction. Oh, yeah, very good. I think 1960 I was making like $70 an hour. That was high pay. Back in 1960, for me, you know, it was better than anybody here in America. And, well, I made good money, but then sometimes you didn't work every day either. You had to wait until the weather... Yeah, there was no weather and sometimes there was no work. So your dad, now, he worked with you all his life? Yeah. But how was he when he got older, or told you to be up in the scaffolds and... From the start. Huh? From the start. What do you mean from the start? 66 year old, and that's when he fell. 66? Yeah. Oh, man. Did he have to... Quit then when he fell down? What happened then? No, Han was 66, and then he got insurance, and they said, you want to make a final settlement. And Papa Han said, yeah, I'll take my little... Every month, you know. So Han lived for... Two years before they ran out. So Han went through doom, you know. And there was enough to keep him going? Yeah. Oh, this thing is going there. Yeah. I don't hear anything. No, well... Well, how do you do that? Just push the button. But... So he didn't work after the injury? No. No, Han was 66. Oh, yeah. 66. Well, he is a good papa. He's kind of a happy-go-lucky, unspele munspele, super, and worked like hell, and hard worker, you know. A really good papa for me. Yeah. Did you talk Swedish to him back and forth sometimes? No. I learned from papa, and maybe out here, too. How about mother? Did she talk Swedish? Oh, yeah. The only time they talked Swedish when they didn't want us little-born to understand what they were talking about, maybe. Did you understand what they were talking about? Yeah. They weren't fooling me. So, yeah. I said, I said, Arthur, you know what the hell we're talking about. I said, yeah, sure, papa. Nothing serious, you know. So how old were you when you went with your parents out here to Lappier? I'd say about two. Do you remember the tenting, pitching a tent here? Oh, yeah. Minn-Fjord built this cottage in 19- Sjögåhull. And, we were the first ones, you know. He built it himself? Well, he had some farmer boys help him from Lappier, and they weren't worth a darn. Oh, he used to get so perbanded. Goddamn dumb farmers. They had the thing screwed up this way. Why couldn't he get some Swedish guys with him? Nobody. Everybody was working, I guess. Nobody knew how to do it. Yeah, but there must have been a lot of Swedish carpenters there. No? No, not very many. There was not too many carpenters in this town. And if there was any, they were all working, I think. And, Minn-Fjord, Han-Ha, you worked on J.L. Hudson's store, you know? Did you ever hear of that? J.L. Hudson's store? Yeah, you mentioned it before. That's the first time I heard of it. Down in Detroit. And papa had, oh, a hundred people working for him, maybe more, I don't know. Yeah. So that's when he got these farmer boys to come and build the summer studio here. You remember the bachelor club? Oh, yeah. It was only for bachelors. Yeah, I think it was. Yeah, I can name them pretty much. Ernie Grandel, did you ever hear of him? And Braden Bay, he was one. He was one. And Oscar Ostholm. Hanadod, he went to California. Oscar Ostholm. Oh, Chef Eric. Eric Erickson. They called him Chef. He cooked for the boys. He was the chef. And, oh, we had Oscar Swanson, and we had, oh, many, many guys. They come and they go. And they had it down there, and that was nice for them, see. They didn't bother nobody. They could party and have a good time, sing or dance, take whatever they wanted. They didn't dance on their own. Oh, yeah, they had a nice big back porch there. Yeah, they had a wind-up Victrola. And when I got a little bit older, then they'd have me come down and soup a little bit, and sing, dance. Oh, yeah, they had a lot of parties down there. Oh, did they tell you about Erickson when Klubben was first born, when it was first started, I should say? Erickson hunts Fela guitar, and his brother-in-law played a ukulele or a banjo. That was part of the Jones family. And I think Florence Johnson could tell you about that. Maybe, have you already heard that, maybe? No, I can't remember if you told me. And they had many nice parties. See, when they came out here, they were 25, 30 years old. They were young kids, you know, come from Sweden. So there were a few that were married when they first came out here? Oh, yeah. Most of them were bachelors or single? No, I'd say most were married. Most were, yeah. And then we had a VJ and bachelors cottage, and they decided they'd let them have that property down there to build a cottage for the bachelors, which is good, I think. And then one by one, they got gifts, got married, or moved away or something. Well, Bradenburg can probably tell you more about that. But I remember, young, we're so little. Did they have any fights out there? I mean, they get... Oh, there was lots of butterfights. They did? Well, in the month or nothing. There was no sheriff out there or anything like that? No, no. They took care of themselves? Yeah. Did they play soccer out there? Yeah, Carl Olsson, he might have started something like that. Well, he was a soccer player. Oh, yeah, he loved soccer. Oh, yeah. But we never had any good soccer ball players. We had a baseball team. So there was no Swedish soccer club here in the Thorten? Well, there were the Germans, the Tyskev, I call them, the German, Swedes, and that's one dollar a go. I can't remember. You never tried to play soccer? No, I just played a little baseball there. Oh, that's too fast. Soccer is a good game then. My grandchildren, they played it. It's getting more popular here in America. But not at that time, what you were doing now? No, soccer, they didn't think so much about that. But you would think of a lot of Polish people there and Germans and Italians. Well, we had the Germans and we had the Polacks and we had a few Italianos. But it never was very popular. They didn't have a field out here? No. Carl Olsson, he tried to get it going, you know, but it didn't work. Then we had a baseball team and Carl had a shirt and a uniform, pants and a shirt, you know, and stuff like that. And that team was called? Boss. Boss, huh? I just forget. Many years ago. A long hour ago, yeah. But, oh, we had a good ball team. And Lagerquist, Hjalmar, you met him, you? No, I never met him. Oh, never met Hjalmar? Oh, that would be the guy to meet. I'm coming from Stockholm and he did this, he did that. Well, you're not going to be here until next Sunday. No. I got it. Arnie, his son, Hjalmar, Arnie, Birger, and Bjorn. Three boys. Yeah. And Birgit, there's four. Oh, maybe you're going to meet Birgit. Would you have to leave tomorrow? I got to leave early tomorrow morning. Oh, fine. So, there are a lot of people that have been passing by here. Yeah, I was hoping you could catch them. But they come and they go and they come and go. Yeah. But some of those people you are raping over there, Jan-Will. Like Birgit and Arnie. Birgit, she's about four older than me. Oh, she's 70 something? Yeah. When we lived down here in Mettemura. And, well, Arnie, he's younger than me. Bjorn, I don't know the dude. He was a boxer. Boxer? Yeah. Athletic kind of guy. And Birgit, more pencil pusher, I call it, you know. But Arnie, now, wasn't he an athletic also? Well, he was a school teacher in gymnastics. Gymnastics? Kind of, yeah. In Paviak? In Detroit. Detroit? Yeah. It's too bad you couldn't meet him. And Papa, Hjalmar, I just sit and talk with him. I miss the old man. He was a good old guy. Oh, he brought us so much. So he lived up here then the last few years? Yeah, he lived here. All during the summers though? No. All year long? Yeah. And then he had a girlfriend. Well, we call it girlfriend. Your mother died first then? No, Minn-Flor died first. Yeah. But then he couldn't have a girlfriend if your mother was living here. No, you've been talking about Hjalmar. Oh, Hjalmar had a girlfriend. Well, we call it that. Just a friend, you know. So I'm going to live with her in the winter. So that'll do. No, Minn-Flor. You better write a little something there. Many, many years ago. But you never went to Sweden to see where Banskro and Morheda? No. Why didn't you take a trip? It cost a penger. And then, jag har en sexborn också. So det kostar pengar, du säger. So I never had the opportunity. De är all grown up, no? Now they are, ja. Maybe someday, but now it's too late. No, they can put in $200 each and they can send you off. Fine, I should go there now. Why? Mama's place, Morheda, is all tore down. It's not even there, I don't think. And Minns-Flor up at Banskro? It's nothing there either. I have an aunt, maybe, in Stockholm. Aunt Dagny. Did Hazel tell you about her? Dagny, maybe. And, but there's no incentive to really go, you know. I'd like to. Why don't you take, go with Hazel now? She's leaving in September. Jag har ingen pengar. Can't afford it. But she is not even Swedish. Oh, she's just as Swedish as I am. Well, you're my liten sister. Ja, but your father was Swedish, your mother was Swedish. Her parents, no, her father and the mother were... Same mother and father. Hungarian. Hungarian? Nej. She's not Swedish. Hazel? No. Hazel, ja, men, I mean Helen. Oh, Helen, oops. Ja, Helen. Oh, that is a different outfit. We had to come with the whole... Oh, but she, she travels to Sweden every year. I know, but... And she's a Hungarian? Hunhård pengar också. She got to spend the money, huh? Well, I don't know, but she's pretty good. She talks bra Svenska. Well, she does, I hear. She talks really good Swedish. Uh-huh. Yeah, and she's been involved with a lot of Swedes and Klubben. Yeah, that's because of Kalla. And, um, but she fell right in there and she learned how to talk Swedish. Sidan två det är fortsättning med Dr. Barry Lepierre, Michigan. Oh, that's pretty good. Ni med träffa om elindas hus. En spelen man med sin fjol. Håll upp den fyllda pappret på. Kortast och blekast vintersol. Inten december dag. Kallad för Thomas Vivlaren. För att hans tro var svag. Han skulle aldrig någonsin trott på en sol, en vår. Och ändå förvandlas vintern till sommar varenda år. Jag tror, jag tror på sommaren. Jag tror, jag tror på sol igen. Jag pyntar mig i blå kravat och hälsar dig med lommig katt. Jag tror på dröm om sommarhus. Med träffa om elindas hus. En spelen man med sin fjol. Håll upp den fyllda pappret på. Mitt sommaravdon, natten lång. Kärlek och dans och sång. Solen som plötsligt börjar gå. Ås och ner på en gång. Pojken med slikande hand i sin. I skarpt och hårt till svar. Lästen han gått och hoppas på under de år som var. Jag tror, jag tror på sommaren. Jag tror, jag tror på sol igen. Jag pyntar mig i blå kravat och hälsar dig med lommig katt. Jag tror på dröm om sommarhus. Med träffa om elindas hus. Why are you interested in Swedish records like this? You don't have any English records. Oh ja. What more is there in Swedish? You've been playing there for many years. Well, I remember my mom and dad. And I was coming out here and I learned to dance a hambo and Swedish. And Jager Records fans came away. So they played Swedish dance music then? When Jager solita. Only Swedish? Ja. How about your sister? Was she interested in the Swedish? Ja. She was dancing. I was in the Bornklubben. But you didn't belong to Bornklubben? No. I thought I was too big or too shy maybe. So you were a husky guy from the beginning? Ja. When you were 17 you were a man? I was in the navy then. 17 year old. 17. But you were big and husky? I was a woman. 17. And that's when the war. Flags coming out of your ears and out of your ass I call it. You were very patriotic. You were drafted in the war? No, I volunteered. You volunteered? Oh ja. Where did you serve then? In the navy. In the Pacific? Ja. Those Galpanese. You were out how many years? 3 years? 3 and a half. So you came back without... No scratches, no nothing. Had a lot of fun. More fun than fun. Ha ha ha. So you were so combative. You can see what kind of a guy I am. I take everything... You took the Japanese around the neck and just left with them? Ja. Even today I don't trust them. You don't? There's something... I guess you never undo that when you got that. And the same thing about the Swedes, same thing about that Persian Gulf business. The ragheads they call them. They got rags on their heads, you know. I don't know what... Oh, they're going to be sluts there I'm afraid. You think so? Well, if it was up to me, I'd either hood them or pay attention or straighten out or get, you know. But they're so full of feet, they lie, Sumik. Can't believe what they say. No. I don't know what they think about it. I have no idea, you know. Can't hear nothing? I haven't read any Swedish papers. I haven't read any American papers. I've been on the news now for two weeks. But you know, the Americans, they're not so loved all over the world like they used to be, you know. They're very strong, popular. But in South America and you in the Neva, I call it, you know. And we're in troubles, I think. We get our nose into too much other people's business. I think, I don't know. Maybe I'm wrong, maybe I'm... I don't know. But... I don't think we should have any business down in South America with the Contras and, you know, you heard about that. Contras, yeah. Do you believe in Contras or... or Ortega? I don't really. Sandinistas? I don't know what the heck to believe. I don't know what's right and what's wrong. Do you know? No, I have no idea. I don't either. I just hope for the best. I don't know what's right and what's wrong and... but I don't think we should butt into their business. That's up to them. That's the way my feelings are. I got friends of mine who are Espanol, Spanish, Mexican, and all that kind of stuff, and good friends of mine, and... I don't think they know either which way it should be, what is true and what isn't true. So when you came back from the war then, what kind of work did you get then? Was it easy to get a job then after you served in the Navy, for instance, or in the Army? Oh, after I got out of the service. Was it easy to get a job? I don't know. Well, how... I found a job. I worked for the Veterans Administration. You did? Shit, I had a big desk with three or four telephones and people working for me and... What kind of job was that? It was in the Veterans Administration and... In Detroit? Yeah. It was in the Guardian Building in Detroit. Did you ask for that job or... Nay, I don't know how the heck I even got that job. I guess when I come out of the service, you know, everybody was getting that $52 a week or whatever it was. So that was like beer money or... we'd go play around, you know. And $52.20 I think it was we called it. And I went along with that for a while, but to me I didn't feel comfortable, so I went and found a job at the Veterans Administration. How long could you get that thing, the $52.20? I think it was $20 a week maybe for 52 weeks or... It was coming from the government, you know. You didn't have to work then? It didn't mean anything, you know. It'd be all right if you wanted to be a bum. But you didn't get on top of what you made on the job, though? No, no. Then they would cancel out. Yeah, well, see, there was no other money coming in. Nobody was working. You just got that as a compensation for being in the service. And $52.20 I think is what they called it. Fifty-two weeks, $20 a week if I remember right. That's back in the 40s, you know. There it is. What the who knew? So it's kind of hard to remember. Well, $20 a week for 52 weeks. I think that's what it was. $52.20. Yeah, that's what they called it, $52.20. So there was a lot of them that took that money? Oh, yeah. Heck, we lined up for that. And we'd get our pay, and they'd probably go cash the check. They'd give you a check. You'd go to the nearest saloon, cash it, and go drink oil or a paratha. So they made the bar owners rich? Oh, yeah, I think so, yeah. Oh, you probably know as well because you've probably filmed. I didn't. Where we got our check was out on Grand River, if I remember right, which was a little ways away from home, so I didn't like the neighborhood. Yeah, but the neighborhoods at that time after the war, they were not bad, though, in Detroit. Nay, heck, I was never afraid to walk around. They were still good. Oh, yeah. They were good neighborhoods. I could walk around all over downtown and down the alleys and behind the stores and never be afraid. But today I wouldn't want to do it. Yeah, what happened then? Where did that come from? Well, you have Lissverdningen, I think so, and the whole neighborhood deteriorates. I don't like to be prejudiced, but how can you not be prejudiced when you have Lissverdningen? They feel each other out. So where did the Swedes move them from Highland Park area? Where did they move to when they were driven out of Moorhead? Oh, I don't know. I think there's still some there, I think. I don't know. People just disappeared. They went out to the suburbs. One went this way, one went the other way. So it's hard to keep track. Did you live down there, too? No. Well, Mom and Papa always lived in a pretty nice neighborhood, I call it. They were Germans and different nationalities. Did they stay on or did they move? Then we moved out to a seven-mile road on Vassar, or just north of Vassar Drive. On the east side? No, on the west side. And it was a very nice neighborhood. And then, oh, yeah, brought up there. Well, that was – I went to the service. I try to remember now. It's hard to remember all these things way back. Oh, I finished my high school, McKinsey High School. Oh, and I had such a good time there, too. I had a good-looking girl. She would drive me home in a convertible, a red, beautiful convertible. Her daddy was a car dealer, so I was a big shot then, a pretty tense boy. But those are good memories. Then I went to the service. I remember Mama and Daddy. I was down on the train, and Mama, she cried, and Daddy did, too, I guess. And I'm just, oh, I'm going to kill all the Germans and the Japanese also. And they were very – we were patriotic, you know. Why did you join the Navy? Did somebody tell you? Me? I thought that's because maybe I could swim. I don't know. I don't really know. But I thought the Navy would be better than sloshing around in the mud like in a regular army, you know. So the guy – it's just a matter of stamping. When you went down there to volunteer, it was just a matter of one stamp here for the Marines, one for the Navy, one for the Army. And you asked for the Navy? Yeah. And you got that stamp? Yeah. And you were not back there for three and a half years? No. Well, I came home on a leave, I think, after maybe a year and a half, maybe I got a leave, a 30-day leave. So what ship did you serve on? Oh, I was on what they call the Antelope, and I was on – oh, I don't know. I forgot to look up my own records. I can't even remember. Well, they was destroyers. Nay, they were – I don't know. Computer ship? No. What the heck would you call them? Utility or type of a ship, you know. Well, you were holding in equipment to them. Yeah, and – oh, Liberty ships, I think you might have called them. They were sinking those babies left and right, and some of them fell apart. You know, they broke in half. You mean they didn't rivet them enough? Yeah. No cold rivets? No, but everything was hurry up, hurry up, you know, and they were building them. So they put all in all of them and scrapped them without testing it? It's kind of hard for me to remember all that stuff, too, what ship I was on and then what islands I was on. I was in the Philippines, and I was in places that nobody could even find on a map today. There were dumb places they call it in Murphysville. Well, where the hell is Murphysville in the Philippines? You know, it was just a bay where we put in – I was in small landing craft. You know what I'm talking about, small landing craft? Yes. Yeah, Gramps, huh? And so we go into Murphysville, and it was nothing but party, party, party. And no Japs there? No, but there were some pretty girls. Natives? Yeah. Some stupid guys, they got married and everything else over there. And they stayed on there, too? No, I think it was just for convenience for a couple of days or weeks, I don't know. And then we had the papas used to bring the daughters down to our base, you know. Here's a beautiful girl, do you like her looks? That kind of stuff. We called them pom-pom girls. They didn't speak English, though? Well, a little bit. And they knew it's a thing, I remember. And all of you were half drunk, I suppose. Yeah, we had tuba, they called it, tuba. It was made out of coconuts. And then there was a Japanese lady, she had stuff she said came right from Manila, and she called that Benedictine. It was purple, come in a bottle, she had labels and everything. So I went in the back room, you know, and it's a big old shack, we were on stilts, I went back there, here's the labels and the bottles. There wasn't important stuff there. But by golly, you drank that stuff. She'd give you a big pitcher of water and you'd take a shot of that. Boy, I went back to the ship floating. So there was strong stuff. My buddy and I, we laughed. It's a wonder we didn't get fucked. No sickness? No. We were lucky. So many guys, they went blind, you know, from that. From the booze? From the booze, yeah. You mean the homebrew? Well, yeah. How could you trust the natives, though? You know, when you're overseas and in the service, you don't give a damn. Money didn't mean nothing, your life didn't mean nothing, you just played the game as best you could. Did the Navy bring you any whiskey and hard liquor? No, y'all, but I had to buy seven crowns from the merchant marine. See, they weren't part of the Navy. They had women and everything for us guys, you know, that were in the regular Navy. And $25 a bottle of whiskey, and that's a lot of pegner back in those days. It was like the black market. Yeah, it was like black market. And you paid that? Well, sure, if you wanted it, and money didn't mean nothing. What the hell did we care about money? We were going to die maybe or anyway. So you were paid there regularly every week? No, sometimes we didn't get paid for months and months and months. But it was on the books, you know. And then we sold our mattress covers. We called them fart sacks. Feasts of sacks. You sold them? To the natives for the dresses for the women. They thought that was so broad. And it was white, you know, linen type. So they were so happy to get that. So I could get a bottle of whiskey for one or two of those fart sacks, I call them, you know, mattress covers. Yeah, but then you didn't have any mattress covers. What did you get? We stole them. Oh, you haven't been in the service? Not American. Oh, well, I tell you, every service is the same. There are crooks and there's more crooks. And there's ways of doing business if you want to, you know, without getting in trouble, of course. So the officers, they looked between the fingers that they didn't... They were probably screwing around with something else. They didn't care about us. They were probably doing their own kind of business. I don't know. They didn't bother us too much. So there was the Great War. Yeah, the Great War, yeah. Well, I came out pretty doggone good. Other guys didn't do so good. And some good buddies of mine, they were very... We were tight, you might call it tight, close, close together. They all didn't make it. I did, I did all right. But it's kind of hard to reminisce back that far. And a lot of times you try to put that out of your mind, you know. You don't like to think about that stuff. I think about the good times. I had a lot of good times, too. When I was in San Francisco, I had lots of good times. So you always think of the good times. You don't think of the bad times. You've got to have a positive thinking. Well, that's the way I try to be. That's the way my daddy was. I think I learned a lot from him. And a lot of times things aren't going so good, you kind of figure they'll change. You've got to have a, what do you call it, a positive attitude. © The Bulletproof Executive 2013