 It's 20th of March 1987. I'm sitting together with Gunnar Arthur Benson, Stirling, Illinois. He was born 1910 to 21st of May in Treslev Halland and came to the United States in 1911 with his parents. Your parents are you, Waldo Vig Bengtsson and Børra Eugenia Gunneson. He was out in the service, your dad. Yes, my father had finished his two years of compulsory military training. When you were born? Well, my folks were married right after he went in the service. I was born while he was in the service. So when he came out he had a wife and a kid to support. Times were rough in Sweden and so we decided to come to this country. And he was in two years? Yes. So was he going to officers training then? No, no, he just met the requirements. He was in Vorberg or Halmstad? Vorberg. See, of course Treslev is a part of Vorberg now. And he was born in Hunestad, which is right next to it. You could almost throw a stone from my mother's home to his home. So they knew each other since... That's my birthplace. That's my mother's home right there in that picture. That's where I was born, that's where she was born. And just a short distance away was my father's home. This is his home. Our son did this watercolour of his home in Sweden. So when he came back there was no way to get a job? No, it was bad. Times were bad. And this uncle of my mother's, her mother's brother, and his wife and daughter were making a visit in Sweden that summer from Minnesota. And so the question was, well, what's going to happen with Johan and Bertha and Gunnar? So they were worried? Yeah, because neither family was really in a position to take on another family. So Dad picked up some work, odds and ends, and then it was decided that we would come to America with Uncle Anders. And this we did, and lucky for us, because we left Vorberg on the train and went to Gothenburg. We had ships passage and everything all arranged. Got there and there was a dock strike, and they didn't know when it was going to be settled. So we had to go back to Vorberg, and then Uncle Anders, he knew his way around a little bit. So we took the train on down to the ferry over to Denmark, and took the train across Denmark, got on a small North Sea ship and went to England, travelled across England, and spent three days in Liverpool, and then we found passage with a Canadian ship. So we entered through the St. Lawrence River when we came to North America. So you came on the Canadian White Star Line then? Yeah, that's right. On the boat Laurentic. And you have no memory of it, because you were… No, I was just a little over a year old. You were only a child then? Yes. In Sweden there. And do you remember if your dad talked about the hardship of finding a job, if there was an after effect of the big strike in Sweden in 1909, if there was still any on? Well, times were kind of tough, and he knew it was going to be hard to find work. Now he wasn't without skills. He was a pretty good carpenter. He knew farming. He had been a stone cutter. I mean, he had done things in his younger life in Sweden. But it was just not a very good time to start out with a family, and we thought there were better chances. And it worked out beautifully for us too, in a sense, because… So he didn't have any thinking about going to Minnesota and being a farmer? No, no. That was a possibility. I think Uncle Anders said, I'll give you work, and he worked that first summer in Minnesota. But when we came to America, we landed in—we came to DeKalb, and Mother had another uncle there, the brother of Anders. And so we stayed with them a few days before we went up to Minnesota. And this Uncle Nils, he was the foreman of the machine shop for the American Steel and Wire Company in DeKalb. And so when we were up in Minnesota, he wrote and said, come back to DeKalb. I have a job for you, hon, in the shop. And the best part of that was that most of the fellows who worked in the machine shop were Swedes, so my dad didn't have to go through this terrible thing of getting acquainted with a job with nobody being able to understand each other, you know. So he went to work for Uncle Nils, and we lived with them for a few months. In the meantime, my oldest sister was on the way, so they thought it was time for us to find our own place because Uncle Nils had several children. And so we got our own home then, and my sister was born. She's two years younger than I am. And then I had two other sisters born here in America, yeah. I forgot to ask one thing. You went on the Canadian shipping line. Yeah. You didn't go through Ellis Island then? No, no. We came to Quebec. We passed through customs in Quebec. You never had any trouble or anything? No. And then we came into America through Port Huron, Michigan. Took the train to Chicago, Chicago to Sycamore, Sycamore to DeKalb on the streetcar. It was a long trip. Yeah. So, anyway. So have they told you anything, hardships on the travel? Well, yeah. We had some exciting times. I told you, bad luck right away about the dock strike. But we were lucky enough to get passage. But crossing the ocean, we ran into a big field of icebergs, huge icebergs. This was when we were getting close to Canada. And we lay quiet for a day there. Mother has told me all of this. Blown the foghorn, you know. That was in early spring that you left? It was in July. Oh, in July. In July, yeah. Still iceberg after? Yeah, yeah. In July. Yeah, we left Sweden the 4th of July, 1911. And so we lay there for at least a day. Then the fog cleared. It was deep fog. The fog cleared and they were able to make their way out of the ice fields and headed for the St. Lawrence. And then we had some troubles in Quebec, I guess, because one of the agents there made a mistake, and so we missed a train connection. But with Uncle Anders along the way, we were able to make it because he could handle the English and all. How long had he been here in Minnesota, your uncle? He came in 1884. I see. So he was an old-timer. Yeah. He had a nice farm, and he had married and had a nice daughter. Where was he in Minnesota? Well, his farm was in Truman, Minnesota. It's southern part, way south. There's a bigger town. It doesn't come to my mind just right now. But anyway, Truman is just a little place. So that's where we stayed. And then Dad helped the uncle with the summer and fall chores until we got this notice from DeKalb. This gives you a little bit of idea. See, they had just picked their apple crop. See in this picture? So this is from Minnesota? This is from Truman, Minnesota. This is my mother, and this is me. This is my father. This is Uncle Anders and his wife, Sophia, and the cousin, Selma. And these others are some relatives and neighbors who lived nearby. They all have big heads. Yeah. I just had a little picture made of this, of my mother and me, and I just sent it to my sister as copies. My first picture in this country, and I said, Look at Mother's hat, and mine too. They always had a dog in it. Oh, yeah, yeah. At least they could. So during World War I, Mother and my two older sisters made a visit up there in the summer of 1917. And that's when I really got acquainted with the area. And years later, I came back, and I was able to drive right to the farm. I had been just a little kid when I'd been there. But there were lots of Swedes living up in that part of Minnesota. So your uncle, now, he was an old-time Swede, I suppose. Yeah, yeah. And this, his brother, Nils, who lived in DeKalb, he was quite a mechanic. I'm going to tell you something about him. Uncle Nils, who is long dead now, he was grandfather to the governor of Illinois, Jim Thompson. Jim Thompson is my cousin. Oh, I see. Yeah. And so we lived with them. And the governor's mother, Agnes, was my first playmate in this country. She was about my age, and she could speak Swedish, and that was the only thing I could speak. And there were a lot of things that worked out pretty good there in the beginning, but they were good to us and got us started. And they were the only family we had in this country all those years. We went back and forth, Christmas and everything. So he started then as a machinist in DeKalb. Yeah, a machinist helper. And he became a full-fledged machinist mechanic. He worked for the American Steel and Wire Company for 40 years. In DeKalb? In DeKalb, yeah. And he never moved away then with his wife? No, he died in DeKalb. My mother, after he died some years later, my mother went back to Sweden on a visit and became reacquainted with an old friend. Well, Mother and Dad had made one trip back to Sweden in 1937, the first time they had gotten back since 1911. And they had gotten acquainted with this couple and spent a lot of time with them. Well, when Mother got back to Sweden there at that time in the 1950s, she had lost her husband and Ernst had lost his wife. So Mother and Ernst hit it off and got married, and she had 11 good years with him. He was a wonderful guy. So that's the way that went. So she died over there, and then her remains were shipped back here to be buried in DeKalb besides Dad's. And did they join the First Lutheran Church in... Oh, yes. Svenska Lutherska Kyrkan. Svenska Lutherska Kyrkan, yes. And you went to Sunday school there? Yes, I did. Confirmed also? Yes. In English. I was in one of the first classes to be confirmed in English. Before that time, there was always some of each. And of course, it wasn't so many years back that they were all confirmed in Swedish. But... Do you remember when they changed over to English service? Yes. It was every other Sunday that they switched to it. It started out... They had two services at one time, Swedish and English. Then it got to be English every Sunday, but every other Sunday, and then finally once a month it was Swedish. And finally it just got back. There wasn't anything but Jyllut in Swedish, and that went by the boards too after a while. That was during your young years, that's you? Oh, yes. So your parents, they were quite young though when they came over here. Yeah. Were they against changing over to English, because they didn't have any job there? No. They went to night school right away. And my mother was very anxious to learn the language, and they both did quite well. Even my father, who didn't move as fast as my mother on this, he got so he wrote a pretty good letter in English. And when I first came here to Sterling to teach school in 1929, we were still talking a lot of Swedish at home. Mother and dad were still reading Svenska Tribunen Nyheter. And... So we would visit a good deal. We talked English too, but it had gradually tapered off. And my younger sister, she was the poorest in Swedish, of course. But they all three can get along pretty well. In fact, they're all three together down in Florida right now. We were supposed to be there too, but we couldn't get away. But it was all Swedish at first. The first day I went to school, I was six years old. They put me in the kindergarten class. The teacher couldn't understand me, and I couldn't understand her. So they put me in the first grade class where there was a Swedish girl, a Miss Anderson. And she helped me a great deal. She translated for me and had me build words. And I did the first grade in a half a year then. Then I went to the second grade, and this girl also had a Scandinavian background. So she understood me a little bit. I was still having trouble even with the kids in school, you know, talking to them. And so she helped me, and I did the second grade in a half a year. So I went through the first two grades in one year. And I was only 12 years old when I graduated from grade school and went to high school. Do you remember if the teacher told you not to speak Swedish at home? No. No. Because there'd been some... No, we had none of that because DeKalb was a pretty good Swedish community. So there was no one that could work for you? So they didn't work on that. And at home, my folks talked Swedish a lot because it was easier for them, and we understood them. They felt more comfortable with it. Yeah. But as my sisters grew up, we kids, we started switching from Swedish to English between us and the kids in the neighborhood. Some of them were Swedish and some were not. But you pick up a lot of language from the other kids. What nationality were the other groups there? Well, the school that I went to was just like the United Nations. We had Italians and Swedish and Finnish and Norwegian and Bulgarians and Greeks and Lithuanians and Polacks. We had them all. I used to be able to say a few words in lots of languages when I was growing up because these kids... I still can count to five in Finnish. But anyway, we had that to deal with. Of course, there were other kids like me that had been born overseas, and I could appreciate their problems in getting acquainted. But I was anxious to learn. And I used to sit in class in the lower grades, and I just envied these kids that stand up to recite, and they used words that I thought were just so big, and I used to think, oh, golly, if I lived in a family where they talked like that at home. Because I'd go home and it was all Swedish. But I didn't mind that, and I have deliberately hung on to it in later years. In fact, when Wilma and I went to Sweden in 1969 representing the state of Illinois for the Bishop Hill exhibit, after I had made my presentations in English to the king, given the gifts to him and all, then I said, Nuska vi tala lite svenska, and there were about 700 people there, and they just burst into a roar of laughter. They never dreamed that I could speak Swedish because my Swedish is never shown in my English, and my English is never shown in my Swedish. So I've enjoyed that. You've been able then to keep it apart. Oh, yes, yes. So you have practiced, I suppose, reading quite a bit of Swedish. Reading. In fact, I have built up my vocabulary quite a bit in the last few years. I have been deliberately reading books in Swedish and enjoy doing it, and I got myself a new dictionary. This Prismus, is it? That's a wonderful dictionary, so I can look up words now that I didn't know. And I translate Swedish letters for people here in Sterling and Rock Falls, Norwegian letters, too. I can read most of them right off at sight. So you went through all the grade and high school in DeKalb, then? Yeah. And then you went on to college. Then I went to the teacher's college in DeKalb. Took a two-year course there, and I was actually headed for the ministry in those days. Did your parents want you to go into that? No, no. My pastor wanted me to go to Augustana and get into ministry, and I wanted to go. And that's always been one of my disappointments, that I never got to Augustana. But anyway, he took me over to see the president of the college and told him what I wanted to do. And he said, well, I suggest that he take the junior college course and get the two-year certificate and go out and teach school for a while and then get back into it. But I liked teaching, and I never got back. And I spent 43 years in the schools here in Sterling. And that was your first and only employment as a teacher? I had one interview in my life, the one that brought me here. Yeah, I spent all my time here. And here you also found your wife? Yep. Yeah, that was through the church. And you came here during the Depression then, or before the Depression? Before the Depression, 29. But it wasn't long before things got kind of tough. In fact, we were planning on getting married early in 1933, I guess it was, because our school had been paying us regularly. We weren't taking script like some schools were. And so we decided we were going to get married. And then they stopped the first check, so we called it off for now. But before a month was out, they had paid us up again, so we got right after it again and got married in 1933. So there was tough times then in Sterling here with the construction? Oh, yes, yes. And there was the steelworks at the time? Yeah, and lots of other manufacturing. There's been a lot of manufacturing here. You see, Sterling is known as the hardware capital, the builder's hardware capital of the country. The Lawrence brothers and National Manufacturing, they make all these nails and screws and hinges and all that kind of stuff. They're known all over the country. But they were slowed down, all of them. But I was lucky. I remember going home one weekend to DeKalb, and in those days we could ride the train, you know, but that's long gone. And sitting there talking with my dad, he said to me, he said, You were right and I was wrong. I said, What was I right about? He said, Do you remember when you graduated from high school? I said, I could get you a job in the machine shop? And I said, Yes. And you said you didn't want to. You wanted to go to college. Yes, and I said, And you agreed that I could. And he said, Well, you've got a job. I'm sitting here rocking away. I don't have a job. He was wrong. I was right to go the way I did. So he agreed to that. Yeah. But wasn't there a trend of our parents to get you out in the workforce immediately to make money? Well, some of that, but my parents never pressured me. They never pressured me in any way. In fact, they were quite proud of the fact that I was going to school because nobody in their families had ever gone beyond elementary school in Sweden. Of course, now we've got lots of cousins and others who are, they're engineers and everything else. But in those days, that was going pretty far. And so I know when I got back to Sweden in 1965 to see my mother just before she died, I didn't even feel comfortable with them at first because I was a school man and they all acted almost like they were afraid of me. They had me pegged on a certain level until I started sitting around on the floor with the kids and playing with them. Then they found out I was a, okay. They had respect for you. Yeah. Just like the minister. Yeah. So anyway, that was some of what happened. So you became a teacher down there at the junior high school. No, I started in the grade school. I taught fifth grade and I did many things in my experience as an educator. I came here as a fifth grade teacher and one of the understandings was that I would start a Boy Scout troop, and I did. And another was that I would supervise the playground. This I did. And that I was an assistant to the coach in the junior high. We had junior high right in our school then. And so I did that for a number of years. Then in 1933, I started the school band. I was always interested in music. I had a lot of musical experience in DeKalb, in grade school, high school, church, city band, all that sort of thing. So this was second nature to me. So I started the band. I didn't have a degree in music in those days, but I started it. And I went back in 1949 and finished up for my degree ten years after—no, twenty years after I came to Sterling. And so I then—about that time, World War II broke and the men were going off and they lost the coach and the manual training teacher. And these were interests of mine, and I had quite some preparation in that field. So they said, we can get a woman to teach the music. Will you do our coaching and manual training work? So I did. And I did that for a few years. Then they came along and said, we want you to be principal of the grade school. So I served there for quite a few years as principal. Then they moved me into the new junior high school, and I was principal of the junior high school for six years. Then I was getting close to retirement, and I decided, I want to go back to the classroom. I really loved that, and I missed it. So I said, get me a fifth grade job. And they did. And I had three wonderful years teaching fifth grade. And it was just like the old days when I first came to Sterling. And then our superintendent retired in 1969, and the new superintendent was a very good friend of mine. He came right over to me and he said, I want you back in the office. So he made me principal of that building right away and did some shuffling around. So my last three years I was principal again. But I had an interesting, satisfying career. But I was getting kind of burned out after 43 years. I was ready to quit. Were the students changing? Oh, they were good. Of course, fifth grade students have always been the greatest. They're old enough to take care of themselves. They haven't gotten too big for their britches yet. I love them, and they love me, I guess. And we had some wonderful times. And whenever I go downtown, I meet these people that I had in school years ago, and we just get to talking. And before I finished teaching, I was teaching the grandchildren of the kids that I started with. You were well known then all over Sterling. Well, yeah, I've – this is what my – You put the mark on it. What's that? You put the mark on it. Yeah. How about – is there any Swedish elements there in Sterling? Not much. There was a Swedish church here back about 110 years ago they started, a Swedish Lutheran church here. And some of the families still have some people living here. But that church kind of died out. They had troubles with numbers and getting a preacher and all. The seminarians used to come from Rock Island and preach for them on Sundays. Then there were other Lutheran churches here, and so these people just kind of – through marriage and one thing or another, they drifted off into the English and the German and you name it. How about during the Depression? Did they move away then from this area? No, this was a pretty good place. This was better than most places. Are you talking about the Swedes? Yeah, I mean the Swedes. Well, they had – a lot of them moved away already. A lot of the old generation were gone, some of them, and the kids, they had married others than the Swedes, you know. And there was no farming land available here at that time in the 1950s, 1920s. All the farmland was gone at that time. Oh, yeah, because some of them farmed. We have some good farmer friends around here. But it wasn't like the early days when you could go out and buy land at a dollar and a quarter an acre, you know. That time was gone. Yeah, that was gone. And how about organizations? Has there been any Swedish organizations? No, I think the church was the only one. I don't think they ever had any Vikings or any of those groups here. In DeKalb we did. Mother and Dad belonged to the Viking – Balder Lodge in DeKalb. And we used to go to Geneva in the summer for their big Viking picnics always. But – not here. But if there are any Scandinavians around, I know them pretty well and they know me. And of course they call me the big Swede around here because I've always hung on to it. When our daughter was in nurses training up in Rockford, Swedish American Hospital, we used to go up often. And I used to love to go over on 7th Street and just stand there in front of a store building and listen to the people as they walked by just to hear them speak Swedish. It was a lot of fun. It was a very Swedish town. Did you have much connection with Rockford or from here? No, that's 60 miles, you know. That's a little far. I'll bet your coffee is cold. It's fine. So, but then when you retired, you got into something else. Governor Ogilvie appointed you to the Detroit State Historical Society. Yeah, you see – How did you get into that? I was always interested in history and I did a lot of research on the local history here. I had been interested in history in DeKalb. You see, DeKalb was where barbed wire got its start. And I knew – in fact, I was acquainted with a lot of those people in DeKalb. And the factory where my dad worked grew out of the original barbed wire business there. But I was always interested in history. And so in 1959, I helped to organize the local historical society. And I moved on and on and got connected with the state society. And in 1969, I was elected president of the Illinois State Historical Society. How did you get into that? Were you politically active? No. Well, I was active in the historical society. And they soon found out that I was busy with that sort of thing. And I went to the meetings. And first thing I knew, I was on the board of directors. And then I was moved into these other offices. And see, that was lucky. It was just the right time for me. So in 1969, I had just been moved into the presidency. And they were getting this Bishop Hill exhibit ready. And I had met Olof Isaksson and Søren Hallgren, his photographer. And we had spent some time together at a meeting up in Rockford. And so Olof wrote to Illinois here to John Norton. You know John Norton? He said, get Gunnar to come over for this. I went to the school people, and they said, sure, you can go. And I had been in the historic sites committee for about five years. That was a five-year term, wasn't it? You were on there for five years? Yeah, in the historic sites committee. And then you had to travel around, whatever they called you. Well, I got around and dedicated some places and made a lot of speeches. In fact, just before you came, I was finishing up typing a speech that I did about ten years ago for one of the churches for an anniversary. They wanted me to help them again. And so I was recalling some of the things that had happened way back. But when you got elected, then you came right into the Bishop Hill exhibit. Yeah, well, we had been to Bishop Hill. I was interested in that. And I had gotten to know John Norton. And John Norton went on that trip to Sweden, too, with us. And they would call me over there once in a while. It became quite close to Edla Warner, the descendant of Eric Jensen. And she went on the trip with us. And so when they had some of their summer festivals, I would come. And one time they had a busload of Norwegians coming on a visit. They were, I think, clerical people from Oslo and other places. And they said, Come on over. You can handle the Norwegians. And we need somebody who can talk to them. So I did. And we got along. They said, Oh, you do real well. So I had paid attention. I was interested. I cared to be able to do it. So we had a good time. We were over there another time when, oh, he used to be the head of the Vasa organization. Burt Winstrom? Yeah, Burt Winstrom, his nephew was married to a cousin of mine. So we had gotten acquainted. And we were there the weekend that they came and made arrangements to build their headquarters at Bishop Hill. We were having a visit at that time. We were helping to entertain the governor and his wife from Småland. So there are some things that have happened. And one time I even got involved in a publication in Sweden. Somebody that knew my family was doing a history of the early farmers and workers in Sweden. And she had gotten a little line on our family and wrote to me. And I wrote to her. And so we correspond. Yeah, she's a historian in her parish, one thing or another. You're much in common then. So it was—I've had a lot of fun. I've really enjoyed it. I'm just sorry that my kids and my wife don't know Swedish. And right now I'm thinking, what am I going to do? I'm 77 years old. I'm not going to stay around forever. What's going to happen to my Swedish materials? And so I have thought about the institute in Rock Island, the immigrant institute. The Svensson Center. The Svensson Center, yeah. I think I'll probably ask them if they want to—because I'm acquainted with Westerberg. And of course I knew his father when he was working with the Swedish Pioneer Society. And I served as secretary of the Swedish Pioneer Society for a while, too. And it was during that time, too, in the 60s and the 70s? Yeah, along in there. And was on the board of directors for several years. I enjoyed that very much. We haven't been getting there so much in later years. And are you still working with it or staying in touch with it, like Bishop Hill? We haven't been—whoops. Not much in just recent years. In fact, I've been thinking I'd like to get over this summer and fall. We haven't been to Julebrook's Doggin' for quite a while. And I have friends over there, like— Ron Nelson? Yeah, and of course Edla and Gunnar. Oh, he used to be the mayor. Gunnar Borg. Gunnar Borg, yeah. But he's dead. Is he dead now? No, he died. And Edla Warner, she is in the home. She is in pretty bad shape. Oh, she is. Yeah, they're getting old, you know. Well, of course, because they're older than I am, some of them. But we met the Swedish consul a few times when we were there. We were on the program with him when they would have their gatherings in the summer. We enjoyed that very much. Your parents, did they have a chance to go back to Sweden at any time? Back once, in 1937. Both of them? Both of them. My mother's father and mother were still living. They had celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary the year before, and the folks couldn't get away. But they finally decided they were going, so they got there while they were still living and had a wonderful summer there. But that was the only time my father got back. His parents were both gone, but his sister and brother, no, his sisters, he had two sisters. They were still living. His brother was gone. But he got to visit the old home and just had a wonderful time that summer doing some repair work around the old place, you know, and recalling the old days and met up with some old friends. And mother, then she went back after dad died, and as I told you, I think, earlier, she remarried and lived over there for 11 years. Did you visit her then during that time? Just when she was dying. Oh, I see. When she was dying. So you went over there for a trip? Yeah, and that was in 1965. I had a wonderful superintendent of schools here. My wife was his secretary at that time, and my superintendent found out that I was terribly upset because mother wanted us to come. And so I finally got two of my sisters, one from DeKalb and one from, she was living in Pennsylvania at that time. I said, you two go. They walked into the hospital room. The first thing my mother said, where's Gunner? Well, of course, that made me feel bad. My mother and I were very close. And so I was just terribly upset about that. And while they were there, she kept bringing this up, I guess. So you were there the next year then? They were there at Thanksgiving time, and then my superintendent, when he found out how it was, he said to my wife, he's going to see his mother. So he came right down to my office. We were in the same building, and he said, you get ready to go to Sweden. I'll take over for you. So that was in December of 1965. And so I got to celebrate Christmas in Sweden, and I had a wonderful time. I went to Ullot, I went to Anandagul at the old fort in Vorberg. My mother was in the hospital when I was there. So I became so familiar over there, I even helped the Salvation Army people decorate for Christmas in the hospital. I had a good time. And at that time, 1965, both your mother's and father's birthplace was still intact? Oh, yes, yes. You can see the houses. Yeah, that still looks like that, my mother's home and my birthplace. And that was your first time that you saw them? Yeah. But of course, I knew what they were like. And in fact, some of my aunts and uncles said, how do you know that so-and-so lived in this place? Well, I said, Mother used to describe these things to me, and I just knew it was that. And so I was able to identify places just from what she did. And I asked questions, and she answered. Now, my father was not that outgoing. I had to dig things out of him. For instance, when they got back from Sweden in 1937, they came on the flying trip back when their first grandchild, our son, was born. Boy, they didn't waste any time getting back to America then. So we're sitting up in DeKalb talking, my father and I, and he said, when my father was here, I said, your father's here? What are you talking about? Yeah, he was here. I said, you never told me that. He said, I didn't know you wanted to know. Anyway, so I started firing the questions at him. He said, I can't answer all those questions. And he said, but I have an old cousin. She's quite a bit older than I am, who was all kind of a family historian. We'll write a letter to her. So he did, and she sent me this beautiful nine-page letter, which traced my father's family way back and told all about these people. And so I really got busy with the genealogy then. And going on further, talking to my father, I said, well, what was your father, my grandfather, doing over here? Well, times were bad in Sweden. This was right after the Civil War in the late 60s. So he came over to America. He was married and had some children, three of them. And he was married twice. My father came to the second marriage. But he came over here to earn enough money to buy a place in Sweden. And he worked on the building of the Union Pacific Railroad. He was a section hand and carpenter and that sort of thing. And he was present, I found out, in recent years when they drove the Golden Spike. Off to Utah? Yeah. Okay, well, you've got history. And I know I said, gee, if I had known that when I was teaching American history, I would have been proud to tell the kids my grandfather was over there when that happened. But your dad never told you that? He never told me that. And I had to just dig things out from him. Oh, he would answer my questions some, but he never took the initiative, whereas my mother did. I always felt closer to my mother's family than to my father's family. And, of course, that was my birthplace, too. And I used to, although I used to write to my father's mother, I corresponded with her when I was just a little kid because I attended Swedish school in the church every summer. I went through First Alasda Buken, Andra Alasda Buken, Tre Alasda Buken, and I knew the catechism in Swedish before I ever knew it in English. So between my mother and myself, I really got acquainted with things, and I knew the names of the people. We had a few friends who came to Chicago that mother and dad knew from the old days in Sweden. And I had a most unusual thing happen here this Christmas. This cousin of mine that sent me that picture I showed you of our family first taken in this country, she sent me this picture, and then she sent me a clipping from the Vorbeck paper about the death of Anders Svensson. Anders Svensson, I thought, who is that? Well, I soon figured out who it was. I remembered him when I was a little kid. He used to come out from Chicago, and he was always so good to me, and he had given me a little dog, a celluloid dog one time, which I prized so highly. But when I was in Sweden in 1965, I'm riding with an aunt and an uncle in the streets of Vorbeck, and here comes a man on a bicycle, and my aunt said to me, There's Anders Svensson. Well, I knew who she meant. So we stopped him, and we talked to him, and I was surprised that he was living then. He was around 80 then, riding his bicycle, big as anything, you know. So he took me home with him, and I met his wife and all. But the thing that happened this past Christmas, here came this obituary for him. He had just died. He was 99 years old. He didn't get married until 1946, but he was able to celebrate his 50th wedding anniversary in his late 90s. So that was one of the fun things that happened when I was there. And, of course, I spent my time when I wasn't with my mother in traveling around, visiting all the family. I visited one cousin one evening, and they knew that I was interested in history, so they took me to this old church. They had been redecorating the church. They had torn the plaster off. No, no. Filosos. And they had torn the plaster off of the church wall, the sanctuary wall, and here were medieval paintings on the wall. Oh, I was just ecstatic about it. And, of course, they were just so tickled that they could show this to me. Well, I got acquainted with the pastor that time, and in 1969, when Wilma and I went over for the Bishop Hill thing, we went to church again. And the whole family came with me, and so Pastor Engstrom, he said to me, I see you brought the whole family with you again. So we got quite well acquainted. And I visited my mother's and dad's old schools and churches, and we had a real good time. This painting of that mill, that was my grandfather's mill. My son did that watercolor, too. Are they still standing? No. Well, just the body of it. The blades were long gone. Then they electrified it, and then finally they just used it for storage purposes. But when I was there, I went back and had a look at it. But the buildings, are they still in the family? Your cousins are there? Oh, yes. My cousin Gunner Gunnerson lives in the old home where I was born. Yeah, and my father's family home has passed into the hands of some other people. They sold the place. His sister sold the place in her later years with the understanding that she could live there as long as she did while she's gone. So it's out of the family. But I have two cousins in Barbary. My cousin Signey, who I was telling you about here early, we correspond regularly. And then I have a cousin Nils. He's a sewing machine salesman over there. And we keep in touch, and I write to some of the others. And this keeps me up on my Swedish, too. You write in Swedish, too? Oh, yes. And to be able to read their letters, too, you know. I've been real happy about it that I didn't let go of it, and I've had a lot of joy with it. Your mother, she was still in the hospital then when you came home in 1965? Yes. Still in the hospital? She was in the hospital. It was a— Come back home or— And then she wound up at Östergården in Barbary and died there the next spring. It was the end for her. We knew that. When you came home, then, did you talk in Swedish only with her then? No, no. We talked English and Swedish both. But she'd been home 11 years then. She hadn't forgotten. Oh, no, no, no. I think she really enjoyed talking with me. See, my mother and I, we had a real close relationship. Not that she didn't with the girls, but I was the only boy. I was her first child. And we always got along so well, and she would just so tickle. I took her home to her apartment for Christmas Eve and invited two of her sisters over, and we had a Christmas party there. I had to carry her in from the car. She wasn't able to walk or anything. But she was just so happy, and we had the Christmas tree lit, and the advent candles lit and everything. We had a good time. One of her sisters lived in the next-door apartment, and so I spent a lot of time there and got to visit them all. It was just a round of parties while I was there to see them. In the same way, when I went back four years later, when my wife was along, it was just party, party, party. And one thing, the last night we were there, they had a big farewell party for us in the home of one of my cousins. So we had a good time together, a big gathering, because it was a pretty good-sized family. And so it was time to say good night. The next morning we were taking the train for Copenhagen. So there they stood. My wife could not speak Swedish, and they could not speak English, but they had learned to say goodbye and a few things, and there they all stood crying. When we got home, I told my kids, I said, Your mother was crying in English, and they were crying in Swedish. But they understood each other. Mutual understanding. When your mother was reminiscing back in time, was there something that she remembered from the camp that she wanted to talk about, especially that she missed being in Sweden? Oh, she asked about the family, of course, and she knew that our son and daughter-in-law were expecting a child. She wasn't with it all the time, but the last night I was with her, she was just as clear as a bell, and she wanted me to tell Carolyn that she was thinking about her and praying for her and hoped that she had a nice child and all of that. So she thought about that, and she asked about other family members. We talked a little bit about the church. She was very active in the church because the old Swedes in the church there, but it's no longer a Swedish Lutheran church, they still gather together and they still celebrate, and my middle sister, she does a lot of singing. She's kind of a semi-pro. She always gets invited to sing the old Swedish songs for them, and if some Swede dies, she always has to sing Trygare kan ingen vara at the funeral. So in the family, my sister Ruth and I have really hung on to things more than the others. So all your sisters then are still in the camp? No, no, no, just Ruth. My oldest sister lives in Nokomis, Florida, just outside of Sarasota, and my youngest sister lives in Hendersonville, North Carolina, but they spend about half of their time in Florida, and so the two sisters, they are together quite a bit down there during the winter season. Your children, they both went to college? Yes, our daughter is a registered nurse. She did her training in Rockford at Swedish American Hospital. One of the experiences we had there when she was in training was when Prince Bertil came over to dedicate the new addition to the Swedish American Hospital, and we got to meet him, and with him at that time was Gunnar Jaring. So when he had a reception line, I got the line, I had prepared my wife for this, I said, I'd like to have a picture to send back to Sweden of the two of us. He said, sure, sure. So he said, now wait a little people, we're going to take a picture. And so then he called, Gunnar, come hit! That was Gunnar Jaring. So there I am between Prince Bertil and Gunnar Jaring, and we had our picture, and we sent that back to Sweden then afterwards. So you were a heretic in Arland? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So then you were not representing Illinois at that time, that was just a private visit you made, in what, 1963? What do you mean, when I met Prince Bertil? Yes. No, that was in Rockford. Yeah, yeah, in Rockford. You were only there then as a private? Oh yes, yes. Our daughter was in training there, and we went up to see her, and we knew this celebration was taking place, and so we wanted to be there. And then Wilma and I met the young king when he was here in 76 at Bishop Hill. Bertil Winstum got us into the headquarters for the Vasa. Yeah, and so we got some pictures and got to meet him at that time. And of course when we were in Sweden in 69 meeting the king, he was just so grand with us, and they really took good care of us. They took us to the embassy, they took us to Uppsala, and we got all around. And we wanted to see runestones, and this one man worked at the museum. He said, I'll take you, and so he did. And we visited Sten Karlsson at the university then. We did the cathedral and the whole business. We had a wonderful, wonderful trip. So you had a very effective life then? Yeah, I'm very happy about it. But your children, or your son, have they been interested in the Swedish background? Well, yes. They're, I don't know whether I should say proud. They are happy about the fact that they have this Scandinavian background. I told you about our daughter, and she's a nurse, and she still does part-time nursing. And she's the organist in her church up in Evansville, Wisconsin, where they live. Her husband is a steel erecting contractor. He's put up a lot of buildings all through northern Illinois and southern Wisconsin. But Carol still does some nursing, but she always liked her music, and she's the organist at the church. Our son is an architect. He got his training at the University of Illinois. He went down to Louisiana for a year, and then he wound up in Nebraska and finally became the associate dean of the College of Architecture. Then the chancellor came to him one day and he said, John, I want you in my office. So he said, I'm going to steal you from the architecture department for half a day. So he taught half a day architecture and worked with the chancellor half a day. Then finally he said, no, this can't go on. He said, I want you over here full time. So he became an assistant to the chancellor in the university. He's had two or three different positions. Right now he's in charge of all the buildings for the whole system, Lincoln, Omaha, and the Agricultural College at Lincoln too. So he's what they call the space czar. Right now he's working on a new training facility for the football team. They're going to build an indoor football practice field. He's in charge of this and he's meeting with the legislature and the other officers connected with the university. That's going to happen now pretty soon. It's the big red. Yeah, big red. He has season tickets, of course, and we get invited out there every fall for a football game. I've seen a lot of good ball games. They must be easy to work for a team like that because everybody's looking for them. Oh, yeah. They're like a god. Well, they've had two outstanding coaches. Of course, they draw heavily from Nebraska. Every state can't say that about its own people. That's part of the trouble Illinois has. They don't always get their own best. They go to other universities, but Nebraska is pretty loyal. They stay with their own. Yeah. So he's been there several years now? Yeah, he's been there over 20 years. In fact, he just got a 25-year watch from the university just here about a month ago. In fact, he's coming out here this weekend on a flying trip. His wife's family had a death in the family, and so they're making a flying trip out here. But they like it there, and Lincoln, Nebraska is a nice town. Oh, it's a nice town. There was one thing I forgot to ask you. When you married your wife, she was of German descent. She was not Swedish. What did your mother say then? Oh, they loved her. At that time, it was— It didn't make any difference. That didn't make any difference. No? No. And my sisters— No word for it. My sisters, my three sisters and my wife, they are like four sisters. How about your sisters? Did they marry non-Swedes also? My oldest sister married a Dane, and my middle sister that still lives in DeKalb, she married a Swede. His grandparents were pioneer settlers in DeKalb County, and my youngest sister married a German. His father was a preacher. So we've got—one time we were down in Florida, all four of us, three Rasiskun, and we had a big dinner. And so I had—I do wood carving. So I made some special little Scandinavian candle holders, and I made them in the colors of Sweden and Denmark and Norway and Germany. And we went into this restaurant, and I got the head waiter there to help us. So we set these out at the places and lit them, and we celebrated all our birthdays. We had a wonderful time. So we have always gotten along with that. We kid each other a little bit. And like if the Norwegians want to kid me once in a while up in Wisconsin, I say, Listen, you know what I heard the other day, that the Norwegians bought 100 septic tanks, and when they learn how to run them, they're going to invade Sweden. Well, they enjoy that. So we have jokes with each other. You were mentioning earlier about patriotism when you were in gun school. How did that go? Can you tell me that? Well, of course in those days, I can remember how we felt about the Germans. And they used to paint their stores yellow and call them all kinds of names. And the Swedes were kind of suspicious because they were neutral and they were friendly. I guess there were actually some royal connections with the German families. So they weren't just too sure, but the neighborhood that I lived in had lots of Swedes. And so we didn't have a problem for that, except this one little fellow I told you about. He had four brothers in the service. His family had a little flag with four stars hanging in the window. And then one day we were playing war, and he said, Who would you stick up for, Sweden or America? And I said, Sweden. And he went home, got his sledgehammer, came back and smashed my wagon. Well, that was really about the only thing. In school, I was very patriotic in the war effort. I was in the lower grades, and we used to knit little hand washcloths and towels. And we sold war stamps. And we did other kinds of things for the war effort. We were very loyal that way. But I was still Swede through and through, you know, and there was no question about that if it got to be that. Well, of course, I found out that that was the wrong view to have. You had to pay for it. Well, a little neighborhood pal, he just died now about a year ago. He moved here to Sterling, too. And we used to play together every day. This was before we went to school. And he would talk to me in English, and I would answer him in Swedish. And it made him so mad because he was so proud of me.