 So you are actually in charge then of this operation of dealing with that guy down there in Vienna. How did you learn about the inside part of his mind, I mean, to trick you into being a part owner and borrowing money to you? Well, I don't know. Yes, I knew the accountants pretty well. In fact, they were a little finicky themselves, I think, the way it sounded. And so that I – anyhow, the banks put in a trustee to take over until the company could give back sound footing instead. And there were things going on there. There was kind of another company operating within that company that was owned by the boss's son. And there was a little – it wasn't exactly the way – in a businesslike manner it operated. And so – well, anyhow, this was in 1928. I had been here 16 years, and I was 16 when I left, and I wanted to go home. And I was in a position by that time to go home and had a very nice, beautiful pack of those – a nice car that I – with me to drive. Brand new? Yeah, brand new. And so I went home and spent the summer there. I went back again, and I realized then that the company was getting back on its feet under this – watch – under the eye of their trustee. And I knew that the minute they were back on its feet, then the boss would be back, and I would have my head chopped off. So I went in shortly after I got back from Sweden and told the trustee that I was leaving as of the end of the year. And he said, I'm sure that the boss, Mr. Ogleby, is glad to use this. Don't they use – yeah, all right. And so then I began to plan for a company of our own, and I spent a lot of time. I set up an office in my home to gather information, but I was very careful not to do anything illegal because the slightest thing, they would have picked up. I used codes for information, things like that, that I could – but as to take anything out, I was careful not to do it. But I did – I prepared everything and set up to get that organization set up and begin to – the company was demoralized. The management, the second management, demoralized. It was easier to – I picked out some of the best people that there was there and told them – asked them if they would like to join me in a little – and my brother was with in spirit, but he had a very good job, and he had obligated himself pretty heavy personally, in a home, big home and cars and a lot of everything, so that he was hoping they could stay on. This was in 1929? 19 – yeah, yeah. It was before the – Yeah, we just barely got started. So in 1929, we were – by that time we were organized, we called ourselves the Altine Manufacturing Company. And so we – New Year's Day, we didn't wait for – we took the holiday off. We started at 7 o'clock New Year's Day morning. We didn't lose an hour even from the time, legal time. We had hired – we had rented a half a floor in a 13-story building, 14-story building. We had a 12th floor. And we had to take an elevator up to the top of a 11-story building, then walk another step up and into a fire door into this place. It was very simple, but the best we could do. And there we began hanging shafts in the ceiling, because at that time, you know, motor driven machines were a little expensive for us, we couldn't afford them, so we drove with belts, you know. I started that then. What kind of production were you looking forward to now? To make special hardware. Special hardware? Yeah. Because the standard hardware, there would have been suicide. And we – I went to – I called up this friend in Indiana, and I told him, I said, I don't expect you to do anything illegal, because it would hurt you. You're working at commission. But I said, if there's something that you – that you have to turn down because it doesn't fit in, I said, let me know. So he called me one day, and he said that there is a company here making chairs, and folding chairs and chairs, and they want to make a chair that they could be rented out or sold to be used at basketball games. That's a big sport in Indiana. So that they made a folding chair that's just a seat and a back, and then some cleats that you slip under a plank. They thought there'd be a big market for that, and it didn't sound like a bad idea. But – So you had to design it and to order for you? Yeah, well, yeah, well, yes. And so I got the order for that. Well, when I was down there seeing that company, then I stopped in to see him in his office. And I told him, I said, you ought to be with us. I said, we're going to start a new company, and you should be a partner. Then we have a company of our own. You'll be a part owner. And oh, he said, that'd be a suicide. He said, it takes so much money to get started. He said, and we'd be broke before we even get the first order. He said, I can't do that. I said, I got a good job. Well, I kept on talking. I said, there's a little company we could merge with. I said, they gave me something to sell. If we do something like that, I may give some thought to it. Well, that company, that was so far from, because I was owned by a company that, somebody that we were to work for, and the one that we had. But I, just to keep him on the string, I gave a little encouragement that way. But anyhow, we got started, and we came out with something new in the hardware that hadn't been used before. Well, in the meantime, on one of those trips, I got a telegram as I was eating breakfast one morning at a hotel from my brother. He said, there had been a yearly meeting. He said, the boss is back in, our old boss is back in power. And he said, and I'm out. I was kicked out, together with several others. And so, then of course, then we really had serious problems, because then we really had to run the job, on the spot. He had to make a living somehow. But anyhow, we started out, then this fellow promised to join us. And so we began to design something original. At that time, they'd been having the same, everybody had the same hardware on the thing, and they used to have flowers and stuff on their doors, and they got to be old-fashioned. And so, coming out with something, we went to a customer and said, we're going to give you a distinguished set of meshed hardware. Everything will match. Your hardware will match your pull for the doors, and it will also match the lock, the catch that's going to open the door. Everything will be the same, beautiful. It'll be your own private part. And that went over big. We got that business. We went to somebody else and we said, we'll give you a set. And we gave them a set of hardware. Now, the basic hardware was the same, but the trimming was a little different, so that it looked different. And they liked to think that they had an exclusive on their hardware. We went for it, and we began to grow quite a bit. We did very, very well. Was this now in 1931, 32? This was in 1929. Yeah, we got some of the business. So in July 19, I think we had—no, we didn't have—the first order we had was in Wisconsin. And there was an order for hinges for $2.48, and the sale for that month was $2.48. And for each new item we got, we had to do some tooling. So for each new customer we got, our problem multiplied by 10, I say. How come? Well, because we had to tool up. We had to get steel for it. We had to get new sizes of steel. We had to put a little in stock because we couldn't just set up for each order. We had to run a little surplus, and there was some tooling expense. So perhaps if the order was for $100, the cost to us was $1,000. You needed a lot of orders then coming in. Yeah, yeah. Each order came in, presented a new problem. We liked to see it come, but it meant a new headache. But when you sold out to the supplier, he got his own hardware, so to speak. He got to be a big supplier then—I mean a big order, so it paid. Oh yeah, oh yeah. We got that order from—we got that company. We kept on getting repeat order from them, you see. But then in September—in July we had $10,000. With August we had $12,000. September the crash came. And from then on, for several years, there was nothing but paper cartons instead of shipping big wooden boxes with hardware, not with your ship, parcel post, because everything was on you. Nobody—there was nobody who was not in it. They can't realize the tremendous— The business was dead then? Oh, completely dead. We had seven banks in Rockford, and five went broke. And I don't think there was only out of the perhaps 75 or 60 or 70 factories—I would say 75 at least—I don't think there was only a handful of few that didn't go broke or had to be reorganized. We had been promised a loan for $50,000 by a bank, but in the last minute they reneged on it, and that was a blessing to us in disguise, because if we had gotten that loan, we would have owned all that. And when that had been due, they would have foreclosed on us. So we would have lost our business. So that was a blessing. As it was, nobody could—we didn't go broke because they had nothing to—we had no outstanding loans of any—we owned one bank, but not very much. What happened to National Lockdown during that time? Well, they gradually went under, too. They did? Yeah. They had to sell out to somebody else. Was that time when Levine Faust went under, too? Well, yes. Well, I suppose in a way he did, yes. So that was a hard blow for the city. So did you employ many people then during the first year? No. Did you employ many people? Well, we had quite a few, of course. We managed to get a loan. We had to go outside and get some outside stockholders. How many did you employ then? Fifty? How many people did you employ? Well, yeah, I would say so. And there was no union? That was the time that the Sturmbanks got in on it. His dad was a friend of ours, a friend of my brother. And he wanted to buy my stock. And he said, no, we're not going to have any outside stockholders. Well, he said, I can loan you some money. And if you can't pay back, get some stock. He was a pretty smart, the old man. So we had to loan somebody. So I told him later on we could use $10,000 for us. We loaned it. Well, that day, the answer, finally, I told him, I said, we'll give you stock for it. That's the way they got started. So he was really what you call a good friend then? He was a good friend in the... Yeah, yeah. We got to be a lot better friend to him than we was to us. You were growing leaves in... Vern came to us. He was a... He was... He didn't fit in. How many months did it take them before you started going full blast again? Well, it wasn't until, shall we say, 1934 that things began to pick up. But it took them many years. Yeah. But you could still keep it open and... Yeah, we still were able to hang together. And so, but of course, we... There wasn't until then that we could really draw our salary ourselves. So you had to work very hard then. When you went home in 1928, you took the new Pecker with you to your father. What did he think about you then? Was he surprised or did he expect to find a gentleman coming home there after a few years? Well, a lot of people stopped around whenever we stopped that car because they hadn't seen anything like that before. Were you married then at that time? Yes, I was married. So you had your wife with you then? Mm-hmm. That was my first wife. We were remarried afterwards. We both lost our first partner. So what did your dad discuss with, you know... Well, of course, he was very... Did you become an inventor yourself then? Yeah, yeah. Well, of course, he was very... Well, I was never the inventor. My brother was the inventor and I was the financial man. But you were also a toolmaker, though. I mean, you learned it, right? Yes, I know. But by that time, we were big enough so that I spent all my time in management. Do you think it was a tremendous help, though, for you to learn the trade from the bottom? Yes, it was very good, yes. Very, very good. Sometimes the office people don't understand... Yes, yes, that's true. I know what we're talking about. There was no foreman or anything to bluff their way through and tell you something about the trade. No, no, no. So you didn't have any... Figuring in your head to stay in Sweden in 1928. You didn't intend to stay in Sweden in 1928? Oh, no, no, no. Not at all? No, not at all. Never in thought, no, no. And your parents also visited Rockford in 1919? Yes, they did. And you both were working for National Lock. Yes. They spent a few months with you. Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. And you were working for National Lock? Yes. Yes, there was after I came back from the Army. So what did they think about Rockford? Oh, they loved it. They loved it very, very much. They were here... They spent I think some three months in Kansas with their folks there. But they got a little job at National Lock Company as a carpenter, doing some work there. So they worked there. It helped them a little bit to finance the trip. So what did he think about the American factories compared to the Swedish ones? Well, of course, that was, he, to finance that trip, he got some money when he sold his little business, you know, to this. So he was more or less retired when he came? No, no, he worked there right along, but he took a leave of absence. So now, then in 1934 and 35, then he started to pick up with the housing industry again, and he could sell more and more. And then you called yourself M-Rock, what was the? No, no, from then on, when this man from Indiana, he became very, he was a very, very aggressive man, a very big contributor to our company. He said that, and which we knew, we knew all the industry, I mean, I think outside of nowhere, you might say, so, but you had to be called something. So he wanted to have a name, he wanted to have a name that indicated what we were doing. So our name became American Cabinet Hardware Corporation, to show what we were making, cabinet hardware. And of course, there was no company that specialized in that before. And so we got that name. And then, at that time, we were only selling to manufacturers of cabinets. But then we found out, we realized that half, perhaps even more, were made in the local shops, you know, and that couldn't even buy in wholesale. They had to go to the hardware store to buy for whatever. So we decided to go retail also. And to do that, we had to have a short name. So we took the name Rockford and American, to the two names, M. Rock. Who came about that name? Did you develop it? Well, there was, well, I think it was one of our fellows in the sales that suggested it because there was another company, the name was of And Rock. So there wasn't much of a change there. But yeah, it served us well. But then, Rock, they caught on and you were on the big scale business. Yeah. And then you went out to every corner. Yeah, yeah. In 1951, we started a branch in Canada. And how many did you employ then? Well, we usually, at that time, we employed about 1,500, 1,600. And they didn't have a union? No. How were you able to keep them happy? Well, I think we had kind of a homespun feeling. We had to set up a profit-sharing plan that they got to share some of the profits. And I guess they felt that there was no, they couldn't do any better by having a union. So they had hospitalization and pensions? Yeah. Yeah. And there was no... Yeah, so the people that are retiring now are doing very well. But the big competitor in the labor force there was the Sunstone. Because they had a big... They were no competitor because they were so different. Different than us. They required more skill. They have more white collar help than they have out in the shop. The Sunstones? Yeah. So there was no competition then to the labor force? No, no, no. Not a bit. We used a lot of women. Oh, I see. Light work, assembly work, and things like that. Packing and... So when you came into the business, then it was just shooting off tremendously? Well, it kept on growing. And your brother now, he stayed on? Yes, he was... He spent his time on the engineering board, practically. Designing. Well, to begin with, he designed hardware. Then we hired somebody else, did most of that. He spent almost all his time on machine designing for productive machines for us. Was these... We had to go to automatic assembly machines, to have a machine do what people did with their fingers. And you had mechanical fingers. We had to have that. That took a lot of time to design something like that. We had to have automatic plating machines. Everything was done automatically. And buffing machines automatically. In other words, to compete, we had to mechanize. Our production was so large that it justified our automatic equipment. And during the war, though, did you still produce the same kind of... Well, of course, during the war, that was a very difficult situation. We decided to stay in our business as long as we could... We couldn't get steel after a while. But one of the first things we ran short of was nickel. Because that was needed. So at that time, we had a plant in Canada, so we were able to get some nickel through Canada. So we were able to survive and do some nickel plating up there, in fact. And then ship it from there to here. But we eventually ran dry on that. We couldn't get anything at all. Then we were completely stuck. And we were fortunate through our accounting firm, who was also an accounting firm for a company in the city of Freeport. They were making a switch, a very accurate switch, that would blow up the plane in case of a crash. If you crashed the plane, so that there would be nothing left for the enemy, and some other switches. So we went to see them. They had so much business that they were afraid they were going to lose. They were afraid that the government was going to go someplace else for additional. And to control that business, they rather sublet. So they let us do some of that thing. And that became a very, very good business for us. And then we went in and we made other things for the... All the planes then had used cables to hold things together, you know, to tie them. They weren't built like they are now. There was a lot of cable work. Well, for each end of a cable, there has to be a... A travel bolt? Yeah. What do you call it? Well, to slip on the cable and fasten it, you know, to put a screw into it. And that was made on screw machines. And the screw machines were just as scarce as hen's teeth. So we developed... In fact, my brother and somebody else helped him, I guess, on it. They developed a way to do it partly under press. And so we got into that business. And that became extremely profitable, so profitable, and the governments have renegotiated us. But in any case, we survived the war. And then you went into peacetime after the war and took over the house building and everything like that. How did you get time now to get involved with the church? Well, of course, I was with the church all the years. Then things went pretty well, and I bought a farm. Let's see now, what was it we were talking about? It was after the war, then. Yeah. So you were involved with the church work. Oh, yes, yes. I asked the church. Our church was... At that time, I had first bought a farm and bought a second farm adjacent to it or across the road from that church. And that second farm I bought mainly not so much because the farm was profitable, but they had a section of wood with a creek running through it that made a beautiful building site, potential. And I wanted to build a home out there. And I was in a situation where I could have a little better home than we had at the time. So I bought that farm and kept that thing for several years and kept it running as a farm, regular dairy farm, until I realized that the city was going to go out that way. And I had a very fine young man operating the farm, and I told him that you're going to outlive me, which he didn't. But you're going to outlive me, I said, and chances are that this farm was going to have to quit farming here before you're ready to retire. So I said, let's sell the cattle and quit farming and rent out land to some other farmer. And then you find yourself, we can do that when you find yourself some good employment, which he did. And he lived there until finally the church needed to expand and our location wasn't good anymore and we couldn't expand where we were. So I had been offered by several churches and different types of business to sell a piece of the land, but I said I won't sell anything for the time being. And I always felt someday our church, our own church, was going to need some place to go. They were looking around all over and everything was so sky high that it's out of question. And to find a good location wasn't very good. So they come to me and wanted to buy it there, and I told them that they were to go. And they decided on it, and I said they could buy it and there would be no charge for it. So that's the way we came there. How about the Ruben Aldean Park on Alpine Road? Is that what was named in your honor? Yeah, well, yes. I was on the park board for quite a few years and then I ended up as president of the park board. And that belonged to a county or something, and that was for sale. They wanted to get rid of it, and the park board didn't have the money to do it, and they didn't want to issue a bond issue to do it. So I decided to buy it and give it to the park, to the city. So that's the public park? And then they changed that name to it, yeah. In your honor, yeah. So that was the only political job you had then on the park board? You didn't write us an offer? No, no, I never wanted to be involved in the politics. No mayor of Rockford? No, no, no. Nothing at all. But you remember the Swedish mayors though here in town, Hallström and Blom? Oh yes, very well. There were a lot of Swedes on the city council then at that time. Oh yes, uh-huh. So were they able to pull the city up over the years with their work? Well, I wouldn't say. Were they educated enough to? No, it didn't take much to be a mayor then. Blom was a good fellow, and Tightfisted was saving it. And Hallström, he was sort of a radical to start with. But when he got a little money, he became a little more liberal too, and more easy to deal with. He was a regular worker, not a... Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was invited up to him. We got to be good friends because we worked together. I think he was on the... I was on the... It was the Swedish-American Bank Board for many years, and he was on that board too. So we got to be very good friends. And Blom, he was a pharmacist. He had a drugstore at Blom. Yes, he did. And the aldermens for Swedes were Gustafsson and Anderson and Peter. A lot of Swedish aldermen. But what happened over the last few years? Do you see too many Swedish names on the city council and the politics? Well, of course, they... The second and third generation? There are some on there, but we're not... The Swedes aren't as Swedish as they used to be now, you know. It's the second generation, and they're pretty much mingled up with intermarriage. And that, you know, that river that separated west from east, that was much wider years ago. It was. Yeah, and in fact, there used to be some fights between the Swedes and Irishmen Saturday nights. But the Swedes didn't belong on the west side at all. And vice versa. And the others didn't want to live on the east side. But that has disappeared now completely. And the bridge was controlled by the Swedes? Nobody can come over from the west side, is that it? Well, I wouldn't say that, but... But there was... There was, for instance, the Swedes, when they got up in the... A little better off, they decided that they should have a country club, a golf club. So they started a golf club, you know. Started Harlem Hills, and when the Depression came, then they went bankrupt. Then they refinanced, and it became Forest Hills. Is it on the west side? No, that's on the east side. But on the west side, the wealthy people in the 20s, they lived on the west side, though. The wealthy people of Rockford, didn't they live on the northwest side of Rockford? That's the way it used to be. I think there's more wealth on the east side than on the west side, Baja, now. Because they said that the Swedish girls, they worked as maids up there. Yes, they did, yeah. Not anymore. Not anymore? No. So those people were Americans then, or Yankees, up there? Well, it used to be, yeah. But the Italians, they were living... The Italians were on the southwest side. So do you think there is a possibility now for people today, they talk about recessions and bad times, and you can probably be a good judge to decide which Depression was worse, the 30s or the 1980s. In other words, in 1930s, now when you started your corporation there, you really had to... Well, we never have had, in the history of America, anything like 1929 and 1930. And I don't think that ever could happen again. We may have a world of depression because... I'm talking about things I don't even understand, but I know this, that every country, you might say, is up to their ears in debt. And no country is positioned to be a bank for others. We'd be lucky if we can salvage some of these loans, bad loans that we are sending out as a nation. So I would say that I don't want to be pessimistic, and I hope that I'm wrong, but I could see that we could easily have a world depression. There'd be a depression, there'd be a world depression. Do you think people are spoiled now with too much success? Well, you know, everybody... Take South America, Mexico, as you know, they're practically on the verge of bankruptcy. I was down in Peru a few months ago, and they have such a tremendous national debt, mostly to the United States, hanging over their heads, that they can't do anything. But they just roll it over from one year to another. Well, yes, but that's got to come to an end someday. So a company, they can't roll over any debt. They are faced with the mortgage closures. Yeah, yeah. So that's a different situation. And you still have good contacts with Sweden? Yes, we go there. Of course, I've been retired now for over 10 years, and we do a lot of traveling. So I will say that to you. Whenever we get... My sister has a... My wife has a sister, two sisters in Jönköping, and one of them have a home where they can have guests and bathroom, just like we have here, which is a little unusual in Sweden, you know. And so we go there quite often. This year we didn't go because we expected them to come here in August. So this is you we are for. Yeah.