 I don't make any difference. Well, Kalmar Län. Had han en gård eller vad var han? Yes, he had two gårder. Två gårdar? Ja. Det växte ni. Hur många barn var ni i familjen? Vi var sju. Sju stycken? Hur många pojkar? Två pojkar och fem pöker. Och du är en utav de äldre eller yngre? I mitten. I mitten? Yes. So you went to school in... Here. Oh, eight of you. But did you start in Sweden in elementary school? Yes, a little. A little, yes. So you don't have a lot of memories from your home town, but it was... Well... Dad also went to America in 1914. Yes, he came... Oh, yes, that's right. 1914, yes. He went everywhere to get to know... Are all the children born in Småland? I have one sister who was born in America. One sister was born here. Yes. It was hard to get away with so many children, six children. And no work. But he had work when he came here in 19... No, there wasn't much work to have. No? But he had... I saved up enough so he bought some furniture and had an apartment for us. So that's how you came? Yes. 1916? Yes. Did you do a pension then, like you did in Sweden? Yes. So what do you pack in me now, when you go back to 1916? Well, I always told my mother, don't bring too many clothes. You can get clothes over there. And when we came, my mother used to say, oh, when I think about all the nice clothes we had, and left them there. How stupid it was. The children could have had them here. Yes, but then it was too late. Yes. All the clothes were... A lot of clothes went to six children. Yes. And the older ones now... The boys were older. Yes, my brother Marit was a policeman. Here in Lackfjord? Mm-hmm. Now you know, the Swedes, they've all heard of Hundegatan. Hundegatan. And I remember my brother was a policeman on Hundegatan. That was something. So how old was he when he came here? Well, he was two years old, or maybe nine, ten. So when you came here, do you remember the trip? Yes. Which boat did you take? Stockholm. Stockholm. You were from Gothenburg? Yes. What time of year was it? Was it spring? June, I think it was. Okay. Yes. So did dad send you any letters or did he come home and get them? Yes, he sent them home and mom took them. But it took two years before you could come over? There was no work to do here. So he didn't dare send you any letters at all? Well, you didn't have that much to get your family over. Yes. So you had to sit here. What did you do when you were alone? Did you live with your parents? Yes, we lived with mom. But you didn't have a farm? No. So how did you manage to support your mom? Did she work? She worked a little, yes. With people? I don't know, but she worked a little and she helped the children who were a little... Handicapped? Older. Because they could help me. I see. So they... You weren't that old so you had to go out and work. Yes. But those who were 10 or 11 years old, they had to go out and do the right thing, as they say. I always think, God in heaven, I'm glad dad came here. Would it have been different if you had stayed in Fingaholm? Yes. I've been there to visit, I think 10 times. I like to visit, but I'm glad to be back in America. What does it look like in Fingaholm? Is it in the woods? Yes, it's beautiful, Sweden is beautiful. You see, there are a lot of stones in Småland. My dad was buried in Sweden. He went there before the war, so he stayed there. So dad, he went to visit before the war? Yes. Just to say hello? Yes. How old was he? Had he quit his job? Many years ago, he never quit. He was not that old, my father was 69 years old when he died. And then he went home? He went home many times. Did he? He traveled back and forth. Mom went with him, and the kids who were small went with him. So he got a good job, dad? Yes, he knew how to save money and how to work. Before we go into that, you traveled back and forth. You were 8 years old, so you remember the trip. Yes. Dad sent you letters? Yes. So you stayed overnight in Gothenburg? Yes. I think we stayed one night. Was it a good trip? Yes. Did you all get together? Yes, we had fun. Did you run around and play on the boat? Yes, everything went well. Wasn't mom nervous? No, I don't know. We had time. You did what mom said? She was strict. Yes, she had to be, she had 6 kids. It was not easy to come to New York alone. Then you came to Ellis Island. Do you remember? Yes, I remember Ellis Island. You had no problems? No. You did a doctor's examination? Yes. A woman we met on the boat, her husband was here. They couldn't get to the boat. Why? She was sick, so she couldn't go. When we told her husband, he said they should come. But they didn't come. So you had to go back to Sweden? Yes. So he was in charge of that person? No, we just met them on the boat. But you had no problems, you just had to continue on the train. You weren't on Ellis Island any longer? No, I don't know how long we were there, but we were there and we saw stuff. We saw Statue of Liberty. There's a lot of... Did you know about Statue of Liberty when you came there? It was the first time we had seen it. You had never heard of it? No. So you didn't know what it meant? No. Your father wrote to you to come over. Did he say anything special that you should bring along? No. It was up to my mother. She had to take what she saw. But there were people who said not to bring clothes and unnecessary things. Yes. I'm afraid. Did you have a big American chest with you? I think we had a big chest and a big basket. A big basket? Yes. Did you have any bags with you? Yes, I think so. You didn't have any food with you? No. Nothing was packed down there. So you took the train from Ellis Island? Yes. And came here to Rockford. How did it go when you ordered food? We sold small bags of food. We had buttercups and bananas. It was the first time I had a banana. How did it taste? Was it good? Yes. You had to go? You had to go by yourself? Yes. So you had to buy the bags you had. And that was enough for how long? Did you buy food when you were on the way? No, I think I had to... My mother said she took coffee and didn't know what money was. She held out her hand and she knew that the man took a silver dollar. The Swedes don't know. Did she have American money growing? Yes, I suppose. But she didn't know what money was. So she held out her hand. And he got what he wanted? Yes, a dollar. The times were bad. It was during the war that you went to the North Sea in 1916. Weren't you afraid to go to the North Sea and the Atlantic? We didn't know enough to do that. No one had warned you? I remember when the war ended. Yes, 1917. So you came to Rackfjord and your father met you at the station. Did he have a flat in the apartment? Yes. Was it down in... Down in Afersundegata. Was it a whole house or was it an apartment? No, no. Upstairs? Yes, upstairs. Were you one of the Swedes you hired? Yes, the people around Afersundegata were Swedish. So when you came there, it was no problem to talk to people? No, my husband always said that the Swedes didn't have enough money. When we came to Rackfjord, we didn't have any more money. That's why we got so many Swedes here. So it's possible to be like that. Yes. So what did your father do? He worked in different factories. Furniture factories? No, iron. I see. Forging plants. Yes. So he worked in that. And he had a steady job? He moved around with me. If he could see that he did better in another place, he left and went. To another place? Yes. So you started school? Yes. All the children? Yes. How did that go? It went well. So you didn't have any problems in school? No. When we learned the language, my brother started first grade. He learned the language and he went straight to school. I see. So he didn't have to go to the small classes? No, when he could speak, he didn't have to. So you learned fast? Yes. When you got home, did you speak Swedish with your parents? Yes, both of us. It took longer for your mother to learn Swedish? Well, when she was out working with people, she didn't learn the language. It took a long time for her, because she was a little older. Yes, she spoke Swedish a lot. And your father too? Yes. But most of the stores were open, so you could order whatever you wanted in Swedish. And then your brother wanted to become a police officer. How did that go? It went well. He was in the police department for 34 years. So the last 20 years he was a detective. What was his name? Maurice Jansson. He went through high school first, and then straight to the police department. The Academy. The police chief was Balgrin. He was the highest chief. Yes. So, did all the children go through high school? Well, my cousin, Lamdy Villa, who was 16 years old, quit school. And took a job? Yes. The times were bad. People didn't look at the schools as they do now. Many people go to college, but they would never go to the schools you know. So, did you go through high school? Yes. All classes? Yes. And then to business college? I went to business college. At Rackford College? Yes. I used to have a hair salon. At the Hair Salon? Yes. At Fasthotel. At the hair salon? But Fasthotel didn't exist when you came? No. It was built up after? Yes. I think it was in 1932. It was finished? Yes. So, you got a job after the Second World War. Was it easy to get a job? Well, it was never easy for me, but many people can never find a job. So, did you start as a hairdresser? Yes. By yourself? Yes. Or did you work for someone? Yes. When I went to the employment office, they wanted to know if I wanted to take the job. I said yes, so I did. Did you have to take the money and buy the hair salon? Well, of course, not like they do now. It went well. And then you went to Fasthotel? Yes. So, what happened to Fasthotel? They were going to make it into an apartment for the elderly. Oh, I see. Yes. It was going to be good. But was it a big hotel in 1932? Was it not a competition? No. It was a nice hotel. It was? Yes, it was. If they are going to have apartments for the elderly, I think they will get good ones. They are beautiful apartments. And then they will make it bigger. But when it opened, did you think it was a competition? No, no. I remember when I was little, we used to go over and pick apples from the garden. We had to pick all the apples from the garden. So we used to go over there and get apples. So he was a nice barber? Yes. He lived in the middle of the Nicholson's Hardware? Yes. He was not married to Livin Fast? No, he had a delivery service. They took horses and... And did he have that? Yes, a delivery stable. Never where he lived? No, he was on 15th Avenue and 6th Street, across from the Zion Church. Oh, up there? And I knew P.E. Peterson. Oh, really? Yes, he lived in the high room. When we were little, he gave us 10 cents. 10 cents. That was a lot of money. We thought he was a really nice guy. What did you get for that? Did you do anything for him? No, we just played. He thought we had nothing and we had nothing. He passed you on the street? Yes, when we lived on 6th Street, he had a shoe factory right there. We used to see him there. Oh, a shoe factory? He was everywhere. A lot of factories he was a part of. So that was P.E. Peterson. He died in 1920? Yes. He disappeared? Yes, we all did. But his wife lived longer? Yes, she lived longer. She got all of P.E. Peterson's money. And when she died, her sister, Mrs. Wall, she was a really nice woman, she got a lot of money. But she went to church and she died. So she was Mrs. Peterson's sister? Yes. She died about 3 or 4 years ago. So, how did it go being a hairdresser at Faust Hotel? It was a good business? Yes, if you do a good job, you get a good salary. So you had a lot of employees or were you alone? No, I always had three other girls. So was it common for the housewives to go and get their hair done? No, not like they do now. It was far between... Well, maybe every other week. Common housewives who were at home? Yes. How much did it cost to get your hair done? Well, I know that when we used to do hair for 50 cents... Permanent? No, not permanent. We washed the hair and put it in a dryer. But of course, people used to wash their own hair. Yes. But those who were out traveling and had a nice hair, they went to a hairdresser? Yes. And there were a lot of machines at that time with hoses and stuff to put up your hair? Yes. Wasn't it difficult? Well, every person is different. So everything goes well for one, doesn't it go well for the other? Yes. It never happened that the hose in the hair was broken? No. But things have changed now. It's more modern. Yes. And think about how well paid they get. I've heard that there are places that cost 30 dollars to get their hair cut. I cut my own hair if I'm going to pay 30 dollars. 30 dollars, yes. Yes, 30 dollars. How did the men's people... They didn't go in and shave every day at a place like that? No. We had a barber shop. And at the same time, the people who lived at the hotel would come in and get their hair cut. David Carlin, you know him, right? Yes. He was a barber. And he shaved people. But he was at Seventh Street, wasn't he? Yes. So, it was a movement that gave birth. Yes. Like mom and dad now. Which church did they go to when they came? Well, we usually go to Tabernacle. And the Mission Church? Yes, there were two black ones. Yes, that was the new church. And the third one was down on Kishwaukee Street. Were there any mission churches in Sweden? No, there were no church in Sweden. But at that time, they did. I don't know. I can never remember that we went. You don't? A couple of years ago, I went to Sweden. I went down to my dad's grave. It was a buried outside church. And I think there were seven of us in the church on Sunday morning. That was all there was? Yes. People in Sweden don't go to church like we do. Which church was it? Was it in Fingalum? No, it was down in Småland. A nice church. Big. Only seven people? And the priest? Yes. It wasn't very collective, was it? No. So you were confirmed in the Tabernacle? Yes. All the children or siblings? Yes, all of them. So you became a nurse and your brother, Marit, became a policeman? Yes. For a year, they called me a center class. What kind of... Because I had done a lot of things for people and helped people. Did you have any... No. No. How did you... You apparently gave hundreds of haircuts to needy men and women. Well, not only that, but I organized the senior citizens in our city here. What year was that? Oh, that must have been... Let's see, David must have been five... About 35 years ago. How did you... You were not old enough to be an old timer yourself. No, but I organized them. What brought them on? Well, the need... Old people need places to go. And years ago, they didn't have Social Security and things like this. This was during the 30s then? Yes. Let's see, my son must have been about four years old. I used to take him with and he's 42 now. So, it must have been about 38. So, it was after the Depression? After the Depression. And people had no place to go and nothing to do. So, we... Rockford College started a project to find out where old people lived and what they liked to do and things like that. And when they got through, they asked Business Professional Women's Club to take it. And I belonged and I wasn't working, so I was one of them and two other gals and myself took this upon ourselves. We entertained for them once a month. We got different groups to come in and furnish the refreshments. We were... Because we were poor. And, oh, it went over with a bang. And the other Salvation Army on the East Side then started, but they run theirs more religious. We run ours like a party and they laughed and they liked it. And we started a kitchen band where they played on the kettles and that, you know. We did a lot of things for them. And Christmas time we always had a wonderful party and they would write down a couple things that they wanted and then we'd each take a slip and some of those girls bought everything on that slip that they needed, wanted. And those were all retired people then? That's right. And they had no Social Security? No Social Security. No insurance and nothing? That's right. And you brought them in then to, you said the Salvation Army here? Yeah. What about the churches? Were they interested? We would ask different groups of their church if they would like to serve someday. And so some of the churches, they would come and serve the lunch, you know. Where did you have this lunch then? At the West Side Salvation Army. West Side Salvation Army? Yeah, that's over on East States and Rockton. And I'd get my sisters involved. It was nothing for my sister to bake 20 pies for Thanksgiving, 20 pumpkin pies. And so we really showed them a real good time. And there was a big need for that kind of service then at that time? At that time. And I used to bring my little son with. And he used to draw, you know, and keep busy. And then he learned to play the piano, so I would have him play a little bit for the old people. And then they'd say another song and he'd say, that's enough. So. So, but during the Depression, did you see a lot of sufferings? There were younger people then. Well, of course, I was so young myself. So you didn't... But I mean, nobody had anything, but then you didn't feel bad because nobody else had anything. Everybody was in the same boat. That's right. So we weren't any worse off than the next guy. Did you have a barber salon at that time too? No, I was too young for that. Too young for that. Was that when you were married, you had that... Yes. Barber shop. And that was also for men? Well, I didn't run the barber shop. I had a chance to, but I run the beauty shop. The beauty shop only. Oh, but you gave a lot of haircuts, as I understand. Well, these kids, they couldn't afford haircuts. They couldn't afford this and that. So we'd done whatever we needed to do. And I used to send kids out to Camp Rotary. That's a camp we have for... And my brother would always say, all right, give me the names of all the kids you were going to have. Because he was on a police department and the police department would pay for so many kids to go to camp. So I would give them the names. But then, not only that, but if I sent the kids out there, they got to have the proper clothes. So I would ask different ones, you can donate this or you can donate that. So I've learned to ask for a lot of things. And people are very, very nice. But you had a committee, though. Were you in charge of it? I was in charge. And how old were you when you started this? Oh, I've always... I have always liked to give and help people. That's been my life. My husband and I bought a little house for a couple with the kids and everything. And I had a wonderful husband. Not many husbands would let you do that. Now, your husband, now, that was David Johnson. That's right. And he was born here in Rockford. Yep. Two years older than you were. You were married in 1928. Yes. 26th of May. Were you married then at the Tabernacle? No. We went to the minister's home, Bextrand's house, and got married. The covenant minister? Yes. Was he also of the covenant faith? I suppose. Oh, no. No, he was confirmed at Lutheran, at Trinity Lutheran. No, not Trinity. Manuel Lutheran. My husband was prominent, too. My husband has the Vassa Award that he got for the kids. Let me talk about him a little bit here. Yes. How did you meet him? Who? David Johnson, your husband. My husband? Oh, we went on a date together. And we had just bought this house, and when he took me home, he said, My gosh, this was our house. So... What do you mean, our house? The house that I lived in, they had sold it about six months before, his parents. Oh, I see. And he bought it back then? No, my father bought it. Your father bought it? So we lived there. That's where... Did you meet in school? No. My brother knew my husband. We called him Red. My brother knew him, but I didn't, because he was a little ahead of me in school. So it was strange, because you picked up a Lutheran instead of a Covenant. Well, I don't know. Didn't you belong to the young people in the Covenant church? No. You were not that much active? No. You went to church? Of course, we were small. Yeah, but when you started to date... Yeah, when we started to date... I don't know, we haven't really... We've been going lately. Not lately, because otherwise we'd go to Taber. Lutheran? Mm-hmm. I see. So, but now when you started to date young guys in high school... Yeah, but I didn't. My father was pretty strict. He was? Oh, very strict. Yeah, but the kids usually, when they were 18, 19, they went out dating, though. Well, probably so. He didn't allow them to do that. I mean, we'd go as a whole gang as far as that goes, but as far as just dating with a fella, we didn't. You couldn't do that. Well, we didn't. You couldn't sit in the rumble seat then with someone. No. Didn't have the rumble seat. It was a little bit later. So... After the Depression, I suppose. No, they had them in the early 30s. I guess. They were invaded, though, for double dating, weren't they? The rumble seats? I don't know. Two in the front and... I never knew anyone who had one. No. That was during the hard times. Nobody could afford to have a car, I suppose. Like the old saying is, Fattigdom och husta. Fattigdom och husta, det... Ja. Det följer tillsammans. So, you met this date, didn't you? You met this David, your future husband here. And you were engaged then and married. Minister Bergstrand, he married you at... Beckstrand. Beckstrand. And... Did he buy a house then or... No, no. Rent an apartment? No, we stayed with his folks for five years. Five years? Nobody had any work. What did he do? My husband worked at Clark's. J.L. Clark. But then when you married in 28, the times were not that bad at that time? Well, they weren't good. You know what I mean? If... If you had a job, if you were married, probably you got laid off because your husband had a job. I see. So, did you start to work too? I was... I had a job. I worked at National Lock when I got married. You continued with that then? I continued. And then the times got so tough and they'd have to lay off. So, they once had a husband who was working, got laid off and I was one of them. Well, there was an unwritten rule then. In other words, if you were married and... Well, and it's better that there's one paycheck coming in than nothing, you know. Oh. So, you had to stay home then? No, that's when I went to beauty school. Oh, this was when you started your own business, so to speak, then? Beauty school. I had to go to school first and learn. How long of a school was that? A year or so? Well, I think not quite a year. Now they go an awful long time, but at that time I think we went probably six months. And then you set up a shop at the Foss Hotel. Mm-hmm. But then it was a bad time too, though. Did you have any... Times were tough, sure. Well, times were lean. There were too many customers there. That's right. The rooms were standing empty. Yeah. Bad times. And Levine Faust now, did he... When did he die? Oh, it's years afterwards. So he survived the Depression, but... Oh, yes. Oh, yes. But he was taken pretty hard off, they said. Well, I don't know. I suppose he could have been a very wealthy man, but it isn't always that people want just wealth. If they're happy, that means a lot. That's the main thing. Yeah. So you saw a lot of suffering then during the Depression? Well, I mean, we saw poorness, but then we were the same way. So you can't, like one girl said, her mother always said how poor we are. She said, Mother, we're not any poorer than the rest of them. And that's right. No one was any poorer, and if you don't have nothing, you can't compare with anything else. And the well-to-do in the community, they were not too well off either. No, I didn't know any well-to-do ones. They all had to take licking from the bad times. How... Your father now, was he a Republican or a Democrat? Republican. Republican. How did he... How can we pick that? Republican? I don't know. You don't know how he was influenced by someone? No. He found the art himself, more or less. So when you started to grow up, then come up in the 20s, did you have any political... No. Not at all? No. And when did you become a citizen? Was your father? Through my father. He took out the papers, then. Papers, and we all become citizens. In the 1930s? Well, probably just around that time. So he was able then to vote for Hoover, maybe? I don't know. Or maybe he wasn't a citizen. We never heard... We never heard... Well, he made us citizens, so he must have been a citizen himself. We come in under that law that you come in before a certain time, and then, you know... Before you were 21? Yeah, all under 21. So my father took it so we could all get in without... So you don't remember going down to the courthouse? Yes, yes. Or you went with the... Oh, we had to go down. The whole family? Yeah, if you wanted to become a citizen. So you went down to Winnebago County. Winnebago County. And there was the judge. Was he a Swede, or... I don't know. You don't remember? No, I remember going down there, but I don't know. There were quite a few people, I suppose. Oh, look at the Swedes that used to pour in Rockford. Yeah, I know. So... Then during the Depression, you had a job as a beauty operator. Yeah. My husband worked at J.L. Clark. He was never laid off for a longer time? No, he was going to quit one time, but then they offered him more money, so he stayed. He was out there quite a long time. And then he left there and went into real estate. Was that after the Depression? Mm-hmm. Did he go to school then to learn that trade, or how did he...? Oh, well, he went to school, and he had business training, and... So he learned it by... Did he go to college to do it, or...? He had some business college. And he got interested in politics, and... How did he get interested in that? Oh, my husband had a wonderful personality. People always liked him, and I think his personality had a lot to do with it. He was always head of everything and that, and I think this is how he got into that. So he was a little bit too young, though, for the Hallström era, or Blom. Yeah. He came after. Yeah. So... But he also was a Republican. Yes. His parents, were they Republicans, you think? I think so. Oh. So he was a staunch Republican, or was he a more liberal...? I don't know. Well, you know how he... Oh, I don't know. We were always Republicans, and that's all I know. Oh. So how did he start it now? As an alderman or a city...? He was a committee man. First? Yes. And then from there, he went up to... State rep. Oh, but he served on city council then? No, my husband... He never did that? Uh-uh. But my son did. My son is... Now. He is in the politics now? Yes. In Rockford? Yes, he's an alderman in the 4th Ward. Oh, so he followed his father's footsteps. Yes, he likes it. Your husband was never an alderman? No. How was he able to get up to the state level, though, immediately? By being well-liked. I see people on... I run into people on the street or that, and they'll say, oh, that husband of yours is a swell guy. Everybody liked him. He had a nice personality, he was liberal, he helped people. Oh. So he was what you call a good Sweden? Well, I would say so. Did they call him the Swedish politician, or...? No, I don't think so. He never made reference to that, or he didn't have to... No....to polish his image in any way, because he was well-liked, you said? He was well-liked, well-known, and had always done the thing that's right and helped people. So that meant that you also had to represent him or help him? Well, we all had to... When you got somebody running for politics in your family, you all pitch in. You all had to have what? Yeah, you bet. So what was your job, now, then, to...? Oh, we just campaigned door to door and done everything we could. To bring out flyers and leaflets and...? That's right. My husband was what started this, I think. My husband was campaign manager for Schlacker. He was our mayor for 20 years, I think. He came after Blum or...? In the 40s? Yes. And my husband was campaign manager. The factories decided that they would want a fellow, preferably Swedish, to take over as campaign manager. And so my husband was asked to do it. He filled the bill, so to speak? Filled the bill. So they wanted a Swede? Yeah, because Swedes, you know, back a Swede. And so that's how he... We went on a landslide. How did you go about it, now? Did you belong to a lot of organizations during the politics? No, but you had a peer. When they'd have meetings, they'd want you to come and give your version of it. And this is how it got started. And two, three, probably two up to three doings in one day they'd have. But it went good, and Schlacker was a well-liked man and a good mayor. What kind of nationality was he of? He was more German. German. But he needed a Swede to bring the votes in. Yep. But your husband was not running for office at that time, though, was he? No, no. He was campaign manager. No, and then my husband served on the school board about nine years. And so he was very... my husband was very active and had lots of... But you didn't belong to Warsaw or Vikings and Swiss children? No, my husband belonged to Switzer and a few things, but not... But he was not active within that organization? No. Did he attend meetings often or...? Oh, now and then. But he was president of the East High Fan Association, and we've had a lot of things of our own that we've been interested in. East High? East High. Fan Association. I see. We had a wonderful fan, lots of members. And what was their objective to do... was it for the school? Well, we bought things for the school that they couldn't otherwise afford. When you've got a group behind you, you can do these things. So you didn't have to assess the residents, then? You took it out on a free offering? I think that we sent out these letters, you know, and we got quite a lot of money in, and we put in booths in the school so they had for voting, you know, just like you have at the place. And we did a lot of things, curtains for the stage and a lot of things that otherwise they wouldn't have had. You had to raise the tax if you wanted to have all that? Well, I suppose. And you took it out... So we did a lot, and everyone else helped, and everyone had a good time, and that's the main thing. So they ran the school budget on a low scale? Oh, my school budget, that was my husband's. We were on a steering committee. That means that you helped the kids and kind of guide them and like that. And my husband was twice he was president of the East High Fan Association. Yes, but on the school board now? No, he was not. He was not on the school board? No. So he had nothing to do with raising taxes or anything? No, no, no. Because there's always been a sore point in the community, you know, where you need more money, what the people say. Well, they always need more money. For especially athletic. So you did more on a free will base then, so to speak, for basketball. Oh, yes, nobody got any. And my husband used to take pictures of the basketball games, and he'd take the mistake that the kids made so they could run it afterwards and they could see what they had done wrong. Oh, I see, with the movie camera. Yes. And it was in the 40s or 50s? Oh, 40 and 50. He did it for quite a few years. So we've lived a full life. You've been active 100 percent? Yes. And not only professional life, you also have dedicated your life to give to the poor. Given, and we have done. To the needy people in the community. That's right. And my son is the same way on a council. He does favor the poor ones and handicapped ones. So how did you instill this thought in the church, you think, or just of seeing things, what happened in the community? Or how did you get this feeling that you've got to help somebody that's handicapped? Oh, I don't know. I've always been that. If I won a lottery, I certainly would help people. I hope I do someday. So there's still a need to help. Well, I think so. If people want to help themselves, you can't help people unless they help themselves. You know that. But years ago, now in the 30s, in other words, there was no work to be had anywhere. And there was no Social Security. Then there was no... No benefits. No benefits, and nobody gave food like they do today. How about the soup line? The Salvation Army was always known for the soup line. How about the other churches during the 30s? Did they have any soup lines? I don't know. I've never been there. No, I mean, you heard about it. Yes, yes. Well, they have about three or four soup kitchens in Rockford now. Today? Yes. But now the other churches are getting into the picture. Well, they have luncheons and things like that for the people. But they have it more for senior citizens, though. They can eat. Yes, anyone can go there and eat, but I still feel I don't like it. I think it should be definitely left for the people who can't, who don't have earning power or have a job. And the people drive up with their grape and Cadillacs and that. They go and eat at noon. I never have been. My husband, I think, would have beat up on me if I would have. But they're what they do today, and they get state aid for those around those things. That's right. People have gotten greedy, too, you know. So they go overboard. They'd like to have as much as possible. But years ago in the 30s, no, those people that went to the soup line, they were poor people, they just couldn't get anything to eat. That's right, they were poor. So they were really in need of it. And when you stop and think now, when a woman years ago, when her husband died and left with probably four or five kids, she had nothing to go on. And now today, they get so much for every child. Just think how good women have it of today in comparison to what they used to have. It was what you call real hard time. Well, wouldn't you say that? And how about the old people? Now you have, in the Rockport area, you have... Nursing homes, you have high-rises. Every church has three or four homes. But in the 30s, though, where did the old people go then if they were... Oh, they either, I think, lived with their children. They did. Well, where else would they go? We had, we used to call it the poor farm, but that was such a disgrace to go there. You know what I mean? We never knew anyone that went there, but it was called a poor house. Now it's a nursing home, and they have wonderful care and everything. So they called it the poor house. Wasn't that a bad expression of the people who had to go there? It wasn't. Because they were thrown out on the bad side of life. That's right. So nobody wanted to go there. No. Well, they had no choice. They had no choice. If you were so bad, where were you going to go? But there was also a disgrace for the children, though, to send their parents there. That's right. Some people still have that idea that they don't like sending their parents away, but what else are you going to do? And they get better care, I think, than when you give them at home because they have good, balanced meals. But the rest homes now, they call it rest homes now. They don't call them all nursing homes. They don't call them the poor farm. No, no, no, no. Of course, a lot of them pay. I know a woman who's been out there for 10, 12 years, and she pays every month. So the old people are well taken care of now in Rockford. Well, I would say you can apply to a lot of organizations. You can get food, but you've got to help yourself a little bit. You can't just sit and, you know. But most of those nursing homes, they are either owned by church, denomination of some sort, or private. I guess so. There are no, there are state-owned. Oh, yes, if there's government money put into it, then they must take in people and take them in cheap. And I've known of people, not just lately, but I have known of people that have paid $40 a month rent, heat and the whole business. That's all? Yeah, because they have so little money coming in, so they must let them live then at the level that they can afford to pay. Those are people now that haven't been able to work, put anything into Social Security. That's right. So they are on the dark side of life. That's right. But in 1963 you got this award, Jultomte for 1963, Santa Claus. That was because you had done some very nice deeds. That's right. Especially to all people. Yeah. And you spent a lot of considerable time. Time and money. 365 days a year almost, as being on the ball. How could you keep the family, or your son raising a son here and your husband being a pastor? Oh, we all worked together. You all worked together on this? Yeah. And you also went into the real estate business, being his eldest lady. Yes. It was for your husband then? Yes. I didn't work for him. I worked for someone else. For someone else. How long did he keep his real estate business? Oh, until he died. He had a real estate business then? Oh, yes. He had a real estate business. Yeah, but then he also had a movie and camera store. Photoshop. Photoshop. Yes. And real estate. What? And real estate. Yeah. How could he keep all those politicians' interests and everything? Oh, he did. And our racehorses. Racehorses? Yeah. Dad had racehorses. And we had quite a few at one time. We used to run them in Arlington, and some of them we run in Florida during the winter. Hell yeah. Yeah. How could you? All this takes time, though. Oh, we'd go down to Florida. In the wintertime? Yeah. And see our horses every day, go down. We were at the races. You must have been successful selling real estate and Photoshop. Oh, my husband made good money. My husband was a lucky person. Now, me, I don't have any luck. But my husband was a very lucky. You must be more than lucky to do all those things. Well, I know it, but you've got to win once in a while in order. You know, it's expensive to keep a horse. Every day you have to pay so much to keep a horse. So you've got to win once in a while. Your horses have got to win. So he played on his horses, then? Well, that's up to each person if they want to play on it or not. And he was lucky? He was always, yeah. I see. And they paid off, then, so you couldn't be able to? Well, they don't pay off because you've got to have winners, let me tell you. You pay $35, $40, $50 a day to keep a horse. How many horses did you have, you said? Well, at one time, we had as many as 29. Horses? Yeah, they weren't all running, but they were. Running until they step up to the next stage. Yeah. Oh, so there was a big business in itself. Yeah. 29 horses. But we always had four or five. Was this during the 40s? No, no, no. 60s. Oh, 60s. So how long did he keep this real estate business now in the photo shop? Oh, he had that for, I don't know, 30 years. Oh, I see. How did he learn this photo business? He was taking a lot of pictures, you said. Oh, they started a camera club in our house. And that's where they went from, and they got more interested in cameras and this and that. And so this store was going to be sold, and so my husband and two other fellas bought it. But afterwards, when my husband died, just my husband and I owned it. You mean your son or you? My husband and I owned it. Oh, after your companions died? Yeah. They didn't die. They sold out to my husband. And that was down in Rockford? In Rockford, out on East 8th Street we are, across from the St. Anthony Hospital. Oh, it's still there? Photo shop. It's still there? No, they moved out to Loves Park, the fellas that bought it, because that's a very expensive rental out there on East 8th, and our business comes over the phone. We had offices in Madison. Oh, I see. So you were more or less in wholesale then, or what did you...? Well, they'd sell commercial to the factories. Oh, I see. And go in and set up big movie cameras and machines and stuff like that. You've got to have good help to do that. But you were in the tool then? No, I did nothing. You were not interested in... Well, I was nothing. No, I did nothing. Well, you did a lot of other things though. Well, that's right. I did other things, but I did not... You were not idle....have anything to do with a camera store. For how many years were you running the beauty shop now at the Foss Hotel? Oh, probably 15. Fifteen years? Uh-huh. And then you were also interested in the Swedish Historical Society in Rockford. Yeah. Their launderhome. Yeah. Did your husband... he also was instrumental in being on the border. Oh, yeah. He greeted the Prime Minister of Sweden. Yes. And the King. Yeah. No, he was not living in 76, was he? No, but my husband, when he went to Sweden, he had lunch with Prince Bertil. And when the King was here a few years ago, I had my picture taken with the King, you know. 76. Yeah. So your husband, David Johnson, he was president for... Swedish Historical......Historical Society. Twice he was. Twice. So he worked with Herman Nelson and... Yes. Herman and my husband were very good friends. Severin and Adelmitter. Yeah. All the old-timers. Yep. And they're going one by one. Oh. It just makes us next. So he was actually one of the founding fathers when they got this home in 1954. Just about, yeah. So we have those bronze plaques with the names on, and his name is on there. So you remember those meetings then when you set it up? Oh, yeah. We used to give a lot of breakfasts and dinners and have a lot of... We had a lot of fun in our museum. Oh. So you met with Elan and Anders' daughter, Mary. Yes. Oh, I knew her. Yes, yes. Was she still living in the home then at the time? She was living in the home, and they had... They'd had money, you know, and I think lost it in the later years. And she used to sell some of her stuff, and they'd take it out at night. So I suppose people wouldn't see it. Well, then you see there was no heat in this house. There was no electricity. It was nothing. And she lived there? She lived there. And so the Swedish Historical was looking for a home, so they bought Mary's home... and they paid her way into the P.A. Peterson home and then gave her a nice hunk of money besides. And we took over the museum. And she lived at the home until she died, but she lived... She had no need of anything. She lived nicely. And she couldn't have done that in her house because, you know, it was run down and cold and that. So, of course, Swedish Historical bought it and, of course, spent quite a lot of money on getting it in shape. How were you able to raise that money at that time in the 50s? Oh, people donated and gave and... Well, I don't know. But you were able to buy the house from her then. And she was never married? No, she never married. And she was apparently a pretty good artist. Yes. A good painter. Yes, very much so. So do you think some of the paintings now on the walls there are by her hand? Well, that's what they're supposed to be. So... I don't know. And she lived there all her life? Yep. Did she want to leave then her home? I think so. She was old enough then to know. Well, and when you don't have any comforts, when there's no heat or electricity and that... How could she survive though without any heat there? Well, I don't know. She probably had a coal stove or something like that, but no furnace. And nobody was helping her? She was keeping her own household? I imagine. I imagine. There are some things in the museum that belonged to them, you know. So most of the furnishings and the paintings there are by her hand and the furnishes? A lot of the things. And furniture was from her father's? Some of it. And some of it went astray. People bought it probably from her and were hoping someday it will come back to us. So they're still in the Rockport area? Well, that's right. And I think it would be nice if people have a piece of furniture that was originally from that home. It would be a wonderful thing to have them donate it back. Do you know of anybody that would have furniture like that or do they keep quiet? No, I don't know anybody that's got any. They don't want to let anybody know? I don't know. But you have the Haddorf piano number one. Yes. And the big cabinets and everything there. It seems to represent the early era of... That's right. The things that had been given has been given to us. There's a lot of beautiful things, but you have to really take one by one and really look it over. Just to pass through doesn't mean anything. But to look at all these things, I've had people say, I didn't know you had so many lovely things. But the Swedes now, have they been supportive in Rockport? I think so. I think so.