 This is cassette 7, side 1, continuation with Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 7, side 1....hours and that, so I just quit, that's all. And I threw that atom one night in there, and oh boy. What do you mean you're going to quit? Well, I'm not going to quit, I'm just going to walk out. I says, you can get somebody else in my place. No, we can't do that. First one thing and then another. What do you want to do? Well, I says, I just have got to have less to do, that's all. Well, hire more people. Yeah, I'll leave that to you, because I can't find any. How many did you employ then, after, for instance, ten years, when you came into the production of peacetime material? Well, after we got going, after the war was done, we had 90 people working for us in that little building over there on Broadway Court. The old Swedish gym? Yeah. And you did specification jobs then for the car industry and any kind of place they wanted something. You made the specifications. Yeah, well, 90 people in there, and he says, where in the world can you put machinery in there for 90 people? Well, I said, we stacked them one on top of the other, which was literally true. So your biggest business now was the screws and fasteners. That was the line you were in. Did you do something else on the… Well, originally we started with the aircraft industry, you know, and we started heading these terminals, and we were told by the people who used them and people who were making them that we never could make those on a header. But it wasn't that easy. I tell you, the government was real good to us. They changed the rules in the middle of the stream, you know. They said you could hire, and then when you did hire them, then they said you can't have them. So one day I had 24 people, I had 24 people, girls and fellows working for me. How could they figure out things like that? They were getting too miserable for… Yeah, I don't know, but they changed the rules so fast sometimes, you know, that you couldn't keep up with them. I guess she took care of it. So what came out of it then? Did you continue to have the 26 people? So then she went back and she called me back. She said, you'll hear from me. And she called me back a couple days later and she said, the reason I took all the calls is because I was there. Carlson wasn't there. He was still over at Elko working. And I think he didn't want to quit over there until he saw this business was going to go good, because he had a good job, see. And he was also married and had a family. Yeah, oh, he didn't have a family. He never did. He had two adopted kids, a boy and a girl later on in life. So you were the only one with a family. Yeah. So she called me and she says, well, I'm coming out to talk to you. She says, she come out. She says, I guess you're on a level. I've checked you out and what you say is true. So she says, I'm going to give you the right to hire any amount of people you want. I talked to the aircraft people and so forth. She says, what you're doing is okay. So just keep on going and I'll okay you to hire 36 to 40 people. Well, I said, I don't know where I could find them or where I'd put them if I did. I ended up later with 90 people in there. But when I told her, I says, just give me a cell and a pillow and I'm going to sleep for three days right straight through. And I don't know how I made it. You know, day in and day out. And Saturday night we quit 1 o'clock because we wouldn't work on Sunday. I'd come home, clean up and crawl in bed and I didn't get up till Sunday night. And maybe not even Sunday night, I slept right through until Monday morning. So you were not able to do like today's executives and taking Wednesday off for golfing? Oh, no. It was unheard of at that time? No. Campbell, he come out one time and he talked to us about taking time off. He said, I want you and Ray to take Wednesday afternoon off and Saturdays. I don't want no more working on Saturdays. So on our way out, I said, did you really mean that? And he says, yeah. I said, all the things that you got lined up for us to do, I think we better work. It's 24 hours a day. What did he say then? He laughed, that's all. He just laughed. How did you cooperate? I mean, personally, you and Ray Kaltzer, you were both of Swedish background. Yeah. And Campbell, he was of English background. Yeah, English, Irish. What was his thinking? Were you on the same level with Ray Kaltzer and different with Campbell? What was your thinking? Was he as aggressive as you, for instance, not to work long hours? Oh, no, no. When he needed a vacation, he took a vacation. That was business, and he'd do his business on vacation. No, he went on as he always did, you know. But we had to line up this and line up that. Who else could do it besides Ray and I? So we had to work with it, that's all. And Campbell, he would get the sales in there for us, sure. And after that, he would do what he had to do, like go on a vacation or probably go to New York or someplace. Probably wouldn't hear from him for two weeks. So he could take off because he could rely on you taking care of the business? Oh, yeah. Sure, he has before, but you couldn't take off because he couldn't run the business? No, he tried that one time and it didn't work. And Carlson had said, I guess his wife was after him, so they decided he's going to take off. He's going to go on a vacation for two weeks. So he went, I forgot where it was anyway. He was gone for two weeks. So Campbell said, he'd come down Monday morning, he says, I'm going to run this show for you, Gene, he says, and you just should do the shop out there and I'll take care of the front end here and all that. Just whatever's got to be done. I said, okay. Well, Monday morning, he went out there and went on, oh, it was Tuesday morning. Monday morning, he didn't do much of anything, just sit in the office. Tuesday morning, he decided he's going to go out and look around in a plant. And there was Jimmy Glasson, one of my foremen, who was a very good man, could do most anything in that area out there. He went over to him and he started talking with him. He says, Jim, he says, you're taking too much time on this job. He says, you've got to speed it up. You fellas have got to learn to work faster, he says. And Jimmy looked at him, he says, who are you talking to? He says, to you, you're the foreman, aren't you? He says, I don't know you anymore. He says, I just quit. What do you mean? Well, you told me what to do, and I'm not going to do that, he says, so I quit. So a little while afterwards, Jim come into my office. He says, well, Jim, I suppose you know that Campbell told you what happened out there? I says, no, I don't know anything about it. Well, you come out there and start telling me what to do and how fast we should work and all that. And he says, I quit. Oh, forget it, Jim, I'll take care of that. So I called Campbell in. I said, look, you stay out of the plant. Now, I mean it, you stay out of the plant. If you want to do any buzzing around, buzz these people in here, but lay off of my people in the plant, or I'll walk out and we'll shut the plant down. He says, I guess you don't want me out there. Bob, I says, you don't understand people. You don't understand how they operate any more than man and moon. I says, forget it. All you talk about is authority and money. Forget it. I says, I'll run that place. Yeah, but now when Ray is in here, I says, I'll run this just like I did before. And whether he's a thousand miles away or not, that shop's going to run just like it did before. I'll handle everything. He got in his car and he went back to Chicago. I guess he hadn't had anybody talk like that to him for a while. So he went back to Chicago. He called up a couple days, how are things going? Just fine. As long as you stay out of here, it's all right, Bob. You get the business and the orders. Get them in there and we'll look at them and decide whether we can do them or not. Well, can you figure the price and everything? I says, of course I can. I can tell you whether we can make it, whether we will make it or not. So that was it. Was he an older man than you were? No, he was two years older than I was. And I was ten years older than Ray. Oh, I see. So he was much younger. Yeah. So it was not always easy? No. No. But you had the time with, you know, everything was going up, up, up, up. The peace time now coming in with the production and everybody was asking for more parts and more screws and more bolts. Yeah, the only thing was, you see, you couldn't get people. I had to train everybody. But you didn't go into a great depth to borrow money. You took it easy, step by step. Yeah. You didn't take half a million dollars loan and a million dollars loan and so on. No, no. How was Campbell now? Did he want to go faster on it? Well, he pushed as fast as he could go. But he had enough money and his business, he was still representing alcohol in the American Cabinet and this other place down in Aurora or where it was. He was representing them, so he was drawing his salary from them, see. I see. But me, I had to live on $327 a month. Yeah, but that wasn't a big deal. Yeah. It was getting better after a few years, though. That was a long time before I got any more. Yeah, but didn't you have any, like, stocks or dividends coming? No, we hadn't incorporated anything yet. So he actually was running it then, more or less? Well, yeah. I guess so. I wasn't too much interested in that. I guess I was made out of something different, I guess, because I could have gone out and made three or four times as much money in a tool shop as what I was making over there, see. So. But you were not interested deep inside yourself to start for Sundstrand, for instance, in their tool room? Pardon? For Sundstrand. You were never thinking about going to Sundstrand? Well, I worked for Sundstrand at one time. Yes, but I mean later on in the future. No, no, I never even thought of it. I knew that if I quit camcorder, I could find a job in 15 minutes anyplace. So. But you were going steady progress, getting better and better. I had people call me at home here, you know, and ask me if I would be interested in the position of management in charge of something. They were looking for guys like me to do that, you know, and I said, No, I'm not interested. Well, we got good offers, good salary and everything. You can't be making much more, much down there. And I said, I'm not in it for the money. They couldn't understand that. But I wouldn't listen to them. So I forget it. Were people more interested in security for their families rather than the one shop deal, for instance, to move over to another company? Oh, yeah. Yeah, well, the people that were looking for work, they would come in and say, Well, what have you got to offer? And how much money can I get? How much vacation do I get? And what other things do you have to offer? It was in the 50s, this already. Mm-hmm. And so that's. But I wasn't interested in that. I said, No, I'm all right. I'm satisfied where I am. How many were Swedes now employed by those 90 people employed by Chemcar? Oh, I don't know. Well, how did you hire them? Did you look for a Swedish bank on people? Well, I had people tapping on my door every day, you know, that is from other plants. And then there were guys who didn't know anything and never will know anything are looking for work, too, you know. But I could hire anybody. I could have hired half of Rockford Screw and El Coutu, too, National Lock, if I'd had room for them and wanted to go out there and hire them. But I know a gentleman, Gunny Englund, come over one day, and he said, Gene, we've got to have a meeting here. You're taking all our people. I says, I'm not taking all your people. I says, I've got six or seven guys here, and four of them are from your place. And, yeah, but they're some of our best help. Well, you have to take care of them, that's all. They come over here, and they're interested in us as a company, is going to deal honestly and justly with them. And I'm not going to, well, you know, if you can pay more than we're paying, I says, I'm not hiring anybody with the inducement that they're going to get more money here. Oh, yeah, yeah, we've heard a lot of that. Well, I says, if you don't believe it, I'll prove it to you. So I said, I called a girl in the payroll department, and I says, bring these cards down from these people. And I gave her the cards, and I hand them out to the guys, and I says, now here's Francine, come from your place. I didn't pay them any more than you pay them over there. And here's another guy here. These are the payroll cards. Well, they couldn't believe that. Well, why do they come? Well, there are other things besides money, you know, and they like to be treated as people. And that's what we try to do here, because we're people ourselves, you know. So that was, but now I says, later on, I had, they called me up and asked me if, no, they called Ray, and he says, that Gene, he's taking all our good help. And Ray said, I don't know anything about that. You'll have to see him about it. So they called me up, and they says, Gene, he says, you're taking our help. No, I said, I'm not taking it. But I says, you're trying to take my help. I says, I bring a guy in here and train him, and when I get him going pretty good, I find he's over to your place because you paid him 15 cents an hour more than I did. But I says, I suppose I have to put up with that. So there is negligence then between you and the others, you train the others. Yeah, yeah. And they pay a little bit more. Yeah, but I'll tell you, we didn't do anything that wasn't fair. All I ask that the others would do the same for us. But both Elko and Rockford Screw, they would grab any man I had if they could get him. Rockford Screw, there was a Swan Hillman. Yeah. How about National Lock, though? You didn't have any? They didn't give us too much trouble. How did you associate with those people, like Swan Hillman, Burdette Colson from National Lock, and Strandquist, John Marlbrook, did you belong to the same group or same church? No, no. You never associated together? No, we didn't have anything to do with one another. You were completely apart? Yeah, yeah. And I remember one time a fellow come over, one of the engineers, and I don't remember who else it was, come over and wanted to talk to me. He says, Gene, I understand you can make, you do some impossible things on the header over here. No, not impossible, but the possible we do. And so I threw the stuff out. You make stuff like that on a two-blow header? Yeah. We can't do it over there. I wish you'd come over and show us how to do it. I says, I can't do that. Well, he said, oh, I'll have to go back and tell them, he says, that you can make them. Well, then National Lock come over and he had an engineer with him and he had some samples. He says, can you make these on a two-blow header? Yeah. So I showed him the samples. I says, are those made on a two-blow? I says, sure. But I says, you have to know how to make your first blows and so forth and there's a little tricky stuff in there, but we can do it and we do it. Well, he says, I'm going back and tell my people back there that either they're going to do it or I'll get somebody else who can. Well, I says, maybe that'll scare them. I don't know. But if I tell them that you can make it, will you make the order for us if they won't do it? I says, sure, if you send it over, we'll quote the price and we'll make it for you. Sure, on a two-blow header. But they must have made it after a while, but you know, they had trouble in the Union over there at National Lock and those guys wanted to make nails, just nails, you know, that's the simplest thing in the world, and get top wages. But they could not make the more tricky items, see. So that's where the trouble started. How many engineers did you employ in your company with a degree? You know, nowadays you have to have an MIT degree, for instance, to get into it. How did you, for instance, you didn't have any degree in engineering. No. Everything was learned from scratch. Yeah. From the beginning. I didn't have any training at all, but I knew how to make things. Besides, forget about the education, which I could have had, would have been better. But I had to do without it. See, in my earlier days, my folks were hard up. They didn't have any money, and no dad was making. He was, one while there he couldn't even work. He had rheumatism so bad. I don't know if I mentioned in my... In the beginning. I think you did, about the hardships. About the house and whatever, yeah, well. You had to go direct to work instead of... Yeah, so all I had in my mind was to get to work and make some money to help support the family. But you have worked with engineers of more modern times. No. What is the difference, though, if you had gone four years to school, for instance? What would you have learned differently? What would I do, you think? Would you do it faster, you think? There's a lot of things that I might have improved a lot on the way I did it, if I could have had the education, see. Yeah, but some of the teachers now in education, they probably didn't know half about what you have learned over the years. I mean, you learned by experience. Yeah, well. Well, I went down to high school and a machine shop because this friend of mine wanted to learn to become a toolmaker. So I went with him down there, and the foreman come over, and he watched me making a screw, and he looked at me and said, You going to make that in this lathe? I said, Sure. That I would like to see. Well, in about a half an hour I'll have it ready, and you can come over and see. So he did. He said, I wouldn't believe it. This machine isn't built for doing things like that. I said, I'm not used to having equipment for everything I do. I make it do with the equipment I have. But the actual layout, you know, my drawings was a little pad that I carried in my pocket here. And as I was walking along, I would make some notes and scratch them out, and make a little sketch and hand it to the guy and say, Can you make it? Yeah? Okay. I'll be back tomorrow and get it. That's the way I did it, see? Well, then it got so we had to have a draftsman to draw, and we had to have an engineer. Well, then it got so that it took a week or maybe two weeks to get the part that I could sketch out and get it through the tool room in a couple of hours, you know. So it was a... I had it ahead of... I said it would have been a drawback for me to have a complement of engineers in that because it would just require more time to get it done. So... She's got somebody out there. Well, anyway... So, but those... like your time period now, are the people coming up like they again, or is it completely a disappearing factor? I mean, guys like you and you have Svante Hellman, Ernie Swenson. Ernie Swenson, I understand, he was educated in Sweden on an engineering basis. But are the people coming up? Nowadays, you're talking about computers, everything, you know, they push out, you know, and have diagrams and everything. So the human being is not there anymore. I mean, would never come up a guy like you, for instance, in Rockford. You mean there's... Producing machines, you know, that was not there. In other words, an engineer, he says they can't be done. Yeah, well that... Because he knows that. Yeah, that... You don't take that theory. No, you see, I made one slogan, and I said that to Ray too when we started. I don't want to hear in our place that it can't be done. If we can't do it, just let's say, I can't do it, maybe somebody else can. But don't say it can't be done, because some guy around the corner with no experience will show you it can be done. So that's the theory we worked under. I said that, well, we coined one phrase, the difficult problems will take a couple of days to do them, but the easy problems we'll do tomorrow. See, that's the way we did it. And we proved that there could be a lot of things done that the heretofore said it couldn't be done. We did it. So there's got to be a positive factor, right? Yeah, yeah. And you believe that, that there's always ways to make it better? Sure, yeah. Yeah, of course, today, like I said, now we got the little adding machine, you know. We used to add it in our head faster than what they can do on a machine now. But the way they hit those machines now is they don't have to know anything. You can add anything up and subtract it and divide and everything else. Do you think they make people lazy? In other words, they are relaxing a little bit too much? Oh, sure. Yeah. But I guess you have to have it at the speed we're operating, I guess. I don't know. You continued with Ken Corwin. In other words, you didn't quit. No, no. To what year, 1978, 79? I don't remember just what year. I'd have to go back in my little book in there and see, I guess. But you were improving and making things better and production was going full steam. Yeah. There was good slack. Now, on that terminal that we said it couldn't be done, we did. And we started competition, forced us to reduce the prices, you know. Where the originals were 40, 45 cents a piece. The last order that we took was for 600,000 pieces at six cents a piece. And these were good parts. These were aircraft quality. When did plastic come in? Plastic? It was never in your factory? No, I never had anything to do with it. At that time? No. It was always steel and the hardware. Now everything is plastic and if it lasts long enough to take it home, otherwise it falls apart. Then you can't get a part. Did it affect your production at the time, plastic? No. There was no competition? No. No. And the Japanese, were they coming in the 60s? Well, after we got into the standards of parts, you know, then the Japanese were in there. And I remember we had three Japs with us out one time for lunch. And we gave them, I threw out a handful of stuff to them on a table over there. We were at Stockholm Inn. And I says, okay, can you make those? Sure, we can make those. I says, how much? Per thousand. Oh, well, we don't even want that stuff. That's cheap stuff. He says, you can make that over here yourself. We'll take the higher priced stuff, they said. They didn't even want, they had driven the prices down so far that it was no rhyme, no reason. We refused to make them. So what is the remedy now for this Japanese threat? Because it's really in the headlines. Well. What could be done? You see, the whole thing is greed for people. They won't buy an American made because it costs them a little more. They can buy the cheaper models from Japan as long as they fight with the people over here and squeeze every nickel out they can. But that's going to come to a screeching halt someday. And they're going to tell them that, well, you're buying the products over there, you'll have to get your pay from there. Because we're not in business anymore. And that's about the way I see it's going to happen. But when an automotive will allow their employees to come in, in foreign made cars and park them in their parking lot and expect them to pay American wages but buy Japanese cars, well, how long can it exist? It won't go on forever. So National Lock now, they gave in. In other words, there were 4,000 workers there when it was the highest employment. What happened really there? Was it the Japanese that really put them out of business? For National Lock? Well, I think they got – well, I think the union – I still maintain the unions had a lot to do with busting up the old reliable manufacturers. You see, I don't know. National Lock, they had a corner on everything, refrigerator hinges, you know, beautiful ones and all that, and all of the other hardware which you can buy for less over in Japan. They're not as good. When the Japanese used to make screws and compete with us, you know, we couldn't even sell the stuff that they made. They didn't know how to make them, but they sure learned how fast. They'd hire our technicians here to come over and help them get going and furnish the equipment and even the capital, I guess, to get going. So then when they got going, they got to make better stuff than what we had for less money. The labor factor is a big thing in the capital. But why do they – like the state of Illinois now, they seem to be so very liberal to Mitsubishi and Toshiba and everything, to start up a factory, but if an American comes in, they are more reluctant to learn of the labor capital. Why don't they believe in American workers anymore or the management? I don't know. I can't answer that. I don't know. Do you think there was some thing of this philosophy you mentioned before today, Hjalmar Bruberg, he said that why should we do anything better? In other words, we can rely on the old method, you know. Was there still in American management's head, do you think, even in the 70s, the reluctance to change over for the threat of the Japanese? Well, there was, but there was no threat on that from a changeover. They followed along. Yeah, yeah. I don't know. But right today, people just – they don't care. If I can buy it for less, I'm going to buy it, as long as I can work for you and get the regular wages, see. But unless you can come up with a better car for less money than the Japanese, I'll buy Japanese, see. Do you think the people, the young generation, are born in the 60s, they are the buyers of today now, because they have the big salaries and the job, or you call them, are they less quality minded, you think, than the previous generation? They can sell them a cheap screw. I mean, it doesn't matter to them. Well… And even a horse is less quality today, if you really check into it. And they get away with it. Well, I don't know. I don't have the answer to that. But I – if you can make it cheap, so it hangs together until it gets in your hands anyway, that's the way it should be. There's no way to repair anything, but you throw it away and… No, no. Throwaways. Everything is throwaways. And Japan is a good maker of throwaways. They make everything throwaway because it don't last long enough anyway, so get rid of it. So before you decided not to sell off or anything, you had no incentive then to continue on, like your sons now. Were they interested in your business? Did they start it with you? Who? Your children, for instance. Were they interested in your business? No, no. You didn't want them to be interested either, or…? No, I had my boy working for me out there, but the only way… Oh, there's a boy and a girl you have now? Yeah. But my boy, I wouldn't hire him at KAMCAR, because if I did, they'd say, well, he hires his kid in there and he gets all the gravy job. Or nepotism. So I said no. But he worked with Greenleaf, and he worked for Illinois Tool over there and several other places. And over at Greenleaf, he proved that he was better than the average on those machines. But they were drill presses or boring mills and all that, you know. And that was just production work, see. And then one day, I had to have… Clyde was… He had become, on his own, a real good welder. And I'd ask him to weld things for me and help me weld things where I had to have help with it. And he would do it. So I had a fellow by the name of Rotliff. He was an old welder, but he was obstinate. And he said, if he said it couldn't be welded, it couldn't be welded, and he wouldn't do it. So I told Clyde, I said, I'd like to have you come over and train a young fellow or two to do some welding for me, to become good welders. Well, what about Grant? He says, Rotliff. I says, he's too stubborn. I can't move him. And I remember we broke a header when we were on 9th Street there. Broke the ram on the header. So I brought it down and told Grant to weld it. It laid there for two days, and he says, I wouldn't touch it. I says, why? That won't hold. I says, okay. So I brought it out one evening and shaved the angles on it and everything else so I could get a better grip for the brazing. And then it was about 2 o'clock in the morning when I got started on it. I welded that whole thing myself. I had two torches, one to heat and one to weld. And I welded that whole thing. After I had welded it, it was laying on the bench cooling, and he come in and saw it. He says, you sure is wasting his time. He says, that won't last 15 minutes in that machine. Well, the next night he come in and it was in the machine running. And every day he'd come in and he'd look at it, and it was still holding up. And when I sold that machine, it was still in there and still running and still holding up. And many times when I needed welders, like in a cleaning machine down there, that screen, that whole business in there was all a shambles. I told Grant, get in there and weld that stuff. I said, take it apart, weld it, and put it back together again. He wouldn't do it. So I finally told him, I said, well, I guess you and I are going to part company. Well, who's going to do your welding? I says, the guy does it now after you go home. So I went out there and put my shop apron on, you know, or my shop coat, and boy, I didn't look like an office worker when I got through. But I welded it and got them all put together. But, you know, when you got to do it yourself to prove to the guys who are supposed to be good at it, you know. So you get tired of that, too, after a while. Different philosophies. So when you sold out, could you agree then with Campbell and Ray Carlson how to do it? Were they all united then? Well, they made us an offer to take over the business. Who bought the company? Well, Royal Little was the purchaser. He had the Textron out there, and he was quite a guy. He took the textile industry and put it on its feet. You know, they were broke, and they were, the guys would bid $2 on a shirt that cost them $3 to make. And he went in there and bought some of them up, closed them down, and put prices on there that they could make it, make money on it, you know. And everybody was happy, and he made money and put that place together. And, or the industry. And he started looking for... Sight Two, Cassette Seven, Sight Two. Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. He started looking for other plants, you know. And then he heard about Camcar, so he came down and took a look. So he put Dave... I forgot his name now. He was chosen to talk to us about selling Camcar, see. So that car or that guy was you? Yeah. And Ray, he says, well, I'll do whatever you guys want to do. And Bobby wanted to sell. And I said, no, I don't want to sell, because I got a lot of friends in this business, and I'm not going to sell out to somebody who I don't know how they're going to handle these people or the business. I said, I don't want any part of it. But if you guys want to sell it, go ahead and sell it. But I said, I don't want no part of it. So you refused to offer? Yeah. But my holdings in the company didn't amount to anything anyway. But they respected me that much that, well, we want you to be in accord and sell with us, see. Just like when we bought the sewing machine in Belvedere. They were bankrupt and closed up, you know. And Bob and Ray and this Dave took us down there. He wanted to sell us. He says, that's a good business down there. Why don't you take it over and run it? I went through the plant, and I said, I don't want no part of it. I said, you'll never make a go of this. You've got a strong union in there. These guys have only learned one thing, and that is get by with as much as you can and do as little as you can. I don't want any part of it. So we sat out there in the car for about 15 minutes. And Bob says, you mean that you don't want no part of this? No. I said, I want no part of it. Well, then I guess they're going to have to put it on the auction block and sell the whole thing off. If you sell the whole thing off, I says, and start a new business, maybe then you can shake the union loose. But they have learned how to be lazy about it and so forth. And I said, I want no part of that. So then we just left it, and it went on the block, and they threw all those people out of work. And I saw the parts they had laying in a pan. I pick up a ticket. It was 15,000 pieces set up for a screw machine, which they couldn't possibly make any money on it. But this guy needed it, so they'd make them. And they went down the tube, like they say. And the trouble was that they couldn't make any money. I said, I don't want any part of that. I don't want no business that they've got in there. We'll start our own business. We'll use the plant as a new business, that's all. Well, so finally they sold the business out. I had a good job of rebuilding the whole thing down there to get it started. And the floor, wood floor, was so soaked with oil, and oil was dripping down underneath there. I said, I don't want any part of that. I said, somebody drop a match down in there, it'll blow up overnight. Well, what do you want to do? Tear the whole floor out and fill it all back in and lay cement. It'd be expensive. I said, well, that's what it's got to be. So we did. Took one wing at a time and filled it in with sand and gravel and laid a cement floor. And, well, there was a lot of other things to do. You didn't buy the sewing machine business, though, did you? No, no. It was just the building, actually? Just the building, yeah. The sewing machine business, that folded, yeah. So you had two factories then, one in Rockford and one in there. Yeah, that was Plant 2 out there. But then when you finally decided to sell out, how long did it take then to convince you, Campbell and Carlson? We couldn't stay with it any longer. You see, if Campbell had died or Carlson, and I was forced to buy them out, I wouldn't have had the money. So I was smart enough to see what somebody else would come in and take control. And there was plenty of people with money who were ready to do that, you know. So I says, that won't work. So we finally decided, I guess we'll have to sell it, and that's what we did. After so many years of experience that you had, in the beginning you were afraid. You hesitated for three in the partnership. How did it work out then? Can you recommend it for other people? Is it a good idea to be three, or is it better to be two? Well, I'd say it's difficult. Well, for instance, now the building that we took over down there, they had a little tool shop in there. And how we got the front end of that building on Broadway Court there, was they had, there were six guys in there, tool makers, good ones. And they started making tools and dies. But, you know, they thought the way to run the business was, if they made a tool and they bid so many hours on it, and they made some money on it, they'd spend it. Well, one day they got to the end of the rope and went to the bank. The bank looked at it and they said, we can't give you any money. You haven't any cash flow. You don't have any money. Well, we want to borrow money, not on this kind of a deal. They ended up, they closed it up, went bankrupt and sold off the machinery and everything, and we got the space. But when we went down to the bank and tried to borrow money, they looked at our cash flow and our method of doing business, and they said, well, we'll give you all the money you need. And I went in there one time and, this is to Pete Peterson, and told him, I said, Pete, I need some money. Sure, how much do you want? $250,000. Oh, you don't want a little bit, do you? No. But I says, Chrysler, the automotive's gone on strike. Chrysler's on strike out there, and I got carloads of stainless coming in, and I got no money to buy it with. And it comes in on my dock, I'll have to return it. Well, okay. He gave me, I think, he authorized $250,000, and he said to Ray and I, sitting there, take what you need, keep drawing from it. So we drew up $220,000. But when the plant, you see, we could manufacture the stuff that we knew that they had to have. But now, there had to be people who knew the game well enough, like Ray and I, and Campbell and in and to it also on a salesman's situation, should I say. But Ray and I decided that this part is going on that car, we know they're going to have to have that part, so we'll make it. We made it, and we used this $220,000 to fill these tote pans with all parts. How long was the strike lasting then? I don't remember how long. It wasn't too long, but... So you were affected by UAW's decisions? Well, yeah, sure. Yeah. But they didn't affect us really, because we knew more than the buyers who bought the stuff. They didn't even know what part they had to have, but we did. We knew what cars, the parts, we knew how to make them. So that when the strike was over, they said, ship everything. Everything? Yeah. We start loading up the docks in there with this stuff, until they told us to stop, they can't take it fast enough. But then we got our money back, see? But not that fast, because Chrysler and some of the other big companies, Ford too, they wanted to buy the stuff and operate on our money for 30 days, see? So we had to keep borrowing money from the bank to finance those rascals while they made... It was all figured out. Yeah, but finally we got to where we put a halt on that and told them that you'll have to get it from our competitors. Who are your competitors? I said, we don't have any, but you might find some. It was too expensive to find one, I suppose. Did you also do work for Lockheed and Boeing, the airplane industry? Yes, yeah, sure. We made for all the aircraft industry, yeah. Yeah, and we got permits so we could go in. I remember how we went up to... What was that in California? One time we went into Washington, one-time state, and they gave us permission to go in where they assembled the airplanes. And this guy that took us around says, I want you to know there ain't very many people that get the privilege to come in here, but we think enough of your honesty and integrity and ability to produce and advise us on how to do it, some of these things. So they says, we'll take you through. And I remember when I went in a B-36. Boy, what a monstrosity. You see one of those things. Man, it was empty in there. They were renovating it, and you could hardly see the front end of the plane. It was so far down. That 36 was a real big monstrosity. But it did well, I guess, in transporting material and troops. Yeah, they could haul almost anything they wanted. Yeah. When it was needed. So your companions, now, Frank Halston, he died suddenly very young. Yeah. In the 50s. Yeah. His birthday was in May, and he was going to retire. I don't remember if he, I guess he was going to stay on for another year, I think it was. But he got a heart attack and died. And Campbell, he got killed on a golf course. I see. Oh, yeah. He was playing golf. He said, I'll tell you, Gene, now I'm going to retire, and I'm going to live on a golf course in the country club. He was quite a sport, you know. So he says, I'm going to have it real easy. So he was up there playing golf one day, and a fellow that I don't know if the, Campbell never drank enough to get drunk, but he did drink. But he could hold his liquor. I don't know if he had anything to drink that day or not, but this other guy that was fooling around there, he hit the accelerator on his cart and knocked him down. And he fell backwards and hit a cement culvert there, and he never recovered consciousness. Did they happen here in Rockford? No, in Chicago. In Chicago. So he retired and completely from everything in business. Yeah. And Ray Carlson, did he continue with something else then? No, he never got a chance to retire either. He died. And you are still around? I'm still around, yeah. You could have kept going another 20 years. Well, I think. So what did you do now? You had to regroup again. You couldn't go back to the drill press or the studio? Well, I could have, but. What did you do? You have your own little shop at home? Oh, I had a lot of real estate and monkeyed around with that. I still do. What I'd do, I'd buy an old run-down place, you know, and put two, three guys in there and fix it up and sell it. Here in Rockford? Yeah. Sometimes I made a little money, and other times I didn't make so much, but it had something to do anyway. And you were occupied to keep your mind off the accidents. Yeah. Well, the thing that I, I'm sorry I did buy, I bought that building down on 7th Street and 10th Avenue, that three-story. And I walked into that, down the basement, and I could see the sky right up through the floors, all the way up through the third floor and the roof. It was in so bad shape. But you bought it? I don't know. I had a yen for, I paid 10,000 for the building and the lot. The lot was worth more than the building. And, or 9,000 it was, I believe. So I decided I'm going to fix it up. So I got Hunt, the building inspector, to come over and look at it. And he says, well, he says, they don't build them like this anymore, he says, but I'll tell you. He says, I wouldn't give somebody else permission to rebuild it, but I know how you do it. You do a good job, he says, and I'll, okay, I'll give you a permit to go ahead. And the foundation and the walls and everything was in good shape. So I started working. I had Paul Rosenquist and his guys in there, and my men, I had two or three men in there working. I says, if you can work with my men, they're not union, you got union, okay, but if you cause me any trouble, you're out. That's all. So you employ a few carpenters then and bricklayers and... Not bricklayers I didn't. Well, yeah, I did too, sometimes. But this was mostly carpenter work, you know, in there. How is the city government to work with? Did they EC to deal with? I didn't have anything to do with them. No? No. After I got a permit, they couldn't do anything, you know, and I get my own men and put them in there. And then, I, but I, well, like Parson, Wally Parson, he was a pretty good businessman. He called me one day and he says, Gene, I got a place I'd like for you to look at. I says, I haven't got time to look. And it was the new wintertime of February, it was about six inches of snow on the ground, foot in some places. He says, I want you to take a ride with me. Well, okay, I said, what do you want? Let's go. We'll go up at noon, he says. Take your lunch hour. So he took me in his car and we went out there. And then look at this farm out there. It was, I forgot how many acres it was, 52 acres up there. Well, anyway, he says, I'd like for you to buy that, Gene. He says, this guy has turned it over to me now. Their bill collectors are after them and they got to have money, he says. It was 26 acres. He said, they need $11,000. I think I can buy the whole kit and caboodle for you for $11,000. Oh, I says, I don't want it. I don't want any more headaches. My head hurts now, I says. Well, but, gee, you can't get a better buy than this. Now I can get more trouble, too, I says. But anyway, well, we finally decided I'd buy it and I bought it. I never even went in the house. The guy that was a brother to Jensen Flores down there lived down the place. Jensen had the say-so of it. And he says, they're crowding me for money, he says, bills. And I says, I haven't got money to pay for that. His brother, he laid in there, stupid drunk all the time, you know. Didn't even get up to go to the toilet, everything he did right in the bed there, you know. And then he laid in there. Mailman come down one day and the mail was piling up in there. And he looked in there and he saw this guy laying there and he thought, he must be dead. So he got to Jensen and Jensen went out there and locked and went in. And there he was, stupid drunk. So, but if you buy it, he says, well, get him out of there. But you got to, we got to get the money together. I got to have $11,000. So I bought it. Fixed it up. Put in another bathroom upstairs and I did a lot of work around there. And I sold it for, I paid $11,000 and sold it for $26,000 or $27,000. So I made some money on that one. But you put a lot of money into it or? Well, yeah, a lot of work. But, yeah, but I, I. So that pays off then in some, but like Rockford now, there are a lot of dilapidated buildings on the southwest side. What's happening there? Is it changing neighborhoods or is it? What do you mean? On Kiss Rock, if you go south. Over the west side? Yeah. Nah. I've learned a lot of things about them. And, you know, I got a restaurant over there now. On the west side? Yeah, 2907 West 8th Street. Jerry's, I bought a place from him. And he walked away and left it. The restaurant? Yeah. And told that guy, go fly your kite. And Jerry, he got hit in the bottle. And whenever he got in trouble, he took a bottle and jumped a plane and went to Florida. Well, he had leased the place from me, so I had to go to court and get the place, get the lease canceled out and got the place back. Boy, what a mess. And the other one I had was over on 15th Avenue. And that thing is still a mess. They vandalized it and, oh, golly. But now I got this thing all fixed up and it's going pretty good. But I don't want that business. I don't want them to deal with stuff like that. Yeah, it's hard to control it, though, because you can't stay down there. You have to rely on people. No, I got to get good help, you know, and get good managers. But where do you find them? Just like every place else. One day I got a call from a guy in Chicago. And he said, Gene, he says, I need a good manager for the little plant I'm running in here. The salary to start with would be $50,000 a year. It sounds like a big plant. Yeah, but he's got to be a good man being able to handle it. Do you have anybody over there that could handle it, or do you know of anybody? No, I says, if I knew of anybody that was good enough to do it, I'd put them to work here myself, I said. Well, he says, you're not a great help for me. He says, I thought probably you would have somebody there who was looking for a better job. Oh, yes, they're all looking for a better job, but they're not good enough to hold on to a $50,000 job. This big money business, though, they always say that if you want to be a good man, you've got to pay more money. Does that hold true, though? How good can a guy be for $50,000? Well, I don't know. I can't measure them anymore because I don't think there are very many around that are good enough to do it. They don't know about the United Wars? No. They can handle it. Well, like I said over at a camp car, put an ad in the paper that you've got a $10,000 job, no experience needed and you don't have to know anything, and you'll fill the lobby in five minutes, I said. But tell them that they've got to print some credentials and show me that they're able to do it. Then it dwindled down to one or two, and they were questionable. Nowadays, when you look at the ad for positions, I don't think those human beings exist in all the qualifications they've got to have. Do you really need to find a guy with all those credentials under his belt? Yeah, I guess you can, but they're not on the loose. But you wouldn't believe how many calls I had from people offering me a better job. When I was at a camp car, they'd say, I heard a lot about your business, and I know about you, and I've searched your past out and everything, and I think we can offer you a better job than what you've got with more money than camp car. But you did all right, though. You don't regret that you stayed with camp car? No. Instead of going to Alcoa? No, well, I wasn't after the money. I never was. I can't understand what makes... There's always an incentive, though, at the end of everything. You've got to have money, you know, so you can control things. Well... There must be a good feeling, though, that you can... you know, a beggar can never make any choices or direct anything. But, I don't know. When they finally decided that George Little come out and said, We'll buy camp car from you. We'll buy it out, give you so much. And then I said this, I said, Well, does that mean that we have to move out? No, I buy it with the promise that you're going to stay, the three of us, three of you. Oh, you're offered? And you stay with that company and do just like you're doing now. Oh, I see. See? Well, we... and he stood by, I tell you. We went into Chicago and Waterbury one time and we were sitting there, Ray and I, and he got the question in a 3-8 header, solid die, and he says there were $26,000 apiece. But he says, We have two of them and now there... then it would be about three years before you can... we can place any more orders. So, Ray and I went out to lunch and decided we'll take both of them, just like that. We didn't ask Roy Little or we didn't ask Textron or anything else. Told them to ship them, and then we'd bill them. And boy, that's fur fly then when they got the bills for that. Where do you get the authority for this? We don't need authority. We don't have time to go move for authority. Are they still in business at the same place? No, Waterbury, they... the union drove them out of business, too. Yeah, but like your chem car now, is it still the same order? Chem car? Yeah, I mean the one that Roy Little, he bought the chem car. Yeah, but that's Textron's. How long did it last? Do they still have it or... Yeah, it's still Textron, but they're... Are they doing? Yeah, they do, all right. There's several companies under Textron. And, yeah, they're... And they are still down there in the old building where you occupied it before? Yeah. Still down there? Yeah, we had... well, let's see now. We had probably... well, we bought... We owned practically all the buildings on 18th Avenue, going clear down to the park. We bought them as they vacated and bankrupt and sold out, and we bought them. And when Belvedere, or I mean Rockford Automatic Screw, were on the corner of Christina and 18th Avenue, they sold out, and the building was empty, we offered it to Textron. Textron didn't want it. They didn't care to go on at that. So I said to Ray, I says, well, I'll buy it. So, well, why don't we buy it together then? Okay, let's do it. So we bought it. And we told Textron, now, if you're ever interested, I know the guys that own it. They didn't like that very well. Were you told then by Textron not to open up your own business again somewhere in the same line? They wouldn't allow that. I would... But did you have to sign an agreement with them to allow them to do that? Yeah. Yeah, as far as that goes... For a certain number of years? Yeah. Well, I told them, I don't want to compete with you. I'm not that smart. I says, the people you got there now are much smarter now than we were, so we wouldn't do that. You are smiling a little bit when you say that. Well... All the people are smart nowadays, though, and there's a lot of factories having trouble. Yeah. Do you think they have to start from the beginning again to... Well, I don't know where a rock or a screw is going to end up. It looks like it's falling apart. But didn't the worker take over the management there? Yeah. So they didn't seem to work too well then? Well, it's just like what aircraft company was it that sold out to their employees? The pilots got together and bought the company. But they're high paid, you know. Yes, there was one company. Yeah. So there's a leadership that is holding the side on. So the first thing they decided after they got it bought, they said, but now, in order to run, you pilots got to take 25% cut. But they wouldn't let the first guy that owned it, wouldn't let him have a cut. But now, they own it themselves, and who's going to pay them if they're not making any money? Well, that's what they told old man Hughes, you know, of the Hughes Aircraft Industry down in New Orleans. They said, the union said, we don't want any of your worries tonight, we just want your money. Very blunt. So they said, well, you can have the business, I'll turn it over to you. What happened, it fell apart. You see, you can dictate to people certain requirements, but you cannot dictate to people where there isn't any money to take. There's a line to be... So, what happens is... Well... The 60s and 70s were very good years. Everything was going up, in other words, the managements were giving after the union. So they were at fault too, in some respect. Because they were also greedy, they didn't want to lose the business. Well, I know, at Chemcar, we were modernizing much of our equipment, so we could afford to pay more and do more of this and that. But, I said this to Ray many times, I says, look, when this equipment needs replacing, where are we going to take the money for that? We're giving away anything that we have an improvement, we have made a profit, but where's it gone? It's gone to the people. Well, you can't do it. Did you have a profit sharing plan? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, it's not easy to... It's not easy to run a business. To know the future. No. No. There's a lot of sacrifices on the... But I'll tell you, now when... When Chemcar had a tough time making money, and it was tough sailing there for a while, and it still is, I guess, when I met the manager over there, I ran into him in Chicago. No, in Florida, I believe it was, or some place. Who should be standing next to me but the manager from Chemcar, Selin. I looked up and I says, do I have the honor of rubbing shoulders with Selin? Well, Gene, what are you doing down here? Same thing as you. Only I says, I'm retired, you're on vacation. So, we got talking, he says, well, I'll tell you, it's not easy to make money today like it was when you and Ray were running it, he says, and Bob, you could get any kind of money you wanted, just ask for it, and you could get it. You can't do that today. Oh, we had a balance sheet. At the bottom of that balance sheet said profit and loss. If the profit wasn't good and the loss was good, you couldn't get much from Textron, I'll tell you. But there had to be a profit there, boy, and they didn't care how much we spent as long as we come out with a profit, that's it. But we found out what we had to have and what we had to do to make a profit. So we spent the money and just passed the bill over to them and they paid for the machinery. Like that time when we bought those two 3-8 headers, and they said, well, we're not going to accept that. What do you mean you're not going to accept that? How do we know that this is going to pay for itself? Because we said so. Well, I said, would it interest you to know that we are running them both full-time and we've got good paying jobs on it? And give us a couple of years and we'll have them paid for. Oh? Oh? Well, I guess it's all right then. Yeah, I guess it is. And if it don't, we don't make any money on it, then you can come back and tell us we made a mistake. Do you think it's easier, like for you now at Chemco, you had a small management, you didn't have too much bulk. But like Textron, they have probably hundreds of committees. Will it take too much time for them to decide about a thing, I mean, to get going? Well... They have the money, of course, they can throw it in if they lose something, but you have to think... You see, we used to have meetings over there at Chemcar of the employees and supervisors and so forth. And they'd all get together and they'd decide what to do and they'd lay it out and assign people to do it. And a couple of weeks later we'd go back in for a progress report. How are we doing? Eh, we're doing all right. They asked this guy, did you take care of that? No, I didn't do much with it. I didn't know what to do with it. I didn't know what happened to it. So I told Ray on the QT, I said, well, we assigned him, and then I went in and did it. I couldn't wait for him to wake up and do it. He didn't know what was going on anyway. So I always said, we all got together and decided that nothing could be done. And then I went out and did it. I didn't know anything about the shop over at Chemcar or how to fix anything or where it was or anything like that. Just go out and ask EH. He knows where it is. He'll know how to fix it. And I did. Eugene Hager. EH they called me. Just give EH a ring. And I didn't hold a club over their head at all. I just went in there and fixed it or told them where it was. I'll never forget one time they had a machine or a tumbler it was that we had to the one, the big one broke down. And I said, well, get those small ones going. Get those going. Forget about that big one until we can get the parts for it or make the parts. Well, I come back and they said, we can't find anything to fix it with. Well, I says, get a speed reducer and put on the one next to the big one there. Put that speed reducer on there. Well, where do we get that? You can't even pick up a speed reducer around here anyplace now? Oh, there's one out in the concept. Well, where? Well, you come inside the door to the left there. There's a pile of machinery and here's what it is. It's down in there somewhere. How do you know? Yeah, we put it out there two years ago. Okay. They went out there. He said he don't know what he's talking about. So I went out there the next day. I says, right about in here is where you put it. You fellas unloaded it. We did? Yeah. Should be right there. So we got in there and run it around. I said, there it is. Get it out. Put it on there and hook it up on the machine. I heard one of the fellas say, I wonder where did he know where that was? But I remembered it, see? So you were ahead of the computers. Yeah, I'll say. But, you know, a few like that and they got so that afterward, if I told them it was there, they'd go run around until they, hunt for it until they found it. It was there. Yeah. But when you grow up with a business and you were in every phase of it and knew all about it, that's what happens. It comes easy then. Yeah. You've got to have the heart in it all the way. Yeah. Well, there was the end of the interview with Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. End of interview.