 This is cassette two, continuation with Warren Peterson, Molina Loy, cassette two, sound one. My daughter, Rena Staben, who is married to Staben, she lives now in Waukegan and she's a teacher of adults in the college there at Lake Shore and Grays Lake campuses of the College of Lake County. Here's a little article that was written in the paper about the award. Adina Staben of Waukegan was named the Teacher of the Year earlier this month by the Illinois Adult Continuing Educators Association in Chicago. This is a copy of the award that she got. We're offered by the representatives, don't ask me to pronounce these, Matt Javits Stern Churchill, from the legislature, yeah. Whereas Adina Staben was named Teacher of the Year by the Illinois Adult Continuing Educators Association and whereas Adina Staben has been with the College of Lake County since 1974 and is an instructor in the English as a Second Language program, and whereas Adina was nominated by colleges and students to become the first CLC instructor so awarded, and whereas among the letters of the nomination is one that characterizes Adina's approach and philosophy to her work. Now therefore be it resolved by the House of Representatives of the 84th General Assembly of the State of Illinois that we congratulate Adina Staben on being named Teacher of the Year by the Illinois Adult Continuing Education Association. We commend Adina for the personal caring and enthusiastic manner in which she tends to her teaching. We recognize the award as an honor to the College of Lake County and to Adina's students, colleagues, and many friends, and we wish Adina continued professional success and health and happiness, and be it further resolved that a suitable copy of this preamble and resolution be presented to Adina Staben. Adopted by the House of Representatives April 21st, 1986. She got a plaque too. She also got a plaque. She can hang up. That's a picture of her. Very good. Yeah, even the Swedes, they make good teachers. That's right, they make good, what we say, a pobro, her mother was also a teacher. Yes, her mother was. Hurry up, you're stealing my time. Oh, yeah. We were talking about that vase that I showed you and took some pictures of. I wrote a little brief history back in 1976, and I'll read that. Sometime during the 1890s, the exact date I do not know, Mrs. Willard Vealy gave this vase to her sister-in-law, Mrs. Harper. I do not know if it was for a wedding or a birthday anniversary. Mrs. Harper, who was Willard Vealy's sister, didn't like her sister-in-law and did not care for the present. A short time after she received it, she said to my mother, Helen Hollander, who was her cook, Helen, if you would like to have that vase, you can have it. I don't want it. My mother accepted the vase with gratitude and took tender care of it during the rest of her single and married life. During that time, it survived many moves, at least six in the city of Moline, plus up to the woods in Michigan and to a farm in Minnesota. When she died in 1961, Ruth and I inherited it. At the time this occurred, Willard Vealy was the owner of Vealy Carriage Works that made fancy horse carriages, and later in the early 1900s made the Vealy Automobile, a very good one. And in the early 1930s made the Vealy Monocoup, an airplane. Both of the latter are now collector's items. During the time Willard Vealy was making the automobile, he built a mansion on 7th Street and Black Hawk Road, then known as the Bottom Road. The Vealy's lived high. Shortly after his company started in the airplane business, he went broke due to bad management. He hired a colonel from the arsenal to run his business, which was not good, not tending to his business, and the Great Depression. By this time, I think his son Willard II was in the business. Anyway, they lost their beautiful mansion, and some years later it became the plantation, a deluxe nightclub and restaurant, which it is today in 1976. Mrs. Harper's husband was the owner and operator of the Harper House, a quality hotel in Rock Island at that time. He was a very quiet, reserved man who did not share his wife's interest in animals. At the time my mother was cook there, Mrs. Harper had a dozen or so dogs of various sizes, a monkey which often ran loose around the place, a parrot, a half a dozen horses. Mrs. Harper was not a society dame. She preferred to spend her time with the animals, especially the horses. She became very friendly with her coachman, a Mr. Harris, which made her husband jealous. Several years later, my mother was not working for them at the time. Mr. Harper died. It was rumored that he killed himself, and Mrs. Harper married her coachman, Mr. Harris. The Harper House was located on the top of the hill in Rock Island near the Chibionik Cemetery, then a very thinly populated and rural area. This is what I remember from what my mother told me, November 29, 1976. That's real thrilling history there. Kind of interesting. So Mother worked for them for how long time did she work there? I don't really know. I think maybe it was a couple of years. She worked for several people. She worked for Harpers and Veles and Coopers. She also worked for two, they called them old maids in those days, single ladies. I don't know what their name was, but that was her first job with the two older ladies. And that was before she was married to your father? Before, yes. After she got married there was no more work outside of home? No more, no. She didn't do any more. All the cooking she did was home. And the sons come along and they need a lot of food. Huh? Her sons need a lot of food. Yeah, sure. Now I'm sitting together with Warren Peterson's wife, Ruth Eleanor Christianson was your maiden name. You were born in 1906, 7 of March in Sharpsburg, Iowa. That's right. And today, 15 June 1986. So tell me a little bit about your father. All right, now my father was wanting to come to the United States because he did not want to be drafted. And so he was going to come when he was 16 years of age, but his father was a cattle man and he took the cattle up to a market and it was a warm day, but when he came back his feet froze because he was wearing rubber boots and they froze so badly that the doctor said that they were going to have to amputate his feet. So there went his chance for coming to America when he was 16. And he said he would rather die than have his feet cut off. And so his mother took care of him and he did not walk, I guess, for several months. And finally he got better so he was able to come to America when he was in 1887, which would make him, let's see, 1897? No, 1887. Oh, 1887. Yes. From 69 to 1887, see, that would leave him about, no, no, no, no, no. No, nine from seven would leave. He was 18, 18 years old. And he did escape the draft then, don't you see? And he wanted to come to Iowa because he knew there was good land there and somebody from his area had told him about the good land in Iowa, but he ran out of money so he got as far as Pennsylvania in the Johnstown area. And I guess he was neglectful in writing to his folks when they heard about the Johnstown flood. They thought he had been carried away in the Johnstown flood. Then they got a letter from him saying that, no, he had left there. He hated to cut down trees. All he was doing was, you know, cutting down trees for tanning. And he said, I don't want this. As soon as he got enough money to get on the railroad and go to southwestern Iowa, that is where he went. And you said you know where Bedford is, see? And when he got to Bedford, Iowa, it was in 1889, and he worked as a farmhand for a small amount, but they allowed him to go to school to learn the English language in the winter months, but he had to work too. And that was in 1889 also. So Iowa, was there any kind of relation there? No, just a friend, a friend that he talked about Iowa. From the same area in Sweden as you were? In Sweden, from Småland, I suppose, Hukov, yes. And so, their names were Ben and Annalena Swanson, and they were near Sharpsburg. And he worked on the farm five years, and then he got lonesome, and he went back to Hukov in 18... Went home to Sweden again. Yeah, 1894, to show him that he'd made good, you see. He took his money and went back to Sweden, because he was the only one in his family that came over here. And there, they told him that his nieces and nephews had a very nice schoolteacher, and he ought to go down and meet this schoolteacher that was from, you know, north of from there. But she would walk part of the way, I guess, and stay in the schoolhouse at night. That was part of it, you know, that they had a little apartment in the back. So, he went down there and got acquainted with her, and she was two years older than him. And she had been engaged, and the man who wanted her to marry and go with him to Colorado, he had said that he would come back for her, because her mother was dying, and she did not want to leave right then, and her mother begged her to stay. Well, he went to Colorado, and she didn't get an address. She never heard a word from him. So, there she was, you know, disappointed in love, and my dad comes along, and I think she thinks he's a pretty good guy. And so, she says, all right, she will come to America with him, but she's not going to marry him. She's going to take enough schoolteacher money with her that if she can't stand it over here, she'll go back and be a schoolteacher in Sweden, because she taught enough years, you see. The way I figure it, that she was about 27, you know, because that was... So, they back to America in 1895. He went back to Hickle in 1894 and stayed there and courted Mama, and they came on the boat, but they weren't married. And then they decided that she should work as a hired girl there at Bedford, Iowa, to learn the language, which was a smart thing, you know, and she learned to read it. She asked people what in the... she got so that she could read it, and she said, what does a man do when he is a backheller? And it was bachelors, you know. What is a backheller? And so, we have funny stories from that. So, that was Amanda Blodt? That was Amanda Blodt, and she hated... She didn't want to... She hated being a hired girl. Oh, she hated being a hired girl. She had to use the back steps, you know, up the back steps of those places there at Bedford, Iowa, because the people that she worked for owned the store, and she remembers that she scrubbed the kitchen floor with lye, because it was wood in the porch, and she said, I'd sit up there and I'd look at my hands that were so pretty when I was teaching school, and here they were. She hated it. But then, in March, they were married, and Papa had bought a little farm then by scrimping and saving, and she gave him his schoolteacher money, too. She decided she wasn't going back to Sweden. And they were married March 1896, and they bought a little farm near Conway, and you could get started, you know, with a team of horses and a plow. And then, in 1897, twins were born, and the doctor left, and a little girl came after the first birth, and the little girl died in a day or two. And the boy lived, and he lived to be nine months, and when Papa would talk about it, he'd still cry. At nine months of age, he got what they called summer complaint, I suppose. It was from milk of some kind that was deleted. There was no refrigeration then. Diarrhea? Diarrhea would be his summer complaint. And he died. They called it summer complaint? They called it summer complaint down there in Iowa. They didn't know what it was, really, but it was diarrhea. They couldn't stop it, and so the baby boy died. And Mama went into a deep depression. She just, you know, it was awful to lose a baby away from home. And then soon after that, Papa was working so hard, and Mama said all he wanted to eat was meat, meat, meat, you know, and of course that was cheap there on the farm. You kill a pig. And so he had stomach ailment and heart trouble, she thought. They sold all their little small holdings and went back to Sweden. To Sweden. And they weren't very welcome because they lived around with relatives in Sweden. They went to his relatives? His relatives in Hygge. And his relatives in Hygge, from what I know, they were quite prosperous, and Papa was the only one who left. And all the others stayed around there, and they made this for me, you see. Now one of his relatives, he was in Stockholm in the Riksdag, and they made him fairly welcome, you know. But Mama's mother had died, and her Papa had married again, and he told her, well, you were welcome to come this time, but don't come back anymore, you know. And when Papa would get mad at Mama, he'd always throw that up to her, you know, about her relatives. So Fritjof Karlsson, that's in relation to your father? He was named after my father, and so he would be a nephew to my dad. I see. And so this is all my relatives over there, you know. But Papa was the only one who went, so Tilda and Amanda and Selma and Julius and Ida, they all, you know, when a letter would come from Papa, it'd be all passed around, so they knew all about us, but I didn't know anything about them very much. Anyway, they went back for a year. To Sweden? Yes. I suppose they lived in a little apartment and did a lot of visiting around, and Papa was going to invest the money that he'd gotten from his farm in Iowa over there in Sweden, and he was going to live there and make a living. But nothing came up, but luckily he went to a good doctor, he said, and the good doctor cured him of his stomach trouble. He told him to drink beer, you know. You mean they continued living in Sweden? They lived in Sweden for a year. And he had trouble over there? Yeah, he had trouble over there until he went to this doctor, and then he got better. Beer? I don't know. That was one of the things Mama hated to see, but anyway, he got a little bit better about his stomach trouble. So back to America they came because Mama said you can't run away from your sorrow. Back to America they came, and she was pregnant on the way back to America, and that was when my sister was born then in 1901. Did they go back to Sharpsburg again? They went back to Sharpsburg. By way of Escanaba, Michigan, she had Mama's family all cleared out. They must have hated that old man, you know, the father. And only one of them ever lived there with him. The rest all cleared out and went to Escanaba. They went to Arizona. He was just an old dragon. I'll tell you what he was. He'd been in the King's Army, and he thought he was better than anybody else, and he had an inflated idea of himself. So he wasn't a little bit stuck up then? Oh, he was stuck up, you know, and he wouldn't do a day's work. He wouldn't do a day's work. He expected the girls to do it. He did see that they got an education, you see. They all turned out to be schoolteachers, his daughters there, but they all cleared out as soon as they could. Anyway, they went to Escanaba, and living there was Mama's baby sister, who was nine years younger than Mama, and she had married. And Papa worked on the ore there for a little bit. He hated that. He loved that thick land down in Iowa that was so much nicer than the stony land in Smolin. So they went back to Taylor County, Iowa, and he persuaded Mina, that's Mama's baby sister, and her husband, John Sundle, to come down to Iowa. Now John Sundle had never farmed a day in his life, but he comes down there, and he buys a farm two miles east of Sharspoor, and Papa buys a farm two miles west of Sharspoor, and that was the one thing that just kept Mama from ever getting depressed again because she and her Mama, as soon as there was a telephone, they could have a private conversation. They were the only Swedish family in the whole county. Was it Taylor County? Taylor County, yes. The only ones around there excepting this older couple, Swansons, that had brought them there. So they would ring 20 people on the line, and they had 9 o'clock, they would call each other, and then they would talk about five minutes, and there was one lady who just hated it. She loved to listen to it, and she'd say, Oh, choke off, choke off, she'd yell at Mama, and Mama would say, Who now, Auntie I-I-Morgan? You know, she was jealous. Then, let's see, then another thing about my dad and Uncle John, they had very much socialist leanings, and Taylor County voted Republican almost entirely. There would be a few scattering of Democrats, but when anything, there were any votes, there were two votes for Eugene V. Debs, the socialist. And, you know, I was so proud of him for it. See, and of course Mama hated war, and of course Eugene Debs went into prison because he was against World War I. What about your aunt, Mama? Were they Democrats or socialists? Oh, they were socialists, too. John and, see, Mama wasn't voting then, John Sundell and John Christensen, they were the socialists. Then after World War I, one of Papa's hired men, well, Mama hated these hired men because Papa prospered, and he, in the harvest time, he would have, well, he'd have a hired man all the time, and that meant for Mama to wash on the scrub board, you know, and cook big meals, and then during harvest time, he might hire two more that would stay there, too. So the farm, how big was it, Mama? Well, it was around 300 acres. 300 acres? Yes, and, you know, when you do it by plow, it took quite a lot. And those hired men that he would gather in, one of them brought us bed bugs, and Mama just had to fit bed bugs. You know what bed bugs are? They bite, you know? And Mama had the awfulest time getting rid of them because you had to take the beds apart and scrub them with kerosene. I think she was ready to leave my father. I think she was pretty proud of things. And then another fella came, and he only worked for one week, and he left, and Papa wondered what had happened to him, and we heard that he had come down with mumps over at Clarinda, Iowa, and within a week's time, my dad got mumps. He thought he was dying. We three girls got mumps. But the only good thing that ever happened to that, Papa never picked up an itinerant guy coming through again. No more strangers. No more strangers. And let's see, then another thing, my mother, you know, they would come and ask my mother if we girls could come and help while the wives around there were having their babies. And Mama would pull herself up and say, My girls are not going to work out. She said, They're going to be schoolteachers. And she wouldn't. Now, there were three of us girls there. It wouldn't have hurt us, you know, to go and help maybe for a week while the lady had her baby, you know. But she would not let us. And we really didn't want to very much, you know, but she'd say, Well, no, my girls are going to be schoolteachers. And she had a real respect for education. They went to church, but there wasn't any Lutheran church around there, and they were just horrified at the giggling kids on the back, you know, pews. So they very seldom went to church, my father and mother. My sisters went, and we went to Sunday school, but they didn't. But there was never a night that I didn't see Mama take her Bible out and read, read every night. And then she would sing those old Swedish songs, and she was the only one in our family that had a nice voice. And she'd sit there and sing, lonesome, I'm sure, you know. Did she sing in Swedish? Oh, Swedish, Swedish, Swedish. And when I went away to college, I got a scholarship because at that time in Iowa, if you were the valedictorian of your class, you'd get a scholarship to either Ames or Iowa City or Cedar Falls. And I was 16 the year I was a senior, so I was just 17, and you couldn't teach until you were 18. So they let me go to Cedar Falls. And I remember that my father said, Now, if you come back, he said, You're the first one of our family that gets to go to college. If you come back an educated fool, you're going to break my heart. But he had real respect for education, and so did my mom. And he didn't want us running around because there were a lot of little girls around there that were having to get married, you know. And he said, Well, now, if we wouldn't date until we were 18, he thought by that time we'd have a little sense, you know. He'd give us each a gold watch, which he did. He was a good, good man, and Mama was very good. I think that's about all, except that Mama didn't think much of the local yokels, you know. She didn't know what it was having to do with them. And occasionally I'd get a letter from one of them asking me for a date, and she'd say, Well, don't bother to answer it. They won't know that you got it. And let's see. Oh, anything else that I wrote down? Well, were they familiarized with the community? I mean, did they visit each other? Papa was very, well, we, about every other Sunday, we would go over to Sundell's, see, because they had three children. So we visited a lot of three girls, no boys. And then Sundell's were two boys and one girl. And they're still all living. Aggie, my oldest cousin there, she is 87. We're there. We're long live, do you know? In Iowa. In Iowa. And, of course, by going to school, we had those contacts, you know. But I would say Papa was much friendlier than Mama. Mama did not, in her later years, she really didn't want to go anywhere. She was very religious, very, very religious, very, very much a recluse, I would say. Was she there from Sweden, you think, religious, going to church every Sunday? Oh, yes, yes. The Lutheran church. Oh, the Lutheran church, yes, yes. You bet. You bet. And Papa was, too, from there, you know. But I remember that, see, Mama died in 1946 and Papa lived on to 1957. So he would come up in our home many times, and he would say that, well, he'd say, you know, when I was young, they tried to scare you, you know, at the Lutheran church with brimstone hellfire. And then he took hold of my little finger and he said, you know, I'm just your earthly father, but do you think for one minute I could stand seeing that little finger burn? He said, how much more your heavenly father loves you than what they try to tell you, you know. And, oh, I was going to say, too, that during World War I, then after World War I, Taylor County was full of KKKs, Ku Klux Klan. They came from the South, then? No, no. Soldiers returning. There was, you know, that's kind of the Bible Belt down there. They were all over. They were in Moline, too. And burning, burning, burning crosses, you know. And one dear lady who had taught the school, first grade, in Lenox, Iowa, they made her quit after 20 years of teaching because she was a Catholic. They hated Catholics, Jews, niggers they called them, blacks, you know. And also foreigners. Anybody foreign. And this Len Graham said to my dad, because Len Graham was one of the ones who was organizing this, and he was a pretty good guy, you know. But they came from having been in the war, and they didn't want any foreign entanglements. And he said to Papa, oh, I wish that you had been born in the United States because then you could join the Ku Klux Klan. And my papa said to us, thank God I wasn't born here because I wouldn't join that organization, you know. But Len got $5 for it, but he got to join it. But you never saw anything like it. There were thousands of Ku Klux Klan weddings, you know, and they had these hooded specimens, you know, running wild. So, but, yeah, you remember then during the First World War when they forbade to preach in a foreign language? Oh, yes, yes, I remember that. So the church couldn't preach that out? No, no, no, no. And sauerkraut, they had to call it liberty cabbage, you know, sauerkraut, because that was German. Liberty cabbage. Liberty cabbage. Is it true that they painted the minister's car yellow? Well, I don't know about that, but they painted, there was a nice bachelor man who lived with his mother, and his name was Duckett, and I think he was probably of German origin back there. And the farmers there, our friend, Pender, thought that he didn't buy enough war bonds, so they came up one time and painted his house yellow, you know. And ornery, ornery, you know, it's lovely. Mob spirit. Oh, I know. And they wouldn't have prosecuted? No, no, no, they were admired, see. The sheriff. They were scared, too, I suppose. Oh, yes, yes, because they were elected, you know. You probably were in on it. So it was not easy then. What did your mother say at times like that, because she could see it? Oh, she hated war, you know, and she cried over it. I remember she cried over the Titanic, you know what that is, you know, she cried over it. She's very tender-hearted about things. And when she would get a little money, there was someone by the name of Linnea that she wrote to in Sweden, and Linnea evidently must have had polio or something because she wasn't able to work, and Mama would send her a little money now and then. We always knew her by name, you know. But Papa ended up, you know, by the people who lived east of us that made fun of us, you know, he ended up by buying their farm and the people down south, he bought their farm, so he ended up by having four farms, you know, when other people were losing their farms. But they worked so hard. They worked so hard. But how could he manage to do that so many years? Now the actors do. Well, then he would rent those out, you see. He rented those out, he rented the east farm out, the south farm out. So he must have made it pretty good then. Oh, he did. Your mother's school money. They were very frugal. They were frugal. I said two, so I took. He flew back to Sweden in 1952, so he was 83 years old. And we came back, he said, that's the only way to go is to fly. He loved it, you know. And he was there about a month, and he said, I was guest of honor in every place, you know. And after he died, my sister wrote, and she said, I just hope that up in heaven he's a guest of honor, too, because that meant so much to him, because he came back, you know, as a... I'm sure he didn't spoil the rumor that he had plenty of money in Iowa and owned three farms, you know. He made goods, and Mama helped him, you know. He should look back then, coming to Pennsylvania, and then send them to Charlottesburg and back to Sweden and back again and back to Sweden. And he had the patience, you know. He'd come, and we would lie out there on the front porch, and he'd tell us stories, you know, stories of what had happened, and sometimes other stories, and we'd say, oh, Papa, what happened next? And he was just about asleep, you know, and he'd say, I don't know, my hat blew off, and I don't know what happened. He had a sense of humor. It was then, no story. So did he tell about the journey over? Oh, yes, yes. He hated the Irish boys, he said, you know, as he came over. It was the first time he... First time he came, you know, without... He went to Liverpool, then. Oh, he went to Liverpool, yes, yes. And he said that he had a trunk, of course, you know, and all he had protected there, and he said that you had to carry a knife around with you, you know. I suppose it was a pocket knife, but a sharp one, but my dad was stocky and well-built, and he wasn't afraid of the devil, as the devil walked in here, you know. And so I think he beat up on one of the Irish lads, and they left his property alone, but he said else they were stealing everything that doesn't nail down. And so he always had kind of a low opinion of them, because he was alone, you know. And then Mama, when she came over with him, you know, as engaged to him, I think she enjoyed that trip. But then when she went back, you see, and they had this hard time in Sweden, but nobody wanted them, and Papa wasn't feeling well, and she was kind of melancholy. She said that when she came back, she was pregnant with this baby, you know, and she was seasick. They were in steerage, you know, everybody throwing up around you. And she said she was so sick, and she said, Stur, I lie a hobbit, I'll never go across again, because Papa wanted to go back, you know. She'd been over to America, and then back again, and then over to America, and she said, I've had it, she said. And she said, worst of all, Papa wasn't seasick one day, you know. And he'd tell her, oh, if she don't eat cheese, she'd be all right, you know, she'd quit throwing up. So they told us a lot of stories, you know, very dear to us. And my sisters were – one sister is five years older than I am, one sister is four years older than I am, and Mama had some little Swedish primmers that she – I think she came, you know, when she went over there that last time. She brought them, and she taught my sisters to read Swedish. And I remember – I was not very old at the time – that when they got to the end, there was a tuppa, and there in the tuppa, Papa had put on that page a nickel for them, because they had read through it. Oh, boy, a nickel was as big as a $10 bill to the kids these days, you know. But when I came along, they were too busy to teach me reading Swedish. We talked Swedish all the time, you know. We did. Oh, yes, yes, all the time. Were you all girls interested in learning or going to school? Oh, yes, yes, yes. Both of my sisters were valedictorians of their class. I was a valedictorian of mine. You jolly well be. If you didn't, my mama would get after you. But was she able to help you with all that? Oh, sure, sure. And Papa, with mathematics, he was a whiz, you know. Oh, she could read English, you know. Another thing, when we had cherries or apples, there were three of us girls and Mama. And two girls and Mama would work at pitting cherries or grapes, and the other one would have to read to us, you see. We would read, because we took quite a lot of magazines. Not too many magazines, but we would read, because there was no radio, so we were the entertainment. Then maybe the next day the next girl got to, and Mama had to fit if we couldn't read well, read with expression and read it well. So you did two jobs at the same time. Yeah, yeah. Nothing was the same. But you learned to do it, you know. You bet, you bet. So your dad helped with the... And then I worked in the fields, because Papa would pay me for working in the fields. So I husked corn, and I worked in the wheat field and the oats field and the barley, right along with the hired men, you know. And the shop, right? And... Had to buy and do them. Yes, by hand. Made you a strong kid when you were 80, but you still could go out and do it. Did all the kids still work like you on the farm, or did some of them? My sister... Oh, no, no. You mean around there? Yeah, around there. Oh, the girls would say, well, we don't work out in the fields. That's boys' work, you know. And I'd say, well, my Papa pays me. I would say that we, they just said, well, look at those foreigners out there making their girls work in the fields, you know. You think they were the same? Oh, yeah. They thought we were, you know, peasants. So who were the rest of the people? Were they Germans or Americans? But not any of them. I don't think any of them were first generation like we were. They were born here. They were born here, and their parents were born here. And, oh, I just suffered when Mama would come to school and she would talk broken English, you know. They'd laugh at her, and I would just curl up inside, you see. It's hard on kids, the first generation, you know. I wanted Mama to be just like those other people, you know. But you had no trouble not to understand Swedish and talk Swedish and then picking up the English, right? Not a bit, not a bit. Of course, my sisters had kind of led the way, you know. But, no, no. You know, kids are lingual, you know. The age to learn a language is before you're ten years of age, and you could learn six languages at that time, I think, if you had to. So how come they settled in Shoresbrough? I mean, there were no Swedes at all. No, uh-uh. But good land, good land, a lot better than what you had in Småland. And not the best land in Iowa. Oh, no, no, no. And it's a little bit up and down, isn't it? Yes, pretty flat, but the ground isn't quite as rich now. Take over here and cross the river at Scott County. Has the best yields. It's the best land in Iowa. And then up in the northwest, it's very good. But Papa probably couldn't have afforded it, don't you see? Because it was one of the last ones. I was going to show you this. But how was he able to buy more farms? Did he go to the bank and take up the soil? Oh, no, he saved it up, you know, my golly. And frugal. And frugal and smart. His dad was a trader, and some of Papa's relatives were lawyers. So he was no dummy. And the bankers there, they really liked my dad. They were always saying how well he did. If there was a bargain coming up, they'd say, I was going to try to show him where you took a picture of me up on the... And selling his products on the train. Oh, yes, and taking it to St. Joseph's. St. Joseph's, you know, he'd watch the markets. Missouri, you mean St. Joseph, Missouri? Yes, St. Joseph, Missouri. He'd send his... When he died, he had quite a bit of money in the bank. Yes, you betcha. Savings bonds, U.S. savings bonds, yeah, quite a bit. And he had those farms, too. And no one took over the farm then from the bank? Oh, yes, yes, yes. My sister... They divided it when... Oh, I see. Ruth has one farm. I have one farm down there. And the sisters. Oh, you still have it? Yeah, yeah. Oh, so you ran it all down? Yeah. And we're not getting rich, are we? We aren't as good as they are. You're making better on the farm than yourself today. Now, my father used to tell me that there in Smolensk, there were rocks as big as our coal house. And I didn't believe it, you know. I thought, well, rocks there are, you know, this big. But when we went over to Sweden, Stury took a picture of me of where Papa said he used to stand up there and pretend he was a Lutheran minister and he would preach to the people. Warnie has a better picture of that in the movie, but I had so much fun. So there, Rock, we were funding a charcoal. Yeah, yeah. So... Well, here's a picture that I had never seen, but he had sent that back to Sweden, taken in Bedford, Iowa. Oh, that's what you meant. And when we were visiting there, they said, well, he sent those over there, and that was before he married Mama, you know. And they was taking it in Red Oak. I think Bedford. Doesn't it say Bedford down there, or am I wrong? I thought it said it was in Red Oak. Well, maybe not. And then this is Mama and Papa's wedding picture. There she is. No, Bedford, Iowa. Oh, Bedford, yeah. And there is Papa and Mama on their wedding. Yeah, Bedford. So when you made the visit, not to your father's... This jury gave this to me. I get to do... See, here I am, Ruth Christensen Peterson, and he has it cleared back to 1651 of my ancestors, which I thought was kind of nice of him, you know. It's kind of hard to trace it, though. They changed the name, so... Oh, sure. You go here and there and there and there and there and there. So you found some of the pictures of your family down in Sweden? Yeah, I found them. When you met your cousins? Yes, although this was in our family, and I met a lot of our cousins there. In fact, there were 16 of us first cousins on Papa's side, and as I said before, all of them stayed there excepting Papa. He was the adventuresome one. Did anybody remember, now, what you had told me about them going over to the United States and back to Sweden again and back again? And your relation? In other words... I don't think so. The people you met in Sweden? Yes, oh, yes. Or anybody living there remembered what happened years ago with your parents? Uh-huh. They remembered seeing them there, you know. But they can't remember coming back and staying there? No, no, no. I don't think so. Maybe, maybe, you see here, Tilda, and I think that she was still living when Papa, you know, so she didn't die until 1947, but her children would probably just see them, you see, because when they were back there, that was 1890, they left... 1895. 1895, uh-huh. And they stayed home one year? They stayed over there one year, uh-huh. The times were pretty bad in the United States in 1993 and 1994. I don't know. It was an economic depression. I suppose. It could have been, uh-huh, uh-huh. So maybe they were... Uh-huh. But Papa had enough money to go back there, and he was going to invest in something back there. So he was a businessman, though, because he couldn't make too much money at the time. No. He wasn't working for farmers, you see. Yeah, no. Well, you see... He must have been an investor. Well, well... Uh-huh, uh-huh. Because just working as a hired man, you didn't make much. No, no. You got your boardroom and a dollar or two a month. Uh-huh. To pay the overalls. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, uh-huh. Yeah, yeah. So he must have been, like you said, a fraudulent auto... Oh, yes, yes, yes. Pitch defense. Oh, yeah, and looking for every chance, you know, every chance to make money. Oh. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm. So he did pretty good then, three farms, huh? He did, yeah. Did you each...? Each have a farm. Yeah, it's pretty... Did he plan it that way, you think? Did you want to marry a farmer? Did he talk about it? Oh, when Warren was working... What happened when you showed him? Well... There's an Armstrong guy. You'll fit right in with this one. My sister Edith married a farmer, and they have a lot of acreage down there now because she married a boy who's inherited farms from his folks, too. Was he a Swedish-backed farmer? He was not. In fact, shall I tell her what my mama said? She married... My sister Edith married a man named George Cade, and his folks had been, you know... George Cade was not a first generation. He'd been here in America for years and years and years, the Cades go back, and it was English and German background. And my sister Edina married a schoolteacher who taught in Davenport, Iowa, and he has English background. And when I told my folks that I might marry Warren Peterson, Mama said to me, you know, both of your sisters married such nice American boys, she said, I don't think you ought to marry a Swede, because she said they don't treat their wives half as nice as George Cade and Dan Kinzer treats Edina and Ed. Well, it was a whole generation different, you know. They changed their mind about Warren, though. But that actually happened. Mama said she was giving me advice. She said, I'm interested. She gave her mother's advice. But you had no intention, Warren, to settle down in Sharksburg to be a farmer. Not much. He wanted me to come down there and do the farm. He wanted to. He wanted me to do that. Because there was one big South farm. I talked to Ruth and I said, no, I don't think that's... Ruth wasn't much in favor of the idea of a farm in the middle. So you've been away from home, then, how many years? Oh, well, I left there to go away to college in 1923, and I have never been back there except in the summertime, school vacations. Because, you see, I was an old maid schoolteacher. I was just like my mom. I married late and married a younger guy, you know. You didn't take any chances. But didn't you feel that you missed something every spring, hitching up the team and out in the field and shopping up? I really, as I was growing up, I loved it. It's a wonderful place for a kid to grow up, you know. And we were pretty isolated. But you lost that feeling after a few years in the classroom. Well, my sister loves the farm. The one who's down there now, she just feels so sorry for us, you know, living here. There's no place like the farm. Bad times and good times, and good times and bad times. So the schoolteacher being a teacher never went back? No, no, no. So the one on the farm, did she also study to be a teacher? Yeah, she taught all three. All three of you? Oh, yes, yes. We weren't hired girls, because Mama said your girls weren't going to be hired girls. So you made your mom a problem. Oh, yes, yes. Did she tell you? Oh, yes, yes. So when Rita got married, she didn't teach anymore school? No, no, because she had to. Mama was very, very proud of her three girls that turned out to be schoolteachers. In a nice way, because if you're a nice little Lutheran lady, you don't show your pride very much, you know. But she was. What church did you attend on there, Mother? Methodist there in Shaxpur. There was no Lutheran church? No, no Lutheran church there. And there were no Swedes more than the Sandals? Except in the Sandals. And then Swansons that brought Papa there. They died early in my life. I don't remember them very much, but they had two bachelor brothers that lived on, and they made good, too. They had one of the nicest farms around there. So the Sandals, now, what happened to their children? Did they stay on? Well, the older girl, she was born in 1899. She taught school, too. Actually, in 1923, when I graduated from high school, my cousin was there, too, and he went on to college. And we were the only two that had gone on to college there before. But they had that real respect for him. And Agnes married, and her husband had been in World War I, and she met him when she was teaching school, and she was staying in his mother and father's house over near Newmarket, which is in that area, too. And so they were married, and it was hard times for them because he came from a big family, and they rented. And I think they were renting about 13 years, and he went over to Newmarket to an American Legion meeting, and he had been gassed in World War I. He was over in France a long time, and he would get this feeling like, I'm choking, so he went out. He said, I'm going to go out and get a breath of fresh air. And when they came out of the American Legion meeting at Newmarket, they found him, and he had missed his step, hit the back of his head, and blood was coming from his nose and his ears, and he never regained consciousness. And he would be in his 30s, and of course that was such a blow to my cousin, Aggie. She came in the middle of the night and took her over to the hospital to be, and she was left with a little boy that was about 11 years old. So her folks took the little boy to live with them. She went back to school teaching one year. Then she went to Des Moines and took business training. And the fact that her husband had been a Legionnaire, she got help, and so during Franklin Delano Roosevelt's term there, she got a good job in Washington, D.C., and worked there all her working days until she retired at 65. And she was a good and brave woman. She never remarried, and you just love her. I said, I think she must have been born laughing, and Warren and Aggie, they doted on each other. My sister and I always talked to each other at 9 o'clock on Saturdays, just like Mama and Mina always talked to each other at 9 o'clock. And then Warren always said, Tell Aggie hello, because she lives there. She came back then from Washington, D.C., and lives in an apartment there in Lenox and runs the Methodist Church. So you mentioned that she worked for a program under Eleanor Roosevelt. Yeah, she was in the Census Department, so she kept on and on and on. She had a good business. It was so much better than trying to teach a little country school that paid so poorly. She did well. Not only that, she ended up with a fairly good retirement. The government pays. If you work long enough, you get a pretty good pension. But you were the only Democrat in Taylor County. I was a socialist. We were socialist. Were you known as that, though? Oh, sure. And your dad was never afraid to state his opinion? No, no, no, no. But this going against the stream, you know, Republicans and KKK. You picked the right place, all right. Did he change his opinion after he got older? Did he have the same socialist... Oh, I think so, very much so. He was a very good socialist, right? No, you see, because they kind of... But in fact, I think towards the last... They asked him to be a Republican judge on an election one time, and he was, you know, because he was there to see that they weren't cheating anybody. But he loved to read. My dad would sit, and he would read. We gave him Life magazine, and he would read it from cover to cover. And as Warren's dad did, too, they would read their paper from cover to cover, you know, and they kept up. What paper did they have, though? Daily paper. Well, first of all, they took the Chicago Daily News, and it came a day late. From Chicago. From Chicago. And then, of his later years, I suppose the last 20 years of his life, he took the Des Moines Register, which is a good paper, you know. He'd read that. Did he have any Swedish paper? Mama took one from Chicago. In fact, her sister, you see, all of them cleared out from Sweden excepting Eva, and Eva was the oldest. And Eva must have been her father's favorite, you see, old man blood. And when Mama and Papa came back to visit, Eva's daughter went back to Escanaba with Papa and Mama, and Eva never forgave them. Because she had three daughters, and Elma came, and Linnea came, and the only one she was left with was Gunnberg that we visited. And Mama would write to Eva, but Eva would never answer her. Never, never. She never forgave her. She said, they stole my daughters from me. And Eva's husband had died of tuberculosis. They died like flies over there with TB. And she went back to teaching, Eva. She taught for 50, 60 years, and she was even written up in the Chicago paper, you know, on news from Smolanda, that she was such a good teacher, but unrelenting. I'll show you a picture of it. And she never answered your call? Oh, never. No, she would write to the baby sister, Mina, you know, but never even one word of message to my Mama. You know, Mama would cry. And the daughter, now, they went to Escanaba. Did she go and back to Sweden? Oh, no, she married, and we are going. Now, let's see. Where is a picture of... This Volker Karlsson, now, you mentioned before, he was a Vikslapsman in Sweden. How was he related, now, to your dad? Oh, this man there? Volker Karlsson. Oh, he would be... His cousin? No, his nephew, his nephew. Nephew. Here he is. Now, this was Papa's favorite sister to Amanda. And here is Fritsjof Karlsson, and he was born in 1892. And you see, Papa's name was Fritsjof, you know, so he was named... And he is in... by Nutsjö. Nutsjö. Nutsjö. And when we were there, he entertained us. All these people there, Fritsjof, and he never married, but he was a grand old man. He made me think of my father and all. He was Vikslapsman. What kind of party was he for, then? Was it the moderates or...? I don't know. I just honestly don't know. Was he a Democrat? I never heard about that. I think he thought we were so dumb that we didn't know, you know. Well, I don't know. Could you talk to him? Oh, sure, sure. He couldn't speak in English, did he? No, no. In fact... So then, perhaps, let's go... In fact, here, I'll tell you a little bit. When we visited Warren's folks, and then we stopped and saw Annika, the one who is related to Mama, you know, and then we went down... The one who was up in Nutsjö. Yes. And then we came down here and we rented a little house in... I mean, we stopped at a hotel in Ljungby. In fact, Mama had... Let's see. Well, the name of that place was kind of nice. Yeah. Terraza Hotel. And I wrote... I called in, and I had to talk in Swedish to Sturie Andersson, who lives down here on the home farm of Hökals, you see. And so I asked to talk, and his wife answered, and I had said to Warren, I don't think they want us to come at all. They sound so cold. My Swedish was so poor, and so I wrote on Monday. I said, this has been a lovely day, and I was absolutely wrong about Sturie Andersson's freedom. They were so very, very cordial toward us, and I fell in love with Sturie, my cousin. He's so peppy and kind and good and reminds me a little of Warren's cousin Howard, not in looks but in manner. Hökal is a beautiful big place, and I saw the barn that Christian Magnussen built over 100 years ago. See, that would be my dad's father. And I saw the stone fence that Fritsche, that would be my dad, and Julius, his brother, had built when young men and Sturie's two married daughters were home and had made the meal. And Frita has, Frita is Sturie's wife, has heart trouble, very bad, but helped a lot. And we had a delicious meal of elk meat and potatoes and peas and carrots and tossed salad and cauliflower served up on a beautiful platter, on beautiful plates. And then we had cheesecake for dessert, and we went walking in the pasture after Warren had taken movie pictures, and I loved them all, my five first cousins. See, they were all there. When I called, I asked her if we could come down that day, and she said, oh, no, no, not today. We were out riding in a car, and we went by the station. We didn't know it was there, but we were trying to find Hükal. We saw about six cars. And I said, there must be having a church meeting, you know, but they were figuring out which one was going to have us. They took us on a grand. The whole week there, we was going from one place to another. I never ate so many, had so many coffees. Every place we went, we had to have coffee and cake or cookies, you know, and we'd go to the next place and have coffee. Oh, I know, I know. Then you had a big meal, and then you had to start out again. And he met us, Sturie met us at Tron Read, wasn't it? And then you followed, see, and then we said, oh, my Lord, that was a place that we saw that we thought they were having a church meeting. And let's see. We went walking in the pasture after Warren had taken the movie's pictures, and I love them all, my five first cousins. They used to be 16 cousins, eight girls and eight boys, and now we're only eight. Four girls, you see the three girls over here in Iowa, and four boys. Adina, Edith, and Ruth Christensen, Esther, Fritsche, Hjalmar, Ruben Christiansen, and Sturie. Hjalmar and Esther are sisters and brothers. We go to see Esther and her husband in Gunghol tomorrow. We went someplace each month, and Warren wrote some for us. We had this little... So you had a full schedule then? Oh, we had a full schedule and a full stomach, Lordy. Full stomach, I've got a lot of stomach complaints. Oh, my man. But Warren's cousin had warned him. He said, now, look, they will put out a lunch for you, and you'll think that's the whole meal. Don't eat too much because in two hours you're going to be eating again. Do you know that area? Yeah, they eat. When you just bought boa, did they come with the main course? Oh, with the main course, yes. But they're healthy, aren't they? They're healthy. And, you know, they said over, they were always saying, you know, the Swedes are not religious. Every church we went to was full, you know. Youngby, we went there. Were they Lutherans also? Oh, yes, yes, and they are very religious, these people. They come around in their bicycle with an umbrella. Oh, yes, in Youngby. Right, bicycle, a whole umbrella. The ladies, too, you know. Most of them had hats, too. Warren, you go over and watch, see if my chicken is stewing dry. So how about, what kind of questions did they ask you, your cousins, about the kind of life you were going to have? They talked quite a bit. They remember Papa being over there in 1952. Oh, yeah. And I gave them some Kennedy dollars, and they said, well, Papa had given them dollars, but not Kennedy dollars, you know, when he was over there. I think that... Did I put some more water on this? A little bit more, I imagine, Warren, because it's kind of... Our daughter is coming tomorrow, and I want to make a chicken casserole for her, so I'm stewing up some chicken for her. Actually, you see, we were there in 1972. I don't remember that they questioned us too much. We had pictures, and they were interested in seeing pictures of my sister, of course. And then there was one that was so... She was just darling. She was married to my cousin, Yalmer, and she wrote poetry, and she wrote to me so much. So you are the only one of the sisters that have been over this way? Yes, yes. The only one? Uh-huh. Now, I was going to see if I could show you... When you came back, now, the only thing you knew was what your parents had told you. That's right. Did it match up, then, what they said, that this big stone, of course, you were surprised to find? Yes, and the big, big barns, Papa would say... It was just them? Yes, yes, and the stone fences, people would say, and Papa would say, well, you think this barn here in Iowa is big, you ought to see the barns in Sweden, because they are big down there in Småland, big, and because their cattle stay in them, you know. And they're proud of their woods, too, they've got big...