 I'm here with Gustav Johnson in Lackford, Illinois. He was born in 1902, 13 September in Pärsnes, in Öland, and came to America in 1926. Can you tell me a little bit about your father, Johan Petter Jonsson in Pärsnes? What did he do? I was here four times. He was here four times. In America? Yeah, but then he had a farm home, you know. So when he came back, we had a farm there and we worked on that when he was here. Then he came home and then he sold the farm and bought a smaller place, more than him, till he died. Now my sister, or brother-in-law, has that place. In Pärsnes? Yeah, in Pärsnes. So he was here four times? Yeah. Here in Lackford? Yeah. The first time he was in Chicago, and then the other three times he was here in Lackford. Did he come to some relation here then? No, he didn't have. He went here alone and then he had a brother who was here, but he was only here a year and a half, and then he went home. He didn't like it. No? So the first time he came here, do you remember what year? No, I don't know. It must have been the 1890s or something. No. No, he was a sailor before that, before he left for the United States. No, I think he went... Yeah, that must have been about the time, 1901 or so, so he went to the United States. Because you were born 1902? Yeah. So he was married then when he went over here? Oh, yeah. But your mother, she didn't want to go with him then? Huh? Your mother didn't want to go? No, she was home right along. She didn't want to go with him? No. How many children were you in the family? Huh? How many brothers and sisters did you have? We were five. Five? Mm-hmm. How many brothers and... We only... we only three left now. Three left? Yeah. How many boys? We were two. Two boys? Three, three boys. Yeah, three boys. But the oldest one, he died here in Rockford. I don't know what year it was, no. So when you started to grow up then, you had to help out on the farm then? Oh, yeah. The thing was that when I was born, my mother got a stroke. So my aunt and grandfather took me, and they lived in Ferry. I was raised there. They was your mother's parents then? Yeah, my mother's sister. Yeah. Mm-hmm. So I was raised there until... Oh, I was about 13, 14, and I went home back home to help with the farm. So you went to school then in Föra? In Föra, yeah. And you went... you were confirmed there also? Oh, yeah. Föra kyrka? Yeah. So what kind of work were you doing then? Everything on the farm? Yeah. Taking care of the cows and plowing? Oh, we was plowing, and we was cutting rye and oats and barley and everything, everything, you know. And picking stones in the ground? Oh, yeah. Were there a lot of stones? Oh, yeah. We had lots of stones here. It never ended? No. And you were out picking every spring? Or did you do that in the fall? You know, for instance now, we used to take a rake and go out and rake them up. And so we'd take them away. Then the next time we plowed, there was just as many left. Never ended? Never ended. But as far as the farm was concerned, we always had good ground. Were you the oldest boy? No, I had one brother who was older than me. He died here about four years ago. Oh, he came over here also? Yeah, he was here before me. So your father came back then, what year, to Sweden? Then I have a younger brother. He lives down in McHenry now. He's married down there. So what year did the father come back then from Rockport to stay in Sweden? Do you remember when he came back? He came back... I left in 26. He came home in 24, I think it was. He stayed there many years? Yeah. And your mother was dead then? No, no. She was still living? No, sure. Did she recover from the stroke? In one way she recovered, but her right leg got shorter and her right arm stood like that. She was paralyzed, you know, the whole side down. But she was able to talk and walk? Oh yeah, oh yeah. She even started all over, so she wrote letters with her left hand. She must have recovered very good now since she was born after you. She's younger than you are. So his dad made visits four times back and forth to Sweden? Yeah. I couldn't tell you that. Four times, yeah. Four times. Oh, what's his name now? I don't know if the still is wrong here. He worked for... What the heck was this contractor's name? He worked for him for, I think, three times when he was here. And the last job he was working on was Swedish-American Hospital. They built that for the first time. That was the last job he had. He drove an old... They didn't have trucks at that time, you know, so they drove an old horse and a wagon and stuff to the jobs, you know. And then they built it on... I think it was the... the paper mill down there where the seminary was. He worked on that too. So he was not able to get your mother over to this country? No, she didn't want to go here. She didn't want to go. And... And he didn't intend to stay here very long, you know. He was just here for... I think the last time he was here, he was here for about eight years. In one stretch? Yeah. And then he went back 24? Yeah. What did he say then? Did you ask him a lot of questions about America or...? Oh, yeah. He didn't mention much about it. No? No. He didn't encourage you to go? Huh? Did he encourage you to go over here? No. He didn't want me to go. But I had my brother here, the oldest brother here, and him and I cooked it up, you know. So you wrote letters back and forth? Yeah. And then when I come here, I wrote to my youngest brother, so he come through. So we all three were here. So your brother, he sent over a ticket to you then? Yeah. I borrowed from him, yeah. So he sent it over to you? I could have been here 25, but it so happened that I was in the army in Sweden. Oh, you were drafted? And I wrote to the king and they refused me. But then a year after, I got permit to go. So where did you do the military service then? Eksjö. Eksjö? Yeah. Nine months? No, we were there seven months. Seven months? Yeah. Five the first year, and then we were there one month, two years after that. So you did your military duty then? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. How did you like that? A lot of people were scared for you though? No, it wasn't so bad except that they had maneuvers. You didn't like that? No, there was one maneuver where they took us down to Östergötland. And I wouldn't do that, or they'd give me the whole Östergötland. It was bad? When we came back from that maneuver, we had 23 caskets standing outside of barracks the next morning. 23 of them. You mean they had died there? Oh, yeah. For what? I had one. I had one for me. We was in one place, and it rained, you know. And we had an officer, and I come from the officer's school in Germany, and he didn't know a blame thing. And we got in in the forest. We was there for four days, and the rain, and we didn't get out. He couldn't get us out of there. And the rain and the trees and the bushes was so thick that we had one head to go ahead with the ax cut so we couldn't go through. We never got to the end of it. We were there for four days. We didn't get nothing to eat, and then we were just soaked through. And then finally, the old king, Gustav V, and his crown prince, Gustav Adolf, were there. And finally the king, he stopped the whole blame thing and took the whole regiment and went right through the forest, the farnus. And it was so darn thick with trees that you couldn't go between them. So he ended the whole thing, and the first thing we did, of course, he took us to the cook wagon to get something to eat, you know. And we didn't have no clothes with us, the chains and nothing. We were just soaking my feet. They didn't have no skin on. Still, I had two pairs of socks in the boots, you know, when the boots are full of water. So they took us to the railroad, and we had some car boxes. They put us in, and took us back to Iquo. And I think there was 50 of us when we came back. When they had the regiment's hospital, you know, they didn't do no operation there. But there were 50 of us, they lined up, and they took us all to the hospital. And we had no skin on the foot and nothing. So I laid there for about, oh, I think it was about two weeks. We laid there. And when we came home, they couldn't take the boots off here. We had boots up to here, you know. So they took a bayonet and cut them from here and out to there. Before they couldn't get them out. Yeah, the feet was swollen, you know, they couldn't get them out. Everyone was. That was in September. Oh, cold rain. A little bit mixed with snow, too. Yeah, 23. Yeah, I suppose most of them did. Some of them got hurt. I had one some, we was in one place there, though. I think there was a third day. And there was a big wide ditch like that. With a wooden fence. And we come like that, and there was that much on that side of the fence. And they told us to jump over the ditch and grab the fence. And then put the gun over on the other side. And we did all of us, when the guy next to me. And then we could jump over the fence on the side of the gun. When the guy next to me, I don't know where he was from. I don't know where he was from, but he jumped over the fence. Right over the bayonet that we had that on. And he went in here and come out here. He died instantly. Right next to me. And I didn't know what to think or what to do. Man, they had some people, some of it, you know, some come and pick them up. I don't know what they did with them. They took them to the railroad station or whatever they did with them. I don't know. When we come home, though they already was in the caskets. Then they put up the whole regiment around here. Like this. And there. The rest of the Kalmar regiment. Though they picked out, for example, we had not one from Öland. Not one. And they found that territory right over us. Unless they picked six of us to go with them home for the financing. We didn't have one. But all the rest of them up in Högsbyen and all the other small land there. They picked out six boys for each casket, you know. So did you get any time off then after they happened? That means you could go home or... We were there about three weeks after. Then it was the end of the month. We was ready to go home. But... So they had a little bit of training. But all of us were in the hospital, so we couldn't get out of there. But we got out of there just before we left. So... After... After we came home, they were there. I was never out there after that, the last week. Then we had to rest up so we could walk. But I wouldn't do that over if they gave me the whole rest of Öland. Not sure we... There's no wonder the young people want to go to America instead of going on to... Oh, yeah. But this was the year after then, in other words, when you had the repetition. Yeah. For one month. Yeah. You see... See, I wrote the second time. I had a guy... I had a minister write first, but they refused me. But then I had another guy write. And when I was in service... When I was in service, the letter come from the king. So I couldn't go. So if my uncle had taken that letter and sent it up to me, I could not show him and... Just leave? Go on right away. But he didn't, so I had to finish up the whole thing. It was in a... Yeah. Yeah, that was only three weeks. That's a big difference. It was... We was there in a month, you know. Oh, yeah. Oh, well, before that, the army, the first five months you were in there, that wasn't bad at all. No trouble? No. How was the food then? Was there all right? Oh, yeah. Oh, yes. Yeah, plenty of food. Then they had what they call... Oh, I don't remember what they call it, but it was the same as a cafeteria. You know, you could go down there if you wanted to buy anything extra. So we went down there at night after we were... And it was right between the caserns, you know, so we could go down there. And there we sat and talked and we acquainted with each other from different places of Småland. Were there many of the guys that were talking about going to the United States then, at that time, to emigrate? There was one, I think he was from Huxley or whatever it was. He was... We become good friends, him and I. And he was in the same boat as I. He had wrote to the king, too, that... He didn't get no permission to go, so he wrote a second time. And he had somebody home, and he got the letter somebody sent it up to him. And I never got a chance to talk to him because he disappeared. So there was another one, somebody, friend of his, too. And he should go here, though. He had already bought his ticket on the boat and everything. So I asked him, I said, what become of him? And he left, he said he got permission of the king to go, so he just showed his paper and left. And he had to take the uniform off and got his clothes and went home. And then they had... Outside of the concierge they have eco, you know. It isn't there anymore now. I don't know where the Kalmar regiment is now. They took it to old people's... I heard that they had done that. I don't know. There was a lake, a nice lake, right outside, you know. And when we came up there the first time, they had a recreation hall. And... And that thing burned down about two weeks before we come up. So we had to go down to the lake. And one day... They took one company at a time. And we went down there one day, took our clothes and went in the lake. And there was one guy with us. He didn't say a blame thing or nothing. I don't know if they ever found out. I never found out about it. But anyway, he took his clothes off. He jumped into the lake and swam underneath the water to the other side of the lake. They never saw him. They figured he'd run. They did try to find him. They could never find him. And some he drove into the water. He went right underneath like a fish. And he swam under... The lake wasn't so big, you know. So he swam to the other side. And they figured out he had somebody over on the other side. The civilian clothes. And he took them and disappeared. Never saw him again? No, never. And they dragged the lake. They had a boat out there. It was kind of like a big anchor. There was four tongs on the blame thing. And they drove and drove and drove and drove all around. And they had... What do you call them? Some... Some go underneath the water. They had them there too. They never found him. So, finally they decided that he had done that. He swam underneath the water, up on the other side. The lake wasn't long, so they couldn't see if there was anyone there. He must have had some... some air clothes for him. So he was never seen again? No. I don't know if they ever found him. I never heard that they ever found him. Well, if he had drawn, he would have come up? Oh, he would have come up after that, yeah. He disappeared? In a couple of days or so, he would have come up. But he never came up. So, there was one guy from home here. And I don't know how in the world he did it. I don't know. We'd been there for about... About three weeks or so. We had the uniforms on and we got the guns. We got every blame thing we could think of. And that guy was from... I didn't even know about it. He was not from the same company as we was. He was from another company. And I knowed him from home. And I didn't... I saw him a couple of times, but finally I never see him anymore. So, one day, I was on the guard, with the guardhouse. And there come what we call retre, you know, the same as deputy sheriff. And I know retre very well from him, so... He come up there with the guardhouse, and I was on the guard, so... I had to open the gate for him when he come. And he had him with him. So, I said to him, his name was... Oh, I can't remember the name of him now. Nelson, his name was. I said to him, what in the world are you doing here? And he said, you know this guy. I said, oh, sure I know him. What happened to him? Oh, he come home, he said. He come home, and I got orders from the government to pick him up. So, I picked him up and took him back here. And, they took him into the company office. I don't remember what company he was on. I think he was on... I was on 11th, and I think he was on the 10th. Yeah, I think he was on the 10th. Anyway, a few minutes after, they took him away. He took him up there, you know. So, my time was up, and another one took over where I was. So, the officer said to me, he said, you go with him now. Go with him up to the company. I can't remember the captain up there. I know him there, too, and I can't remember the name now. So, we went up there, and met him and me, and this guy, you know. And... So... We went up and saw the captain there, and we talked to him, you know, and everything else. And then, after a while, after we had talked, he turned to me, and he said... He said, you take him with you now. Let him go with you. And you take him with you now to the Yale house. So, we took him down there, you know, and put him in the Yale house. I don't know how long he was in there. I can't remember. I said, so I talked to him, and I said, how in the heck did you get home? But then he said, I just left and went on to railroad station, took the train home, and said, that's all that's good. Nobody said anything. So, did you... After the military service, you went home then? To Jylland? Yeah. And then you... What did you work then? Because you were a... I worked for my uncle, in Föra, for a year after. He was a farmer? Yeah, he was a farmer too, yeah. So you stayed with him then until... I stayed with him until I left. That was not quite a year, you know. Yeah, that was about a year, because it was in September we... We were through with the army, and then I left the next September. Aha. So, was there any more, or anyone else that left with you at the same time? Oh yeah, there was one boy, but I didn't know him. I knowed him there. He was from Persies. I knew him there, but I didn't know that he should go here. From... I come on the train, and I should go down to Borgholm, and to Kalmar, and down to the boat, you know. And I come on the train, there he was. What was his name? His name was Hilding... Nilsson, I think it was. From Föra? From Persies. From Persies. Yeah, and... So I went over, and I said, well, where you going? Well, I'm going to go to America, so he... So we was together, till we come to Rockford, right along on the boat, train, boat. And I remember so well, and we come to Chicago, you know. Now, first we come to New York, and there they had... Ellis Island? No, that never was, we was on the second class, that never was, no. So your brother sent you a second class ticket then? Yeah. I see. And... Now we come to New York, they took us up to the railroad tracks in there, you know. And... We got on the train to Chicago. So when we come to the... Stopped on the train to Chicago, I think she was from the Serbian Army. And there was a woman come up to us, we was sitting there, him and I, and the train's gonna leave at five o'clock. And we sat there, and that woman come up and she said, she said, in Swedish, I will be here, he said, or she told us to get on the train. So don't worry. But if I don't come, he said, you go down that gate. There's a little gate you go through, you know. Go right down that gate, right there, and the train stand right there, she said. It was leaving for Rockford? Yeah. So... She never showed up. But she was waiting for another train from... Say to. And the train's gonna leave at five o'clock, ten minutes, five minutes, and now I'm sitting in the elevator, and the elevator says, where are you going? So... I let the train go, so we took four trains, we took them, we waited until the gate, down there, and the train stood right there. And the conductor on the train stood there. And he couldn't say anything, you know, so I... Do the hair of Pete. And he said in Swedish, You don't have to be afraid, the boy said, I'm gonna take you to Rockford. Who was that? The conductor on the train. He was Swedish, then? He was Swedish, yeah. Oh yeah, don't worry, boy, I said, I'm gonna take you to Rockford. And so when we come in there, he asked us, Have you... Have you laid down, said you left the boat? No, I said, we haven't. So he took... He took the seats, you know, put one like that and one like that, and he took the suitcase and put it, now you lay down there. Before you sleep, he said, I'm gonna come to Rockford, I'm gonna throw you off. And he did too. And when we come there, my brother was right there, and I had a friend of his, you know, who met us. And your brother, now, his name was... My oldest brother, Juhl. Juhl? Yeah. Juhl Johnson? Yeah, he changed his name to Arden. Arden? Yeah, his middle name was Juhl Arden. So he changed his name, took the middle name. So his name was Juhl Arden. And he's been dead now for... Oh, about five years. How did he spell that? A-D-E-N? Yeah. Arden. Yeah, Arden, yeah. So he met you there, what time of the day was that? Huh? What time of the day did you arrive here in Rockford then? When we come in here to Rockford, about seven o'clock. At night? Yeah, at night, yeah. Seven o'clock. And there my brother was, and he didn't know... We had Northwestern, and we had Illinois Central, and that time, you know, come into Rockford. So... He had a friend, and he went to Northwestern, and my brother, he went down to Illinois Central downtown, and worked for us, you know. One train was supposed to be there by five o'clock, and they was there, but they didn't. And then... I don't know how there was, they drove between us, I suppose, but anyway, they drove up to... Anyway, they drove up to... No, it was downtown. And we come to Northwestern. So they were there, both of them, they met us when we came, and took us home. So your friend, he went to his relation then, he had a relation... Yeah, he had some relations that were there looking for him too. So... So when you left now from Öland, what did you pack on your suitcase? Your father, did he tell you what to bring? No. He didn't recommend any special thing? No. What did he say, though, when you left? I put some clothes in there, and then... And then... And then the... My mother... How was it? You know the dried goose, home, you know? Dried goose? Yeah, dried goose, and they cut them in half. So he put the half, so I had to my brother. He was crazy for them. Then there was another... You mean meat, goose? Yeah, yeah. Dried goose? Then there was... Another couple, some had a boy, some here in Chicago. And they sent it around, cheese, you know, but that round and about, that thick, so I had for them. So when I come here to Rockford, my uncle, who was here, he helped me, so we sent it into Chicago to him. Then he come down here and saw me a couple of times after that. Then he went home. And this Hilding, some I told you about, who was with me, he was here for approximately two and a half years, and he went home. And then right after I found out, when I was home in 1947, yeah, in 1947, my wife and I was home in Sweden. When I found out, right after he go home, about six months after he died, you know, after that, he didn't like it here. He didn't? No. I talked to him many times, but he didn't like it here. So he went home, and he wasn't home more than about six months when he died. Six months when he died. So, but your father, he didn't recommend anything to you? No, he didn't mention anything. He didn't warn you for anything? No. He told us about 7th Street or Rockford or everything like that, you know. I know all about it before I come here. So your brother, did you stay with your brother the first time? Oh yeah. For how long? About a year. You stayed with him then? Yeah, since I got married. And he got you a job also, or did you find a... Oh yeah, I started with him down to the old factory, XL, down on... down there by the river, you know. Was there furniture? Yeah, where the Winnebago was. I started with him there, but then, after I got married, I met another friend and he was working and... Yeah, it was so that XL got in a bad shape so we couldn't get no pay from them. Were they Swedish, those people? What? Were they Swedish? Yeah, yeah, they were. And then I got another friend and he worked to Peerless on 11th Street. Or, what was his name? It was a Swedish one there too. He had a drugstore on 7th Street, you know, Jan Wester. So he asked me if I wanted some help there, so I got a job there. At the drugstore? What? At the drugstore? No, out in the factory. Out in the factory? Peerless. Oh, Peerless. No, not anymore. What did they fabricate? What kind of furniture? Oh, they made dining room furniture, stuff like that, you know. See, I was there that day. That day the tornado went over Rockford here. I was working there that day. Was it 1928? 27, I think it was. 27? 27, 28, I don't know. 27, I think it was. So what happened then? Did it... A lot of buildings? When there was nothing hot there, we had... We were making buffets. And it was so dark and hot that day, and we had all the windows open like that, on the west side, all through 11th Street, you know. And we saw the clouds coming up, and we didn't pay no attention on it. We were hanging doors and mucking around. And pretty soon the wind come. The first thing that happened, there was thundering and lightning so bad, you know. The streetcars went outside, and just as we came right to the factory, lightning hit the streetcar, and there it stood. It didn't move. So, then the wind come up, and we were two guys on each window, and we had five windows open. And we were two guys, was going to try to close them, but we couldn't, why God didn't touch them. We couldn't close them. And the water just poured right in. And we had the buffets so far from the... We had a wood bench stood there, and then so far from there, between. So they didn't get much water on the doors. So there wasn't much for you. And right soon the lightning hit the the streetcar, the power went off. So, the superintendent, he went into the office and took a call to find out what was going on. And I lived on, on Railroad Avenue, on 9th Avenue. There were two other factories down on Railroad Avenue, you know. And all he got, he got the telephone. They told him that, I can't remember the name of the factory he had, had blown down. And we lived on 9th Avenue, and they were down on Railroad Avenue, you know. So, we run home. My father and I, we run home, we lived together there, and he lived in one house and I in another. And we run home so fast as we could, you know. And the first thing we, when we come home, I went up, we went up to the house, and I went out in the back of the house, and there stood my wife and was close. She didn't know anything about the house. She wasn't close. She didn't know anything about it. She hadn't heard anything. And they never, for you know, they come to Elko on Broadway. He turned a little bit that way. So they never went over there. And they went up to Ratju, you know. There they took some homes and porches and everything else. So she didn't know a blimping thing about it. So after a while we had a cup of coffee for a while, and then my partner and I, we went up to where is it? 17th, no, 18th Avenue, you know, where the old factories was there. And there they had, you know, and the corner of Elko on Broadway, that was taken off, and so we went down there and and saw that down on 11th Street there was a horse taken off, turned around and lay in the bit of rough on the street. Was there any insurance for those people? I don't know. Oh, they must have had insurance. I think there was a, what was that factory, you know, some brought down? Union. I think there was five killed there, you know. They had a big water tank on top, you know, that they used to have. And that blimping thing got loose and went right smack down to the basement. There was five of them killed there that day. And we, we talked to a guy who was there, and he was up there just when it happened. I don't know if he worked there or not, but he was around there when it happened. And he run across the street, and there was a tree somewhere that was bigger than this, round. And he jumped on the street, on the tree, you know, put his arm around it, or else he would have blown away. They took the tree and him and the whole blimping thing, saw him walking all, jumped right over. And he was on that side, he said, if he had been on the other side of the tree, he would have been squeezed to death. Oh. You saw a lot of bad weather, didn't you? Oh, boy, that day. And there was on my birthday, too, besides. We could have a birthday party that night. In September, huh? Yeah. So how much were you paying now when you started the first job there at your brother? Oh, 35 cents, no. What kind of work were you doing there? You cut a rip saw, or? No. First, first I worked with a little machine where they made dub tailing. You know what dub tailing is? Where they made drawers and stuff. I did that for a while. Then they had, after that, they had a guy some, some around there, what do they call him now, some made table legs and stuff, you know? The lathe? The lathe. The svalbjorn. Yeah. And he, I don't know, he quit for some reason, but it took me to run that. I ran that for a couple of years, I guess. And then I quit and went to... Why did you quit? Did you like the job or better? No, they got, I don't know how they were, we had trouble with the bank. We couldn't cash the checks and whatever. Finally, they got money in the bank so we couldn't cash them afterwards. So you married in 1927. How did you meet your wife now? At some, did you join the church when you came here? No. She had a brother here, some were here and him and I was good friends and I went to see him and finally I lined it up that way. I see. So she was a widow then, your wife? Yeah. She had, how many children did she have then? Huh? How many children? She had her, that's all. She was about two and a half, three years old. Was she working then or... No, she never worked. No. No. So, and did you join any other organizations like Warsaw, Viking? Yeah, I joined Viking because my brother was a member there and I went with them for I don't know how many years but then the depression came, you know, then I quit. But now, the only thing I belong to now is Swedish American, or Swedish Culture Society. Swedish Culture. Yeah. That's the only thing I belong to now. And then Table Lutheran Church. Table Lutheran. Yeah. Yeah, Table Lutheran Church. We belong there. So you married in the Table Lutheran then or... No, in Zion. Oh, Zion. Yeah. You married there. In the parish in the Zion. So, then you moved into your own apartment or how did you... Yeah, we lived in that old house down there for a while. Then I went up to, up to 9th Avenue or 20th Street and I bought a bungalow there. And we lived there for 27 years. So what happened when the depression hit in 1929? Were you laid off? What were you working then? When... I had three, three different jobs. First... Yeah, but where were you laid off from when the depression hit? First, they didn't get no orders out from there, no to... Paris. So I went on to Winnebago. And my next door neighbor had a boy some, a little bit, so-so. I took him with and we got jobs down there. But he worked only one day and then they sent him home. And I worked there for about five days. Then they run out of stuff, so they sent us home. They sent us home. I was repairing furniture there for them, where I was. Then... There was a... The Winnebago, yeah. Then they had where old Excel was where I was before. So they sent us home. And I met a friend, some lived on 19th Street. I met him. And he asked me, how recently? He said, do you have a job now? I have a job, I said, but they have nothing to do. So they sent us home. And I don't know when they're gonna call us back. Well, he said, we have lots of... There was a company that made television cabinets, just cabinets, that's all. And we have so doggone much to repair, he said, you can't even believe it. But they got the cabinets done, they sent them over to the belt sanders, you know. And they had a long room with belt sanders. And... And they sanded the top and they took all the corners off. And he had to stand there and... Sometimes they made the cabinets and they put the pieces backwards. So he said, if you want to have a job, he said, I'm gonna talk to the superintendent, he is an Italian. What factory was that? That was the old... What was it called? Next to Winnebago, where I was before, where I started. Was there a Swedish oil factory too? No, there was no Swedish there, no, no, no. So there were Italians working there? Yeah, there was... There were so much women working there and there was... Italians and... That guy who told me about it, he was a Swedish of course. So I said, he talked to him and he said, Yeah, you should take him right now. Tell him to come down with you tomorrow. He told me where I should take him, so I took my... Went down to Winnebago and took my tools. And they didn't want me to go. Oh, you had your own tools? Oh, yeah. So I went in to Winnebago and picked up my tools and went in next door. And I was there for about three months. How much did they pay? Oh, that time they was after... I think it was about 50 cents an hour we got there. But I finally got... Then I don't know how it was. They quit. The companies that made them, television cabinets, they quit. Completely. There was radio cabinets, but there was no TV at that time? No, there were television cabinets. What were they called? There was before... Was this before 1930? Yeah. During the Depression. Yeah, but they didn't have any television then? Oh, they made them by the millions down there. I don't know what they did for them. They must have been radio cabinets then? No, no. No. Winnebago, they... They were television, they didn't have any. Yeah, but Winnebago, they made... They made radio cabinets. They made radio cabinets. But that company you worked for made the television? Yeah, they made television. There was a company from Indiana. Oh, brother, they made them... Where did they start coming? Made them by the millions. And finally I got tired of the shit there, and go there and fix up them all gone. And then, you know, they had one guy, him and I here, that's... some... helped me to get the job. The elevator come down, and we stood right behind the elevator and fixed up. When I finally got tired, one... I didn't go. One Saturday morning, he called me. He said, they want us to come down, he said. They want us to come down and fix some cabinets today. I said, heck with them, I'm not gonna go down. And they got their whole car loaded. They had them finished and everything. They were finished, sent in there to the company. And when they come in, they have put the whole front backwards. What kind of workers were on there, the 70-line? Huh? What kind of workers were you with on there? I don't know what I was. It sounds like a skewy business. It was backwards, wasn't it? There was not too many Swedes working there. No, no. So he told me... When that superintendent was there, he said, he wasn't an African-Irish guy, he wasn't Italian. He was a relative to the guy from the drugstore out here. Out here, you know, where we were today. On Broadway? No. Drugstore. Out on Five Points here, you know. Five Points. Yeah. And I didn't know that he was a relative from the one day I went into the drugstore. And I come to mention about it. How come? I said, that's Superintendent Arnold... So and so, in fact, they have the same name as you. Yeah, that's my brother, he said. And he was an awfully nice guy, you know. Well, then one day, that company in Indiana, they quit. No, I didn't know. So I went on to... farther down with the rebels, where the paper mill was, you know. And I got a job there. I was there for about four years. And I worked with a paper machine, you know. But it only was about 25 cents an hour. And I figured I'd better have nothing. Then finally, they cut it down to 20 cents. Then they cut it down to 15 cents. But then it happened so, that the election was, and Roosevelt come in. It was 32? The election. Yeah. Now he come in, they went up to 47 cents an hour. And they had only two... I worked... two years with a paper machine. And they had only two shift of firemen for the fire, for the boilers. So they had to have another fireman, three shifts. Eight hours. And they picked me. As a fireman? So I was a fireman for... two and a half years. And then Ray Vaughn, who owned the factory, the paper mill, you know. He sold it to Three River, Michigan. And... He sold the whole blame thing to them. He sold the whole blame thing to them. And that is where they have the paint company now. I can't remember the name of it now. They is there now. So you mean they closed off the whole thing then? Oh yeah, he closed the whole blame thing. They took the whole thing out of there. And you were without a job? Yeah. No. So they took us. They said, you ain't gonna be out of the job. If you want. We gonna send you up to Michigan. So we went up there. You and your wife? No. The boys didn't work with me. We was... Six, seven of us, you know. We come up to Michigan. Three Rivers. And we went to... Where is it located? Three Rivers? Three Rivers, Michigan. I don't know where it was. But then we... This on the lower Michigan? Yeah. That's the lower Michigan. And we... The first thing we did when we come up there... We went and looked. And there was a house there on the side. Rooms for rent. So we went in and saw the lady and we got a room there. And we told her how it was. She said, I won't go... I won't go down there to the... We should go down and see the... The place? And see the factory. And there was only one floor, the whole thing, and there was a long... Two blocks. Everything was on one floor, the whole blame thing. So we went down there, you know. But she warned you? Yeah, she warned us. But we didn't think. She went down there and there was a little river, went like that with a... A bridge. And... Railings on both sides. And there the guys sat on that, you know. And they looked at us and... And we looked and... And we went by them and we went down to the plant, you know. And when we come there, they had the whole fire department there. They had... 15, 20 policemen... Walking around. And they had the guns ready and holding their hands on them. And there was at least 150 people... 150 people walking around all over, you know. Were they on strike or what? Yeah, they were on strike. So one policeman come up and he said... Are you from Rockford? Yeah. We're supposed to go into their office... And tell them that we're here. And he said, there won't be much use, but I'm going to tell you what it is. I'm going to take a partner with me. And we was... So far from over to the next sidewalk from the building. So he called to his partner. Are you going with me? We're going to take these boys into their office. And... One... He said, line up now. Two and two. So we did. And one was on that side of us and the other one was on the other side. And they both pulled the guns and held it in their hands. And he took us into the office. And... We come in there and there were nice people that talked to us. And then he said, man... I don't know, he said, how long this will last. He said, it might last for months. We don't know. So I advise you to go back to the... To Rockford. Go home to Rockford again and see if you can get something else to do. Because we don't know. But... Was the whole plant shut down at that time? Oh yeah, there was nothing going on at that time. And... If you want, he said, to... See the plant, but there was nobody inside. No, not alone. The doors were locked and everything, you know. So... He said to the police, I said, you take them around the plant and let them see the plant if they want to see it. So we did. And now you come back from that, he said, you come in here to the office. So they took us in the office.