 This is cassette two, side number one, a continuation with Nedvin Nelson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So, she had some regrets about never being able to go back to Sweden with your mother. In other words, she missed the opportunity, or there was no way for her to get away. That's what she said, and she said, you know, it cost a lot of money in those days, too. And, of course, my grandmother died, I think it was in 1928. And she lived alone in a family farm. And so, she would have liked to have gone back, but then the grandmother passed away. But then my mother had saved those letters, and I saved them, and I gave them to this cousin out there in Tacoma. And she's trying to transcribe them into English. They were written in Swedish, of course. Oh, beautiful. Were you able to understand them when you were reading? Well, some of them, when I was out visiting her a number of years ago, I brought them with me, and we would, both of us, try to transcribe them. They were beautiful, the handwriting and all. So what were they talking about in the letters? Did your mother come back? No, she was telling about the different relatives over there, and my mother would always send her something, like she sent her coffee, and then they'd roast it over there. My mother always sent her something. And she was telling about that she'd received the packages, and a thing that was coffee, and my mother sent her prunes, and different things that they couldn't... Well, she could buy it over there, but it was more expensive, see? And then she'd roast the coffee herself. So they bought white coffee, and they sent over... Mm-hmm. Green coffee. Oh, green coffee, okay. Green coffee, uh-huh. Now, she was always sending her a package. And your mother, now, she had brothers still in Sweden, and the oldest one got the farm. Uh-uh. So your grandmother stayed with her. No, he was dead. And the two boys were gone, and one daughter was gone, so it was just my mother and her youngest sister left when my grandmother died. So the farm was sold at an auction for 10,000 crowns. So it didn't stay in the family then? It didn't stay in the family, no. So then the first time when I was in Sweden, this cousin, that was my mother's brother's son, he lived here in Rockford, he was there too, so we looked up the... He knew where the farm was, and he knew where the pasture was down to the Baltic Sea, so we walked down there in the pasture to the Baltic Sea. So he knew more about it than I did, but it was fun. We saw the house, and a woman let us in the house, and we saw the home, and it was very interesting. It was an old home then. Yeah, uh-huh, but it was nice. Typical Ölandshom. Uh-huh. And then I had a second cousin over there. She lives in Stockholm, and she was telling about her mother, when she was little, lived near the ocean too, and they were out one day digging in the sand. Maybe I told you about that. Uh-huh. And they found some coins, and they ran home with them, but they didn't dare to keep them in the family, so they went to Kalmar and turned them in, and they got a little money for it, but they were old Arab coins. So I suppose the pirates had dug them down in the sand, see? And then they bought them a little, what she said, some kind of a necklace or something out of the money. They were telling about that when I was over there. It was interesting. So it was an old story, I think. Oh, you heard so much when you were over there that honestly... Was there something special your mother talked about from home that she missed or the nature or the Baltics? No, she didn't miss anything. She said the reason she came to America was that she had to work in the fields and drive oxen, and she said that made her so discouraged because the oxen were so slow. So that's why she came to America. But before that, they had sent her to Siuskula in Kalmar, so she could sew a lot of clothes. So she didn't long back too much to that time, in other words, there was hard work in... Yeah, it was too hard work in the fields. That's why she wanted to come to America. Then her father gave her money, and he told her that if she didn't like it, to write to him, and he would send her money, she could come back. But she said, I never wanted to go back the way I had to work. So... Time was way past. Oh! So, but she said you had to work in America too in those days, and be a maid a dollar and a half a week. But it was probably easier though than the homeless lady. That's right. That's what she said too. At least she didn't have to drive oxen, she used to tell. In the letters now from your grandmother to your mother, do they tell them when somebody died, and somebody was born? Yes, that's it, all is about the family. They kept up on that in every letter. How often did they write letters to each other? Oh... I don't know. A couple of times a year, or...? Yeah, it wasn't every month, or a couple of times a year, see. First birthdays and the names they perhaps... That's right. So... Yeah. They were great on names years ago. In Sweden we also have names day as well as birth. Yeah, that's right. Oh yes, now I've understood. Here they never call on them over this country though, because there are so many different names as well. Your name now, Mildred, where did that come from? Is it an old family name? Well, I tell you, and like it is today, you know, they have it like Jennifer, some of those. But in that, when I was born, Mildred was very popular. Was? Very. I have a lot of friends by the name of Mildred that are my age. Swedish friends, or...? Yes, uh-huh, uh-huh. Now that was very popular, Mildred was. I see, so that's why... And she said her sister, her oldest sister, said to her, now don't you name, give your children a Swedish name. Why? She said, they live in America now, and you give them an English name. She said, don't give them a Swedish name. So she said, I had to give you an English name. So a lot of the children in my neighborhood were called Mildred. There were quite a few of them. So that's not the Swedish name that means? No, it's not a Swedish name. It's an American name. No, it's an old English name, I was told. I had, some years ago, a friend looked up, it's an English name. So she was told to stay away from the Swedes, huh? Yeah, she said, don't give your children a Swedish name. How about the rest of your friends, when you were going to school and high school, were there any teasing about being a Swede? Like the Swede school, you were Swedish scabs. Yeah, we were Swedish scabs. How about in the school, in the public school? Well, there was a lot of Swedes in our neighborhood, you see. Were all Swedish? Just about, well, I can't say they were all Swedish, but there were a lot of Swedes. So the non-Swedes were not that popular, in other words, they were not overpowering you? No, no. There were not too many Italians or Germans? Well, they lived in different sections of the city, see. In the school you went to, they were all Swedish? A lot of them were Swedish. That neighborhood, that's around 7th Street, see? Yes. And that was called Snusgatan. Snusgatan school, huh? But in high school, now, did they offer... That was all different nationalities. They didn't offer Swedish? We only had one Central High in those days. Where was it located? Down on Madison Street. On Madison, right downtown? Uh-huh. And they came from all the neighboring towns, too, because a lot of these neighboring towns in those days didn't have a high school. I graduated in 1919, and we were 236 in the class. Did they offer Swedish at that time? In high school? Yes. They did? They had Swedish. You could take Swedish. Did you take it? No, I didn't. I took two years of Latin. Latin? Latin. You really went away for Swedish? That was for... Did your mother tell you about that, or...? No. But she did stress the point of... Listen, you take what you think best, but take something that you're going to get good out of, she used to say. What did she think about Pastor Seedorf? Well, she was a little disgusted with him. Was he a little bit too high? Well, I'd say he was awful stubborn. You couldn't tell him anything. So he was that type of person. He wanted his way. Yeah, his way. But how about the Bordeaux and Beacons and trustees? Couldn't they tell him to be a little bit more liberal? I don't know. I don't think they could tell him too much. He was the minister. He was in charge. So he was quite a guy. But... But like your mother now, she could enjoy an English sermon as well as a Swedish one. Yes. So she had no trouble there? No, no. No, she understood it better. My father understood English too, but he had worked with Swedes practically all his life. So he didn't talk such good English. He could talk very good Swedish, but... So he felt more comfortable with the Swedish sermon. That's right. He could relax more. But your mother didn't... No, my mother could understand English just as well as Swedish. How about now? She was 101 when she died. Did anything about her Swedish background come forward when she was really old? Did she recite more Tryggare kan ingen vara and Sandvässhar and hymnos and so on? Well, she sang for him. I had a... She sang in Swedish then? A tape. I have it put away, but I'll bring it out. And then you bring your recorder sometime. I see. So she sings? She sings. In Swedish? In Swedish. She was... On one of them, I think she was 100, and the other one, she was 101. I see. But she was very alert. She enjoyed everything. So she liked to read and know what was going on. Did she sing in English too? No, just Swedish. Only Swedish? She had learned that from a childhood, you see. So she didn't learn any new English songs? Not in Tryggare, no. I see. But she enjoyed music. Did she ever have a request when she died that somebody was going to read something in Swedish? Well, her grandnephew was a singer, Ray Olsen. I see. So he sings at the same time in Swedish? He sang Tryggare in Swedish, and How Great Thou Art. That was another favorite of hers. Is he Swedish? Or is he Norwegian? No. Well, yeah, but she'd heard it in English. But he is a good vocalist here in Rockford, but he don't live here now. He lives up at Lake Ripley. That's up in Wisconsin? About an hour and a half drive from Rockford here. And his great-grandfather was my father's first cousin, and his great-grandmother was my mother's sister. So when they come down, I see them a lot. So he came then for the funeral, or he was living here at the time? He what? Was he living here then when your mother died? He was living here in Rockford, yes. He was with his father working then as a plasterer. His father was a plasterer, and his great-grandfather was a plasterer. So she died in 1970? 1970. And she was well all the way up to her... Yeah, I tell you, she had obstruction of the gallbladder. And many years ago, when I was working in Chicago, she had an attack. She came in to visit. She had an attack then, so she was in the hospital, and she knew she had gallbladder, but it passed over. You know, in those days, you didn't care about an operation. So she went back home and never had any trouble until later years, then she'd get attacks. And then she got a terrible attack, and like doctors said, she was just too old to be operated. It was taking a chance. So she was in the hospital about seven weeks, and that's when she had an obstruction of the gallbladder. But she had broke her hip when she was 84, and she said, you know, I'm going to walk again, and she did too. She did? She made up her mind she was going to walk. She didn't have to have a stepstool or anything? No, she used a cane, but then later in life, you know, it bothered her, you know, so she had to be in a wheelchair. But she did walk after she broke her hip. And she was clear in her head? Yes, she was, way up to the very last. She remembered all the relations that Bernice Johnson, it was through my mother that helped her. That big clout. See, my mother remembered all those people. It's remarkable. But you know, I suppose, Erland, on that part of Erland, was like Rockford. You knew everybody, don't you think so? You knew people? Well, they were not affected by something outside. In other words, they stayed within that close-knit society. Yeah, that's right. And there was not too many moving in. That's right. And they stayed there all their lives, I suppose. Because I can remember when I was a child, my father had a cousin that lived out in Byron, on a farm. And we used to go out there in those lumber wagons and horses every summer and have a reunion. All those families. What did they talk about then, when they came together like that? Oh, they talked about Erland. And their occupations, what they did, see? And their families. And all of those people, of course, reunion people, they had letters from their friends and brothers and sisters. That's right. And then they pulled it together. That's right. And they all talked about it. And that was over 80 years ago that we got together every year. And we'd go out to that farm in Byron in these lumber wagons and horses. And that was the days when they had a lot of food. And they had kruppkaker. No, we didn't have kruppkaker then. It was on a Sunday. I see. They usually had chicken. It was on Saturday. Yeah. Well, they were particular about that, to have it only on Saturday. Yeah, usually we had kruppkaker on Saturday. My mother used to make them on Saturday, and then she used to bake bread. Oh, so that was the fabricating day. Yeah, those were the days. You don't get the kruppkaker like you used to. No. There is a place that makes them, you know, but of course they don't make them in the summer. Is this tradition carried on, or by the younger generation of Erlandinger? You mean kruppkaker? You mean they're carrying it out? Yes. And a lot of them are carrying out this Christmas smörgåsbord. Smörgåsbord. So the younger generation then had to call on it. Now, I go with these families on Christmas. These were my cousins. And they have a—they try to carry out the Swedish. They order kruppkaker a couple weeks in advance so they can serve them Christmas Eve. Now, I never was used to kruppkaker on Christmas Eve, but these young people want them on Christmas Eve. And they have all this other Swedish food. But I wasn't used to kruppkaker on Christmas Eve. You had lutefisk. We had lutefisk, but they don't. Now, they don't have lutefisk, but they have all the rest. But we always had lutefisk on Christmas Eve. But I got a kick out of all these young people. They want kruppkaker on Christmas Eve. So they carry on the tradition then. Yeah, that's right. But now I suppose they buy the kruppkaker or is that— Oh, sure, they buy them, you know. Oh, sure. Of course you can't buy them. I think April's the last up until October here now. But it's surprising how— Now, I know Ray Olsen's mother is German descent, and she makes them beautifully, too. She used to, of course. Now, she's 91 years old, but she'll still eat them. And we'll go and buy them. We'll order them and buy them, and she'll have them. And her children and grandchildren just love them. So she's German? She's German. His mother's German. How did she learn to make kruppkaker? Well, she learned it through the restaurant. Friends? Uh-huh. So that's just like my brother. Maybe I told you he came home with his wife from California, and he said to her, Now, you watch my mother, how she makes kruppkaker, so you can make them. So she watched her, and they went home. And he called my mother, and he said, Guess what? Blanche made kruppkaker, and guess what? We had kruppkaker soup. A little bit too thin. So then he called her a couple weeks later, and he said, Guess what? He said, Blanche made kruppkaker, and guess what? If she'd thrown one at me, she would have killed me. It was so hard. So then he called her a couple weeks later. My brother used to call my mother quite often on the telephone. So then he called, and he said, Guess what? Blanche made kruppkaker, and they were perfect tonight. Third time. We used to laugh about that. Well, she was non-Swedish then. No, his wife wasn't Swedish. So it takes a certain skill to do it right. Well, it does do. You've got to have a certain amount of flour and everything. Even if you have the recipe, it might not turn out. That's right. So there was one of the— You could buy kruppkaker. We bought them when I was over in Sweden, in Öland. Oh, they make them in the—sell them in the stores there too now. Yeah. And then you had Urbom and Axel Olsson and all the good doctors here in town. Who? Urbom. Oh, Urbom, yeah. What did your mother think about him? She didn't think much of him. No? Uh-uh. No, we never went to him. Never went to him? They used to say he's just a pill doctor. But Bernice was sold on him. That Peterson family was sold on him. So there were certain groups of people that— Yeah. Then there was a Dr. Olsson too. Axel Olsson and Alfri Olsson? Yeah, Dr. Olsson and Dr. Urbom. They were both homeopaths. Yeah, those were the days. Naturläkare. Yeah. Healed by nature. I bet you've heard a lot of funny stories through all your travels and all these. Yes, everybody here gives— I suppose in different cities that you come to. Yes. They're all different. Uh-huh. They all have something to tell you about certain people. Yes, yes. Did you sit down and talk to your mother in her high age about what she remembered from her childhood? Well, yes. Well, I'd heard a lot through the years. Did she talk quite a bit about her parents and her grandparents? Yes, yes. Oh, yes. Because they would go back to 1700, you know, when she was talking. Well, she talked about the grandmother that had the five sisters over there. Her grandmother? The grandmother. They were five sisters. And the one sister had 12 children, and the one 13. And they stayed on Öland? Yes, and the one with 13. The 12 came to this country. The 12 children came to this country. All 12 children came to this country? No, that one sister with the 12 children. She came? No, she didn't come, but the 12 children all emigrated to Pennsylvania and out through the east. Oh, yes, a tremendous bunch of people. Twelve. Twelve children, but they came different times. But the 13th, he stayed in Öland. The last one? Uh-huh. Did she stay there? He, there was Ö Oh, he was the boy? Uh-huh. So that's Ö because I visited with his daughter, and she worked in a bank in Borholm. Why did he stay? Well, I don't know why he stayed. You were thinking there would be 12 different letters coming from this country. That's right. And then she said to me, you know, my father used to say to me, he was going over and visit Maja Stina. That was my grandmother. She said he just loved to go over and talk to her, because she knew the whole family, see. And so then she said that was my father's greatest pleasure, when he could go over and talk to Maja Stina. That was the daughter over in Sweden. They lived in a reppling urchin, and she's the one that worked in the bank. So, yeah. It's amazing, though, 12 of them became immigrants. Yeah, just think. And they all settled over in through Pennsylvania. So their mother and father, they stayed in Sweden, of course. That's why their mother Ö Yeah, one of them Ö now, I don't know which one it was, but my mother said that one of them drank quite a bit. And then he got a Ö they tell stories. One of them got a terrible pain in a toe. And what did he do? He got pretty liquored up, she said, and he chopped the toe off. Can you imagine something like that? Oh. But that's where she said it was, some of them. There was some inflammation in the toe then? Yes, it did, where he had a lot of pain. Chopped it off? I just can't feature that. She said that that's Ö They didn't have Ö boom there, you see. Oh, they didn't have Ö, but still Ö They should have put it on right away. Oh, yeah, she sure could tell the stories, because she remembered all that. What was their last name, those 12 children of their father and mother? Was it Olsen, or Ö? I got the family truck Ö So that's Per Andersen. Yeah, that was a great Ö Von Schuspie Öland. He was born 1758. 1758. Mm-hmm. No, he was married in 58. Oh, was he married, yeah. And he was born Ö He was born in Ö 1700, it looks like. Uh-huh. 1729. And they had five sisters. Mm-hmm. And one of them had 12 children. Yeah, there's one Ö Or 13. Yeah, one had 12 and one had 13. So all of those 12 that came to the United States, they all settled around Pennsylvania and Ö Out in Ö Winburn? Out someplace, out east someplace. And they kept contact with your mother? Yeah, those cousins kept contact, because there were three of them that come Ö How about the old Ö they would be cousins to her then? They were her cousins, first cousins. And I know there were three that came different times to visit her. For the younger generation, they are interested in to keep up on the family traditions. Mm-hmm. And really, they were really interested in Sweden, Anna, too. Oh, yes. On family trees. Yes, they were. A lot of them had gone back to Ö Oh, where was it on Ö someplace on the mainland where they keep Ö had the archives. Did you talk to your mother at any time that you wrote down what she said? You didn't have a tape recorder and sit and talk with her? No, no, I wish I did, but I didn't. She was singing, though? She was singing. Yeah, because Ö you know, in those days, in the early days, there were a lot of Ö their friends were from the same part of the country and the same Ö and they'd come over and talk and you'd hear them, what they were talking about, you see. And then after I'd been over there, then I could appreciate it more. And with these people, you know, you heard a lot then. So they were interested to find out what happened to their friends over there when they moved to Ö That's right, uh-huh, uh-huh. And they talked about their relatives. Whom they married. Uh-huh. So Ö But Ö I don't know if I told you, then one day some woman came to the back door and my mother went to the door and she was selling books. And so my mother got in conversation with her and my mother thought she talks like she's Swedish, you know. So my mother said to her, Are you Swedish? And she said, Yes. And she said, Well, what part of Sweden are you from? She said to her. And the woman said, Well, I was born on Öland. And my mother said, Oh, I was born on Öland too. And so my mother said, Where were you born? And she told her. And then my mother said, Well, I was born on Långlund. And the woman said, This girl said, Oh, she said, I had an aunt that lived on Långlund. And my mother said, What was her name? Maja Kajsa. Oh, my mother said, My dear girl, that was my mother. And that was her first cousin. Isn't that a coincidence? Yes. And she was a seven-day Adventist working for some college trying to go get some Ö She wanted to be a nurse, but she was selling these books so she'd make an education, you see. And she had no ideaÖ No, she had no idea. Who she was talking to. So then my mother told her, You come on in. So my mother made coffee, and they sat and talked. And then she said, Oh, she said, Can I leave my books here? And my mother said, You sure can. So then she came off, and then between the two, they talked about Sweden all the time and their families, see. Then later, sheÖ I think she took up nursing over in Elmhurst. Isn't there a seven-dayÖ some kind of aÖ Yes, that's right. Well, anyway, so my mother didn't hear much about her, but sheÖ Her name was Nina. She had a sister in Chicago, and she spent a lot of time in Chicago with those sisters. Well, anyway, then she went out to Iowa to work, and she took care of a banker's wife for a long, long time. And this banker's wife died. Cassette 2, side 2. She said then this husband died, and he had a family, and there got to be quite a court trial over real estate. So she said she didn't have much money then, but she went back to Chicago and lived. And then her daughter was growing, and she went out east someplace, and she went out east to live with the daughter. Well, these relatives in Chicago don't know whatever happened to her. They tried to contact her and contact the daughter, but the daughter never answered. So then I wrote in corresponding with this family tree, I wrote to somebody out in Mara, New Jersey. He was a doctor. And I asked him about this Nina, if he knew anything about her, and he gave me the address to the daughter, and I wrote to the daughter and put an enclosed envelope, stamped envelope and everything, but I never heard from her. And these sisters in Chicago never heard either, so they don't know what happened to her. But she must have passed away out there because she was as old as, younger, my mother, a little younger than my mother though. But you see, some of them don't care about it, and she don't want to have any contact with the family. But it was her real daughter though. That was her real daughter, uh-huh. That was her real daughter with the banker. You would think she would respond. Uh-huh, she'd want to, because this doctor that wrote me then and told me her address, see, so, but that's the way it is, you see, some people are not interested in family trees, so. She would like to disappear. Uh-huh, uh-huh. And the letters never came back either, eh? No, never, so she must have gotten them, but she never answered. So, and these relatives in Chicago wondered too what ever happened, because they never heard from the daughter either. I think she lived down in Georgia, if I wasn't mistaken, the daughter. So, but you know, it's surprising when you do correspond, the information you get from different people about different things. Yes. So, I haven't done it for a number of years, but I'd like to get them up to date, a lot of this stuff. To keep up, yeah? Uh-huh. So that lady or that other, she had her roots in Longleat? Yeah, uh-huh, wasn't that funny? Wasn't that a coincidence? Is that? No, so, my mother used to talk about that, and she used to come in often when she was selling books, you know, and. Do you belong to Landsklubben now? Now I do. The last few years I belonged. I never did before. But your parents belonged to it, though? My father did, but not my mother. My father did. I see. Uh-huh. But you know, there are not too many of them now. No, they are failing off. It's just. And the young generation, the... They're not interested. And there's no immigrants that come. Do you suppose opening up to some immigrants now, there'll be any coming? No. I don't think they're encouraging enough to come. No, I don't think. You know, it's pretty good over there now, so they have no reason to. Uh-huh. I don't think so. I don't think so. But there will always be somebody that comes, but... And I don't think they're encouraging the Swedes either to come. No, I don't think so, because there will not be any great numbers like there was in the 20s. No. There was a last wave. You know, and then when I was in Sweden the first time, I went to Stockholm. I contacted this cousin, the second cousin, and then she met me. And then I went to her apartment and met her mother. And her mother was 90, over 90 years old, and she was the first cousin of my mother's. And then they had, this cousin had another sister that lived in Danderud. Oh, there's a suburb to Stockholm, Danderud. Uh-huh. And so I stayed with them, and my, they were up on everything. They were real golfers and tennis people. But it was fun. You learned a lot from them. And she took me, this one, Birgitta from Danderud, she took me all over Stockholm. I saw everything there was to see in Stockholm. But it was fun. You get to see people and know what they're doing, and you learn an awful lot about everything. So I really enjoyed that trip. So then I went with this cousin, the other cousin, then we took the trip to the North Cape. That was beautiful, too. Yeah. And that was the end of the interview with Mildred Nelson, Wachfer Illinois. End of interview.