 And then I went with Rockford Furniture Company and I had the Rockford Furniture Company and the Winnebago line, Winnebago Manufacturing Company. And the Rockford Peerless and the Rockford Eagle. I had four lines. That you were selling for? That I was selling for. And then I went, they went broke of course, during the Depression. And I started in 1934 I think it was with the Wyman Company. They moved here from Chicago. And I was with them until I was about, well I quit, I was 70 and a half. I traveled. So I've been home about 19 years. This is Everett Valentine, born 1895, 8th of December in Rockford, Illinois, in Stocking. We have today 9th of March 1987. This Wyman Company was there, Swedish Outfit was there. No that was Jewish. They came from Chicago? Yeah. Did they have a factory here or an outlet? Well they had a factory, I think they paid a quarter a month for. You see it was the Depression. And then they bought the Union Plant. No they moved to the Union Plant. Then they bought the Empire Manufacturing Company. And they were there until I think it was, let's see, I was 71 when I quit. They were there until 87, 77. About 66 they sold out to another company. And then they went and moved down south, called it the Wyman Company. What kind of line were they in then? Case goods? No, they were Rockford Furniture and Winnebago was case goods. But the Wyman Company manufactured like this table and that cocktail table, living room furniture. And you were the salesman out on the road? Yeah. Did you drive with the car or did you go by? Oh I drove with the car then. All the time? Well not when I first started, I took the trains. Let us start now from the beginning here. Let us start from the beginning now. You were born here in Rockford, Illinois. Yeah. And your parents came from Sweden? Yeah. From Östergötland and Västergötland. That is right. But you do not remember if dad came from Östergötland or mother. It is either or there. Yeah. So about what time did they arrive here in Sycamore? They came to Sycamore first. Well, my mother's folks did. My father's folks came here in Rockford. Direct to Rockford? Yeah. And I had two brothers. I mean my father had two brothers. One was a finishing foreman and the other one was a hand carver. Ed, his name was Valentine. So they worked then for Scandia Empire or Ö You do not remember the company they worked for? No, I do not. Well, I remember that Fred, the finishing, he was a finishing foreman out to the Royal Mantel. Royal Mantel. Royal Mantel. They made dining room. So did you start in the furniture factories too when you started out as a school? Well, I worked at everything imaginable. I worked in a furniture factory. I worked at the National Lock and I worked all over. I was with Monty Palmer, a furniture designer. He got me into the furniture business. So how old were you then when you started to work? After high school? No, oh yeah, I was only 13. When did you start to work? 14 I was, yeah. You did not go through high school then? No, but I went to Browns Business College. So you took up writing and bookkeeping? Yeah, everything. Everything, huh? Typing too? No, everything but typing. So your intention then was to go into office work or Ö That is right. So what happened then when you were through with the business college? Well, I went through and I went to work for the Emerson-Brenningham company. And I was there about six months. I think they paid $25 a month. You worked ten hours a day. When I first started to work, they paid 50 cents a day when I was 14. And I worked in a drugstore for $3 a week, six days a week, ten hours a day. You lived at home then? Yeah. Were you able to keep that money though you made there? I gave it to my mother. She got the whole thing? You didnít put anything off of yourself? No, no. The whole thing, she took care of it? Yeah, I carried the papers. I think I was about seven or eight. I had a hundred customers. A hundred customers? Yeah. And you had to do the collecting too? Yeah, I collected on Saturday. Boy. So there was winter or snow or sleet or rain, nothing stopped you? Yeah, thatís right. This was a lot of papers, a hundred customers? Yeah. And that was around 7th Street orÖ Well, I started at 9th Avenue and I went to Broadway and then way out on both sides of the street. I see. Itíd take me a couple hours, three hours maybe. And Iíd run from Turner School, I was on 9th Street, all the way down to get those papers and run back to 9th Avenue. You had a little wagon then or how did you get them? No, you just carried them. You carried them? Yeah. That was a big job though, I mean, for a small kid. Yeah. I used to run them two miles down there and two miles back and then start peddling the papers. So that took you about two and a half to three hours then, every day? Was it in the morning orÖ? Sometimes the press would break down, you wouldnít get them until 9 oíclock at night. The paper press would break down so youíd be through at midnight and go to school the next day. Yeah, but you had somebody with you though, you didnít walk alone at night? Occasionally my sister would go with me, yeah. I see. Because it was dark then, I mean, how could youÖ Yeah. We had a big family, there was eleven children in our family. Eleven children? Yeah. How many boys and how many girls? Well, some of them passed on, but at that, I remember four boys and seven girls. There was a big family to feed then? Yeah. Thereís only Doris and I left, and Doris is in San Francisco. I see. Were you the youngest then? No, Zella was the youngest, she was the youngest. I was 13 years older than Zella. Oh, I see. And then came Doris, and then came May, and then me. So how about the rest of your brothers and sisters now, what kind of work did they get? They had to go out and start their ownÖ Well, May was married to Roy Hanson, he was an Englishman. He became secretary of the Rockford Life Insurance Company. And Zella married George Skane, he passed on, and then she married Dr. Anderson. And Doris married a man here, what the heck was his name? But anyway, she got married twice too. He was in the Army, I was in the First World War. You were drafted? Huh? You were drafted then? Were you drafted? No, I joined. You joined? I joined six months before I was drafted. What outfit then did you join? The Army or theÖ The Army. The Army. Yeah. So you went overseas? No. I was about to go overseas. I was standing in front of a place on East State Street, and a parade went by. And next to me was a man, Sanborn. He had charge of the draft. And he said, I knew him because he played a lot of billiards down there. And I used to watch him play billiards. And he said to me, why donít you join the Army? Well, I was at, before that I worked for the General Engineering Construction Company. And I donít know, I was up in Milwaukee and we put in that conduit in West Dallas and the foreman quit. So I finished that job. I was only about 17 then. And the state engineer helped me with laying out everything. Well, then I, he sent me to Buffalo, Mr. Budlong, and I came back from there. Buffalo, New York? Yeah. To study gasoline motors. And when I come back from there, he put me on one of these big digging machines. He had ten of those. And we went down next to the Great Lakes to dig. And it was a big pond there and the water run in as soon as you dug. So I pulled the machine up on the side and I quit. And I called him from the fire station there and he said, stay there until I get down there. So I stayed there and I quit. Well, I had trouble with my feet because we were carrying ties all day long under the tractors to keep that from sinking away. And my feet went on a bum and I was home for a couple of weeks and my feet got all right and I joined the Army. Well, then they took me from Kansas City from Sweeney Auto School down to Macon, Georgia, Camp Wheeler. And the day, oh, about a week before we went overseas, he had this car, the expert chauffeur and mechanic. And he called me out and a fluke came out. And he put me out in an ambulance carrying all these people that came in with the fluke and the troop trains to the hospital. So I didn't get overseas. Well, I wanted to go overseas so I went to this captain and I told him I wanted to go overseas. Well, he said, so much red tape and all that junk, he said. So he said there's nothing I can do but drive an ambulance. So that's what I did then. During the whole war? Yeah. The rest of the war. The rest of the war, yeah. So after you were discharged then, you came back to Rockford? Yeah. And you started to work then for? Yeah, I went to work for Bundle. I'd run the machines, those big digging machines. And he put me in charge of all the plumbing. And they went on a strike. And I told him, I said, you got to settle it or you won't have any customers left. And he didn't settle it so I quit too. You quit too? Yeah. Then Buddy Palmer, the designer, talked me into going out to see Mr. Lonely at the desk company and he put me out on the road. As a salesman? Yeah. How were you trained then to be a furniture salesman? Did you go to any? Oh, I sold clothing before. Oh, clothing? I was just a natural, I guess. I don't know. You just came natural to you? Yeah. You didn't go to any salesman school or anything like that? No, I just went out and sold. And you sold to the big stores then? Yeah. To the outlets? Yeah. Was it easy to sell? I made Kansas and Missouri and Texas and Oklahoma and Sioux Falls, South Dakota. And you traveled by train then? Huh? You traveled by train then? Yeah, by train. And the air I bring cars. So you had to stay away from Rockford then for several months when you went out and? Oh yeah, I was gone for six weeks. Six weeks at a time? Yeah. I was before I was married. How much were you able to sell then? I mean, tables and chairs and sofas and everything? Oh, I was doing about $250,000 to $300,000 a year. I see. Yeah. Did you have commission then? Yeah. I worked out of commission all my life. You never had any salary? No. So if you didn't sell, there was no money? I either had to sell or I didn't get paid. Yeah, but they paid for the transportation and the eating and stuff like that. No, no. I paid for that. You paid for that too? Yeah. I worked out of the state commission. How did it work out now compared to being working in the factory? Did you make more money then? Oh yeah, I made, with the linemen I made up to $25,000 a year. You did? Yeah. I made money. And then the Depression came along, you know, before that. And I built a beautiful house in 1928 when I got married. And that house cost me about $22,000. I lost it during the Depression for an $8,000 mortgage. You lost the whole thing? I lost the whole damn thing. I figured I was worth about $100,000 in 1920, oh about 1930 or 29. And the bank went broke and everything, you know. Which bank was that, security? Yeah. And I went, I had a double in debility, you know. So I lost everything. And I finally bought this house. So, when you bought the house then for $22,000 in 1928, how much were you making a year then? You were making pretty good money then in the 20s. Oh yeah, I was making about $15,000 a year. You see, you could travel in those days for $50 a week. So it was cheap to live then? Yeah. That was good money, big money. Which item now was the easiest to sell on the road for furniture? Bedroom furniture or case goods or? Oh, I think. What did you make most money on? Well, you see the thing, I started to sell right off the bat. They never had a salesman around for this company, making cans in Missouri. I built up a nice business there for two years. The first year I broke about even. And the next year I started to make money. Then the Rockford Furniture bought the Rockford desk company. And Wilson came in. He was with the Rockford Furniture and I had just written an order from a Texas man from Dallas for a carload of secretaries and a carload of dining rooms. So he says, he just bought the Rockford desk company. I said, gee, that's too bad. I just started to build up a nice business order. Well, there's two salesmen he said we should keep. He said that was Valentine and Murphy. Murphy made Wisconsin and I made all the other territory for the desk company. John Siddle was carrying the Rockford Furniture line in Michigan, outside of Detroit, and Ohio and like that. And he had tuberculosis. He was out in the sanitarium. So he said, we're going to give you that territory, but he said you got to give him a commission on all the mail orders that come in for the first year. So there's nothing else I could do. And I turned out to be, I was making a lot of like Columbus and Dayton. A guy come in one day from Dayton and he bought 24 suits from me. I thought he was kidding. And I got by the door and he said, don't you want to, don't you, will you give me an acknowledgement? And I said, I thought you was kidding when you took six of each kind, you know. He said, I wasn't kidding. Did you ever hear of me? I said, no. He said, I'm Ali Mudd from Dayton, Ohio. So I wrote up the order and that guy must have given me 50 grand that year on dining room. And I did a terrific job. I used to do as much business or more. And then out of Boston, he was, he had Toledo and Akron, Youngstown and Philadelphia, all that territory. Detroit. So you, you made more money than the owners some years then? Oh yeah. Did they say anything about that? Did they want to cut your? Oh yeah, that was quite a thought there. That's just, sometimes I make some more money. How much percentage did you have then on the sale? Well, on the dining room, bedroom was 6%. On the tables, there was three commissions. On the cheapest, the cheap, they paid 5%, 7%. But then on the high price stuff, they paid 10%. What was that? Huh? The 10%, what was that? It was the more expensive ones? Yeah, more expensive table. And that's what I was selling mostly towards the last. Was it easy to sell the Rockford furniture compared now with Grand Rapids and Jamestown? Oh, it was about an even break. Even break? Yeah. Grand Rapids was supposed to be the, you know. Were they the biggest? Yeah. Who were the furniture makers now in Grand Rapids? They were not Swedes though, they were Dutch or? Well, Jamestown, it was three, three manufacturers, Rockford, Grand Rapids and Jamestown. Yeah. Jamestown and Rockford, they were Swedes. Yeah. And Grand Rapids, who were they? The people in Grand Rapids, what kind of nationality was running their stuff? Oh, Hollanders mostly. Oh, Hollanders. Yeah. Very nice people. Good quality? Oh, yeah. Well, before the South went in the business, the only place you could buy quality furniture was Grand Rapids and Rockford and Jamestown. It was the only three places? Yeah. They bought anything that wanted anything. The prices now between Jamestown, Rockford and Grand Rapids, was it the same? They were very much alike, yeah. Very much alike. So, now when you come home then after the big trip like that, you had a big order, 50,000 and you had 10,000 and 12,000. What did they say then to you? They want to knock you down a little bit because you were making too much money. No. No, the Jewish people were the best people I ever worked for. Were they better than the Swedes? Oh, yeah. What did they differ? Well, what's the use of talking about it? No, but I mean, it's interesting though to see. Were they more businesslike, in other words, the Jewish people? Yeah. And you know, when you made money for them, when you sold, they give you every mail order. They did? They did. And everything, they were just as nice to me as they could be. So, they never quarreled about your rate and commission or anything, the Jewish? No. When you did your business, they appreciated it? Yeah. When the Swedes were… They were jealous that you were making too much money? Could you see that? Yeah. They wanted to go out on the road to the south a lot of the time and they sold nothing. Well, they did. They went on their own? Yeah. But here, you were a Swede now. Couldn't you convince them about the tactics to be used? I mean, you were a Swede. Yeah. Couldn't you discuss it with them then? What? Were you not able to convince them then, the owners of Rockford Desk and Rockford Furniture? Oh, they all liked me. They did? Because I sold good for them. But you made a lot of money though. I did for a while, yeah. But then the depression came along and I lost everything. So, how was the 1920s though? Was 1920s a good time of business? Did you sell a lot of furniture during the 20s? Yeah. You did? Between 1920, I think it was… See, I got out of the Army in 1919, I think it was. From 1921 to 1928, it was really good. Good time? Yeah. Then the depression came, you know. Who bought this furniture now? Was it a regular working man or the middle class or upper brackets? Well, it was the middle class and the upper brackets. It was priced their way then, so anybody could buy it. No. We started in the dining room with a buffet table and six chairs at around $150, $160. But there was a lot of money though in those days. Yeah. But it was good furniture. It was a veneered down wall. Well made? Yeah, it was real good. Well made and no union? No unions in the beginning? No. So, what happened then when you lost your house that you bought in 1928? Did you lose it in 1931, 32? Yeah. I rented a house up there for $55 a month. A $25,000 home for $55 a month. $55 a month. Now, I started to get on my feet again. Were you still working as a salesman then? Yeah. But it was hard times? Oh, yeah. I managed to squeak by. See, I had two boys. One of them is an actor now with the Camelot. They opened tonight in Miami. Yes. And the other boy was a sculptor. See, that's James. Well, they have both— Tommy fell off a mountain and killed himself about three, four years—or about seven years ago. He was out in Boulder, Colorado. He went to that Denver—to that college there in Boulder. So you had two boys then? Yeah. No girls? No girls. Just two boys. So they were artistic then, gifted children? Yeah. One was a sculptor, and the other boy is an actor. He's been on Broadway. So they both went through college then, your children? Yeah. Oh. And these are my grandchildren. They're Tommies. See, that's a picture of Tommy there on the wall. I see. And there's Jamie. There's four grandchildren. There's Rose and Ellen and Jamie and Jess. So they live— They live in Boulder, two of them. And Rose is teaching in Austin, Texas. And Ellen, I don't know, she's in a financial business somewhere in Iowa. So when you—during the Depression, did the furniture factories have to cut the prices then on the furniture that went on? Oh, yeah. We sold—I had everything in my grip. It was 50 off the wholesale. I see. So you had to cut down on your commission too then, or just to— No. You didn't have to— I only made 6 percent. Six percent. So they didn't cut that. You had the same percentage. Yeah. But it was a rough time. Oh. How about now? Did you lose any money in the bank? I mean, savings account at the security? Oh, I don't know. I never got anything, probably. There was Truman Johnson and Engstrom and Gustafson. Yeah. How did you know? Well I heard about them. They started the bank. And they completely folded up. Truman went there for a year. And when he got out, I felt sorry for him. And I got him some lines. Well, I had the Winnebago line. And Jim Dunn bought the Winnebago company. And he said, Is Truman a good friend of yours? I said, I don't know if he's a friend. But I said, I got him some lines. And I left room with me at the Knickerbocker in Chicago. I said, I paid his room rent and everything. He said, he was out the factory and wanted your line. So I said, I never had any use for scornings. I said, I never had any confidence in him. He said, I was scorned. Is that what he said? Truman Johnson? Yeah. I said, I thought so, I said, because I said, you was out and looked for my line. He said, what is my line after all the things I've done for you? Yeah, but why did you offer him a job then? He was the guy that sold your hostel, wasn't that in the bank? No, the insurance company. Insurance company. Rockford Life. And I had a brother-in-law that became president of the Rockford Life. He worked there then, but he didn't dare say anything. No? No. I built a beautiful brick house. This Truman Johnson, he was stock owner of the bank. Yeah. He was not the president though. Yeah. He was the president. I think he was. I think he was the president, or Evans Anderson maybe was, I don't know. And the whole bank collapsed. Oh yeah. They took the money, they took a lot of money and put it in the market. And they thought the market was going up, instead of that it went down. So they took a chance on it and it didn't work. Yeah. And they had to cover, you know. So, but you were still on the road then during the Depression? Yeah. Trying to sell? Yeah. And Oscar was, we were having lunch this five-five and Oscar Lansom was there. And Lansom was bragging about what he started and what he did, you know. And Harold says, well he said, Oscar, there's one thing they can't accuse you of. And he said, what's that? He said, Obama will pay the dividend. That really put him on the bump. So he, did he sell his factory or what happened? He had four of them. Free sewing machine and the... Oh that. He and Armour Johnson got into an argument. Yeah. With these Jewish boys in Canada. I think at that time, the free sewing machine had about $200,000 cash in the bank and they had this piano and lounge rooms. Well, those Jewish boys made a million dollars out of it. They got into arguments and sold out to these guys. I mean, it was so silly. They just threw away a million dollars. But they got some cash back though. Yeah, they got a little cash, a little amount, everything. They owed that money. And they folded up the whole thing? Yeah. They sold out the whole thing. These guys made over a million dollars out of it. Did they continue the factory then here in Rockford, those guys in Canada? Huh? Did they continue to work here in Rockford then? Oh, they moved here, yeah. They moved here? Yeah. Kessler, he became a, I think he was the president of the sewing machine company. Kessler? They auctioned off all the machinery and lounge room and the furniture and everything. So his line then stopped production then, in other words. Yeah. Lansner, that was gone. Yeah. And it was in the 40s? I don't know what year. Late 30s? It was about to be 1933 or so. Oh, it was during the Depression then? Yeah, during the Depression. But the sewing machine company was a good, you know, an outfit. Then it was making money and doing real well. How about the Haddorf Piano Company? Were they in a good business? Oh, yeah. They were old men by the lounge room. They got that too, you know. And that Haddorf Piano, they used to compare it with the Steinway, you know. But they went out of business? Yeah, they went out of business. So a lot of workers lost their jobs then? Yeah. Well, what they were paying, during the Depression, they had them down to 20 cents an hour. It was just terrible. So you had to regroup then. You lost your home and you lost money in the bank. Yeah. But you still felt the need to help Truman Johnson as a friend? That was after. That was after? Yeah, he got out of pen then. So he got a year in prison? Huh? He got a year? Yeah, a year. He was the only one that served time though? Well, Art Anderson went over for a year. Art didn't work at the bank. But he got involved with that loan company. I could tell you a lot of stuff about it. What happened really, now? Did people feel, how did people react to this? I mean, did they talk about it openly or did they just? Oh, they just let it go. Yeah. Weren't you afraid to put money in the bank, for instance, after you got the $100? Did you feel good to go put that money in the bank after this happened? Well... Did you trust the banks? Yeah. They started a new bank up there. On Broadway? Yeah. Are they still there? Yeah. In the same house? Huh? In the same house? Same people? The same house? Oh, it's the same place, yeah. Yeah. But you would think people would get scared of banks after something like this happens. Well, I was. You know, when they take the house away from you, you pay in every month and then they... So what happened there? Did they tell you to pay up the mortgage or what? Yeah, that's right. The Rock for Life did. They wanted you to pay... I was only a year behind in interest. $240. I was paying 6% interest. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying $6. Yeah. I was paying 6% then. Was that high? $6? Or $480. Yeah, $480. Yeah. And they wanted you to pay up the whole thing then? No, they wanted me to pay the interest. I couldn't pay it. The interest? There was no way to... No. And there were no other people you could borrow money from either at that time? Everybody was in the same boat? No. I owned a lot over on Broadway next to my mother's house there. I'm 1326. I sold half of that to my brother for he gave me $1,000. Well, I paid for some of that stock, you see. My mother had to pay $500. I had to pay for her. And I don't know, everything went to pieces. I probably could have saved that house if I'd have been smart. But there was just too much at the same time? Yeah. And I had some stock in different places. They went broke, you know. There was one place in Indiana, Evansville I think it was, I had about $1,200 of the stock I've had. And they liquidated. And then the guy that liquidated stole the money and scammed them. So I didn't get a cent out of that. And then Otto had given me some radio stock. His son-in-law worked at the First National Bank and he bought some of that. I bought some of that too. And I lost Samson. Well, everything started... To tumble down? Yeah. You remember P.A. Peterson? Oh, sure. He died in 1927. Yeah. Do you think he would have been able to... His... I mean, heirs now. They seemed to do all right during the Depression. They didn't lose any money. I probably would have gone to him. I think he'd have taken care of me. You think so? Yeah. I know he told Julian Hanson, he said, Julian told him, I'm going to make Grandfather Cox. And he said, well, when you get ready, he said, I'll take it and give you a certain amount of money. Well, about a year later, Julian met him and he said, you told me that you would give me some money. He said, did I? He said, if I did, I'll give it to you. But I remember he went to Grand Rapids. That's the first place I went to the market, you know. And they were building the manufacturers' building, they called it the manufacturers' building. And he took out a piece of brown paper and wrote a check on it. I think it was about 150,000 bucks. And it went through and they kept on building. Is that right? You see, Grand Rapids was the market in those days. And then they moved, we started showing Chicago afterwards. Did you sell most of the furniture on those exhibits? Yeah, sold a lot of furniture then. That way? Yeah. See, everybody went to the market. There was a way to do it. But P.A. Peterson, how was he able to be so wealthy and keep the money over the Depression? I mean, his heirs. Well, you and him, he was 55 years old. He was absolutely broke. But the creditors figured that if they put him in the bankruptcy, they wouldn't get any money. So they let him go. And he worked out of it, paid up all his bills, and he became a millionaire. Do you think he would have done the same thing during the 30s? Huh? Yeah, but it was not possible to do that way during the 30s, though. There was a different situation in the 30s. Wow. Do you think P.A. Peterson would have been able to ride out the Depression? Yeah. If he had been alive? He didn't ride off anything. They just went along with him, all the creditors. They figured if they put him in bankruptcy, they wouldn't get a cent. And if they went along with him and gave him credit and let him go, he might pull out of it, which he did. But the people now in the 30s, during the Depression, there was too many of them. Yeah, but he passed out in 27. 27, yes. Yeah. If he had been alive in the 30s, do you think he would have done the same thing? Well, you see, Barney Flynn took over. He was a lawyer? Yeah. How was he able, I mean, to keep P.A. Peterson's holdings? Well, P.A. Peterson, at that time, he owned the Rockford Life Insurance. He owned the Rockford Drop Forge. He was the one, I think, that started the transaction and the National Mirror Works. He was in everything. And, Barney, I remember we were going to, you see, right during the depth of the Depression, we had a meeting at the manufacturer's bank. And they wanted, they were going to start furniture stores in Milwaukee. We called it the Viking Furniture Company. And John Wester got up and he said, I make a motion that Valentine go up to Milwaukee to open up that store. Well, I was broke at the time. And he said, how much do you want? I said, $75 a week. He said, that's kind of steep, isn't it? And I said, I can't go up there for any less. I said, I'll have to rent a room up there and I'll have to, you know, commute to go home on the weekend. So they hired me. Well, I had got that. Barney Flynn had charge of it. He didn't put in anything. I never forget that John walked into the meeting one night. He looked, you see, he owed the manufacturer's bank about $100,000. John Wester. Yeah, but he signed it all over to his wife. You could do that in those days. So he was going around looking like that. And Harry West said, John, what are you looking at? He said, I was just thinking, he said, if the ceiling walls could talk, how many times have I taken, my name has been taken and waived in this room. Jeez, I thought I was split. But I went up there for about three months. And Barney never sent a check to me. So I went to Chicago on that North Shore Limited and got me a couple of lines that went to work. And I stayed in the furniture business again, selling. Selling. So it didn't work out then in Milwaukee? Huh? It didn't work out then in Milwaukee? No. Viking Furniture. They were supposed to put everything on consignment and then sell it to a dealer cheaper than they'd send it to me. And it was called Viking Furniture? Yeah. They never got off the ground? Yeah. They never got off the ground? Oh yeah. I sold quite a little stuff. I had a, John had a little end cable at $4 I think it was, $4 and I printed I don't know how many blotters I sent out. I sold a hundred of them and I sold another hundred. And John says, you are doing a terrific job on my line. So Barney wasn't paying him for it at all. And John came up and I said, I need another hundred of those end cables. I've got about sixty of them sold. He said, do you have to sell nothing but my stuff? He said, he didn't ship them at all because Barney wasn't paying him for it. And they charged decorating and everything. They didn't pay for a damn thing. I run a whole page ad in the Milwaukee Journal I think it was. They never paid for that. I run a page ad in the Sentinel I think it was. And they didn't pay for that. The only place I could advertise was in this Polish paper and I had to give them furniture. Oh it was the… So you got the bad reputation up in Milwaukee then. You didn't pay your bills. They come around you know and Barney Flint didn't pay anything. Yeah but how could they get away with that? I don't know. They tried everything. And Wilson, he sent them, you see in Milwaukee they built their buffets. And they sold a lot of just chairs and table. So he put those on consignment with me. But he sold them to, what's the name again? He sold them to the furniture dealer out there for less money than he was selling them to me. And they were on a whole page ad now. I said how can I sell them for twice the money they're getting? Why were they doing that? I mean why would they want to cut you? Anything to get a few bucks. There was like a panic then. They didn't care about the… Yeah. Yeah but when you met those guys now, John Wester and Barney Flint, didn't you tell them off? What in the hell are you doing here? Well I… I mean you were getting paid. That was Wilson that did it. Yes but I mean they were not treating you too nice up in Milwaukee. I mean not paying the bills or anything. I don't know. Were you able to tell them off then? No. No? They'd sell anything they could get. I sold about a hundred secretaries at $22 a piece for Crowley Mill in Detroit. And I stopped in Chicago on the way back in the clodies. I knew Mr. Crawford quite well. And he had in the window a butt secretary, 72 inches high, all butt walnut, beautifully made and finished at $19.95. And I said, what did you pay for those, Mr. Crawford? He said, $12. I said, I just sold a hundred of them and they turned down the order and I think it was $22. And while I was there, Mr. Wilson called up from the Rockford Furniture and he said, I'm sorry Mr. Crawford but we can't ship you those secretaries. Those hundred secretaries at $12. Well Crawford said, I already got them over $60 and sold. And he said, if you don't ship them, I'll sue you. So he had to ship them. I don't know. They got so bunged up. And this was during the Depression. Yeah. We had a coffee table. I know Jewish people, Homer Grossman and Pope Wager and Manny Myers moved out to Rockford. They were renting a place on 4th Street with planers and everything, all the machinery and all the booths, play booths and everything for $150 a month. They were making a Duncan 5 coffee table for $5.75. When I went out there, they were making it for Western Picture Frame and shipping it for $4. And I said to Homer Grossman, I said, why don't you let me sell it? I'll sell it for $5.75. He said, what makes you think that you can sell it? And I said, if they can sell it, I can sell it. I went out on the road. I started at Hammond, Indiana and I sold 18 of them. And I sent the order in. And I went over to Gary. I sold about 24 of them. I carried one of the cars, carried it in. I don't know. When I got to Detroit, to Crowley Miller, I had an occasional table with four carved legs and it was all pierced carving around with a mark at the top for $10.50. I had marked it $21.50, $21 for a fellow in South Bend. He wanted to take it out and show it to a customer. And it was marked $21.00. That was retail. So, Crowley Miller, he said, I'll give you 100 tables at $10.00. Well, it was $10.50. That was the regular price. But he was all done at $21.00. So I said, you got a deal. And I marked it down. I sent in 100 tables at $10.00. And Homer couldn't understand it. When I come back, he said, I didn't know there were that many customers in Michigan. He said, we've had a man there, he said he sold $66 in six months. You send in $100, $200, $500 a day. He said, I've never seen anything like it. Where the hell have you been all my life? And I sold them. He started to mark it. He quit then. Went to a picture room, got a man in New York, and they built up a building. They were nationally advertising. It was one of the hottest places in the country. I'll never forget Grand Rapids. I just made the city and I thought, well, what's the use of it? I was sitting thinking, waiting for a bus. And the thought came to me, why don't you go to offer claimants exclusive on the line? So I went to Jay Vandenberg and he said, well, you've already been in here about an hour ago. I said, if you give me $1,500 for an order, I'll tie the line up with you. And he said, you will? And I said, yeah. And he gave me $1,500. That account turned out to be about $25,000 a year. All 10%. You kept that promise then? Yeah. And I tied the line up with him. But John West and Barney Flynn, they sold to everybody. What was the difference? I mean, you worked for the Wyman Brothers or Wyman's. What did they do differently than John West, for instance, and Barney Flynn? Why, what did they do differently? I got a catalog downstairs, I think. They made about at least 100 different kinds. So they were much bigger then? Yeah. They were able to... This table here, this 52-hut line, you see that's in later on. Yes. And that's 14-carat gold leaf tooling on there. Who produced that one? Wyman. Wyman. And that's leather, top grain leather. How much did they retail for? I think we sold that to start with at $39.75, and it got to be $54, I think. But look at that table. You couldn't make it today without, you haven't got the mechanics. You see that tooling and everything was put in by hand. There's a lot of man hours on that table. Huh? There's a lot of man hours on that table. Oh, it's all inlaid there. Yes. $39.95? Yeah. It's a steal. Well, even at that time, I mean. Oh, yeah. But we sold them. I must have sold a couple of hundred myself. And they cut, you see, they cut a hundred, not less than a hundred of a number. And I told them when they sold out, these two boys from college got in there, and they started to get six of a number and eight of a number. I said, if a design alone costs you $1,000, and you got six, it costs you $30 a table. If you got a hundred, it costs you $10. See? I said, you can cut the price $20 on design alone. And now after I quit, they went to Herb and they said, gee, I wish that Valentine had come back with us. That I didn't want to work for him. One boy was supposed to be a Rhodes Scholar, you know. In two weeks, they knew everything about the furniture business. When you came back now after a sales trip out to Ohio and Missouri and Kansas or whatever it was, did you sit down with the board of directors at the meeting, for instance, and told them what the customers wanted, you suggested things? No. Were you able to do that? No. They didn't listen to you? Well, I got a friend, sometime Frank Johnson, he originally was a portrait painter. Yes. And he went in the designing business of furniture because he could make a living in portraits. And I used to, he'd maybe make eight or ten designs. I'd go up and pick out the ones that were for my territory that I thought would sell. But we never had a directors' meeting. Because I am sure when you went out selling now that they had suggestions to you, the furniture, they wanted something a little bit different and so on. No. They didn't tell you that? No. They didn't recommend anything different on the style or anything? No. They didn't do that? No. You just sold them. But how did they change the designing now from year to year? I mean, you had one? Oh, we had designer, sure. But did they follow the time, what the people wanted? Sometimes, yeah. Or did the people have to take the designer's layout or? Yeah, generally. They had to do that? Yeah, we made a lot of Spanish, never sold. They never sold? No. And then it got to be 18th century English mostly. How about this Pennsylvania Dutch out in the Grand Rapids? Well, that's good. Look at my dining room. When did they come in the style? Were they in the 40s? Yeah. Oh, but yeah, I think. Well, the maple is always there. The maple? Yeah. Because Grand Rapids has a- This is cherry. Yes. This dining room suit. You sell that too? You sold that too? No, I didn't. You didn't sell that? No. No? They made maple furniture, the Hoohenrock, for Scandia made it. Mm-hmm. But you see, when they started to make maple, see, when you make it out of solid maple, it tracks and contracts, you know. You got to put glue blocks in there in certain places so that when it gets damp or anything, those glue blocks and everything give a little bit in a certain space. Otherwise, it warps, you know. And they had a lot of warping. They didn't know how to make maple to start with. Scandia, when I first went, they were the biggest death line in the United States. Scandia. Scandia. Donovan East Second. Yeah. Oh, North Second. North Second, yeah. North Second. See, they made all secretaries and knee-hold guests and things like that. They were the hottest line in the country on that. Well, then James Town went into Maddox and different ones. So you knew Willard Brolinen? Oh, yeah. You knew him since many years back? Yes, I knew him. He seems to be in everything. Yeah. Why did they diversify so much like Hoagland and Olsen and Brolinen? They had investments in so many different companies. I don't know. Why did they do that? Well, all they did is sign notes. I remember I took them out when they built the Faust Hotel. I took Wilson and John, and Brolinen was there. See, that was the day that Faust put in a quarter of a million in that. Faust Hotel. And that Faust Hotel, that's why they named it Faust. And Mr. Brolinen, you know, was a very – he was a real cool – I always believed that he was self-conscious more than anything else. Because he'd come over to the car and he shook hands with me. And he said, how are you, Mr. Wilson? I said, I'm fine, Mr. Brolinen. And when John, Erwin Wilson, and John Wilson came out, I said, gee, Mr. Brolinen was real friendly today. He came over and shook hands with me, and he was just as nice and everything. Well, he always gets happy. He said, well, he signs a note. He had signed a note for 50,000 for the Faust, see. And Wilson signed a note for 50,000. And John, well, I went out to the factory. I had gotten married then. And I just built the house and carpeted it and all, getting it ready. And Wilson said to me, he said, you better buy some Faust Hotel. And I said, I just came from Lima. And they built that Arkham Hotel there. And I said, they've gone through the ringer twice. And I said, this is the four nights, I said, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. They'd all go to Chicago on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. Or they'd go home. Well, Wilson said, this is a civic affair. He said, put Wally, they called me, they called me Dally in those days, see. And he called me Wally. That was the sweet part of it. He said, put Wally down for 12 shares.