 Cassette three, side one. Mrs. Evelyn Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette three, side one. Yes, we are talking about Church. Why didn't Jamali want to stay in there? I don't know. I don't know, except if she wanted to– Maybe he liked the pastor, maybe? Well, I think she would like him, but I think maybe she wanted to establish herself someplace. My mother was like that. Jamali was closer to where she lived, wasn't she? Well, she lived on the west side. What was the difference, though, between 1 Lutheran and Zion, for instance? Well, Zion was an offshoot of 1 Lutheran. First wanted to go to English, and Zion wanted to remain with Swedish sproke. And so Zion broke off from 1 Lutheran. And Trinity was of another synod. It was not like we are still– Well, there was no Swedish Trinity. No, it was of a different synod. It was not Augustinian, and we were Augustana. So that was the difference there, but otherwise they were Lutheran. They're–you know, like now they're Missourian. But Trinity, though, they were more like businessmen and– Well, yeah, they were– –well-situated people. Yeah, mm-hmm. And of course, 1 Lutheran was also–but it was of the wealthy Swedes. The first? 1 Lutheran, yeah. They were considered the more wealthy Swedes. And they wanted to break off to be English. They wanted to have English services. But– But Dr. Loreen, he spoke in Swedish, though. Oh, sure. But he was of the latter. He was–you know, but this was– This was 102 years ago we broke off. You know, Zion left in 1882. We left and our church was formed in 1883. So that was a long time ago, but that's why we remained Swedish. And anyway, that's–evidently my mother wanted to establish herself in her own church because it was–that was her idea, and she was buried from, you know, from Zion also when she died in 1977. And that was when– Well, Trinity didn't have any Swedish services. No, no, no. But her–you see, her cousins were educated, too. So they went there, and one of them was a missionary out of there. She died, and her name was Emma Johnson, and she died in 1963, I believe it was. She was in India for the most part of her life. But my mother worked, as I said, on the–for the wealthy Americans, and then– But she had money and could travel, and she did well. Then she got married in 1909, and then my dad opened his little business up. After they'd gotten married, he opened up his business with John Anderson. And unfortunately, they were not businessmen. They trusted people so that their business just went nowhere. And so they closed up shop, and my father then joined Norberg Fagerberg. They simply couldn't make a go of it. People took advantage of them and didn't pay, and my father always figured a man was as good as his word, but that isn't quite the case. So Norberg Fagerberg, Betty, and Swedish, and Fagerberg, Betty, were both Swedes. And that is who my father joined up with. And he had worked in the interim, I suppose, before he got married. He had worked for Harry Burpee, who then was a furniture– He sold furniture, and he had a funeral parlor. And he is the man who left his big home, the Burpee home, to our Burpee Museums downtown. And as a matter of fact, the chiffonier in my bedroom is a present from Mr. Burpee in 1910. His store was across the State Street Bridge from my father's shop, and he had a fire in 1910. And my father and John ran across the bridge and pushed furniture out, hauled furniture out of Burpee's store, out onto the street. And so Mr. Burpee gave my father, who was then a newly married man, gave him this chest that I have in my bedroom now. And I have left the mirror just as it was from the fire. It's dripping and crackly. I did refinish it, but that is from the fire of 1910 at Mr. Burpee's store. My souvenir. What do you remember now about the Depression? What was the most noticeable in your family? Was it a lack of work or income? Well, my father's little shop downtown, Norberg-Fagerberg, kept going. My father took home about $5 a week at the time. He was an officer, and so they each took a minimal amount of money. We had no money, but we had a big garden behind our house, and they raised potatoes and beans and beets and canned tomatoes. My mother was putting up tomatoes and rhubarb. And then my brothers and sisters were old enough so that they were working. My brother had been born in 1910. It was a long year after my parents were just exactly the same as Bert's parents. They were both married in July, and their sons were both born in May. And so they had a garden, and we got along. I personally don't remember anything except that there was no money for a lot of extra things, and we were not accustomed to extra things, being in a family of six. We did not live on the dole, and I was never hungry in my life at home. My mother baked, wonderful bakery, and we always had meat, and we always had milk and fresh vegetables. And your father hunted a lot. And my father hunted, yes. My father and uncle loved to hunt, which my husband also has done. So we would have rabbits, and that's about all I would eat. There were pheasants and rabbits. Pheasants they shot, too. There were chickens in those days. Yeah. And so that they, it was a sport for them, and then also it put... They fished a lot, didn't they? Yeah, they fished, and then they went out and seen crafter. So we had, in the late summer, we would have craft class. It was from the Kishwaukee. Yeah, Rock River. Rock River. So that we had, it was not a gracious life or anything, but we always had a nice... My mother always set a nice table. My mother was a very good cook, and a lot of people say their mothers were good cooks, but mine was a good cook. It was not that I was accustomed to her cooking, but she could really make a nice meal out of nothing. And it's amazing, though, because you say, talk about a lot of people come for coffee. Yes, yes. My mother cooked delicious boulard and cinnamon rolls. Did she even bring something with them? Never, never, never. My mother baked, and she always made ends meet. But then, like I was, at the time I was fortunate because I hadn't grown up to be as tall as I am now, so that I had older sisters, and I always had hand-me-downs. I was 12 years old before I had my first own dress. I was 12, and by that time I had started to grow tall so that my sister's clothes didn't fit me anymore. I'm the tallest. I have a younger brother who is taller than I am, but I am the tallest in the family. And anyway, I was 12 before I had my own dress. Perhaps you were fed better than the rest of them. No, I don't think so. But this is, as a matter of fact, I was quite slender. I was tall and slender, and my brother, who is 6 feet 2, was also very slender. We were not particularly active or sports-minded. We did things in school. My brother went to college. My youngest brother is the only one who had a formal education, went to college. But we all graduated from high school, and we were all musical. Did you stay from your mother's side? My father's. My mother was very literal. My mother liked to read and write and talk. My mother could read and write when she was 4, so she was very intellectual that way. What kind of books did she read? When she came to America, she read American books. She read all the time. I liked Bert's mother, too. Bert's mother worked the crossword puzzles and things to expand their world. My mother did that when she had time. Your father sang with the- Yeah, my dad sang with Scythiad and then some other- Lyron? Not Lyron, no. He didn't belong to Lyron. But he sang with a couple of choruses. He had a very good voice. He played the violin and the piano. He was quite artistic. He did oil paintings. He must have painted 20 borehole sluts in oil. My family home is hung with oils that he has painted. We have one oil that he painted when he was 84 years old from memory. He painted of the- what do you call them? What kind of- Clipper ship. Clipper ship going up when the ice had gone out in the spring. He painted from memory what he saw on Erland. I used to have an ice boat and do a lot of ice boating. He was telling about when the Kalmar Sund froze over, he hauled freight on a big ice boat from Erland over to Oscarshamn. And then in the other direction also. And these ice boats would carry 20 people. 20 people could sit a beam on them so that it was a transport for a few Eure you could get from Erland to Kalmar. You'd sit on the beams of an ice boat. But we had an ice boat up at Lake Geneva which was small just for two people, but this sat 20 people on the beams, on the runners. And they had to sail them? Yes. This was back- Turn of the century. 90 years ago. Yeah, 90 years ago. But they utilized everything. So you remember that when you saw your- Yes. My father remembered everything. And my father, when he had cancer, said how much- He'd been back in 1907. He said how much he would really love to go back to Sweden, but he said the thing is everybody is gone that would recognize him and that he would know there would be nobody there for him to talk to about anything. And what he wanted to do was to hire a helicopter. Now this is my 88-year-old father talking. He wanted to hire a helicopter and just fly over the places where he had been, the places where he had lived and where his friends lived and the lake where he had been and all of the places that he had been when he was a young man in Erland. That's what his dream was to do. His dream was never fulfilled, but- He never came back. No, he never went back there. Only in 1907 he went back there. But otherwise my parents were outgoing, both of them. We had company all the time, and things were never lavish, but my mother always knew how to prepare something appropriate for the occasion that she could afford, but she never apologized. One thing, my mother never apologized for what she put on the table. She never said that I had dolig mat or anything like that. Like some people, even when it's the most luscious thing, they will still apologize for the food they put on the table, and that kills me because you know they worked over it for two days, but my mother never did, and we had nice food. We all got through the Depression fine, and it was not easy or simple or whatever, but my sisters would have a nice hat now and then, and they would have nice coats. They worked. Did they live in their own house then? They still lived home. My first sister- My eldest brother got married in 1936, and my next sister was married in 1939, so nobody in our family got married young. You married- He was the- No, I'm talking about Alice. Oh, I see. I thought you were talking about Jean. No, Alice was the first one. You married the president of the Red River. Yeah, my second sister married a Lutheran minister, so that he was actually the bishop in the Red River District in Minnesota before he retired. Larson? No, his name was Carlson, Walter Carlson. He was the Lutheran in Augustana. It would have been LCA, it would have been Augustana. Well, yeah, it would- So she met him there as a pastor in Rockford, then? Yes, he served at both- first Lutheran and Zion. He served both churches, one as a student and the other as assistant pastor, but he pursued her, you know, and so she was married in 1940 and then moved up to northern Minnesota. So she belonged to the Luther League then? Oh, yeah. Your sister, I mean, so they met through the church then? Well, you see, we all attended church, and he was the minister. He was the assistant minister. Maybe he confirmed her. Yeah, no, no, he was young. As a matter of fact, he's younger than she is. When you said Luther League- Yes, honey, we're on tape, yes. You must have listened to Prairie Home Companion. Sometimes, yeah. Yes, that's cute, yeah. No, but she's about four months older than he is. So, no, they just struck it off. That was just the way it was, and then they got married right after his ordination in 1940. He was ordained in June, and they were married in June. Talking about struck it off, how about your parents now? They had four girls there. They had to be a little bit concerned about what kind of dates you were bringing home. My mother and father never worried about their daughters at all. They trusted us. They must have been worried sometimes. No, I don't think so. I don't think so. They trusted us, and I never had one- I don't believe I was ever on one date when I ever said anything to anybody about, gosh, I've got to get home or, boy, I'm going to get hecked for my mother. I've stayed out too late or anything. I never- But it was unusual because most of the parents told them not to- They worried, but they never- They might have worried. I don't know, but I don't think worry is the word. I don't think my-I never had any problems. I don't think my sisters did with the fellows. The guys always came to the house to pick us up. They knew who they were out with. Yeah, they knew who we were with, and I had friends from out of town that I went out with, and they knew that I would come home early enough because those guys had to drive back to St. Charles or something that night. I had no- How about if you dated an Italian or an Irish boy? It wouldn't-Well, my father would probably have sworn a little bit about it, but I never dated it. I dated a Presbyterian guy for about half a year, but he liked him. I mean, he-I suppose he looked sweetie. She had blonde, curly hair, and it was nice looking, but I just-I was never attracted to anybody like that. I had a lot of boyfriends, but then my sisters, too, were never- One of my sisters went with an Italian fellow, but my father knew his father, so there was no problem. But she only dated him. You know, just- They said that the Italians were the darn good dancers. Yeah, well, that may have been-I never went to dances when I was dating. I went to things at church. And to swing shows. Yeah, but that was always with my parents. Yeah, they had swing dances. Yeah, I would dance with my father. I would be with my mother and dad. I never went there when I was older, when I got to the point where I could be out. When I was 15 years old, I didn't go to the lodges or anything. And when I was up there, I danced with my uncle and I danced with my father. Or I danced with my sister or another girl, you know. How about now-you were not interested in a continue on this victory, for instance. Your father was very interested in it. My sisters- You didn't find any interest in it. My sisters did, and they just belonged. They didn't-and the same thing with Harold Lodge. No, the place for the lodges, I think, was for somebody who didn't have a lot of connections. I can really see the need for them for these people who came over. That's right. People who first came over to give them a background, to give them an assurance of a background. But I didn't need that. I mean, when you have a home, when you have a family, you know, a mom and a pop, brothers and sisters and friends right there, you don't have to have that continual assurance that you have a background. I had one. I went to church, and I'm not hyper-super religious or anything, but my interests were there. I went to shows, and we had a lot of parties when I was growing up, when I was in that age. I had girlfriends, and we would have parties and invite boys, you know, and there was no problem. We didn't drink. I think I was 29 years old before I had a cocktail, but it was not that I didn't haveóthat there was no alcohol at our home, because there was. We went out on picnics. We did, yeah. And when I startedó Steak and fries. When I went with him, yeah, it was the same thing. We had steak, fries, and picnics with groups of kids. We had friends, and we did something which kids don't do anymore. We double-dated and bunch-dated. We were maybe four couples or six couples, and we'd go all out for a picnic, or we would go to somebody's house and have a party. And when you say party, it sounds crazy, but we didn't dance, and we would play crazy games, and it was just fun. We would eat, but there wasn't tható And it just wasn'tówe didn't smoke. It was different. Yeah, we didn't smoke, and it wasn't because we thought it was sinful. We just didn't. We just didn't smoke. We didn't drink. What about your dad? Did he smoke? Sure. My father smoked. Every morning before he left the house, he lit up a cigar for his father, too. They smoked Dutch Master cigars. My father smoked a pipe, sure. And my fatheró Did he have a soup? Yeah, my father belonged to his fifth unit. No one else had to have a soup. My father belonged to his fifth unit, and it goes without saying. But there was no temptation in it for me. If I had wanted to, I don't think my parents would have slapped my hands. If I had gone and helped myself to a glass of wine, I would never have been reprimanded for it. But I never cared for it. I never felt the need for it. I didn't even think that I wasóI wouldn't beóI wouldn't beówhat is the word? Sneaking. I wouldn't be sneaking anything because they didn't care if I had taken it. And thereforeóI mean, that way is the way to be, I think, to put it there. If you like it, it's all right. Help yourself. But if you don't, leave it alone. I mean, this is how we were raised. So you stopped being too nagging, then? That's right. There was nothing at all, and we didn't like it. None of us kidsóI don't think any of us drink. Drink. Drink. That's right. My brother died, yes. Yes, my eldest brother died. So then you found this guy with theó Convertible. Convertible, the rumble seat. Yes. The rumble seat was invented for double dating, you think? Well, probably. I was putting the mother-in-law inógoing over a bump with the mother-in-law in the rumble seat. No, but I had gone to confirmation, and his sister was in my confirmation class. I had seen him in church. He had been with the bunch of guys at church. And we were in Luther League. That's why we were all in groups, and we had parties. We would have fun thingsóyou know, have fun groups doing things, and there was no stigma on you if you came with a bunch of girls, and if the guys came as a bunch of guys, there was nothing wrong if you came alone. And now it's like you can'tóyou have toóyou've got to have a date. But we had guys and girls together, and we had fun, and we would meet at different places. There were places around to meet. And then we had fun at Christmas. Like my family wasówe had Christmases similar to his in our home. So there was a knit family circle then, togetherness, in a different way than today. Yeah, not so much family as the community we lived in, the community we traveled in. I mean, we hadóour church was, for the most part, people that lived 8, 10 blocks away from the church. Like he lived on 9th Avenue, I lived on 6th Avenue, and he walked to church and I walked to church. We never saw each other walk to church. He walked to school and I walked to school. We never saw each other walking to high school. But we were there, and I would probably see him in high school, but it didn't mean anything to me. He was my girlfriend's brother. And when we went to church in the morning, we also had night services on Sunday night, and sometimes we would go there. And it wasn't that we sat and prayed either. We would go to Luther League. We sang in choir, and we had choir practice once a week. And if we were singing, we had several choirs then, male and female and a cappella and things. But it was notóI didn't do anything with my brothers or sisters a lot because they were older. My next sister is 6 years older than I am, so she was way beyond me. When I was 10, she was 16, you know, and out of the way. So you didn't have to walk in common with her? No. And she moved off. But now she and I are friends. She still lives in my parents' home. She's an old maid. She's 70 years old, and she lives in my parents' home. But the others are married, and I moved away. One of my brothers is dead, and my sister and her husband live in Minnesota yet, and another sister lives right over there across the valley, and then my brother lives in California. So you still have a circle of friends. Yeah, we've got a large circle. I meanó We've got justóyeah. So, and was there any communication with other nationalities, for instance, the Polacks and the Italians and the Irish? My best girlfriend was Lithuanian in high school. So there was no high school then? Yeah. I went around with her for six years, and then she went to college, and then eventually she married and moved out east. But her father was a Lithuanian immigrant, and they were Catholic. They were not Lithuanians, which many of them are. But you didn't discuss the religious friendship? Never. Never. We played golf every week, and during the summerówe played every Wednesday for five yearsówe played golf in the summertime. We walked out to the Sinisepi Golf Course and played golf, and one of the girls' fathers was the head of the typesettingóthe line of type at the Rockford newspapers. He was the superintendent there. And the other girl's father had a drugstore downtown, and then this girl's father was a barber, and my father had his little shop, but there was noóI mean, we were just good friends, and we all liked the same things, we had the same attitude toward things. And I still see two of those girls once in a whileóyou know, Betty June. We went to see Martin Luther, as a matter of factóLuther, the drama that Arnett's Theatre put onóand she was there. So she's been not a close friend, but a good friend all these years. Do you think it was easier for the Irishónot the Italians, but I mean the Irishónot to get a job? I think they hadó In the Swedes, because they had no language problems. But I think they had the same problem. But was it easier for the Swedes because they had so many connections? No, Ió Which was best? I think they allóI think the Irish stayed with the Irish and the Swedes stayed with the Swedes. They all had connections. But I think that they wereóif there was a job available, I think anybody could get a job, because there was alwaysóI mean, we had streetcars, we had street departments, and we had truck drivers, we had fire departments, we had places where anybody could get a job. You wouldn't have to know English for Swedes to be on the fire department. The Swedes stayed more or less with industry, with furniture and machine tools. They stayed away from digging ditches. Face it. But, no, I don't think that the English language made that much difference at that time. But how about politics? You had some Swedish politicians there, Hallström and Blom. Yes, as a matter of fact, I still write to Mayor Hallström's daughter. She's one of my good friends. She lives in Texas? Yes, and Mayor Blom had his drug store up just a block and a half from my parents. Because they were born in Sweden, both of them. I don't think Henry Blom was. I think he was American. I think he was American. But I know Herman was. But he was a good mayor. As a matter of fact, my father was a blooming Republican. He was really a Hoover man until the... But Hallström was opposite, though. Yes, that's right. But until the Depression, my father was a Hoover man. After that, my father became a Democrat. But, no, I don't know what was the matter. See, the daughters got along. I got along fine with Irene, and I still do. Irene is now blind. She's had a stroke, his daughter. And her brother lives with her down in Texas. And they're nice, awfully nice kids. I always have gotten along fine with her, but our fathers didn't get along. But there was never... There were just a couple of times, a couple of bombastic telephone calls, but nothing worse. Were they the same age as you then, the children of Hallström? His daughter is the same age as I am. She was born a little bit after, a couple of months after I was born. And then his son is younger. He was a socialist, Hallström. That's what he said. I got along fine with his daughter. And then, of course, he ended up as a very wealthy insurance man. He became a Republican. I don't know what he became. My father, yes, I don't know what Herman became. You never know what people become. So how about your father? Why was he huberized? How early did he...? Well, you see, my father was a businessman, so he was a Republican. I mean, he was a well... So there was a common way to do that in Garoszów? Sure, and the Democrats were the working men. I had to show him the carving. He made a carving of the workers. Yes, yes. But anyway, usually the working men were the Democrats, and the Republicans were supposed to be the well-heeled society, which we were, of course, not. My father wasn't well-heeled, but he was a businessman. Did he actually feel, then, your father, that the Hoover administration brought on the depression? Of course. Everybody did. Everybody did, and the people who didn't... My father didn't sit and read treatises and books and things about this. He just felt... Cassette three, side two, continuation with Evelyn Carlson, Rockville, Illinois. Cassette three, side two. So there were quite a few Swedish Republicans, though, in the working class. And that always surprised me, though. Even the factory workers were Republicans. They were conservative. Who told them this, or who got them into that idea? It was just that they were conservative, and the thing is, they wanted to be with the conservative or the upper class. This was the movement. I think they did not want to be associated with the, quote, working man, unquote, aspect. They wanted to be more genteel, so that they would be in the upper stratum. No offense against you, but the cigar and the Republican, I mean, that was a signal to the outside world, you know, you were a Republican more or less then. No, it was just that they liked... They just liked... Because the workers, did he smoke cigars? Oh, my father did. My father, oh, yeah. But he was not a worker, he was a businessman. Oh, he worked. No, he had to work. They were working people. They all had to work. My father did the carving and all that, I mean, in his shop. Yeah, but like a guy, you know, working at the Scania Furniture Company, for instance, at a furniture factory. Did he smoke cigars? Well, probably off. Sure, when he was... My uncle did. My uncle never owned the thing. My uncle worked at a furniture factory, and he smoked cigars just like my dad did. Exactly. And Uncle Axel chewed snuff. No, but my father and his brother smoked the same cigars, and my uncle only worked in a furniture factory, and my father was part owner of, but not a furniture factory, of a furniture processing factory. So there was no line drawn between the cigar and the... No, no. They didn't smoke cigarettes. And then his father went to cigarettes when he got more nervous, more worried, and he started... Your father went to a pipe. And my father went to a pipe. He smoked velvet, and your uncle smoked... Prince Albert. Prince Albert, and your uncle drank Sonny Brook, and your father drank gin bean. That's right. That's right. So they had the convictions, obviously. Yes, yes. They had their convictions. So he changed completely over then, so he voted for Roosevelt. You bet. So what did he say about Roosevelt and his new deal? Oh, it was marvelous, of course. I mean, that's the way they all felt. A lot of people were against Roosevelt, though. But, you know, for somebody who practically lost his whole lifetime of work, had it knocked out from under him, you know, and he felt that he'd been betrayed. He had... You know, my father had... What is the word? Had invested in a bank on Broadway, and he had property, and he lost this, and he had bonds in his bank, and so, like, long afterwards, I know that the school kids had a bank. We had a banking... What do you call it? A little savings account in school, and we would put our pennies and things, and we would have a savings account day. We would have a little bank book, and our money was kept in this bank that my father had bought bonds in, and the stockholders did not have to do this, but the bondholders had to replace the money that they used when they paid, like, if they paid 4% back to the kids, it was from people like my father who had to pay it back in, and so my father had to actually take food money and send in $50 at a time, which when he was earning $5 a week, send in $50 in order to pay back the school children their percentage on their little savings accounts, and this is what happened to him. I mean, everything went, but we still did not live on... We never had to live on relief. He was bitter then, the youngster. Yeah, yes, very. So what happened to your account and the school children's account? Did you get any money out of it? Oh, yeah, we would get, like, 4% on a dollar, so we probably got 14 cents back or something. Well, that's all. Yeah, uh-huh, but you see, some kids had more money, and some kids had... but it was all the school kids in Rockford. But they had to... It was not the Swedish bank, though. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it was run... It was all the banks. It was run by a Swede who disappeared. I mean, that was the president. He went to Florida, he disappeared, and when the banks failed, he disappeared with a lot of money. What was the name of their bank? Security. Security. On 7th Street. So after that, the word security didn't mean too much to your mother. Yeah, we got Liberty Bell, the security bank. We all got one of those, like a copper bell. That was our savings bank that we got from security. Where did we get the Lindy banks from? Was that security? It's yours. That's mine, and I lost it. One was Lindy. Anyway, I think as far as politics is concerned... But they weren't... Most of the Republicans changed over to Democrat after the Depression. But then as they became more affluent again, I think a lot of them had switched back to Republican. Then they trended back. I think a lot of them went with John Kennedy. I think they got a little bit bemused by Eisenhower, so they went with John Kennedy, and I think they went back again. I personally know of a lot of Republicans who voted for John Kennedy because there was nothing going on with Eisenhower at all. But my father never was interested in politics. He was never an alderman or anything. Did he discuss... He was a good friend of Halstom's then? Yeah. Did you look up to each other? No, no, no. Halstom's lived up on London, and my father was going to build a house. We had lovely property up in that area, but we never got... He had to sell it just to pay off his losses. But again, in his eyes he was diminished, but I was young. I was only 7 years old at the time of the Depression, the first one, and I never suffered any... I never noticed any deprivation. I still had clothes, and I still had friends, and I still had my house. Everything was there, the neighborhood. But that must have been a bad feeling, losing your money and property and everything. Yeah, yeah. Well, everything that my... It was... For my father, he became bitter because he had lost everything he had worked hard for since he'd come here, and he still retained ownership of that company, but there was no business going on there, so that it actually... It was like a white elephant for a long time because there was nothing. Nobody was paying to have their furniture fixed because there were no wealthy people anymore, you know. But there must have been someone making money during the Depression. Who was that that made good in the Depression? I think it was always somebody that... Well, the food stores still had to... People had to buy food. The fuel directors, I suppose. Well, yeah, but I... And I don't think that they were paid very much. No, I don't think people paid much for their services, no. But food they had to buy. How about insurance? I don't think people even carried insurance. Because there was... and the Vasa and the Scandinavian fraternity took care of that. Yeah, but that was so little. It was devastatingly little. I mean, when you think about what it was, that was... I mean, nothing. Did the churches help out? No, they had no money. I mean... The reservation army, they had a supply. Yeah, and you know, the churches only... The churches are like the government. They're only... They're only the... The government getting in. That's right. They are only the sum of the whole thing, that if their parishioners can't put any money in the basket, there's no money to give away. My mother's uncle was a cabinetmaker, carpenter. He built... He owned his two-family home on 8th Street, close to Broadway. Anyway, he built a nice brick bungalow next door, and the day he went and borrowed money on the other house to pay for his bungalow, the banks busted, and he went to draw out his money, and he couldn't get it. So he lost the new house that he just built, and he lost the house that he took the mortgage out of. Yes. So he ended up renting in his other house. He lost two houses. He lost two houses in one day. In one day. In one day. He put the money in the bank one day, and the next he was going to take the money out. He took a mortgage against his old house to pay for the new house, and he paid for the new house. He got... Well, he got the money. He got the money out for the new house. I don't know how... Whatever it was. Anyway, he lost everything. Oh, no, he didn't get the money to pay. He could have taken it out. That's right. He could not pay for the second house. The money disappeared in the crash, and so there he had the mortgage to be paid and the loan. There were so many people above their reach during the Depression. It was terrible. So he lost... He did lose two houses. They're still there. Looked very nice. But what happened to the bankers now, the bank presidents and the trustees? Did they benefit from this in one way or another? Well, no, they couldn't. Well, they couldn't except in the case of a few unscrupulous ones who disappeared, who took their money. And, I mean, they took what money they had in the bank and went because they saw what was happening, so they withdrew their money before the banks were officially closed. I mean, there was a close down of the banks, and everything had to stop. And these few unscrupulous ones took their money out right before the closing order of time came, and they left. And they never showed up again? Well, they came back, sure. They came back? Oh, yes, some of them did. But, you see, they said they planned this vacation, and they escaped unhurt. But tactics like that, is that regarded as being smart, you think, or is it regarded as being crooked? Well, that's a little crooked. Yeah, but isn't it also the smart way? I mean, you're in a good business. Yeah, that's right. But you didn't make too many friends then. No, that man lost out. His name was Mud for a long, long time, I think, even until his death. But it was just too bad. But then you, second World War came on, and it started to change your life a bit. Yeah, I graduated in 1940 from high school, and then I got a job. I was a secretary. I worked at secretarial jobs from January of 1940 until I got married. Did you have secretarial training in school, then high school? Yes, and then I went to a special school at night. I had taken all that in school, yes. I did 140 words a minute. There were only two people in my whole class that could do that. I had gotten my 120 pin, and I did 140. One minute, 140 words. I could take down. I could not type, shorthand. Oh, shorthand, I see. I could do 140 words a minute. So if you talked, I could write down 140 words. But you see, the trouble is I talk as fast as I think, and that's my whole problem. I talk very fast, but I could also comprehend and write it down very fast in shorthand. So you had an easy time to get a job, then? Yes. I worked at Sunstrands. Sunstrands. Yes. I didn't go there because my brother had been there since 1927, and he had come there on his own recognizance. He was smart. When we graduated, there were two jobs for secretaries open. One was Woodward Governor and one was Sunstrands, and the two top gals in our class were told about this. I was one of them, and this whatever her name was. Doesn't matter. Yes, doesn't matter. Anyway, she and I raced out to try for those jobs, and I thought, well, I would rather do Sunstrands. It was closer to home than to run out to Woodward Governor, and she lived on the west side, so I got the Sunstrands job. But I went out the day of our graduation lunch in January. I went out to Sunstrands and had an interview, and I got the job. I was there until I got married, and in those days, that's when ladies quit. When I got married, I was through. Even when your husband left for the war, couldn't you continue on working there? I went back to work at Ekstrom Carlson then. Then I went back as a secretary to the president of Ekstrom Carlson because I sold our car when he went in the service, and then I lived with my parents, and so I wanted a place close to home, and so I went to Ekstrom Carlson, which was a machine tool factory, and I worked then as the secretary to the president and sales manager. I was there until 1948. So there was a lot of shorthand during that time. In other words, there was no typing machinery. No, no, there was no... I used dictaphones. Yeah, I used that. Oh, yeah. Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. I used that. I had used that all the time that I've been working. I've been using dictaphones. So you didn't use the... I used direct. I mean, they talked to me, and I wrote, and then also when they were alone, they used the dictaphone, and then I transcribed notes from that. So I did it all, all different kinds. I was a secretary. I did everything, you know. So was that a custom of the women staying home then after getting married? Sure. They couldn't go back to work. That's right, but most women... It had nothing to do with the war. It was previous to the war. Gals didn't really work after they got married. I mean, they really... Because there was a lot of men who lost their jobs. Yeah, but... There was a family, stronger family ties there. We just stayed home and kept house. You just assume that when a woman got married, she stayed home... Then you quit....and took care of a family, and you never... You didn't work outside the house. You didn't have daycare centers in those days. I mean, nowadays, it's customary for them... But it started during......for the husband and wife to work and send their kids to a daycare center. That wasn't the way it was when we were married. During World War II, they started higher than... Since we were married in 42, you know, things really had not been fired up here. But in World War II, then, they required the help of women in industry as well as in the offices. You know, women were like Rosie the Riveter and all these things. They were working in industry so that they were needed. And that's when they started with daycare centers and married women going back to work and everything. But I didn't until he went into the Army, and I was living with my parents. And so I went back to work then for four years. And he came back, and we started building our first house because we'd rented a home in 1942, rented a house out on the golf course. And so we'd been through all that. And then we built a little house. We built most of it ourselves, and we lived there until 1951. We started this one. So the first house now, you were building that, what kind of ideas did you have then? What was put in this house? I mean, there was more than that. Well, I'll tell you. In 1946, when we built this house, you could not get a piece of lumber. You could not find one. You could not find material to build a house. But what we found was a chicken brooder made in Walnut, Illinois. It was 18 feet by 36 feet. And in the town of Belvedere, some enterprising person had put one up and had made it into a house. And so that's what Walnut, Illinois lumber company started doing. They made these prefab houses, and they started putting insulation in them, and they built these arched things. And so we and another couple bought an acre of land, and we each built our chicken brooder. But it was magnificent. And we went up to the foundation with a long-handled shovel, dug it, and laid the blocks, poured the cement, drilled the well. You had a center in it? No, we had just a crawl space. We had a crawl space under it, yes. By hand, and drilled a well. But our houses were really very lovely because we have pictures of them, and we did not have wall-to-wall carpeting. We had a way for the farmer to cut the oats. Yes, cut the oats. We brought this land just east of here, and the farmer had oats on it. We waited for him to cut the oats. But we had lovely carpeting that was as big as the room but not wall-to-wall so that we could reverse it. We had built-in bookcases, and we had a kitchen and a lovely bathroom. But I used every decorating skill I ever had. And you got those from the Better Homes and Gardens? Everything was from here, just like this house. You didn't read any magazines before you went there? Never. All your own ideas? All I ever do, even with this, we planned this whole house, every partition and everything in this house, every piece of woodwork in our house, everything we planned, the paneling and the handles and everything we did in this house, which was 35 years ago. But we did the same thing with our chicken brooder because I went and looked at this one in Belvedere, and I said, I will not live in a house like that. I walked away from that. I said, never. I came from a decent house. What did he say then? Well, he felt the same way as I. But then we started to... We just got out of the Army, and you couldn't buy any materials. We didn't have that much money then either. There was a shortage of everything then, of course. Oh, we could, as a matter of fact, in this house, this chicken brooder, there were two windows in the bedroom, and there was, between two windows, we had this plasterboard. But between these two windows, there was this odd, crazy space, and we couldn't quite figure out. We said it had to be a piece of wood over these two things. There was no other way we could do it. And you know, he went to every lumber company in Rockford and could not find a piece of wood that wide. I think it was eight inches by whatever it was, six feet or something, five feet. And we had a friend who owned Forest City Lumber Company. Remember, Bob went up into the loft in his lumber company, and he walked through and he found a board laying up between some rafters or beams up in the loft of his lumber shed, and that is the board that we put in that bedroom. So that was about the last decent finishing board in Rockford. But this was 1946, right after the war. There was nothing. There really wasn't. And there wasn't a house to rent, and there wasn't a house to buy. There was nothing. There was such a shortage here. So there was no construction going on that day? Nothing. Nothing. There was nothing to build from. It started probably 1947. They started trickling through, but this house that we built all came through pre-constructed, and it came from the mill down there, and it was built of very inferior stuff. I mean, the outside, the wood was very bad. The only thing that was good were the structural beams. It was this arched, high-arched beam, and that was good. That was a wonderful. It's still standing, but they put on conventional sides on the house. There's still people are still living in it, and it's wonderful. It's insulated so well. But that is what we lived in. You can find page number 46 and show them afterwards. But that's where we lived, and we had half an acre of land, and we had a little creek that went through it, and on the front end we had horseshoes, and we had picnic tables. We had the family there all the time. Every Sunday we had a picnic. How far from downtown Rockford was this to Hawthorne? This is over here on Glendale Avenue. Two or three blocks down here, that's all. This is all wilderness. This is all farmland. Here, this was. This is all wilderness. But we lived on Glendale Avenue. Our address, the address for our house is now 29th Street because we had the whole thing going down. We planted blueberries and raspberries. We had pear trees and apple trees and just nice things. We had a nice little house, but it just got too small. We had company all the time. A lot of pheasants and a lot of rabbits. Yes, he shot rabbits and pheasants. But that was 35 years ago. That was a long time ago. But we still had a nice, we had a very nice home, and everybody liked to come out to it. It was pleasant, this country. So your parents stayed with you, your mother, you said? No, they didn't stay with us. We had them over. They stayed in their home. They stayed in their own home, and we took care of them. And then we had Meals on Wheels for his parents for four years. They brought in meals. Did they talk more about Sweden in their older days than before? The two men and my mother did. His mother did not, but our two fathers. Because she was too young when she came. No, no. She was too far gone. She was too far gone from Alzheimer's. But my mother only remembered her youth. When she was over here, she'd think she was an island. Yes, but our fathers were very kluk. Our fathers were both very kluk when they died, and they and my uncle also came over. My uncle was 92 when he died. My mother was 93. But the three old men were very kluk, and they would sit and talk. While his father lived a completely different youth, they still sat and talked about things that happened in their youth. We'd always have them over on Christmas Day for their East Greens Grits and Lutefisk. Yes, every—I used to fix seven pounds of Lutefisk every Christmas Day, and then whoever was around would come over and have potatoes and peas and Lutefisk and East Greens Grits. But anyway, that is— that was when they talked about their youth, was when they were old. But they never talked about it longingly. I don't remember. It was just facts, and they would just bring up funny little things. Did they talk about the depression in the 30s they went through? Did they compare any notes? No, no, never did. They didn't talk too much about it? No, mm-mm, mm-mm. No, because each—all three of these guys, my uncle and his wife had no children, and they had a nice apartment, and they got rent from upstairs, and so they never had a problem. My father had six kids and was really hustling to have work. Bert's father was—they did not have a lot of work, but his father was in experimental work and still had a job, so that they had a situation completely different than my parents, yeah. And, you know, when you have twice as many kids, there's twice as much everything, food and clothing and everything, bedding, washing, everything. But both of our mothers were very hardworking ladies. His mother was too. She had—because his father worked so much, she had a lot to do. How about the church now? You have seen over the years they've been changing different liturgical services and so on. Do you like that compared to 40, 50 years ago? There was more tradition years ago. Even 25 years—well, let's see, let's see, where are we? Yeah, even 25 years ago, before we changed to our Red Book, both of us liked it better then. We can see that maybe there should have been a few changes, but we think that somebody got—we feel, this is how Bert and I feel, that somebody got carried away by people who, because of their maybe superior education or maybe because of their supposed intellect, thought that there should be something else interspersed into our worship. And to us, it's a jarring note. It isn't—we think traditional things should still be there. We don't like the new music wasted on us, and they say that it's lovely and that it's beautiful and that we're going to— Nobody can sing it. You go to church on Sunday morning, and there's nobody singing. They say that it's— Nobody's singing the old hymns. Everybody's singing. But they say that it's going to be the tradition, but we still— we were greeters at church yesterday morning, went to service, and we sit and sing these things, and it still falls alien on your ears. If you're a music major, you can't sing it. Yeah, but when you listen to the music and you listen to the liturgy that the minister is singing and you try to find melody in it and you try to find something old to grab onto, it isn't there at all. Is it that they cater too much to the young people or— Well, it isn't so much to the young people and caring about the older. It's that the young people are the ones that are running it. Well, it's the young people that have grown old, and during this time they have picked up this education, and they have gone to Europe, they have studied the Catholic rituals, they have listened to these things, these Gregorian chants and things, and I think that they feel that they have to bring something great into our service, that we are—I don't know. It's like they're trying to imbue us with something that we aren't, and I just wish that we were just singing the plain old things again of 20 years ago. But we aren't—or 25 years ago, I should say. It doesn't sound the same. Of course, back in the old days when we were confirmed, there was one—you had one minister, and of course he was the Hellfire and Brimstone minister, you know, but that was it. And nowadays you have at least two ministers, you have youth directors, you have music directors, you have—it's a big organization. But it is—as far as the church service is concerned, it perhaps would be all right if you were all music majors and if you— But you are still young, though, both of you. Yeah, well, that's what I said, but— But how about the older people, now they are born in the 90s? They don't sing. They don't sing. So they don't care about it if you mention every other thing. They just stand there and look at the book. No, they won't sing, and I don't blame them, because some of the music, even yesterday, I started singing—what did we sing? What was the first song we sang yesterday? I started singing—I was singing all the wrong words. And I looked down at this book, and I thought, what? You know, what? What did we sing first? Anyway, they had changed all the words in this one particular hymn. Somebody had adjusted their existence in church, too, so they changed everything. It's not what I learned as a young person or a younger person. It's not the hymn that I learned. It's not the words that I learned. Completely different. And if they think they're improving it, that's okay, but I don't— I like to be able to sing songs that I know and not just stand with my eyes glued to the page. I like to sing the words, but they weren't singing those words yesterday. How about your friends, now that they're belonging to the Free Church and the Assembly of God? There are so many churches in Rockford. It's unbelievable where you go up on the airplane and look. Do they have the same feeling about their religion? I don't have any friends that go to Assembly of God. They're all singers. Everybody sings. Yeah, I truly do not have any friends who belong— I've got one—we've got one relative in Mission Church, and she's so mixed up. She doesn't know where she's going anyway. But, no, really, all of our friends, as Bert said, they're Lutherans or Methodists, I should say. They're good Methodists and Lutherans. One girl was a Lutheran, and she married a Methodist. Yeah, she married a Methodist. She married a Methodist church. Because his family was a very old family in that centennial, a 150-year-old church in Rockford. So this was easy to grow up in, even being a Swedish Lutheran. No, it was difficult. We made it. No, but it is just—I think if you go along with everything that is foisted on you, if you don't object to anything, I think then there's something wrong with you. Really, I don't think they should change things the way they have, to just say this is the way it's now going to be, and then in 1988 it will be another. This is the way it's now going to be. She is right. Thanks, John.