 My parents were both born in this country. So these are grandparents? So my grandparents on both sides, both my mother's parents and my dad's parents came from Sweden. And your father, he was born in Kansas? In Linsberg. In fact, he lived from the time he was two years old on that same farm that my grandparents homesteaded and lived there till he died when he was 78 years old. 76 years he lived on that farm. And your mother came from the same area, Smoky Valley? Yeah, she was born in, yeah it was Linsberg too, it was a little further south. New Gotland? No, no, it was not New Gotland, just south of Linsberg on the other side of the river, about, the river, Smoky Hill River runs through the farm. So that would be Linsberg. Linsberg would have been her route. And how many children were you in the family? We were five, and I'm the oldest. Five and only boys? I have four boys and one girl, and my family and my wife's and I, we have four boys and a girl also. Duplicated it. So you were born in Linsberg in 1914, during the war times? Yeah. And your father, was he a farmer? He was a farmer. So you were born on the farm? I was born on the farm, literally born on the farm. And raised on the farm until you went to college? That is right. And do you remember any, it would be the 20s then? Yes. Before the depression, how were the times then? Well, I remember, somewhere along the conclusion of the First World War, I remember at school that we were advised to not pick up anything on the roads for fear somebody had been around, I guess Germans, I guess. That was our fear during World War II. And I have a slight recollection of the end of World War II. You don't remember anything about like Omaha, and not like Iowa? They were very strict about foreign language. That was not the case in Kansas though. You mean... They could speak, preach in Swedish for instance in the churches and have gatherings in the foreign... We didn't have any trouble with... You don't remember that? Yes. We... Let me... Have you rephrased the question? Maybe I'm not answering right. In other words, in Iowa, there was a governor, I can't say Holder, I believe was his name. He declared all foreign languages to be banned from churches and public gatherings. Okay. No, we have no trouble with the Swedish preaching in the church. In fact, I missed being confirmed in Swedish by two classes. The third class ahead of me was in Swedish and then the next... Or was it one? I forget. And there would have been probably two then that were in English before. So I may have been the third one that was confirmed, either second or third that was confirmed in English. And that was at Bethany? No, this was at Fremont Lutheran Church out in the country. F-R-E-E-M-O-U-N-T. So your family was closer to that one then? That's where our roots are. And that's... All of us in the Lundquist tribe were a part of that church. My grandmother's brother, as a layman, and I think his first name was John, John Rodell, R-O-D-E-L-L, was the one that was the stimulator in getting that congregation together back in 1868. And wandering through the cemetery many years later, I discovered cement like a post, like a square post, standing by a grave, and it had a kind of a slant on it like a lectern. And I had never detected before that the congregation had dedicated that to his memory, because as a layman he had been the instigator of getting this bunch of Swedes together to start a congregation. Did he donate a few acres then to the cemetery? I don't think he had money to donate anything. I think he was just a... A good vision. A good vision of gathering these Swedes together. So he was the Olaf Olsson of Fremont then? Well, yeah, he could have been the Olaf Olsson of Fremont. So he must have come, then, your grandparents with the land company from Chicago that settled the area. I would think that's probably how they... In the railroad coming through, the Missouri Pacific Railroad, just was only... Let's see, there's only... There's only a 40-acre piece of land, and then my grandparents' farm was the next piece of land there. Do you remember your grandparents? My grandfather, on my dad's side of the family, died six months before I was born, so I never had any recollection of him. My grandmother subsequently... Well, I shouldn't say subsequently. When my mother and dad got married, my mother moved into the house where my dad was raised, and he had a younger brother still living at home. Now, that woman had a lot of guts. She moved in with her in-laws and a brother-in-law. Did it work out all right? Well, it worked out because my uncle got married, I think, in a couple of years after that, and then just moved down the road a ways. Well, first he was a little further away. My dad and uncle started buying stuff together as kids because they were the two youngest boys. There was a sister in between them, but they were the two youngest of the eight children in the family. And they just started buying stuff together, and they just kept on until they were 75 years old and finally decided the time had come they had to separate their business or their farming. That was an emotional experience for those two. They fought like a couple of typical brothers, but when it came to dividing up the property, in that period of time they had accumulated each a farm or the equivalent of each a farm and a lot of machinery and cattle and stuff. I was, of course, long gone from there at that time, but I remember people telling me how emotional they both got about it. They had an interesting life then. Yeah. They were able to be companions for a long time though. And that area, there was all Lutheran's then belonging to either Fremont or...? Yeah, they either belonged to Fremont, Bethany, and then subsequently Messiah came on the stems, and New Gotland, Marquette, Fallon, Salemsburg, Asaria. There were churches, Swede churches in every direction around there. Carolina, and I would guess by that in my early days we were probably 95% Lutheran around there. There were a few Swedish, there was a Swedish Baptist church in Lundsburg, a Swedish Methodist, Swedish Covenant, but they never developed into any major... He was very liberal in his teaching, Olof Olsson. You know, he came from the Lesare movement in Sweden, of course. Yeah. Did they have anything to do with it that they were more liberal than Lutherans in that part? That's why the Covenants didn't get on so much, because they could feel at home with the Lutherans. I... my own personal reaction to my own upbringing relates more to the college, and I have often referred to myself as a classical Lutheran, enjoying the heritage of art and music and liberal arts education, and I've always referred to myself, or looked upon myself, as having been born and raised into a classical type of a Lutheran. Now, I suppose, having said that, the Covenant people, of course, with more of their pietistic and type of an approach, probably would have arrived at that because of the fact that we were... I have never looked upon myself as a liberal, although I think people look on me sometimes, and I said this to somebody recently, and he says, You a liberal? I look at you as a conservative. No, but when it comes to religion, don't you have liberal views, or are you a fundamentalist? Oh, no, I'm an evangelical Lutheran. You are with the times. I'm with what I believe you relate the Gospel to the time that you're living in, and I firmly believe that that's what Christ did. I think he related his message to the situation, and he had all kinds of situations that he related to. I, in relation to this fundamentalist thing, I feel that the Gospel is unchangeable, but the vehicle of approaching people has to change with the times we're living in, or otherwise you're going to lose people. So you were able not to come away from the country and into the college, of course. You went to Bethany. Well, I was a product of that depression, and it was a rather... I became a strange maverick because I could not... My parents were just at the verge of losing the farm. You were one of the older boys then? I was the oldest, and the first of that family. I could not get enough money to drive seven miles into town to go to Bethany, just literally could not. Now, kids could come in from other areas and find work in town, but the assumption, which was probably correct, was that since I lived there I could surely find enough money to get in town. I literally could not. So I strayed up to Minneapolis, and well, first after a year of high school I worked for a year for a farmer for $18 a month plus my board and room, and that was from 5 to 9 at night. We did our chores before sunup, and we did them after sundown. It was o'clock. I would milk 13 cows some nights by myself. The boss would go off. How did you feel? This was not the life for you then? Well, the Depression, it just revealed to me this was not something I was going to be interested in. Farming just was not an option. It just was nothing there to even get interested in. People often ask me, how did you get in the ministry? And I tell them I got in through the 4-H club. Look at me! What's 4-H club got to do with the ministry? Didn't you get out and get hit with a revival or something? But really what happened, and of course at the time I didn't know it, but what really happened was we organized a little 4-H club in that community, in the old stone church there that's still sitting there. Were they one of the first organized 4-H clubs? Yes, we were the first 4-H club in that little township. And I became the first president of that, and I seemed to like that leadership role. At the time I didn't have any idea what it meant, but as I looked back on it I got a kick out of it. I liked to organize and I liked to do these things. Did you meet in the church? We met in the old stone church that's a church museum now. It's built in 1868 or 1870. And it's still standing there. That's a long story about how they hauled all those brown stone in there. And then of course I went into high school, or was in high school, and I went to a Bible camp at Camp Washunga, which was our old Kansas Conference camp. That was a good experience, and I began to think about, well, junior in high school, what am I going to do with this life I've got here? Anyway, to make a long story short, by the time I was a senior I decided I'd go into ministry. I had a lot of friends around there that would talk about it, and there were several of us going into ministry from some of the other churches. And I think my cousin Carl Lundquist, Carl E. Lund-quist, of whom you I'm sure know, had a little to do with it, not a lot, but Carl Lundquist being an older cousin, and went with him out to Ogalla, Kansas one weekend. And I saw him functioning in that as a student pastor, and I thought, boy, this looks pretty neat. So I mean, there were a whole series of little things that probably just finally crystallized. But then I got out of high school and had no money. I had all this education to do. I packed my suitcase and hitchhiked to Minneapolis. What did your parents say then? Were they worried for you? Well, they were worried. I had a $20 bill in my pocket, period. That was my sum total earnings from having worked on a farm the summer before for an uncle of my mother's brother. That was the sum total that I got for the whole summer, $20. Did they expect you to take over the farm, you think, one day, your parents? No, I don't think they ever... I don't think that was ever... Or did the parents actually ask the kids to be farmers at that time in the Depression? Well, I think the hard part for my parents was to see me go with so little money. I had a lot of guts and a lot of grit, more than I realized I needed. And I packed my way up to Minneapolis, and I went to the Lutheran Bible Institute, which didn't cost anything to go there. There was no tuition. And after three weeks trying to sell vacuum cleaners and sold nothing, and was penniless, I got a job in a Curtis Hotel for three meals a day for three and a half hours of work a day. And that gave me my board. I could go either walk a mile and a half to get to each meal, but that was all right. And I got my room on credit. And then at the end of the first quarter, my dad had sold a calf and made enough. Well, I got a calf out of it. That's what I get. I went to the bank and borrowed $20 on that calf for security and made it go on. And so I got maybe $40 or $50 or something at the time I got back at Christmas time. So this is all the collateral you had to show them at the bank? That's all I had, $20. This Bible Institute, what denomination was that? Well, it was Lutheran. It was a Lutheran Bible Institute. And I had met a seminary professor at camp, and I had discussed this lack of money with him. And he said, Why don't you go to this Lutheran Bible Institute? It won't cost you anything. If you can find money to buy your board and room, you'll learn something. It was strictly a Bible study movement. It's a freelance movement, very pietistic type of a thing. And that didn't bother me so much because I had always grown up with college kids at Lindsberg. I was always fooling around with older kids anyway. And I met college kids that had the same reason, had to get out of school because they had no money to go to college. So they'd go there for a while. So the teachers were not an influence on you then at that time? You were there only until... I was there. There was a couple of teachers that I think a guy by the name of Dr. Carl Suttergren that was a good influence on me. But he too was more of the classical type of a person, dignified. And I don't consider myself an intellectual, but I certainly enjoyed the reasoning process of things and so on. So I spent a couple of years there, and by that time I'd gotten established and needed to go on to college. And there was Augsburg College in Minneapolis there, and I could find work by having two jobs and pay my way through college where tuition was 25 hours a quarter. And I could do that better than going to Bethany. So you had no connection then with the pastor in the Fremont Church or the pastor at Bethany at that time? Well, the only connections I had with the pastor at Fremont, who was a former missionary to India and was born and raised outside of Wahoo here... I want to tell you, it's Teddy Allen, the lady. Outside Wahoo, there was a missionary. My confirmation pastor, he was, his name was Reverend O.L. Larson. I guess his influence and confirmation had the biggest impact on me, because he was a good teacher. But outside of any influences from shaping my ministry, there's nothing that really came out of that congregation except what had been shaped in my early days in the congregation and from my home. So it didn't bother you then to live far from home and being able to go home every weekend? I guess I learned to be independent, and I was determined to get that education. I had a lot of hard knocks, knowing what it means to be on the poor side of life. But then after I got through college, I had met my wife up there in Minneapolis, and so we got married right after I got out of college. In fact, I wasn't even quite done. I had about 12 hours to finish. Before you were ordained then? Yes. This kind of unusual for the... At that period of time, it was very unusual. They usually waited until they were ordained. But we had gone together four and a half years. So she was also in college then? Well, she didn't get on to college because of poverty. Her parents had no money. But we had met during that Lutheran Bible Institute experience. She had been there. So she was working while I was going through college. Then we decided to get married, and I went up to Duluth, Minnesota as a student pastor. I had about 10, 12 hours of college work because I'd been ill there one quarter. Finished that, and then we had our first son up there. I went on to seminary. To Augustana? To Augustana. By the time we got through there, we had a second son and got out of seminary in 1944. Then you were ordained at what conference? I was ordained at the Augustana Synod meeting in First Lutheran Church in St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1944, June 11th. Then I went to Everett, Washington, outside of Seattle, and took a dual parish there. There was a parish in town and another parish out by a lake about 12 miles out called Lake Stevens, Washington. I stayed there for eight years. Then I got a call from Gethsemane Lutheran in Austin, Texas, and the old Swedish Carl Wadane. Then we were there 14 years, so there's where our kids more or less grew up. So 14 years? I was there 14 years. How was that congregation compared to the west side of the continent? Well... More relaxed feeling? Really, I have served three very distinct type of congregations. In Everett, Washington, I had one college graduate and the rest of them were just laboring people. Pulp mill workers, sawmill workers, out in the forest chopping down trees, maybe two, three business people, and that's probably all I had. Then I went to Austin, and then I was dealing with government people because of the state capital. A lot of people that were working in all of the government buildings down there, and very small salaries, never any big government people. State government people don't earn too much money. Not good security, but... And then there were a smattering of business people, but none of whom were big business people excepting Carl Wadane. He was the... The department store business man. He was the banking and ranching and the whole works. He had to do what the rest didn't do, he had to do. Well, he wasn't the greatest giver in the world either, but then that's not too unusual with people that make money. And then this congregation here was probably more upper middle class, or middle class and upper, but much more business related than the Augustana here, which was a different and a good experience. And of course, then I got here just at the time of that, 1966 when I came here with the changing times and got involved with that whole split in the congregation and the movement out west. I spent nine years there, and then I had this opportunity to come over here, and I've been here 12 years. 12 years, just started my 13th year here, 1st of August. Your teaching background came through a lot of tests. What did you learn in the Theologica School, for instance, at Augustana? Was it the old type Lutheranism at that time, 1940s? When I compare my and our, meaning a good group of us that went through Augustana, I think we had one of the strongest, most ecumenical, diverse theological educations of any seminary group in the country. That seminary group of professors were really something else. So you felt like a big family then from course to course? Oh, absolutely. We would get together at the Synod and meet each other as classmates, schoolmates, and the cohesiveness of that old Augustana church is unequaled. We were back to a Lutheran School of Theology a couple of years ago at the 125th celebration of the seminary, and at that banquet of 800 people, they started out with Swalmey Seminary and Maywood and whatever else seminary and the Seminax group, and then Augustana. Man, there were 125, 150 people stood up. It has really to this day left an impact and will continue to be an impact in this new church. I am convinced. What I think our seminary did for us, we had a guy like A.D. Matson that was a labor movement guy that taught a lot of us off the farms about labor and the sweatshops and child labor and women and really sensitized many of us to that phase of life because that was what he... And amazingly enough, the first thing I did was get a call to a town full of labor movement. Had I not had that, I would have had a hard time understanding a town that was run by the labor movement. Government, everything was run by the labor movement. But these were your members, and you ministered to those people. The contrast to that was a guy like Eric Wallstrom who was a scholar. Nothing thrilled me more than to get good grades under Eric Wallstrom. And he had that Swedish brogue, Well, now, young men, he was absolutely fantastic. And he could take the Greek and just make it live in the New Testament. It was our New Testament. And we had Carl Anderson who was more bland and even-keeled, and he was teaching Hebrew. We just had a real good smattering of cross. I was very grateful. So what they taught you there, then, you actually implemented it out in the field and in all the places you came to? I remember we had one course, which was just a seminar course with A.D. Matson. And he'd invite in farm people, he'd invite in labor people, he'd small businessmen, every smattering of social workers, and we just sat and talked. And I'll tell you, that was practical stuff. That was the kind of stuff you relate the gospel to where people live, where they're at. So he was quite a bit ahead of his time, then, compared to other denominations. Oh, my, yes. He was way ahead of his time. He was even ahead of his time in the Augustana Church. A lot of people thought the guy was a communist. Well, it sounds like it. I mean, if you go back 50 years, it probably sounds like being a rebel. Yeah, but he was a social conscience person, and he knew where he came from. His dad had been a pastor. His brother was president of the seminary, ultimately, and another brother was a pastor. And Carl Matson, his brother's son, is a pastor here. Oh, no, David Matson over here at the... Have you been to see him? No, I haven't seen him. Oh, he's got stories that are just fabulous. The old... His mother is a Bergendorf, so he's got stories galore. He was a patient here a year last January, so I really had some chance to chat with him. You stayed now for so many years in each congregation. You have a lot of experience, of course. You were not the type that came here one year and left the next. No. I was 8, 14, and 9, and now 12 here. This is the time where you really start to know the people. Oh, absolutely. Are you a believer in that the pastors stay with the congregation as long as possible to grow up with it? Well, it's worked out that way for me. Now, the other people, it works out differently, and there are probably good reasons why a pastor and congregation should separate because certain pastors of us only have so much to give, and a congregation has so much that they can receive from us. I think my last parish is a good example because I came into a church in that time for burning, split the place down the center aisle, and I had families where sisters and husbands were against their brother and sisters, and it was a real conflict. After 9 years, I felt at least a couple of years before that that my time was up. I had nothing more left to give. Were you a tiger all of a sudden? Well, I was worn out because there was a lot of struggle and a lot of hassle. When you've got people that are arguing with each other on our two sides of the fence, and you're the middle guy, I just was worn out. In fact, it was beginning to affect my health. I told the bishop, who was my predecessor for all practical purposes, Ruben Swanson, that I need to get out of here. I jokingly, not jokingly, but seriously said, I said, I know what's going to happen because some of our members are dissatisfied with me, and they've probably already been to see you and asked you to get rid of me. He just sat there with a straight face. But, see, I knew they had done that with Bill Youngdahl. I knew they had done that because I knew enough about him. So he's the son of the Youngdahls from Minneapolis? Minneapolis, yeah. He was the best character. Continue next site. Next site. Site 2. He came here in the political rebellion, being a Democrat, of course, in the Republican stronghold. Yeah, and of course that was not known. I'm not even sure Ruben Swanson knew that, and they had been classmates. But Ruben knew that the congregation was facing a change, and I think he was probably was instrumental in getting Bill here, which may have been a mistake, but then that's hindsight. That's not for... He was so socially conscious, sensitized, Bill was, and I think probably in antithesis to his staunch Republican family, and I don't want to put all the emphasis on Republicans, the Youngdahls. I grew up in, or I went to school in Minneapolis, and my wife worked for some of the Youngdahl people, so she knew them. She worked in a grocery store for some of them, and she had intimate relations with some of those people, and they were Minnesota, and I think those Youngdahls, great stuff. And poor Bill, he was the son of the former governor, and the nephew of the great uncle, Ruben. And the poor guy just couldn't find his own identity, and he found it in that film, Time for Burning, you know, but I go, here's my chance, and he may have overdone it. And the very things that he wanted, we were able to accomplish, but we did it in building the bridge, the approach to the bridge slowly. And if you don't build the approach to the bridge right, the bridge may fall down, and he just came in and was going to do it now, in changing the congregation into that neighborhood. We started the Project Embrace program there, and it's still going, 18, 19 years later. Yeah, he came right after Ruben Swanson became the bishop of the Senate, and then he was there just a year, and then... Just a year. And then things got so hot that he was asked to leave, and then I came in. So there was probably more a personal strong feeling at his, because the school of theology at that time was not that pushing out Osiris, that broadly, I mean. No. Well, the 60s in the United States was a lot of upheaval, tumultuous time with all of the students' uprisings, and it was a tough time. But you would think, though, because there was still a Swedish congregation, you can say, I'm assuming. Oh, absolutely. How would they be affected? Was there movement in the community that affected them, or were they trying to defend themselves or something? I mean, the church life shouldn't have been interfering. What would happen outside so much? Well, there are several factors involved in the thing. The people in this city started moving west. As their parents were in the Swedish community, which was around Augustana, more or less, and then as their parents became better off and more economically secure, they started moving west. And then, of course, the children began to, well, not so much. Well, some of them moved west, and just like Harry Anderson and Gunnar Måsblad, which is brother-in-law and so on. They moved out, and there were many others. But then their kids, you see, started settling down in their new homes out in the western part and nearing other churches. And then their kids started growing up, and I remember several families that transferred because, you know, why should we drive five, six miles down here to Augustana when we're six blocks from another Lutheran church, which was in the LCA? So that was one factor. Probably the one that was the more difficult was that the homes where the Swedes lived were being filled up with blacks. And those homes were being sold to some of the black people, and there were nice homes at that time. There was a Dr. Nelson that had died before I got here that had a beautiful brick home just three, four blocks east of the church there. And then, of course, do you minister to the people in the neighborhood or do you just go all over the city where there are other Lutheran churches? So it was a part of the sociological movement of the times, not only in Omaha, this was going on all over the country. And we had sent, or Augustana, I should say, had sent Dr. Sjogren to Africa as a missionary right after he finished medical school. They had sent Sister Jean Michaelbust as a missionary north to Africa. And when I came here, then she had been home for a while and worked up at Emanuel Hospital and decided to go back to Africa. So we had a commissioning service for her one night, which within the first year I was there. And I made the statement, and some missionary came and preached and installed her, and I was just the host pastor. But I remember saying that night, I says, well, tonight we'll go two directions. We'll go to Africa, we'll go down the street. But I said, both of which are missionary work. Were you able to keep the humour? And one of the members who was, I don't know, have you ever met Ray Christensen, the film guy? I think he's moved to California. Well, anyway, he came to me after that service. He says, do you know what you said tonight? I said, sure I know what I said. I said I said it deliberately. It was thought out. He says, you're never going to last very long around this bunch. He says, you're not going to go down the street with these black people? Well, I said, we'll wait and see. And within a year we had organized the Project Embrace program, which together with the neighboring church, a Presbyterian church, and that's still going. Were they stubborn, or the old Swedes, on the church council? Because you had to be there in the middle and all the rest of the... Oh, sure. They were on both sides of the fence. Some of them were against it, and some were for it. Because the Swedes are known to be very liberal to give to foreign missions. Oh, yeah. Hundreds of years back. You go out to these countries and you find Swedes in the foreign countries. Yes. I mean, literally, from Sweden. But here you had the next door knob. Was their thinking a little bit different than to give to Africa, for instance, help? Yeah. It's easy to give money when it's far away, but when it's your neighbor next door that's a black Swede... I've got to tell you a story about it. We were in downtown Stockholm here a few years ago, and I got lost. I couldn't get into the right lane to get off the highway. And so I missed the thing, and I had to get off the next place, and I needed to find how to get back on the road. I was going up to Uppsala. So I stopped in the filling station. I was sitting on his haunches putting air in his tire in his little car, and I waited, and I started talking Swedish to the guy. He was black. He started answering me in Swedish, but he caught on that I was not a true Swede from Sweden. So he switched over to English. He says, You follow me. He says, I'll get you out of town. He says, I'm going that way. He says, I'm not going to Uppsala, but I'm going to get you out of town. And he says, If the light changes, I'll stop and I'll wait for you. He did, too. He's Swedish. Yeah. That's why I kid people. I says, They got black Swedes in Sweden. Well, they were not there, though, when they left Sweden, those people here in Omao and other places in the United States. The immigrants never saw a black person until they came here, of course. I didn't see a black person until I was 13 years old when I went to Kansas City as a 4-H clubber to take some 4-H calves to the market. You know the one living in Lindsborg, though, they have a story about? Well... He lived north on the farm in Småland. He could have. I don't recall that. They had a law. In Lindsborg. That's right. That you could not be a black man living inside of Lindsborg. You see, 1978, I interviewed a Mrs. I think her name was Selma Carlson, or it was up in Småland. And her father had this David Price, he was a black person. He was up there. And she said, could he come with me? Sure, I said, let him come with you and we meet at the Bethany Lutheran Church. And that guy turned around at least 50 times before he walked in and I had to drag him in. And he said, this is the first time I am in Lindsborg, he said. This was 1978. He'd been all his life up there in Småland. I didn't even realize there was a black man living up there. So you could see on him, you know, because there was still, I know I can go here, he said. But still I have in my head, you know, I'm not supposed to be here. Isn't this something? Yeah, well, when we were in Austin and we had the four boys and our daughter, and my wife was 35, 40 white shirts, and these were before these kind of shirts. And I just said, this is ridiculous to stand there in that iron night and day. And we went and hired a black girl to come and help with the ironing twice a week. And our boys were in high school and getting into college and so on. We could not get that girl to walk through the front door to come into our house. She was a nice 25-year-old Christian girl, Baptist Christian, but she would not go through that front door. She had to go by and come in the back door. And we tried our level best to get her to eat lunch with us at the kitchen table. We finally succeeded, but I'll tell you, it was like pulling hen's teeth out of her. She was the slave girl and she was not supposed to eat with us. But we just, we finally got her convinced to sit down and eat lunch with us. But you see, it was so ingrained in her that she couldn't, and that's what you're saying about this guy. But it was a sample of it. But the Swedes, they are usually thought of as being liberal. Well, in social contact, Sweden has been one of the avant-garde places. It's easier to see anybody else's fault, you know, hundreds and thousands of miles away. There was the horse market, of course, that tilted the situation up there in Afghanistan. So when the black ones came in, the prices probably went down after a couple of years. Well, you get that syndrome all over the country that if the blacks move in... But isn't that true, though? It's partially true and it probably is temporarily true because the blacks in Omaha have started leaving Augustana territory and have moved out to 60th and Reddick. They've got a lily-white church out there. They're scared to death that they're going to start coming into that church. So they have means not to buy a house? They have means to get way out in the West because they're improving. I work with black nurses around here. You don't even think about whether they're black. They are so nice and so good. You never even think about it when you work with people. You just don't even think. I tell you what really shook up some people in Augustana when we had a black... I don't remember whether it was a white girl or a black man, but they walked into church a few times. I tell you, that really shook them up. You were in between there to take the heat from... What did the colored people say to you down there? Did they push you into going faster at it? They were, in some respects, the black people were very, very gracious because they understood the white man's thinking. Interestingly enough, we didn't take in a single black member in the nine years I was there, but some of the kids that were in that first Project Embrace program are now in the church. They sing in the choir. They are acolytes. That's a thrill to see your fruit of something that happened 20 years ago. Their background, religion, was that Southern Baptist most of them? Well, traditionally black people are Baptists, but some are Methodists because there's an African Methodist church. And then there has gotten to be a lot of sex group that comes in and open up a storefront. You don't know what they are. We never tried to proselyte. We felt that if they were active in a black church, and I had good relationships with some of the black pastors in the neighborhood, I would not proselyte. I would say, you go to your own church. If you can come here and participate and your kids... We set up a tutoring program, so we would tutor the kids that didn't have skills to read and write and arithmetic. But we did it in conjunction with the school system. And we had our tutors trained by a professional person that knew how to teach our people to do tutoring. And then we would take them after school. The lady that directs the program, I hired her. I've been gone there 12 years and she's still there. But she's a teacher's aide, works with the school in the daytime, and she comes over there after school hours. You came into Antarctica and came into this tremendous uproar. What did the Senate office do for you? Did they back you up or did they help you, inform you about good things that happened here? Or people stand behind you? What did they say? Poor Reuben. He was caught in the middle. Really, there wasn't that much help from Reuben, and there was no way he could be of any great help. I'm not saying he was against. He backed me up and was very supportive. But he was caught in such an unbelievable situation because Reuben is a real financier. He's a real astute money guy. A lot of his lunch meetings were with some of the members. They were discussing stock market more than they were discussing church. That isn't to say they didn't discuss church, but they had lots of fun out of this life, too. It was real hard because he had people coming at him from both sides, and they were battering him up and down. I had one interesting happening. First on, one of the ladies and her husband had become quite wealthy. So she was talking to me all about this mish-mash, and I just yessed her on. I just listened and just said, Yeah, yeah, I understand. I didn't say anything more than that. She was obviously against this whole movement. Bill Youngdahl had wrecked the church, and we had a big-going church here, and people were coming in for 10, 15 miles and so on. She went on and told him, Well, she said, We've got the new pastor on our side. That was me. I just laughed because I knew that my task, if it was going to be of any meaning, would be to help the congregation minister to poorer people. They were not only blacks. There were a lot of poor whites there that were on welfare and so on, too. It was a formidable task. Did you talk to your predecessor before he left? Did he instruct you what to do? Well, he had approved of my coming from Texas. The two bishops, of course, had... You never met them before? Well, I had met Reuben. I knew who he was. He knew who I was. But he did not give me any kind of encouragement one way or the other. He let the congregation work it out with me, which at that point in time was the best thing he could do. We negotiated. They came down to see me. I came up here. They came back down to see me. I came back up here. By that time, I'd accepted the call. But I needed to make sure what the world... I didn't know what I was getting into. Were they fair to you? I mean, explain what... Oh, yeah. I think they were very... Drift before you went back to Texas again. Well, we were under... They needed to be sure, and I needed to be sure, that this was... And I'd been there 14 years, and I needed to move. I had run out of gas there. We'd gone through the whole relocation program in Gethsemane. But you had the Spanish influx going down in Austin a little bit. Oh, yeah. Our oldest three children went through junior high and high school with one-third Spanish, one-third black, one-third white. So our kids have a real good, balanced integration of... And they had more trouble, too. They had more troubles probably with the Spanish people than with the blacks, because they were so quick with their knives. They would trip the kids in high school, and then they'd pull out a knife and threaten them. So... They had some experiences, all right. Our oldest son, I don't know if you know anything about him. He's a CBS sportscaster with CBS. Lundquist. Lundquist, Vern Lundquist. That's your son? That's our oldest son. I see. Was he in sports then, athletic, in college, or how did he...? No, he's never played anything else in the little backyard basketball and football, and played a little intramural basketball in high school. But he's never... None of our kids were big enough to really... But we decided when we had four boys early on that we wanted to keep them interested in sports. And we've always kept them interested in sports. And my wife knows nothing about sports, and even to this day she doesn't, but she agreed with the idea of keeping them busy. So that's how he got into sports. And then he got into all the show, Lord TV. Yeah. Well, he got into radio this last year in college. Well, actually it goes down to his junior high days. The junior high was on the campus of the University of Texas, and he got picked up to do some radio work as a microphone and played the part of an Indian or something on radio. So he's had a mic in front of him since he was 4 years old. He used to build a little stick and make a microphone and act like he was broadcasting when he was 4 or 5 years old. He's been with CBS now for several years? Three years, yeah. Oh, so that's how you know that. That's interesting. Yeah, he's an interesting person and a fun kid. So he lives in New York then? No, he lives in Steamboat Springs, Colorado. He was in Dallas for 16 years and did an ABC local broadcast there. And he's the only sportscaster in the history of sports in Texas that has won 7 or 8 Sportscaster of the Year awards by his peers. Nobody else has ever received that. Does he cover all kinds of sports events? Well, he does a lot of things. His favorite is football, and he's going to do Nebraska and Oklahoma State this coming Saturday on CBS, down from Stillwater. But he does football, basketball. He does not do baseball. He does boxing, soccer. He's even been over in Germany and done horse jumping. And I asked him a couple of years ago over the phone, I said, what do you know about horse jumping? He says, I don't know a thing. I said, how are you going to do a broadcast on it? He says, they've hired somebody to coach me for 2 or 3 days and review films and go sort of Germany. So he's a good innovator on the spot. Yeah. I like that kid, both he and me, that we have voices alike and certain looks alike. So are you interested in athletics like football? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I like. I'm a spectator type. I played football in high school, but gosh, that's years ago. Down in Fremont. Well, in Lindsburg. I went to the Lindsburg High School because we were in that district a mile west of us, and that was a dividing line, and those people went to Marquette High School. So I played against some of my own classmates in church during high school days. That was the only paved road in the McPherson County to Marquette. You can't ride a licorice like that. That's right. If it's true or not, I don't know. No, it was true. Some of my high school friends, they would go to Marquette or, I don't know, bootleg it from Missouri if they ever could get down to Missouri and bootleg the stuff in. But Marquette was open, and they would get their liquor over there. And they're still the same thing today. There's a dry city in Lindsburg. No, they've got beer joints in Lindsburg. Yeah, they do now. We're going down there Thursday. We're going down for the Hillnings Fest. Have you been down there for that? Oh, yeah. I've been there many times. Now, are you living in this country? In East Moline, Illinois. In East Moline. You're just living there. We had lunch with Sutter Lunds today. He was out at Central City, Nebraska, and he said that years ago when he was a pastor out there, you had been out there to visit. He is now living in Minneapolis, Minnesota. By the way, Central City, it was called Lone Tree years ago. Yes, I believe so. The city of Lone Tree. Lone Tree, yeah. Now, how long have you lived in Moline? Since 1971. It seems to me you were at Augustana when I was there. Seventy-five. We were three Lundquists who became pastors. Carl was the oldest. Was he born in where? In Lindsburg. In Lindsburg. Yeah, and his dad's name was Emanuel Lundquist, and I was next, the son of Eben Lundquist, and we lived about two miles apart. And then Virgil was my, his dad's name was Abner. That was my dad's youngest brother. How much difference in age did they have between you three? Let me see. Carl was the oldest. Carl was born in 1909 or 1908, because he passed away young. He was only 57 years old. And then I'm next, and Virgil is about two or three years younger than I. Now, it was Virgil's dad and my dad that farmed in partnership, so we grew up more like brothers in some respects. And each one had a pastor's son, huh? Yeah, and we were all three the oldest of the sons in each family. Virgil was the oldest son in their family. Now, Carl had two older sisters, but he was the oldest son, and then he had a younger brother, Werner Lundquist. I don't know if you ever met him. He used to, I just found out the other day he's retired from running the motel there in Lundsberg. I met him. You probably. He's related to you, then? Yeah, that's a first cousin. He and Carl were brothers. A heavyset fellow. Yeah, fairly tall. He was there in 1973 when I was there. Oh, yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. He's run that, that's a part of it. Viking motel. Viking motel, that's right. And he still owns that? I think so. I'm not sure. I think there are some other people that own it, but now whether he's sold out now that he's retired or not, I don't know. But I'll see him Thursday night because he and I were graduated from the same high school, and we're having our 55th reunion of our high school class Thursday night. So there's going to be a big party down in Innsbruck, then? Oh, yeah, and then we go to the Smörgåsbord on Friday night, and then my family, my brothers and sister, were honoring my sister and her husband at their 40th wedding anniversary, which took place in August. But we're getting together for a little Smörgåsbord. And your mother, now, is she at the Bethany home? She's at Bethany home, yeah. Her mind is not too good, so sometimes she knows it, sometimes she doesn't. But we're planning on having her 100th birthday party next January. Oh, that's wonderful. Yeah, her brothers, she has a couple of brothers who lived in 95, 92, and her sister lived to about 90, 91. How about your father? When did he pass away? He was 78, and he died in 1962, so he's been gone quite a while. So has she been in Innsbruck all her life? Oh, yeah. She had a lot of guts to get there as a young woman. What did she tell you about when you were growing up about the old times? Did she tell you about her parents? Well, they lived a pretty rough life, you know, just hand to mouth. They were farmers. Were her parents, then, among those people that brought all the stones together for the Fremont church? Yeah, well, I'm not sure about her parents. I'm not positive that her parents were quite as into the church as my dad's people were. My grandmother, I guess, has had as much influence on me as anybody, my dad's mother, largely because she was an arthritic, and she had to sit in a rocking chair. She couldn't even. My mother had five kids and took care of her mother-in-law, plus her brother-in-law, and then her husband. And she had a lot of guts. Not very many young women, 21 or 2 years old, would do something like that. So my grandmother, in order to relieve my mother to take care of the other kids, she would tell the old Indian stories to me and tell me a lot of stories that left a real impression on me. I saw the good side of her. I guess she had a bad side, too, that I didn't know too much about. But I hear later that she was quite a mean old lady, wasn't she? They probably had to be tough, though. Well, they had to be. But my dad was born in a sod hut, that his parents had homesteaded this piece of ground, dug a hole in the ground and covered it over with some sod, and that's where he was born. And then a few years later they built, how they got money to build this house, I don't know. But that was built in 1913 and still stands out there. It's being rented out now to somebody. You don't remember the sod house? They were all gone then? They were gone. But the stories that I heard about them was evident. They must be a lot of life, but they were hard. The survivors became hard people. They were survivors, those people. I remember my grandmother telling about the rocks of Smolan. She said nothing would grow in Smolan where they came from because of the rocks. And when we were over there four years ago or five years ago this fall, boy did that come to life. I saw the area in Lundabergia, that's the area where my grandmother and her husband came from. And when I saw those rocks on some of the old farms that were some of our relatives, you know, their second cousins living in there now, how they were going to grow there today, I don't know. Clean soil in the Smoky Valley must have been heaven then. That had to be heaven to them. And having seen that area of the country, I've got to tell you a funny story. I was with the chief chaplain of the Church of Sweden from Uppsala. What the heck's his name? Three things that happen to you when you get old. The first one is you remember ghosts and the other two you don't remember. Anyway, he invited us to be with him in a rehabilitation hospital in Stockholm. Or was it? No, it was up in Uppsala. And this was a big, fairly good-sized room and there were people wheeled in on beds and wheelchairs and everything. And so, gosh, what the heck his name was, it was introducing me that we were there visiting. And he said that I had, my roots had come from Lundaberg. And one lady, she was either in a bed or a wheelchair, she says, Eeebo! Emil Lundaberg, huh? The old stories from Ostrid Lindberg, Lengrid.