 Yeah, we have 1st of October 1987, I think, together with Mr. and Mrs. Carl Edward Carlson, Omaha, Nebraska. Can you tell me now, Mr. Carlson, your parents, your father, he came from Vermland. Vermland, right. At what time? Oh, boy. Roughly 1900s? Yeah, I'd say I have it down here. He came in 1905. Did he come alone? He came alone to Omaha, Nebraska, right. What was the reason for him to? Well, this was a pretty desolate part of the country up there, and they were, let's see, three brothers and a sister. And he was born on a farm? He was born on a farm, and his mother died when he was born, so his sister raised him, really. And I don't really know why he came over. You know, it's hard. You don't know if there were any aunts or other relations here? No, he had no other relations here, none. Did his sister come after him? Huh? Mrs. Hilquist come after him? No, that's right. His sister, that's right, Mrs. Hilquist. Was she here? She was here, right. That's right. He came to her house, that's right. Okay. So he had somebody to count on? Yeah. Uh-huh. So it was 1905? 1905. Did he go over to Norway then, or did he tell you at the time? I can't say, no. And he came here and went to work in Wahoo, Nebraska, carrying bricks for Olsen Construction Company. Charlie Olsen, who owned the company, was a cousin, a distant cousin, but that didn't last long, so he came back to Omaha, and he and a fellow by the name of Johnson started building houses together, you know, one at a time or so. How long time after he arrived did he start with that? I would say it was the second year, yeah. And then he just, that was his profession, building homes. He never got into commercial at all. So he was not old enough then to have learned the trade in Sweden or to be a carpenter. Did he pick it up over here? He picked it up over here, right. He built some of the most beautiful homes in Omaha. Oh, yeah. He built some beautiful homes in Omaha. Residential homes, that part. Oh, yeah. Out in the Fair Acres and Dundee area, and very, very nice homes, right. It's interesting how he was able to do that without any... Yeah, I don't know. You know, the problem with us kids, we didn't ask questions. And he never talked about it. And he never talked about it. You know, neither one of them. You sort of picked up little things once in a while, but boy, we could only have asked questions, you know. But I know he was out in the woods cutting timber because he said they used to play tricks of when they're sleeping, they'd pour water on their hair and freeze them to the ground, you know. And he told me that, for one thing. What do you mean? They'd freeze? They'd freeze? Same to me? Yeah. Pour water on their hair while they're sleeping and it'd freeze it to the ground. So I suppose it was pretty rough back there, yeah. But he was used to roughing it out in the woods. Yeah, he was, uh-huh, right. The life. Right. He never went back to Sweden after the case? Yes, he did. After they got married, my mother and he got married, they went back to Sweden and visited both places, where his home was and where her home was. But his father was dead then at the time, or? His father, you know, he never talked about his father. I don't know. He was raised by his sister. He was raised by his sister, right. So they must have died when he was five. Yeah, yeah. Because he was the youngest in the family, and quite a bit younger than the rest of them, too. And how did she come over there? Alone, or? Well, she came over. There was a fellow by the name of Pearson, who had two sons, and he was visiting their home in Sweden, and he wanted to bring her over to marry one of his sons. And that's how she came over, except that her father owned three sawmills with another man. It was up in Dalarna. Yeah. And he was murdered one night. To her father? Yeah. And there was a lot of, he went out of the house in a huff one night. He found something wrong, I guess, with the bookkeeping or whatever, and went over to his partner's house, and there was a lot of hollering, a neighbor said, and he never came back. In the spring, they found him in the lake, drowned. So, and then the partner took over the sawmills and left his family with nothing, because they were quite well off at the time. And so she came over to America because Pearson wanted her to come over, and her coming over here was something else. She came over with three other girls to Ellis Island, and they went to Chicago, and she was the only one coming to Omaha. And they sent her by way of St. Louis for some reason or other on a train, and she sat in the station in St. Louis for three days and three nights, not knowing what to do or where to go or what. And a conductor came along and looked at her tag and took her by the arm and put her on the train for Omaha. And she could have been wiped out, you know. So she came here, and she, I don't know what ever happened about the two boys, but she never married them. And she worked as a cook in a home up on 38th Street, one of those nice, rich homes up there. For American families. Right, uh-huh. And they had what they called the Five O'Clock Group at the Swedish Mission Church on 23rd and Davenport, which later became the Covenant Church. And they would go down, because they had Sunday afternoon off, they would go down at this Five O'Clock meeting, and this is where she met my dad, because he went there too. Was he a member then at the time? No, they were not members, I don't think, at that time, but they were members later, yeah. This is how, this is how the Swedish girls met the Swedish fellas, was at the Five O'Clock meeting in the afternoon. Yeah. Like Dorothy says, the ladies would line up at the door and the men would come along and pick one up and take him home. That's what her mother told her. Well, I suppose they were safe then, because they knew each other, they were Swedes. Yeah. That was their first step. Sure, that was their social gathering. That's right, uh-huh, yeah. They were safe, at least to begin with. Sure, right. So they got married and they went to Sweden and visited the folks and saw them and then they came back here, but they never went back again after that. Did your mother speak more about Sweden over the years, more than your father? Not, no, except She told you all about your dad? Yeah, about my, yeah, about her father. But she brought your mother? Oh, yeah. She told me, though, how beautiful, she used to row across the lake, because they were on a peninsula, the sawmill was on a peninsula, and she would row across the lake to school and skate across to school, you know, and she, my father and she were able to bring all the sisters over, which were two sisters and a brother and her mother. And they all came to our house. How old was your grandma at that time then? She was older than that, I think, because she was, she seemed to me like a real old lady. Yeah, she'd smoke a pipe, you know, and we would peek in the window and watch her in the basement. She'd go down to the basement and smoke her pipe and we'd watch her through the window and I'd bring the kids from the neighborhood over to show them, you know. My dad would buy Prince Albert and a can. So did she speak a special dialect compared to your father's Swedish? Did you understand Swedish when you were born, I mean growing up? I only knew Swedish. You couldn't... I couldn't talk English. But you understood it though when they talked. Oh yeah, I talked Swedish and understood Swedish perfectly. And when I went to school, five years old, the kindergarten teacher took me home and told my folks they better start talking English in front of me. And so that's when the Swedish stopped. I see. Yeah. But my grandmother died in 1929 and I would speak to her in Swedish. But after that it was gone. Were you able to understand her Swedish though? Oh yeah, oh yeah. Because they have a special dialect, the old timers up there. Yeah, we understood it real good, right. She never learned English though. Pardon? She never learned English. Not her mother, no. And my mother talked perfectly English before she passed away, you know. And my father did too. They were so young when they came over though. Right, uh-huh. And let's see, what else? Oh, we went over to Sweden, what was it, how many years ago? In 67. In 67. I could understand Swedish, but it was hard to talk it. So we got along pretty good. So, but when grandma came over she had two daughters with her. She had two daughters with her, right. Was there any left in Sweden? No. So you don't have any cousins or? I have no cousins or anyone now in Sweden. I did have, my father's side, I had that aunt and three brothers who were all in the military band and they were on military pension of some kind, I guess. So you saw the birthplace then? Oh yeah, beautiful. Did you see? There's one iron spike. You saw me all burned down after they came over here and my grandmother or my mother would say, well, that was payment for what happened, yes. So they couldn't do anything then to? No, they couldn't. Uh-uh. That's for sure. So there's just a spike driven where the sawmill? There's an iron rod, about an inch round rod with a bolt on top of it. That's the only, the man that lived in the house took me down to the point down there and showed me that. That's all left of that sawmill. Memory left. So when they married then here in Omaha, at the Covenant Church, you became members there and you went to Sunday school there? Oh yeah, sure. And he continued on to build houses. Right. And when you were old enough, did you start with your dad or did you take another? Well, when I worked for my dad, when I was in high school, I worked for my dad in the summer times doing all kinds of carpenter work. So he taught you and also you started? Right, absolutely. And so? Uh-huh. Did he have a big company? No, he probably, maybe he had seven or eight carpenters working for him. How about in the winter time way back? Were they able to continue? Not as well as now, no. Uh-uh. They didn't have the same kind of work? But they would try to close these in, you know, and they had the old charcoal kerosene. My dad used to have a whole bunch of these round kerosene things about this high that he'd put in the houses, the various houses, you know. So that's how they kept on, I guess. But they'd try to get the house closed in. In the kitchen, for instance, were they constructed on the site? Oh, yeah, everything was made on the site. And he was prefab? No, no prefab whatsoever. Uh-uh. He was a contractor. He had the whole thing there. That's right. When the house was finished, he had done it. Right. Uh-huh. How did they get the new ideas, though? Could they order a house tailor-made the way they wanted? That's what he usually did, mostly, was a person would come to him and he'd draw up a sketch of how they wanted their house, and then he'd build it accordingly. Then later years, an architect would draw the plans for him. And he worked with this architect and built the houses. Uh-huh. And they had to ask for building permits just like they do now? Oh, yeah, building permits and all. Many times I went out and helped him survey, marking out the stakes so they could dig the foundation, you know, with a horse and a scoop. Was that what they started with? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I remember that. Oh, yeah, I remember that. That was in the 20s, then? Yes, it would be in the 20s, right. Uh-huh. What happened during the Depression? Was he able to... It was real rough. It really was, yeah. The only thing that helped him a little bit was that he had a contract to build about ten houses all the same for a binary real estate company. And that took a while. So he was not... He had it rough. It wasn't that easy, you know. He hadn't built any houses that he was not able to sell or anything like that, so he had to carry them on the... Well, he only did a couple of his own. He never did a speculative building very much. He did a couple, yeah, but most of them were done for somebody already ahead of time. And you were ready then to start working during the Depression? Pardon me? You were old enough then to start working in the Depression? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, not just part-time. Yeah, part-time, right. Did you go to school then? I went to school. I went to high school, and then I went to college. Here in Omaha? Oh, yeah, Omaha U, right. And then when you came out... I was going to... Did you get a business degree then, or...? Yeah, I got a B.A. degree, right. I was going to go to Omaha U for two years and then go to Lincoln and finish up because they had the architectural school. Omaha University didn't have it then, but there's a pre-engineering course I took. Well, my dad got a stroke, and so I had to stay home because I couldn't find a job in Lincoln. I went through all of the streets in Lincoln, even the dishwashing and what, but all those jobs are handed down from friend to friend, so there wasn't any chance of doing that. What year was that, 35, 36? That was about 30... Or 32. 32 when you graduated from high school. Yeah, so it would be about 34. And then I had worked, and I made up... I supported myself in college, but I was able to live at home, see? And then my dad had a stroke, and he was paralyzed for eight years before he died. What, eight years? Yeah, he was on his right side. And you know the funny thing? He lost his English, but his Swedish remained. Is that right? Yeah. Isn't that funny? He never talked English again then? Uh-uh. Very little, you know, stumbled on it. But the Swedish... But the Swedish was predominant, yeah. He'd talk and he'd say something, a few words in English, and then the rest would be Swedish or something like that. So they came back then? Yeah. But your mother was still in good health then? Oh, yeah. She was in good health, right. And then when you met your wife, you met her through the church, and it was like you're dead. Yeah. I didn't know her until later years, though. You did when you didn't pay the bills. Yeah. We were at many birthday parties together and from church people. We went to the same grade school. Same grade school, same high school. I remember him, but he doesn't. So when I was in college, then I needed somebody to dance for a fraternity party, so I called her up and that started it. In that school, what kind of nationalities were there? Irish, Polish? What school? In your high school, for instance. Our high school? High school? Yes. I was thinking Jewish, Italian, predominantly, I guess. But not too many Swedes, though? Not an awful lot, no. What would have happened then if you had gone with a Polish girl, for instance? I don't know. What do you think Grandma would have said? Yeah, she says, that was the first question, erde svensk. So the Swedes, they were probably worried about the Catholics and Polish. Oh, yes. Yeah, very much so. Catholic was a bad word. That was a bad word, absolutely. Almost as bad as Lutherans. The lines were so strict then between each religion. Oh, yes, they were. Very much so. But it's not that way anymore. No, they don't pay attention at all. It's probably going overboard that way. Yeah, maybe so. But they were used to that, to pay attention to whom they dated and particularly married. So of your classmates now, how many Swedes were there, you think? In the high school? Yeah. Fifty? There were 300 when we graduated. And I suppose there was 10% of them were Swedes. You think so? I wouldn't you? I wouldn't think there were that many. Maybe not. Okay. But you didn't have anything special Swedish doings or did you kept together, for instance? You mean? Well, not playing. I mean, in high school you don't play, but I mean, you wouldn't be younger. Did you play with Swedes predominantly or it didn't mean a thing? No. There was a Jewish boy next door which we were very good friends with and did a lot, yes. But the parents, they stuck to their same nationality, right? They certainly seemed to, yes. They didn't necessarily invited a nationality without knowing them very well. That's right. That's right. They were mostly church-bound, you know, and the church was a thing. The church was the center of everything. Did your parents belong to any of the clubs in Omaha, like Noonday Club? Noonday Club, yes. My dad belonged to the Noonday Club. How about Vasa Viking and... No, they didn't. My uncle belonged to the Vasa and the Vikings, yes, but my dad didn't. The reason they joined those organizations was because of hospitalization. Oh, is that what it was? Oh. He got sick, but how did he have his hospitalization fixed then? I don't think he had any. Well, he did have a policy with United Benefit, but that, they canceled him out on that one. Yeah, so he didn't get any hospitalization, right. Most of the people didn't have that, none of them. Yeah, right. Belonged to some fraternal order. The church didn't have any hospitalization. No, they didn't have any planned. No. And if they got, when they got old, no, they stayed at home then. Yeah, yeah, they stayed at home. There was no home they could go to. Well, like Emmanuel had a home up there. Yeah, but no, they stayed at home. They stayed at home. They were, they both died in the house. Oh. Yeah. So how old was your dad then when he? My dad was 67 when he died. My mother was 76. And your grandma, how old was she? Oh, boy. I'll mention she was 85. So she lived many years then after she came back? Maybe 80. I would say 80, yeah. How did she take the move from Sweden, from Dalarna to Omaha? Not too bad, really. She didn't, never complained, no. Did she have to do something for instance? No, she didn't, really. She never made any friends outside of your? No, she never was out, never made any friends outside of our family. And she stayed at our house most of the time. But she did go to church though? You know, I don't think she ever did. Come to think of it, I can't remember. I don't think she ever did. I never saw her. Uh-uh. I wonder, they changed from Swedish to English. But she couldn't understand the Swedish? But that was before she came, so, no, I don't think she went. Because she couldn't understand English, right. There was no way for her. Uh-huh. Yeah. So she is buried in Omaha then? Yes, she is, right. A long way from home. Yes. And her father, her husband is buried in Falun. Yeah. Uh-huh. How did you see the visit now in Sweden? Did you, was there something they have told you that you could refresh your memory with? Like your father and your mother told you? Well, see, there wasn't any relatives, any. They didn't show you anything more than what you saw in the mail? My mother's place, the old couple that was there were very kind and showed us a house, which was immaculate and well kept up, and showed us where the sawmill was, and that's about all. My father's place, that's a different story. During World War I, evidently they sent the kids from the city out to the farms, and the boy was sent out to live with the sister and the three brothers that were left there. And he grew up there and married, and then when we were there, this boy and his mother and his wife were there, but we couldn't talk English to them at all. They were really Swedish in the backwoods there. But we got along, and she showed us some things that we wanted to see. The time was short, however, for us, because we were on a trip from Oslo to Stockholm on a bus, and then we stopped at Karlstad, and we rented a car and drove back. It was dark when we got there, practically, and then we had to get back about midnight. Yeah, a very short time. Did they remember your dad? Oh, yeah. She, no, wait a minute, my dad, no. He was too young when he left. Yeah, he left before the boy came out there, right. Yeah. Because he came over here before World War I, see. And it was about 37 or so that my dad got a letter from his sister saying that you're going to have to come home and take care of us because we're getting too old to take care of the place, or we're going to have to give the place to this adopted boy and his wife, and they'll promise to take care of us. Well, it was a big decision for my dad at the time. He didn't know if he should bring I and my sister over there or not, and he finally decided that, okay, forget it and let the boy have the home if he'll take care of his sister and his brothers. So they did that. It wasn't much of a farm, was it, there? No. A little clearing in the woods. Yeah. It wasn't the place to make a living on. No, really not. Not like Omaha. No, for sure. Okay. So then you had a bit of a van landing if you went back to Sweden. Yeah, that's right. Is that bad or is that good? Where are you from? I'm from Dahlstrand. Dahlstrand? So then after a while you got into the commercial building supply. Right. And when I graduated, well, I couldn't go to Lincoln to finish up for architecture. I changed over to a business course, and then I took extra drawing to supplement. So with that degree, I was working for an architect during the summer, my senior year, drawing houses for him. The same architect my dad had for a building. And the owner of the Kraus & Trosten Company came out to sell incinerators, and he asked the architect, do you know of any young draftsmen that I might be able to hire? My draftsman just went around the streetcar the wrong way and got a ticket, and I fired him. So he said, yeah, this fellow. He said, I can't keep him on. He said, he's just here for the summer. Got this job for $15 a week. That was before the war? That was before the war, War II, yeah. That was in 37. And so I worked there as a draftsman. We did elevator fronts, and I drew the drawings for the castings and the struts and so forth. And then after I was there a year, the boss died. And his partner, who was Harry Trosten, was a city councilman full-time at that time. And he came over to the office and he says, who are you? He had never seen me before. I said, well, I'm the draftsman. I've been working here for a year. So we got to talking, and he says, well, if you want to stay on, I'm going to try to keep this business going because I'm going to have to have a place to go if I ever get out of politics. He says, so why don't you, we'll write to all the factories and we'll... Continuous on next slide. Okay. So he says, if you can keep the company going, I'll get a partner. He says, it shouldn't take too long. Well, let's see. It was, what, three, four years later, we got a partner. We combined with another competitor, Mr. Porter. And what happened was I just kept on with the steel windows and the metal doors and the things, office partitions and so forth, the elevator fronts, and the new partner kept on with his acoustical ceiling, floor covering, and we just worked almost independently. So they became Porter and Trosten? Porter and Trosten then, see. Well, then that went along for quite a few years, and then Mr. Porter died, and Trosten was still in politics, and he came and he says to me, I'm going to finish this term out, and he says, if you will stay with us, I'll make you a partner. So he asked me if I could, to raise as much money as I could raise, and then we put that into the common stock. He put that in the same amount in common stock, and he had the preferred stock for the rest of the value of the company. And then, let's see what happened after that. Was it during the war or after the war? This was after the war, because during the war Mr. Porter was there. I had a ñ You were drafted in? I was 4F because I had two punctured eardrums, but I went down to the bomber plant because there wasn't any work going on. I went down to the bomber plant and was there for three years, four years, whatever it was. So the business completely shut down then? Well, Mr. Porter was there, see, and held on, because all you could do was business that had priorities, you know. So he'd go out to me, the bomber plant, and he'd go out to Grand Island and pick up whatever he could from the bomber plant. That's how I got the job at the bomber plant. I went down there to sell them guards for their belts on their wheels, on their machines. We were selling those at that time. Well, anyway, they told me I should grab one of those jobs down there, so I went in to see, and he said, ìSure, we'll take you right now.î But I said, ìNo, I got to wait until I talk to Mr. Porter and give him a couple of weeks.î And they said, ìOh, you can't do that.î And I said, ìWell, that's too bad.î But they went along, and I went down there two weeks later. Mr. Porter was pretty happy because he didn't know what was going to happen. So it was hard to get supplies then? Oh, yeah, very hard. You had to have priority orders, which involved military only. And then after the war, I came back and then worked with Mr. Porter. And the first job I remember was we furnished a whole bunch of stuff on Boys Town, the biggest contract we ever had. And Mr. Porter was out of town, and Mr. Trusten was too, and I happened to be called over there and sold it. And these guys couldn't believe it when they came back to town. But anyway, when Mr. Porter died, that's when Mr. Trusten said we'd be partners. So and then it was the period of the attorney wrote it up, so a period of five years after the partnership, then I would be on the same basis as he was. And then that's how everything worked out. You had to show good faith that you were going to stay on? Yeah. So Mr. Trusten was a littleóhe was hard to work for, very hard to work for. What kind of nationality was he? He was Jewish. Jewish. Trusten too? Kraus was Jewish, and so was Trusten. Mr. Porter was not. And he was very hard to work for, and Dorothy can tell you, I just hadóI was going to quit many times. How did you keep on though? I don't know. That old Swedishóthat old Swedish fortitude. Maybe it was a good balance. Yeah. Yeah, I think it probably was. But being a politician, did they help in the business? Was he able toó Yeah, but you know what? He would never let us bid any city work. Why? Was it because of confidentiality? Because he was a politician. So he couldn't do that? I can tell you another story about him. But how could you avoid losing a look at the contracts over the city? They were. They were veryó They were bypassed then? We bypassed every one of them. But then you had to give him credit. He was honest. Yeah, always very honest. No, I'm not fooling. He was honest. He'd give you a shirt off his back if you were in trouble. Yeah. In fact, I'll tell you a story about him. He was in charge of public properties. And they were taking bids on light poles. And they were going to change from wood to metal, aluminum. And there was 100,000 poles to be bought. In Omaha? Yes. And they had the bidding. And he wanted Westinghouse. I think it was Westinghouse. No. It was another firm. He wanted this firm anyway. And the bid came in. They were low. And after the letting, the guy came into Truston's office and he says, Well, that's great. He says, you know, there's a dollar a pole in that contract for you. How shall I put it? In your bank account or what? Truston says, just a minute. And he went up to the mayor and he says, Cancel the bids. He saysó So he wouldn't take it? He wouldn't take it, no. And when he left the business, all he had was what Gunner and I got up for him, you know, to retire on. And Gunner, he told you how he came into the business. No, I never got into this. I didn't have an interview. Well, Omaha Steelworks was going down and Gunner was out of a job. And he saw me at Ross's Steakhouse one day at noon and he said, When's Truston going to retire? And I said, Oh, I don't know. I wish he would. So he says, Why don't you ask him? So I said, I did. And I asked Truston, I said, What would you think about retiring if I found another partner to buy you out? He says, Well, let me see what you got. And Gunner asked me for names of, I think it was five companies back in Indiana and that area that we represented, and he wanted to see what they thought about us. And he came back with a good report that we were a good company. And so he wrote up a deal. He spentóhe's a good planner. You know, he can progress five years and all that. Soó Project. Project. So he figured out a process of doing that, buying Truston out, and we arranged with the bank money to do this. And he was willing to let it go then? And he finally let go. And his wife and the attorney talked him into it because he was continuously complaining about headaches and so forth. He was having a terrible time. And neither one of those four were two partners. He didn't have any children to take over. Yes. He hadóhe hadóboth of them had children, butó They were not interested inó No. So then it becameówell, it's still Porter, Truston, and Carlson. Yeah, sure is. So you were Porter's ever since 1960s? It was about 50ówhat wasólet's see, 14 years ago? We were still living in Popleton. We moved from there in í56. Okay. í56. Right. That's a long time then. Yeah. We wereówell, I had an agreement that I would retire in ten years when I was 67. Oh, I see. So that's when I retired. You didn't want to go to Truston's where you were, I mean, Porter's, to wear your cell phone to the last drop. Well, Ióyou know, at first, when it came to that time, boy, I thought, how can I quit? You know, I've had thisóI've been in this thing all my life. I've worked on plans till midnight, you know, andó You didn't really want to retire. I really didn't, but boy, I'm glad I did. Well, it was a contract. It was elevenóthere were eleven years to go. That seemed like a long time. Yeah. It went by so quickly. He didn't want to quit, but he'd signed the contract, so he had to quit. So did you write the contract another ten years? No. Gunner wasn't listening to that. No. Gunner wanted the business. So í67, I retired. Then I went to work for Gunner promoting Saudi Arabia work. We had two architects in town that were doing Saudi Arabia work, and if I could promote products that our factories had to use in Saudi Arabia, we'd get a commission on it. Well, the first year was fine, but then I worked Monday, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and then it's rentaled off, so I only worked on Friday the last two years, and then it was out. So it was justóit was nice tapering down. Tapering down. Uh-huh. Right. So it's still going, and Gunner is the sole owner of theó He's the sole owner, right. Uh-huh. So he has all the headaches himself. He has all the headaches himself. How does it work, though, to be a partner? You are in partnership now with this porter. Does it work most of the time? Is it worth the headaches? I guess I was in the right place all the time. When I was hired originally, I was in the right place because I had another offer, another job, and that one quit a year afterwards, which I didn't take that one, of course. I was in the right place. Everything happened just perfect, you know, and beingó It's awfully easy to get along with anybody that can't get along with him, can't get along with anybody. That's the thing. Well, they're stimulating factors. Yeah. I'm the one to hold them down, right. Too hot-tempered ones won't work then. No. No one got to give and listen. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. So did your father live then when you became a porter on this? No. He was already gone then. Yeah. He was gone. Uh-huh. Yeah. And nobody could figure outónone of my family or my relatives could figure out that I'd go to a company called Krauss & Trusten, whoever heard of them, you know. It was the best thing I ever did. Yeah. So I was vice president foróduring Trusten's time, and then I was president during the partnership with Gunner. So you covered all theó All the way up. Yes, but the territory not. You were working more in Nebraska, in Iowa. We worked over halfway to Des Moines. Highway 71 cuts halfway betweenówe worked over halfway to Des Moines and all of Nebraska. Yeah. Is this a specified territory? That was a marketing area, they call it. Yeah. I see. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So did you work then together with other contractors to get theó We had toówhat I mostly did was go out and promote to the architects the use of our products, and they'd draw them into their plans, and then we had a chanceówe had a better chance of getting the job. It was luck, didn't it? Well, not exactly, because we got a lot of competition, but it helped a lot. And then we'd bid the job, and we'd quote the contractors, and then whoever was successful, we'd follow this fellow until we could get as much business out of him as we could. Then we had to worry about getting paid. To collect. Right. Well, I suppose you had a good treasure. That was Gunner's job. So he was theówell, he is a Husky, so heó Now that he has Carsten there, why, he does the collecting. That is probably the hardest part of the job, to get the money to get paid. Well, yeah, and then get the money from the bank to operate on, too. You know, they're getting tough. Always headaches. Yeah. But how is theóthe best years? Was that in the late 70s, late 60s? The best years? Yes. Right after World War II. That was the best. That was the best. 44, 45, something in there. Everything was blasting up then. Yeah. It was just going crazy. And then you get all the material and supplies you needed. Then you got materials and supplies. We were mostly on quotas because they couldn't produce fast enough. Soóbut that was the best years, yes. And the competition hadn't started at that time, though, so much? Well, no, because some of the guys were not coming. Well, we bid to Boys Town. I don't know if we were any other bids because I worked on that one for long, many weeks. Right after I got through the war contract, andóbut then theyóour competition started coming back, and then it got tougher again. So when something is going good, there's always somebody looking toó That's exactly right. Yeah. So Boys Town, they were expanding then at that time? Yeah. They built all the high schoolóeverything on the east side. The high school, the high school buildings, dining hall, auditorium, all of thoseó25 homes, dormitories, yeah. And there was Father Flanagan. Father Flanagan, right. It was his dream being a vision in reality. That's for sure. This church now, the First Covenant, has there beenóspeaking something about the Swedish heritage for the members over there, in what respect, and festivals, or Lusia, for instance? Yeah, we have a Lusia. Yeah? We just have taken up Lusia recently. Do you remember it was the Lusia program way back when you were a youngster? No. Another time? No. How about this summer festival? Yulata. Yulata. Oh, yeah, we have Yulata. We're the only ones in town. You're the only one in theó Yeah. You know why. Yeah, because Gunnar says, I'm going to go to your Yulata. I don't know if you'll get there, butó Is there on Christmas morning? Yes. You don't have it in the evening, then? No. Oh, yes, we have a New Year's Eve, or Christmas Eve service as well as Yulata. Oh, yeah, we have like 5 o'clock or something like that, isn't it? In English, yeah. They sing Gorgon's Hallelujah, Morgan's Club. Oh. You know what that is? Oh, yeah. All the verses. All the verses. The choir, well, there are people in the audience that are able to follow along with it. Oh, I'm not sure that they sing it in Swedish anymore. They used to sing it in Swedish, and I think they sing it in English now. Yeah, I'mó You are able to get a Swedish preacher then for the Yulata service. Oh, that's in English. Oh, this is in English? Yes. They don't preach in Swedish anymore? No. No. But then we have a good attendance for that Yulata. It is a tradition. We, Dorothy and I, put the candlesówe put lighted candles in the windows on that side, and so when they come in, it looks real good. Do you remember Christmas now, when you were young? Oh, yeah. How long before Christmas did your dad bring home the Christmas tree? Sure, just a minute. Where did he buy it? Oh, aboutó Do you remember where he bought the tree? We went down to the grocery store. They had Christmas trees? Yeah. The short needle or the long needle? The short needle, always the short needle. We never used the long one, always the short needle. And we would get that, and we'd go and get the lutefisk and the sticks. Dry. Right, and I'd cut it in the bandsaw for my mother, soak it in the lye. He'd get the lye from the plaster. Dry. We'd soak it in the lye. She'd get the hog's head. We'd mix the silta, put the weights on top, and she'd make the patates carved and boiled potatoes, and we would have Christmas at our house one year, and then we'd go to the other three. So every fourth year we'd have it at our house. And then in the meantime, the other one had Thanksgiving or some other celebration. They took turns then. Yeah, but everybody had the same kind of a situation, and the only one that didn't was Lee Anderson'sómy uncle. He, besides the patates carved and the boiled potatoes and the silta and lutefisk, after that he'd bring in a turkey. But we never had that at our house. Yeah. He was more Americanized. Yeah, he brought in the turkey afterwards, yeah. But on Christmas Eve, did you get the Christmas presents from Santa Claus? We got theó Did he come to your house? No. We'd exchange presents. After the dishes were done, we had to wait, the kids, until after the dishes were all done, then we could open our presents on Christmas Eve. Then the next Sunday morning, Santa Claus left a package for me and my sister on the front porch. He didn't have the stocking then? No, no. How about the guy with the turkey? Did he have a Christmas stocking? No, no. They came in later then, when your kids wereó Yeah, you're right, they did. There was more in the 30s and 40s then. Yeah, right. Honey, you knowó And you had live candles in the Christmas tree. We have nothingó You're bothering. You had live candles then in the Christmas tree? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. And they were lit only Christmas Eve? I think that's right. I think that's right. Kind of think of it. And we really had to watch them, because, you know, they'd burn that tree up. Did you have it standing on the tree, or did you throw it out after a couple of weeks? It was about a week afterwards, I guess we threw it out, New Year's or something like that. It was gone? Yeah. You didn't have a party then when you threw the Christmas tree out? No. Did you dance around the tree? No, we didn't. No. What kind of decorations did they have in the tree? Oh, we'd have silk, I mean, gold strains, or we'd have popcorn in the string, or balls, oró We had also some Swedish candy. It was twistedó Of pork and cheese, huh? Yeah, on sticks about that long with flayed ends, and they'd hang on the tree. Did Marjorie make them for you? I don't know where she got them. This is Helma Helma Hillquist. Oh, Helma Hillquist, okay, she made them. Did you have the same thing in your home, Miss? What? Porta Lisa in the Christmas tree. Oh, we had candy and stuff, yeah, kind of Swedish, I guess. There were peppermint sticks wrapped in it. Right, right. They called them Porta Lisa. Okay. I think of little, you knowó The oneó The one with the red stripes, yeah. Right, okay. But there was this, the long ones were the same dough. Okay, all right. That's right. So, and that tradition, did you continue on that same Christmas tradition, soaking the lute fish andó No, no. After Christmas tree, oró No, I don't thinkó After we got married, we didn't do that, did we? We don't soak it. We've had lute fish every Christmas. You buy it prepared. Yeah, prepared, right. And how about the Christmas tree? Are you short-needled? Well, you know, we've been out of town. We go to New York to our daughter. I see, so you don't have to worry aboutó Like this next Christmas, or St. Louis, we trade it off, so we don't do that. We light up the tree out in front a little bit. Oh? Yeah. How about the church? The first covenant church out there? Oh, they decorate. They decorate, realó They decorate the Christmas tree. Oh, yes. They always, yeah. They decorate justó Real good. Yeah, Christmas is a big event in the church. Then going back to the church now, you remember Gustav Johnson, Hultman? I've heard of Gustav Johnson, and Hultman I know very well. Was he here performing that you were involved? Yes, because my folks would take me down there. They always wanted to hear him. And weóthe church was full. In fact, they were worried about the balcony falling down on the 23rd in Davenport when it was so full. And he'd go from the organ to his little organ he brought to the piano to different instruments. Oh, that was a big event. Oh, that was a big event. And he was standing when he was playing it. Yeah, he was. Like the young people do today, they stand and play the piano. Sometimes. Yeah. I didn't remember that. Yeah, his little portable thing, you know. I remember that he had a hanky that he stuck in there. Yeah. He was pretty fancy. Did he have a brother out there, F.A. Hultman, that was a pastor? Yes, uh-huh. In Omaha? Yeah. Uh-huh. But that was before your time, though. You don't remember him? No. I don't remember him, no. We don't remember him when he was a pastor. We just remember him on his trips back. Well, our folks knew him. Oh, yeah. Yes, I imagine they did. But F.K. Johnson, you don'tó There's a Hultman relative that lives around here someplace. In Omaha? He's in Omaha a lot. Howard sees him every once in a while. I don't know if he lives in Fremont or someplace close by. He's in Omaha a lot. I think he'só The grandson, then? The nephew or something like that. And his name is Hultman? Yeah. Uh-huh. My brother's out of town, otherwise I would ask. He would be interesting for you to talk to. Yeah, he would. So the hymnals now, they were some years ago. You still have them in the hymnal today, quite a few of them. Yeah, yeah. Oh, we have a lot of them. Oh, yeah. They kept the Swedish tradition. Translatedó Yes.óthe English of the Swedish hymn. Yeah, we sing them a lot. And the young people, they have no problem to follow along with it, as long as they like them? The young people now, do they like to sing those old Swedish hymns? Oh, yes, uh-huh, yes, they enjoy that. They have no trouble to follow along? No. We have a string band that has started up in church just the last three or four years ago, and they even go around and perform at other churches in the area. And they sing those Swedish numbers, you know, that have that same old rhythm. So the string band, when you were growing up, was there a string band? The Swedish string band in church, oh, yes. How long did they continue? Oh, dear, I don't know. Not too long afteróin my time, but I know it was going strong in my parents' time. But I remember it. You didn't belong or play in it? No. I didn't play an instrument. So the second and third generation, they are faithful members and thenó Uh-huh. And live on the Swedish traditions? Oh, yes, we still carry on lots of Swedish traditions. And it's amazing that we have so many people that are not Swedish, but yet they seem to enjoy the Swedish tradition. People have to be mixed up. Uh-huh. The Swedes marry Germans, Irish and Polish. Yes, blend, yes. So there's no problem today, no? No. There's no discussion about it? No, uh-uh, no problem at all. When you were growing up, did you have any services together with the Lutherans or the Baptists or the Methodists? No. Did they exchange the pulpit like they do today? No, not that I remember. Today is later. No, I don't remember any exchange like that. But today they have a talk, once in a while. Oh, we have all kinds of different ministers in the church, yeah. We stick mainly to the covenant, I would say, but we've had lots of Lutheran ministers and Baptists and Mennonites. At one time we had quite an affiliation with the Mennonite church, the Grace Bible Institute. Oh, they have a congregation there? Uh-huh. There are Mennonites in Nebraska, aren't there? Oh, yes. Grace Bible Institute is quite an ongoing organization there, Mennonites. Wonderful people. A problem in our church. When the new hymnal comes out, there are a few hymns that are missing, but the Swedish ones seem to stay in there. They survive? Uh-huh. I suppose they don't like when there's too much change. It's hard to follow along. Yeah. You talk to Edith West and she can tell you all about it. She's quite a historian. She makes a mental note of everything that happens. The other name is Swanson. Carl Swanson. Carl Swanson. Now, who was he? He was my uncle. He was my mother's brother. And he came from Sweden? He came from Sweden. From what part of Sweden? Blekinge. Blekinge. Uh-huh. Aserum or? Pardon me? What place in Blekinge do you know the place? Kyrkult. Kyrkult. Uh-huh. Close to Kyrkult. So they came together, your mother and? No, my mother came first. She had an older sister that came first. They had an aunt that lived here in Omaha. In fact, an aunt and uncle that lived here in Omaha. And they, so they, my, her older sister came first, then my mother. Then they sent for Carl, their younger brother. Uh-huh. So he was 15 years old when he came to Omaha. Uh-huh. And he started to work for, he lived with your mother. He, no, my mother was a domestic like all the girls were. But she met him at the airport and brought him. No, at the railroad station. At the railroad station. I thought I'd be there in the airport. Yeah. And brought him out to where she was, where she lived. She had asked permission to bring him there. And then he had, she gave him a dinner. And then she walked him through Hanscom Park over to where this aunt and uncle lived. And he always teased her because as they were walking through Hanscom Park, there was a pavilion there. And she told him, oh, they have some of the best stuff in there. It's called ice cream. But she didn't buy him any. And he always teased her about how she told him how wonderful this ice cream was, but she didn't buy him any. But they didn't have a nickel to spend. They walked and she made like $2.50 a week was all she made. And they put that away and sent money home for, to bring him over. And they sent money home for her mother to buy a house in Sweden. So they watched their pennies. They didn't buy ice cream cones. There's room in the budget for that. He worked for Derpy's, didn't he? No, well, he worked for grocery stores. He worked, I think he worked for Haglund's and some of those Swedish... He didn't go to school then when he was 15 years? He had some schooling after he got here. I can't tell you exactly what, but he did get more education here after he got to Omaha. He picked up English very easy on the bed I took. So, yeah.