 Yeah, we have June 10th, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Mr. and Mrs. Warren Peterson in Moline, Illinois. Warren Peterson was born 1909, 8th of November. November 8th. November 8th, in Moline. Moline, yeah. And both your parents came from Sweden. They both came from Sweden, right. Your father's family in 1880. In 1880, yeah. How many were they now that... This is all that came when he came over at the time. But there were other... Anna, there was one other one, they had one other child, Anna, and they left her in Sweden. And that is what the relatives I have, or did have. She was an older sister. She was his second. She was next to my father, was the oldest. Oh, so she stayed with some relation then? She stayed right there, yeah, and raised a family. And when we were over there, they were my cousins, you know, but they were actually older than I was for some reason. I suppose she got married earlier. So, what was the reason you think they came over? This is what I never did find out, really, why. I thought, I think, say, it was having some hard times. I don't think it was the Army or anything like that. I think they were just difficult times. And they had heard about John Deere, you know, that's the big drawing card in those days. So there was no one over there? John Deere? Oh, people would come here, they'd come in New York, you know, and come out on a train and they'd let me off at Johnny Deere. That was Moline, you know. Sure, he was well known. He hired a lot of Swedish, an awful lot. And I guess there were some other ethnic groups that came along too. Was your grandfather, what kind of work was he doing over in Sweden? Far as I know, he was a shoemaker. He had all sorts of tools. I know when he died and we were cleaning out the sheds, there was all sorts of shoemaker tools. And he did work for a while here when he first came over on the railroad, just a section gang, that's all he worked on. But then I guess he went back into his shoemaking business. But he didn't live to be real old. So I don't remember him at all because he died when I was just a little lad, you know, and it didn't mean a thing to me. But he came here with his wife and all his children, except one. Director Moline. Far as I know, yeah. Did he stop in Rockford or Chicago? No, I don't think so. So they must have some other friends. A lot of people had friends in this area right here. Only the people, as far as I know, when they came over, they had a destination in mind. There was work there and they had been told that it's good. Now Ruth's father, he was more interested in farming, so he was looking around. But my folks were not farmers. They were factory workers or what have you. So your father, now he was 11 years old. Yeah. So he came there, he started school at Moline. He went to school for a while. I don't know what grade he graduated from, but he went to school for a while and then he went to work for John Deere. And they located, you said they rented a flat? They, well Moline, of course, was not as built up as much as it is now, but they had a, the first place they had was a house over near the more downtown, and I can't tell you exactly where it was, but I think it was on top of the hill or close to the top of the hill. And when he got out of the way, in those days, he was in people's farmland and pastures and whatnot. But they, afterwards, they moved, and the only home that I knew they had was the one that I, after I'd grown up and, you know, knew where to look. That was over on 9th Street and 18th Avenue. It was close to the Bedouin people then. Yeah, yeah, sure. They were neighbors with the, for a nation. That's right. You go down near 7th Street and you were in Belgium town, and you go up this way and you were in Swedish town. So when you were growing up, did you understand that you were Swedish and others were Belgian? Oh, sure, sure, sure. In what ways? Well, they call us a dumb Swede. Well, they did that. Oh, sure. Well, I, when I grew up on 11th Street and 33rd Avenue, that's, I stayed there till I was going to kindergarten. I think I stayed in there till I was almost through kindergarten, which was, I suppose, what, six years old, something like that. And when we, my brother and I could talk nothing but Swedish when we went to start at school and the teacher had to tell us, tell my mother, you gotta talk English to those boys. They don't understand a thing I say, see? And she talked English from then on, and so we kinda lost our Swedish until I went back to Sweden and I found out I had to talk it. Well, then I'd done pretty well, learned a little bit, you know. So you came back then? Yeah, yeah, kinda came back, yeah. So how about the Belgians? Now, did they use their language when they… Very much so, yeah. More than the Swedes, you think? Were they more clandestine? I don't, no, I don't think so. I don't think so. No, you know, for a while here in, well, what they used to call the halfway, that was down there near Ericsson School and around there, there were a lot of Swedes there. Why did they call it the halfway? I heard that remark before. I asked my mother and father that and they said the same. They really didn't know, but they called it the halfway. Was it halfway between Rock Island and the… I suppose that's what they figured it was, but I think it's closer to the city of Moline downtown area than it was to the Rock Island downtown area, but… But there was a common expression. That's right, halfway. Where are you from? Oh, I'm down, live down the halfway. Did you hear that before? Yes, I heard it before, but nobody can explain, you know, the reason why. No, I can't either. I can't either. But that's where it was, around Ericsson School in that area. That's where my mother grew up, down there, right across from Ericsson School. So her family now, well, let me continue with your… My dad's family. Dad's family. How many brothers? Well, he had, at this time he had two brothers. My dad had, there were three brothers of him. And then he had one other younger brother that was born here, Emil. He's dead now. And two maiden sisters. They were twins, sisters were, Ellen and Hilda, but they're dead also now. They were born here. And all the rest of them were born in Sweden. They had some, Manuel was born, I think it's one of them was born in Sweden, he died, and they had another one they named Emmanuel, Emmanuel, Emmanuel, or whatever it was. Emmanuel, we call him. And he was born in the United States and he died. I could take you down and show you my family tree and you can see how that worked. When they came over, I think that was about it right there. And then there's this Anna, the sister, the oldest, older, next, older, well, she was next to the oldest sister. She stayed in Sweden, so they had at that time… So this picture was taken over here then? I think so. Because she is dead on there. No, no. It was taken here, right? It was taken here. Yeah. So your dad, now, he started to work… At John Deere. Immediately after school? I would say so. I never questioned him exactly when he started, but I know he went to school long enough to learn the language, how to write it, and so forth. And he went to work for John Deere and he got to working in the wood department. And he eventually, well, I don't know if he learned to trade or not, but he eventually became a carpenter and so did my, this Charlie. He also did the same thing. But he studied in the evening, what do they call that course they used to take there? Drafting a business? Yeah. And he started contracting. And my dad worked for him. And the youngest, the other one, this other one, he turned out to be a painter. And Emil, the one that was born here, he also turned out to be a contractor, I mean a carpenter. But he didn't, he was, he went from, started in the trade, he didn't go to John Deere, he started right in the trade, see. So at John Deere at that time there was a lot of woodwork, I suppose, with the wagons. Oh yeah, wagons and whatnot. And plow handles and all. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So. And they built, I think they built a few little buildings here and there, something like that, you know. So he was on the carpenter crew then? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Most of the time. But now your uncle, Charles F. Peterson. Charles E. Charles E. Peterson. Yeah. That was the one that started the big construction company, the biggest there in this area. Yeah, it's pretty big. He first, he first started out with his, a couple of relatives. His one was Brissman, the other one was Johnson. And they formed a company, and the three of them was known as Brissman and Company. But after a couple of years, why, they separated and my uncle started, called it the C.E. Peterson Company, or C.E. Peterson Contractors. So Brissman, they also came from West Hewitt Town? I don't think so. He is related to the Leroy. Yeah, Leroy, yeah, yeah. Is his uncle or father maybe? The one that started the business? Yeah, I mean Leroy Brissman, I understand. Yeah. His uncle. He's in the same generation as I am. Oh, I see. Yeah. That was his, I guess it was his father that was. Was the carpenter or the. He was in the business, yeah. And the other one was Johnson, which was my uncle Charlie's wife's brother. I don't think they stayed in the business very long, I don't know. And their business was general contracting, building houses. Yeah, building houses. Schools, churches. Anything, yeah. They built the Fort Armstrong Theater in Rock Island, for one thing I know of. And a lot of houses, and now they work on pretty big stuff. They don't fool around with houses anymore. Of course, the housing business is now. Dead. Well, they make up so much in the lumber yard that all they do is fit it together. It used to be that you'd have the carpenter, he'd lay it out, cut everything up, cut the roof rafters and the joists and the wall, make the openings. But now it's all, they put the whole thing together, so all you got to do is set up the roof rafters and nail a few boards on and you're set. Sometimes a whole wall comes and a whole bathroom. It isn't very much, it isn't much profit in it anymore. It's more like do it yourself then. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But they are still in the business then, the C.E. Peterson. Oh, yes. Yeah. His sons then continue on. Huh? His sons continue on. Yeah, yeah, yeah. His grandsons, or? Yeah, grandsons, yeah. He had three boys, Kenneth and Elmer and Howard, and they just recently, in the last five years, they all passed away. They died. And their sons are running it. Well, Elmer and Kenneth, Howard's sons. So they call the business the C.E. Peterson Sons now. Sons. Yeah. And now they are in bigger... They go in for bigger items like schools and truck terminals and things like that, you know. There's more sophistication to it. Yeah, well, it isn't so cut and dried as a house. The houses, they got a plan and they come with a wall and a roof. But did this Charles Peterson build a lot of houses here for dwellings for Swedes? Oh, yes. And others. Yeah, yeah. He built houses. And then he'd buy older houses and remodel them. Sell them. Did he buy some lots, too, and build up certain additions? I don't know if he did much of that, but his sons did some of that, quite a bit of that. They bought whole sections. Yeah, they'd buy some land and they'd sell it or build houses or something, you know. They owned that place down there, Midvale Farm, you know, that whole piece of land. They owned that, and of course they sold it off, a lot of it. Mostly they sold things down there. But there's a couple other places where they've built condominiums and sold them. Some of them they did all right and some they didn't. Oh, it depends on the... And some of them they built houses and sold them. They call them spec houses, they call them. They build a house and sell it, you know. But they... Mostly they bid on things, and now I don't think they go in for this condominium stuff. It's peed it out after a few years. Well, it's kind of highly competitive, I guess. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So you went to school then in Moline? Right. At the Erickson School to start with, or...? No, I went to Garfield to start with. You see, Garfield is way out there on the southwest. That's where we went to school, Garfield. And then my dad built a house on 20th Avenue and 9th Street, so then we went to William Carr. Then he decided he was going to go farming in Michigan, so we went. He had bought some land up in Michigan, and we went up there in Michigan. Do you remember that? Oh, very much so. We went up there and lived for a whole year over in woods and fishing and all that great stuff. Why did he change it all like that? I mean, was he dissatisfied with the carpentry? He thought it would... I don't know. I think he thought he was going to have an easier life or something. So he invested in a farm then in Michigan? Yeah, but it really wasn't a farm because it was all covered with trees. You had to have stump pullers, and he was going to go up there and pull the stumps and start farming the land, but he found out that wasn't so good. Well, we went up there in the early part of 1918, I think it was 18 or 19, and then he worked up there and he built a little house for us to live in. Then he came back and he worked as a carpenter during the winter, and he built these, what they call the government houses over here. He never did come back. He decided he was going to go farming in Minnesota then. I don't know where he got these ideas. Where in Michigan did he buy this farm? It's up near Cadillac. Okay, well, that's far north. Yeah, yeah, Bay City, well, not Bay City, but Grayling and Cadillac. Roscommon was the name of the town. We were right by a nice big lake, clear water and good fishing and everything. So you liked it up there? Oh, I loved that stuff, yeah. So the whole family picked up and moved to Michigan? Yeah, we went up there. Well, my dad and I went up there on a train, and we stayed with some friends of his up there that had gone up ahead of time in a little house. And he fixed a place up for us to live in one of the barns. And my mother and my other two brothers came up there, and they lived there for about a month while we built a little house up there in the woods, a two-room house, about a one and a half or two. And he no more than got that done and planted some potatoes and stuff, you know, and he wasn't making any money, so he went back to Moline to work and make some money. That's when he worked on these government houses over there on 27th Street and 20 around there. You know where they are? They call them the government houses. You probably don't know because that's from World War I. No. They start at 27th Street along 23rd Avenue. They start at 27th Street, and they run down to about almost 19th Street. Oh, I see. And all those houses over there, that's a housing project. Was that built for people that came back from the war, First World War? I think it was supposed to be some low-cost housing, but they were built during the last year of the war. The First World War? Yeah, World War I. So it was impossible for him to get an extra job then up in Michigan? Well, he couldn't make any money there. But he still had his house up there on 20th Avenue, a real nice big house, but he traded that off and the farm in Michigan for some land in Minnesota, which didn't even cover the good down payment, which was a lot of interest besides a lot of payments. So he moved to Minnesota the next year out on the farm. To where in Minnesota? Claremont. That's near Casson and what else? That's the only two towns I know of right close. I'd have to look at the map for it. Where do they make all those jewelry and rings, Ruth? Owatonna. Owatonna. So southern Minnesota? Southern, yeah. And there was a farm already established then? Oh, yeah, yeah. Stump pulling or anything like that? No, no, there was rich land and all that, but my dad was no farmer, and he didn't have any know-how. He had to raise cattle and livestock and plant and everything, and that went kaput in about less than a year or so. Then he was broke. He had to come back to Moline and start all over again. Where do you think he got those ideas? Boy, don't ask me. There were promoters here, see. The real estate men were at it. Several people went up there, including Estradolls. One of the Estradolls were up there. The Depression hit and they couldn't pay the rent. See, that was 1920. But he was during the First World War, though, he went up to Minnesota, to Michigan. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And also Minnesota was... That would be the next year after the... First World War. 1921, probably. 1920. 1919. November 1918 when the war was finished, wasn't it? Then the next year we went up to Minnesota. That was 1919. So the whole family moved up then? We all moved up there. Stayed there for a little less than a year. And the house was sold there in Moline? He traded the house in and this land that he had paid for in Michigan, which was about 80 acres, it was... Now it's worth a lot of money, but in those days it was, I think, like 15 or 20 dollars an acre. Very low price. Then he bought this farm in Minnesota for 200 dollars an acre. 200 acres. 200. Well, that was a big farm. Oh, yes. Yes. So you didn't have to husk any corn out of the fall there. You left before the... That's right. You left before the harvest. Yeah, pretty much so. Yeah, they didn't... Let's see, he bought a few pigs, little ones, and we had a couple of cows, which my brother and I milked most of the time, and he decided that he was no farmer. And not only that, he couldn't pay the interest on his loan. Didn't make enough money. He was dissatisfied with the barn, so he built himself a nice big expensive barn up there. Yeah. Well, I think the barn had burned down. Carpenter's skill, you know. Yeah, he was more interested... He never lived it down. His wife never let him forget it. No, they'd argue about that. Of course, I could understand my mother, you know, here... Drag her to Michigan, drag her up to Minnesota and come back. Went broke when they were 50 years old or so, you know, and had to start all over. That's tough. And your mother, now, if we take her side, she came not from a farmer family. She came from Stockholm where... Yes. Yeah. She didn't have any farm upbringing either. No, no, no. Her mother died and her father was... What did he do, Warren? He was just a factory worker. I don't know that he had any special skills or anything. She was raised an only child and I think the stepmother must have been very good to her because they had much nicer furniture and things, you know. Yeah. So she came over here with some... She came over... She came over with a lot. She came over by herself. By herself, but with a other group and she had a sign on telling her name and... God sent for her, don't you see? Yeah. The mother died and left her with the relatives and then he sent for her as soon as he married and could have a home for her. And she also came to Morine. Yeah. Yeah. See, he was working... Her dad was working for John Deere, living down there on Halfway. On Halfway. Yeah. And your father and your mother, they made that? I'll tell you how that was a peculiar situation. My mother, when she grew up, she started working for the... She called them rich people. Well, they were well-to-do. Coopers and the... She even... Harpers and Veleys and... And... The last one she was working for was... What was it? Coopers. Coopers, I guess. Coopers. And the Coopers decided they was going to go down to Texas and they... So they went down and they picked out a place and then they come back to Moline and they hired Henry Horst, who was the contractor, a big one, here in Moline, to go down and build them a house. And... So my dad, I think, was at the time working for Henry Horst, so he went down there and worked on this house, which was a big mansion, you know. And when they got it partially finished, why, Coopers moved down there with all their help and so forth, and my mother was the cook. And my father got acquainted with my mother down in Cleburne, Texas is where it was, and they got married down there in the Rose Garden on this. He had to go way down to Texas to meet his wife, and he lived a couple of miles apart up here in Moline. And then after the marriage, she quit at Coopers then? Oh, right away, yeah. Right away? Yeah, yeah, and they lived in Cleburne while my dad finished up the house out there with the rest of the car. Then they moved back to Moline, and they moved out there where I told you, 11th Street and 33rd Avenue, and that's where I was born and my two brothers. I have one older and one younger. So you have three brothers then in the family? Two brothers. Two brothers? Yeah, we are three brothers. I have two, one older and one younger. And no sister? No sisters. You were married in 1907 in Texas. In 1907. 1907. And then lived pretty good until 1918 when your dad went crazy and went up to Michigan. Well, I'll tell you how that happened. We was living out there, and everything was going fine. He was working at steady work. He was working as a concierge. Had a lovely home near Williamsburg. Real nice home, and he lived out there on 33rd Avenue and 11th Street, and there was a fellow, there was kind of a hollow there, and on the way down there on the other side, there was a fellow by the name of Hammerstrom. And I don't know where he got this. He painted Michigan in glowing colors. Yeah, he had bought us some land up there, and I think they went up there and stayed for a while, and then they came back. But anyway, he enviggled my dad to buy this land up there, which wasn't a bad investment if he had just forgot about it because it was cheap land and the taxes were low and everything else. He worked as a carpenter. That got him started on this binge about being a farmer. The farmers saw him coming when they got to Minnesota and sold him cows that went dry. Oh, yeah. Well, to be a farmer is the same thing as any other occupation. You got to be, you got to be, yeah, you got to have some experience and knowledge. He had three strong sons. In fact, a lot of them go to school and college now to become good farmers. But you were too young, though, to understand really what happened. That's right. I was just having a great lot of time there. Michigan, Minnesota, boy. Fishing. Yeah. Yeah. So you went to the 10,000 lakes in Minnesota. Yeah, I didn't do much fishing in Minnesota. I got the idea I was going to be a trapper there. Oh. Yeah, but I never did. Well, you stayed over the winter, too? Yeah, we stayed there about a year, I guess. We came back in the spring. Uncle Charlie had to send them money so they could get back here, didn't he? Yep, yep. You had one good trapping season, though. Well, I didn't catch anything, but I bought some traps and some kind of funduson was the name of the outfit that sold the traps, and they sell you some stuff that you put on your hands and put on the bait so they couldn't smell your human sense, you know, and all that. I never got a very good start on it, but it was very interesting. So that was the end of the trapping season and you left Minnesota? Yep, yep. So Uncle Charlie had to bail you out then up there in the... Yes. Well, my dad didn't have enough to buy a ticket back to Moline. I'll tell you, these real estate guys, they were pretty slick guys. I think they operated on the premise that they would get these people's money. They didn't care how, but they'd get it. And they'd foreclose. They'd foreclose on them. And then they'd get more and more in debt so they couldn't... Yeah, you'd get to the place, you're broke. Oh, they probably still do the same thing, the banks and the real estate guys, if they can. There was a lot of people mad at those guys. They'd come down here and get these people to go up there, you know. I think there was about a dozen people they got from this Moline area to go up there and try out this farming deal that was supposed to be a... Boy, that was going to be great. You'd make a lot of money, easy work. The Garden of Eden. Yeah, just sit back and let the crops come and grow. Well, how was the land at that time? It was already a good farmland. Oh, you bet. Yeah, very good. Some of the best. Yeah, some of the best. There was too much at that time. Because the crops, there was a slight depression about... In Hardings, you know, that was 1921, see, and there was quite a depression. A lot of people lost farms. I think if he'd been a good farmer, he could have made a go of it, you know. But we didn't even harvest one crop. We did a little, harvest a little bit, but didn't amount to anything, you know. And it was mostly corn then? Mostly corn, yeah. And, you know, you go up there from a carpenter to be a farmer, you don't know anything about it. It sounds good, but it's not so easy. And on a farm, it's quite a bit of work, you know. So you didn't... Didn't prosper as a farmer. No. You didn't buy any racehorses that were... No. No, no, no, no, no. You didn't join the church up there in Minnesota? We didn't go to church very often because we was out in the country and we had no transportation to speak of. So it was too far away. Yeah. We went... Side two, continuation with Warren Peterson, Moline. Side two. So you were confirmed at First Lutheran? No, my dad was when he was... Your dad was? Yeah. See, they went to the First Lutheran Church when they lived here and he was a boy and lived with his parents here. They all went to First Lutheran. And C.E. Peterson, or Charlie Peterson, he continued until his death, and his boys, too, that belonged to the First Lutheran, down there on Fifth Avenue and 13th Street. But my dad... There was a new church starting up here, up in Highland, at the time we moved back from Minnesota, and he bought a place over here just a short ways over on about... It's this side of 34th Street. He bought a house when he came back from Minnesota, small down payment. Then there was a church starting up here, Calvary Lutheran, and he joined that, and my mother did, too, and from then on we all went to... That's the one on 23rd Avenue. That's right. Calvary Lutheran. It's 29th Street and 23rd Avenue. And he stayed, and then he belonged to that. Until his death. Yeah, until he died, my mother died. So then he, did he work then for his brother the rest of his life? Yeah, most of the time. Very seldom did he work for another contractor. He mostly worked for his brother, Charlie. And your boys now were old enough to... We'd work, we'd... In the summertime, we'd also work for Charlie Peterson. He'd pay us a small amount, and we'd dig and shovel cement and take nails out of boards. What do you mean pay a small amount? Didn't he pay you enough for what you did? Well, the first year I worked for him, he paid me 15 cents an hour. 15 cents an hour? But you were 12 years old. That was good for a 12-year-old kid. It was one cent for every year. Worked all day long, eight hours a day, and five and a half days, and I think I made six dollars or something like that. Oh, that's great. Yeah, but you didn't have to dig or do any hard work, though. Oh, yes. Yeah, we... We'd make cement in those days. You'd shovel the sand and the cement and stuff in the mixer. We did that, sure. His boy, Kenneth, who later helped take over the business, he and I and my brother, we did a lot of that work, yeah. Digging, yeah. Now it's all union, see? You didn't do that. We were just laborers. That's all we were. But it was a hard job for a small boy, too. Pretty hard sometimes. You broke in like that. Pretty hard sometimes. Of course, we were pretty good size, you know. That was good for us. You did practice. Yes, yes. And... So did you continue with the... Well......carpenter work then after a while, or... No, no. My two brothers learned the carpenter trade and they continued with all that until they retired. But I... I was going to this church up here and the pastor up there, I told him I was going to learn a trade, you know, and he talked me into going to school. College. After I got out of high school, I worked out here at what's American Machine and Metal, but it was Troy Laundry in those days. I worked out there for a whole year after I graduated from high school, running a... I took machine shop in high school, so I was pretty good at running lathes and shapers and drilling, radial drills and that, and... I was going to the church there and we had a pastor, Reverend Dickhart. He was the graduate of Gustavus Adolphus in St. Peter, Minnesota, which is something like Augie, you know, and... The neighbor of ours, Mr. Edward Nelson, who is now a retired pastor, he was going to go up there in St. Peter and he had... One year in Augie, he was going to go up to St. Peter and finish out his college there, and they talked me into going to school with them up there. So I went to Gustavus. I went one year at Gustavus. And I had enough money that I had saved working out this factory in East Moline so I could pay the whole first year. We worked for our room, but not for our board, and I paid my tuition and board, worked for my room. At the end of the year, I was broke again, so I came back and I was going to go to work again and make some more money so I could go back to school. I wanted to work on a hard road. That's the only place I could find a job. And that didn't last the whole summer, about half the summer, I guess, and they laid us all off because we were building bridges out near Geneseo. I was sitting down in the library one day and along came a friend of mine who had played football with me in high school. He says, What are you doing? I says, Nothing. He says, I want to go down. I'm going down to Bradley. He'd already been there one year. He says, Football practice starts next week or something like that, I don't know, Monday. He says, You want to go along? I says, Yeah, I'll go along. So I went down with him and talked to the coach down there, and he gave me a uniform and went out and practiced a little bit and stayed there for about a week. He says, You want to go to school next fall? I says, Yep. He says, Well, I tell you, I can get you a job for your board and your room and a job for your tuition, a job for everything. A big package. And Bradley, no, that was in the... Bradley in Peoria. Peoria. Yeah. So that got me started at Bradley, and I went and finished out at Bradley University, played football and worked at all these jobs. In fact, I didn't have much time to do anything except work and go to school. Then I graduated and I worked for Caterpillar. I had a degree in engineering, so I worked for Caterpillar, but they left me out in the production department, and I kept taking government examinations for this, that, and the other thing, and one was for engineering aid at Rock Island Arsenal. And I had a good grade in that, so they called me up here, and I went to work at the Rock Island Arsenal. I worked there for 33 years. That's where I retired from. So the Depression years, then, you went to... School....to school, then. It just worked out great. In those Depression years, no jobs for many people. I was going to school and getting an education. I worked at a restaurant for my meals and I worked at a house for my room. If a lady would catch me, she'd have me working all the time, washing windows and sweeping sidewalks and sweeping floors. Man, she just had more jobs for me, you know. I learned real quick that you don't stick around too much. Then I worked at school. Well, the tuition was, I think, $100, $120 a semester, and for playing football they gave me 50% off, so I had to pay $60. Then I worked that out at the school, painting lockers and doing this and that and the other, whatever they wanted me to do. So you didn't have to take a loan or borrow from your father or anything? You didn't have any money to borrow me. Heck, I didn't see a nickel between one end of one year to the beginning of another. Everything was work. I worked for this, I worked for that, you know. And his mother said to him, are you going to go to school all your life? Is that what she said? Yes. Yeah. She thought I was supposed to, ought to learn. She realized that was the smartest thing you could do during the Depression. But wasn't that the opinion of all the people at that time? That's right. You're wasting your time. Why sure. And especially girls. Yeah. They went to school. There was a waste of time. Yeah. Well, of course, they thought I should learn a trade, you know, like being a carpenter or bricklayer or something like that. Because when you went to Bradley University, you know, down to Puyallup, you couldn't tell your father where you were going to end up being. I mean, what kind of vocation. No, no, no. It was just out in the blue sky. Well, that's what I took. That's what I, of course, I liked and I took them. And he didn't convince you to become a farmer either? Huh? He didn't convince you to be a farmer? No. You just married a farmer's daughter, didn't you? I married a farmer's daughter. But she didn't want to be a farmer either. No? No. Did you? No, no. She was a city. She liked the city better, she said. So you made a pretty good choice then going to… Yeah. I liked my work and I got to be pretty, had a pretty good job. And there were no unions over at Arsenal? No. We had… It was civil service. Civil service. Civil service and you had a sign that you wouldn't be in any… We belonged to a union, but it was not a union that could go on a strike or anything. It was just mostly a representation that would… Wind management. Yeah, that's right. It was a union without no bite. That's right. Yeah. So what did you notice now during the depression of the Jandier workers and Moulin-Plau, international farm, how they had problems with the union coming in and… What was the feeling in Moulin at that time with wind management and the workers? Well, you know, I don't know too much about that because I wasn't working for them and neither was my, anybody of my family. So there was not an ordinary community and there was… Yeah, there was… My family were all in the building business. Building business, yeah. Except me, which I was in… Did they have any trouble with the unions? No, they were all union. The carpenters? Yeah, and so was the contractor, I think. Yeah. They were unionized quite a bit. Oh, yeah. You betcha. The carpenters was a pretty strong union at that time. But Jandier in the 1930s before Roosevelt came in, if they learned that you were union, you were out and they blackballed you any place you can get. Yeah, there was… They had a lot of… There was no way to get a job there in Moulin. They were kind of against unions, yeah. Kind of. He's more liberal. Well, you know, they were. All the building trades, though, like carpenters, bricklayers, sheet metal workers and plasters, they were all, during that period, they were all union. And they still are, but there's still some… Now there's a lot of them that are not union, you know. But during that period, there was very few that were not union. I heard the expression about the old wagon shop. They called it the old people's home. Oh, is that right? The old Jandier workers, that's what they called it. Yeah. Because they were the old Swedes and the old Belgians. And they were not unionized, you know, till… I mean, they held off the lumbers. Yeah. Well, I suppose there was a different breed of people, you know, the ones that came from Sweden. They wanted to have a job. Yeah. They didn't care about any union representation. They were hardworking. They were used to long hours and hard work. And whenever they paid them, they was okay. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Now it's a different story. Yeah. Well, you take a lot of those ethnic people that come over from Europe, southern Europeans and, well, Sweden and all of them. They were hardworking people and they would work long hours and not too great a pay, but they were… they saved and they made things do and they prospered. Right? They didn't buy anything on time. No, and if you got a rip in your pants, you repaired that. You sewed it in a patch on there, you know. Now they throw it away, buy some new. So there's a difference in cycle. My mother, she always was doing something and knitting socks or knitting mittens or patching this or patching that. Yeah, when Warren married me, well, he had socks that were mended and then men's on top of men's, you know, mending. Thrifty housekeeping. Thrifty, yeah, that's what they were. But she had a tough job, though, with no daughters helping her in the kitchen. That's right. Any of you that helped the pigeon to peel the potatoes? Once in a while we'd help and wipe the dishes, but we weren't very good at it. Deliberately, I suppose. I learned more of that when I went to college. I probably washed more dishes when I went to college than I would… and most people were wiping and washing in their lifetime. In the greasy spoon restaurant. When I first started in, I'd come in at 7 o'clock and I'd work till 10.30 at night. That was for my meals. And I was washing dishes all that time, see. There was no dishwasher. You washed them by hand, wiped them. How about at home now? Did your father help your mother with doing the dishes? No, not too much, except if she was ill. Otherwise… She took care of the whole thing? Yeah. Yeah. She'd pack our… When we was working or my dad was working, we were working, she'd pack our lunches and get up and make breakfast. We didn't do hardly anything except get up and wash our face and clean up a little bit and sit down at the table. That was another thing that the older people, the lady of the house, she'd done all that. The men folks, they didn't do much of that, I guess. Is that what you… Yes. In other words, they could… The men in the house, he could lay down and read the paper and… That's right. The wife has to be in the kitchen till 8, 10 o'clock. Yeah, right, right. Before it's needed. That's right. How about at Christmas, the holidays now? Did dad or you boys help out with getting the Christmas tree and dressing it and… Oh, yeah. Yeah, we'd kind of like to do that. They had regular candles then, you know. We'd put decorations on and candles and whatnot. What kind of tree was it? Was it a fir tree or spruce? Oh, I don't remember. We had mostly the short needle ones. That'd probably be us. You bought that right away? Usually. When we were up in Michigan, we had our own and we'd go out and cut one, dandy one. You really lived it up then? Yeah. Certain things, not everything. You were the best in the country. Yeah. But anything other than helping, like beating the rugs in the spring and hanging the rugs out in the line, you'd beat them up. They had a time getting us to do that, you know. Did all the families do that, hanging out the rugs to beat them? Seemed like it. That seemed to be a spring. Oh, in the spring, they'd take the rug out. It wasn't fastened down. They'd take it out and hang it over the line and beat it up, you know, and you'd see the dust flying. They had rug beaters. Did they have true rugs in the homes? Some of them, yeah, a lot of rag rugs. Rag rugs. Yeah, but in the living room or some room like that, they'd have a big square rug, maybe nine foot by 12 foot or something, and it'd come about that far from the wall. It didn't go up to the wall, you know, and they'd roll that up and take it outside and put it over the closed line. They had regular, you've seen those rug beaters. Oh, the whiskies, like whipping. Yeah, big thing with wire, bang, bang, bang. But we only did that about once a year, I think, as far as I can remember. There were no vacuum cleaners around then? We had one that you pushed back and forth, but it wouldn't do very good. It'd pick up a few things, but it wouldn't pick up any dust out of a rug. Most of it was left for a year of cleaning. Yeah. Whether it needed it or not. Yeah. So, and then the wash, though, I mean, the model has to do all the washing by hand. Yeah, she'd… Scrubbing board. Yeah, she'd work that, the clothes on the board, but we got a wash machine after a while, one that you go back and forth or up and down, I forget what you, and it had a big wheel on it, you know. And then you… Then we'd get in on that, and my mother would say, well, now you do this for about 15 minutes, you know. That big wheel would go around, well, that kind of helped. Ignited the wash. Yeah, yeah. No power. All hand work. Only hand power. Only hand power, yeah. And before that, it was all on the washboard. Getting like this, you know. But I never had to do any of that. I run that wash machine deal. You would think the boys could do that thing, but they never did. No. Because you were still… Well, we'd cut the grass. We had a lawnmower, you know, you'd push the lawnmower, we'd cut that. Not too much. We'd cut the cherries, and my dad would have some, we had some fruit trees over here. He'd have us pump the sprayer deal. We'd pump and he'd spray. And you also had the chicken coop, I suppose? Yeah, we had chickens. We had apples and peaches and berries and a lot of grapes and… what was that, I think raspberries, two kinds, red and black. Then we'd plant, we had an acre of ground. It was actually more than an acre. And then we'd have a guy come in and plow it up, and then we'd raise tomatoes and potatoes and all sorts of lettuce, all sorts of garden things. So you had a lot of canned foods then? My mother would can everything, including strawberries. Strawberries too? Yeah. Yeah, we usually had a fair amount of strawberries. That's what we used to, when we were younger, we'd work for the people around us before we'd work at home. We'd weed strawberries and pick strawberries, make a little money that way. And when a party was expected, somebody was coming for a visit on a Sunday, did you kill a rooster then or a chicken? Yeah, oh yeah. Well, we had enough chicken so that we'd, on Sunday we'd either have a beef roast or chicken, usually. So there was a big dinner then, Sunday? Yeah, Sunday noon, that was a big dinner. Yeah, we had enough chicken so we'd go down there and catch a chicken and chop its head off, and my mother had to do all the picking and cleaning. So mother, she was a jack of all trades? Yep, she was. How about the Christmas season, she did a lot of extra preparing of food? Yeah, yeah. Kallsylta, präsylta. Yeah, and lutefisk. Lutefisk. Yeah, she'd soak that in, they'd come and, well, they had to stand in the stores and sometimes in barrels, you know, and they were like big sticks, you know, you could kill somebody with that thing. They'd bring it home and saw it up into pieces about that long and put it in lye water and soak it. Then they'd have to change that water every once in a while and they'd eventually get it all, all the lye out of it, I guess. I don't remember how it worked, but it sure smelled better to me. Did you like it? Yeah. You all ate it in your family then, there was nobody that said there was no good, I think you all... Well, I think my younger brother didn't care too much about it, but my older brother and I and my folks, we liked it very much. As I recall it, I'm not sure, but he didn't care much about the... The youngest one? Yeah, yeah. He was a little more picky about his food. Was he more spoiled than you think, the last one? Well, I don't know. I don't think so, really. And we had herring most all the time, you know. My mother would cut up a herring, I think it was salt herring, put in some vinegar and water and onion in there, and that'd be on the table just about all the time for every meal. That was kind of an appetizer or something, if you want to call it that. And we'd usually have some of the other dishes, potato, bologna, patatas corv, you know. At Christmas now, did you have Santa Claus coming to your home at Christmas Eve or in the morning, Christmas presents? Julklappare is the golden. Yeah. Well, I can't tell you, because a lot of times we didn't have any Santa Claus, and they were just waiting for us by the Christmas tree. The parents said that they, he's visiting during the night or something like that? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Tell them about Santa Claus coming. Oh, yeah. When I was about two years old... The whole family got together. We always, well, on New Year's, Thanksgiving, New Year's, and Christmas, my, the whole family would kind of get together. It would probably be at one of the other places. And this Christmas, it was over to my aunt, to Maiden Aunt's, over there on 9th Street and 18th Avenue. And I was two years, about two years old, and my uncle, Amo, he was going to play Santa Claus. So he got dressed up in some red stuff, and then he took my... Red cap? Red hockey cap, you know. He put that on his head, you know, and he was coming in there. And I was just a little, two years old. I didn't know much about Santa Claus. They said that was Santa Claus. Yeah, and I says, Santa Claus, Harman, Miss. I ran away. I knew it was my, in my head. Well, I couldn't talk anything but Swedish anyways. Santa Claus, Harman, Miss. They never let him forget that. No, they kept telling me about that. I didn't remember, but that's what they told me. You didn't think much of that old man that came in. The Fourth of July, they usually, we lived out in sort of an outskirts, the sticks they call it over here. This was all farmland more or less. People had acres or two acres or something. They'd all come out to our place on the Fourth of July and play horseshoe and catch and have a regular picnic, outdoor picnic. They'd set up a couple of horses and put some doors across the horses and they'd have a big picnic dinner and supper too. And New Year's, Christmas, we'd usually go to, well, we'd go someplace at Thanksgiving time. We usually went to my Aunt Hull and Aunt Ellen, the two maiden ones. And at times we even went there at Christmas. And then my Uncle Charlie's place, they would go on New Year's. We usually went there for New Year's. And I don't know, we had to change around a little bit. The Fourth of July to your folks, see? Fourth of July, yeah. So the family came together and... Oh yeah, see the brothers, the brothers and the aunts. Very much in that close-knit. So how many cousins were you then from this family? Well, Charlie had six children. Six children. So we had... And you had three. And we had three. Nine. And my Uncle Emil had one, was Bobby. That was about it. My Uncle Swan, he was always up in Kenosha, Wisconsin, for some reason. He worked for, I think, some car company up there, striping or something like that. So he had a couple of children, but they were older than we were. And he never came to those get-togethers we had. We usually had quite a bunch there, playing horseshoe. Well, Fourth of July we'd shoot off firecrackers. Have plenty to eat. Then everybody brought something. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Kind of a potluck deal, I guess. And you were members of the California Lutheran Church, you said? Right, yeah. So you were confirmed there... 1923. 1923. I've been a member for 63 years. So now you know how old I am. That's right. And how about other organizations now, Swedish background, Vikings, Horsa? I belonged to the Vikings for about one year, that's all. When you were younger? No, it was about 15 years ago, I guess, something like that. I never did attend much of their meetings or do anything, so I just sort of dropped out. How about your father? Did he or your parents? He didn't belong to the Vikings. He belonged to the Oddfellas. That little pin there, I don't really know what their purpose was. I think it was just social or whatever it was. Well, they had some hospitalization also. Yeah. I don't know much about it except I know he belonged to the Oddfellas. And that's about all the organizations we belonged to. And your mother didn't belong to anything in the... Just the church and the ladies' aid. Yeah, she was very active in church and ladies' aid and whatnot. It's amazing how the women could attend to the home, you know, and then all the... Isn't that true? Yeah. And be up to church. Cooking and sewing and patching and everything. Yeah. That's right. But I suppose there was like a relaxation to come together and... I suppose, yeah....get yourself to where you were. They'd do some quilting, you know, and sometimes they'd have big sales. Were you active within the church, Luther League? Oh, yeah. Yeah, very much so. My two brothers and I, we were all very active in Luther League, young people. Yeah. And how about politics now? Were you a Huberist man or... I'm not a politician. Not a politician. No, no, no. I don't vote for any Democrat or any Republican or anything else. You found no truth in that either? No, he votes for the man. I vote for the guy. If I think he's a good guy, I'll vote for him. But as far as... Sometimes it's hard to find out who is the best one. It's tough. I'll tell you. It's tough. Sometimes I give up. Hard to trust. Oh, I kind of lean a little bit towards the Democratic side right now. Democratic. Yeah. How about your father? Was he... I really don't know which one he really favored. He never did talk to me much about it. We never talked politics in our house. No? No. The only one who would do something that my mother didn't like was she'd get on him, you know, like... My brother Paul had to serve in the Army in the South Pacific and that was a time that Roosevelt was president, you know. That turned her off on Roosevelt, she says. Well, I suppose... Well, the thing that Roosevelt said, he did say at one time that he wouldn't send any of our boys over the waters to fight on foreign soil. But he did it. He said it's necessary. Well, I suppose. So he had to eat his own words. Yeah. It was a hard proposition, I suppose, to make. And how many children do you have now? I have two daughters. Two daughters. Yep. They're both teachers. One out in Yakima, Washington. She's teaching in the first grade now. And the other one in Waukegan. And she's an adult, continuing education. These are a lot of people that come from other countries and they want to continue their education, learn to speak and write this language. She teaches that type of people. In a college, Lake County. Yeah, Lake County College. And she received an award this year as the Outstanding Teacher of the Year.