 In 1974, we went over to visit my daughter in Germany and they took a tour with us to Denmark and Sweden and Norway. We went on a two-week tour over there. So it was fun to see, but being on a tour, you couldn't go where my father was born and like that. You had to just go with the tour, you know. And we went to Stockholm and Oslo and, you know, on the... A real nice place. You didn't go to the place where you were born? No, no, no. Because we just went along with the tour, you know. But at least I got to see all those places and enjoyed them. And I thought Norway was really so pretty too, and Sweden, all of them. Your parents, now, did they talk about Sweden sometimes? No, I don't remember my father talking about Sweden, because like I say, he was only seven when he come and he never got to go back there. So and my mother never was over there. So but let's see. My other brother went over there and my sister, I... She was over there too, I think. My sister went on a trip around the world and I think that she went over there too. But she is gone now too. But we enjoyed the fact that we were, you know, and it's too bad you can't speak Swedish then. How about your other six children? Are they able to speak the older ones? To speak Swedish? My other... Of your sisters and brothers? My family? Yes. I think my brother, because this cow that's still living, his wife speaks good Swedish and so when they were over there, she could speak real good. And my brother could understand it, but I don't think he was fluent in speaking it either. I mean, he could just get the drift and understand it and say a few words, but I mean, as far I don't think he did any really conversing in Swedish. So they didn't go in the Swedish Sunday school or Swedish confirmation? No. They wanted English. Well, my sister might have been because until we were, after we were married, Swedish Methodist Church had a Swedish service at noon. So we always, because we couldn't understand it, we'd always go to the service in the evening. I don't know when they quit having, or start having the English service, but that's the only one I remember. But it was always, we'd go to the service at night because that was English. But you were confirmed in English? Yes. There was no Swedish? 1922 I was confirmed in English. But I imagine my sister, when she was confirmed, it was probably Swedish. That far back, I don't think they had English then at our church. I mean. How about the relation with other groups of people? You said there were Swedes living around where you were living. How about the Belgians? Were they living close by? Yes. There was a, on, where we lived, across the alley was a group of Belgian people. And one family across the street from us was Belgian. The rest of them were all Swedish. Everybody in that block was Swedish except the one, Van Hex, their name was, and they were Belgian. But in back of us, there was quite a few Belgian families. And then up on 7th Street, we lived on 10th, between 10th and 11th Street, and on 7th Street, there's quite a few Belgian people. So you were very close down to the Belgian, Belgian border. So how did they, were they different? Well, except the Van Hex that lived across the street from us, we never did associate very much with the Belgian people. Because their religion was Catholic, and there was a line drawn immediately. But this Van Hex that lived across the street from us, their granddaughter lived with them, and she was my age. So I used to go over to their house quite a bit, because she was my age. And then their aunts lived just down the end of the block from us in a double house, the two aunts lived. So I saw quite a bit of them as Belgians, but they're the only Belgians I remember that I associated with at all. They didn't have any Ludwig's gift? No. They had other things. At Christmas. Completely different. What was their dish then for Christmas? I don't know. I don't remember that. I don't really remember very well our family dinners when my mother was still living. That we had a traditional Swedish, and my sister-in-law started that more because of her mother being right Swedish, you know. My mother would make those things, but I can't remember having a definite meal for Christmas Eve. So that fades away then for each generation? Seems to. Like your daughters now wouldn't care to, or have a craving for it or anything like that? No. My daughter doesn't eat so many things, and that wouldn't mean anything to her, I don't think, to keep up that tradition when she doesn't eat it, you know. It wouldn't be interesting to her. So that fades away. And you are acting now with the Swedish, not Swedish, but I mean the former Swedish Bethel Methodist Church. There's nothing of Swedish celebrations there at any time? No. Lucia or? It was, well, oh goodness. Many years after we were married that they—not many years, I guess. Let's see, we were married in thirty-four, and it was between thirty-four and thirty-nine that they converted it to the Bethel Church and got away from Swedish completely. But the minister we had at that time spoke broken Swedish, Reverend Pearson. Well, Exon Pearson. Yeah. And he was the one that was there when he married us, and he was the one that was there until he retired. And then when it went into the—he was still there when they left the Swedish name, Swedish Methodist Church, and went into the regular, but he no longer would have Swedish service. So he spoke in English, but it was broken. Yeah, a little, just that little bit that you noticed. Yeah, yeah. But he is really a fire spark. He's still living. Yes, over a hundred. A hundred-three or whatever it is. We did stop up and see him one time when we were up there a few years ago. About six, seven years ago we stopped to see him, but his wife had died by then, and he was still at home, but I think he's in a nursing home now. But he still has a good mind, which is wonderful. He's very clear. So he served there for many years in Moline. Yeah. Oh, he was in there—19 years, I think it was, that he was in our church. He came from Chicago, Evanston, around Chicago area. He went to a seminary there in Evanston, I suppose. I think that's where he went. Yes. And he came over, you know. He came over with— With many others—with many others—with many others, with many others. Just a Swedish immigrant and worked hard until he finally decided to go to school. You know, he just did construction work and digging and things like that, he said, just to— To survive. Right. And then he became a Methodist minister. So the old people then apparently thought very highly of him as a pastor. He was very friendly and visiting people. Did the pastor visit people more often back then, you think, than they do today? I think so. I think so. They took their time then. But he was very busy. I mean, he was in so many things around here. In fact, the last few years that he was with us, the mortuary there sponsored his sermon on radio for quite a few years because he was very outstanding and, you know, everybody liked him real well. But when I was saying that he took the time to visit people, at that time probably less people complained about things, like now people run into the pastor all the time with problems. Right. I don't think they did then. Back then, they probably didn't. And— He had to seek them out. Nowadays, they come to him. Because nobody complained years ago. They accepted the bad things, you know, and I know at home we were poor, didn't have any money and everything, but we didn't think anything much of it because we were a big family and had fun together and enjoyed each other. And— You said one day at a time. You never thought very much about it. You know, that was our life and all those Swedish neighbors around us were living about the same way and everything, and we didn't think that much of it, I guess. The people are living up on the hill, like Butterworth and Wyman, you never looked that far to— No. I always thought of them as—we'd always walk past their place when we went down to my grandmother's because she lived on Fifth Street and Fifth Avenue. And when we'd walk past there, I'd always feel like they were, you know, like a princess there, the people that lived there in that beautiful house. But they were people that made the money when they—through John Deere. That's right, they did the money one way or another. So there was no complaining about the Deere or International being hard to people and working them hard. And like I say, my dad worked ten hours a day and— No complaints. And six days a week. No vacation. I don't remember ever having a vacation. Your parents never took a few days off to go anywhere? No, never. You know, never ate out anyplace, you know, because there weren't that many restaurants around and they didn't have dress shops where you went and bought a dress. They made the dresses and my mother was a beautiful seamstress and she made lovely, lovely dresses. Made her wedding dress and it's real pretty, but I don't have it, of course. So when did you start to buy your own dress or did you also manufacture your own? My mother used to make my clothes too, you know, until she died. She always—until she got sick. She always made everything, even for my sister. She'd even make our panties and underwear. Did she follow the fashion then in one way or how did she get the patterns, I mean, to fit you, for instance? And were you particular to have something so you were in style with the rest of the people in Bolivia? Did you tell her what you wanted or—? Sometimes, yeah. I remember I told her one time what kind of a dress I wanted and she made it. She had taken training as a seamstress, you know, and that was her business, so. So she was open then to see what was going on? Yes. In the world. And, you know, she still, up until she died, she still dressed old-fashioned, you know. I thought she looked old. She was only 49 and I thought she looked old because she wore long dresses yet. So she never changed the length of her dress? No, she never wore shorter dress. It was long. And the rest of the ladies had the same thing, though? Oh, yes, yeah. Were they dressed in black very often or—? She wore a black skirt a lot with a—she called them dressing sacks and it was a blouse with like a pebblen on it, you know. And she wore that. She never wore a house dress that I ever remember. It was always these skirts and, you know, in hot weather and everything, they still didn't wear sleeveless—anything sleeveless. They wasn't a proper to come—? Never around home or anyplace. Well, she never at home either. Never wore sleeveless dress or anything like that. Always long sleeves and hot weather. I don't know. And of course, you know, our home had just not electricity or anything. It was always—I remember I heard them say that the house that they built cost $1,500 in that year. And that was in about, I don't know, 1895, I believe it was, or around that time that they built. And there was kerosene lamps then? Yeah. The only light that we had was a light in the kitchen and it was connected to our gas stove and it had a gas light up above it. And it had a little funny gas thing that they— And it was glowing all the time then? No, no, no. Only at night when they burned it. Oh, I see. Yeah, no. Otherwise, most of the time it was an old cook stove we had there. And then in the dining room they had one of those round potbelly stoves. And it was fired by coal then? Yeah. And there was a door between the living room and the dining room so that was always shut to keep it warmer in the dining and bedroom areas. And one room was always considered to be the— The dining room was our family. The dining room. And it was very seldom used then? The living room was the one that was seldom used because it was too cold in there because there wasn't a stove in there. It was just a stove. So when company came there for dinners, then you open up and you get the heat in. Yeah. But there wasn't too much entertaining that I remember of any. You know, like when you have eight in our family, we had a big table in the kitchen, in a big kitchen, and we ate there. And that was a lot to have. And then if you invite another family, you can hardly entertain them. Yes, but when you invited, your parents invited, you surely couldn't be alone then. You had to eat separate then, I suppose, from the rest of the people. Yes. If they invited friends. But we did have a nice dining room so the company could eat in the dining room. We had a nice, you know, good-sized dining room. But the children couldn't be seated. No, we would probably have to eat in the kitchen. Because there was a big table in the kitchen too, you know, for eight of us because we always ate in the kitchen. You probably felt better to be alone away from the other adults too. But the one sister of mine died. She was born, my brother and I were born after she was, and she died of diphtheria. So it was just my sister and myself and my four brothers that were my main family after my parents died when I was younger. So I was glad they kept me, you know, that they furnished me the home until I got married. Yes. Then you can set out on your own. Then you could set out on your own and start a family and look forward to a new generation. So some of those old-timers, they have left many years ago, I suppose. Yeah, they're all leaving me. Yeah, but your generation is still along anyway. So the stores down in Moline, they were owned by Swedes, some of them, like Hallgren Shoe Store and Wiedin. And the meat markets. Were they catered by Swedes then, if they were Swedish? No, there was one that owned two blocks up from us that owned a meat shop, and they were Belgian. So the Swedes, did they buy in there too? Sure, sure. There was one two blocks up that way and this other one two blocks that way from us. And we'd go to either one, whichever my mother told me to run to, I'd run. You could... And there was a little store on the corner, you know, because there was family little grocery stores. There was a grocery store just like from here, not even as far as from here to the corner from our house. Yeah, we had a breakfast. Did they go around and take up orders? No, there was a, that store didn't, but there was one called Neve's that, they'd call us every week and ask for an order, and then they would deliver. They came to the house and take the order? No, they'd call on the telephone after we got a telephone. Oh, so you did. When did you get the phone? It was in about 1917. 1917, the first World War. Did most of the homes then take telephones? Or did it take a long time before they... I think that they began to have phones, others then too. As I remember, my brother went to World War I, and we had a phone at that time. And that's when my father died, that he was, when he was over in France fighting. And my brother didn't know it for six weeks that my brother, or my father, had even died because it was all by ship. And then they censored every letter we got from my brother, there'd be things cut out of it because of the war. So they'd take a long time. Be censored, yeah. So he couldn't come home then because... He didn't even know it till long after he was buried that he had died. But he came back. And he did come back. He was gassed when he was over there, and he lost a lot of weight. And then they sent him to England, and he recovered in England, so he got back his health and gained weight and everything, so he was back to normal by the time he came home. Your brother, right, said that your father, he wanted his sons to be strong physically and to wrestle and... I don't remember that. You don't remember that? No. That was before you were born perhaps that he... I don't remember that. He wrestled with them. Yeah. I don't remember that. I don't know. But... Yeah? All right. By the time I was a little girl, when he was away so much, so I didn't see him very much, so I don't remember like I do my mother. Our house was remodeled, and then we got electricity. And inside plumbing in 1917. So most of the houses before that time, they all had an outdoor... Yeah. Facilities. Facilities, yeah. Yeah. And the pump that we had. How did you take the bathtub? I mean, was it inside with the bathtub in most houses? They did think enough about it that our kitchen was like this, and then they had, they called it a pantry here, and then there was a room here that we called it a closet. There was a hall here going into the dining room like this. But this place here was, I imagine they left it with the idea of having a toilet in there, see? But they never did until when this house was a bungalow. And in 1917, when we got the plumbing in and everything, the roof was raised up, and then we had three bedrooms put upstairs, and then the bathroom was put upstairs. They didn't use this until my brother bought the house after I become of age, and then he made this into a, like a bathroom, you know, like a, just, it had... It was a regular bathroom then, like... Well, it didn't have a bath in it. It had the toilet and bowl and everything. So this room was made into a extra. So the bathtub, what was that located? That, well, oh, then I said, they kind of made this room for a future bathroom, I guess, and so that's where we took our bath in, in there, and then we'd have to carry the water in there. How about the washing now? What did they wash in the... She had to wash in the basement, in this way, yeah. And the first time that she, the kind of washing machine that she got was run by water, after we got the water in there, running water after, and then she got a washing machine that was run by water, and the water kept going in there to make the thing spin around. And it was run by water instead of electricity. Well, she, you don't remember if she was happy when she got that machine, did she trust it? Yes, yeah, well, it was really nice because after, you know, doing that for everything, and then of course you had to rinse them in your, still your tubs. And then hanging up and drying outside or? Outside. Because the basement was not cemented, it was mud floor at first, you know, until they put cement, years after they put cement in the basement, because it was just dirt floors. So they couldn't hang up and be washed down there? No. Because every time you walked on it, there would be. And then the house was built so you could walk right outside from the basement, you know, you didn't have to go through the upstairs, you just opened these things and walked outside. How often were they washing them in the wintertime, for instance? They saved it up for a couple of weeks or? No, I think she washed every week. Every week? Started early in the morning. You got to be on the line. And everything had to be ironed too then, it isn't like it is now. And they boiled everything that was white. Right. After, I don't know, I can't remember that, before that, how she did it, but they would have to heat the water upstairs and carry it down, you know, because there was no electricity down there, gas in the basement, so they would have to carry the water down there. You didn't have to have a bottle for washing at any time? No. No. Maybe she didn't trust you when you were at a young age. How about your sisters now, they had to have a bottle? Well. Or did they go outside? See from the time I remember, my brothers and sisters were working. So they got a job as soon as they got out of school? Yeah. As soon as they were out of school, they start working. So I don't remember them working around the house. My brother and I used to be there, my younger brother was only 15 months older than me. So we were playing mates then when you were growing up. Yes. That was end of interview.