 Gilbert William Pearson was born 1909, 2nd of August, in Moline, Illinois. His wife Ethel Elsa, born Peterson, was also born in Moline, Illinois, the 21st of March, 1913. I am visiting with both of them, and we have today, 15th of April, 1986. They came in 1902, they were not married when they came, they came singly. They came on the same boat. I didn't have it ready for you, they landed in Boston. They were sweethearts, but they didn't come over here married. My father had an uncle in Moline, his name was Bruce. He had come to America probably in the early 80s or somewhere in there. He had worked down there at the Moline Plow Company, that was a big thing here, the Moline Plow Company and Deeren Company. And there had been, you see in my father's family, it was a large family of nine children. His oldest brother had come over here maybe ten years previous, but this uncle had come to Moline. So he communicated with my dad, and my dad decided he was going to seek some new adventures and seek a better life in this country. It only cost $50. So he came over here. My father came to the U.S. in the summer of 1902. It cost $50 and he was sponsored by his uncle Bruce, who paid the $50. Okay, now let me see this, turn it off. Do you mean Bruce was the last name? Well, I tell you, his name was Johnson, but he took the name of Bruce because it was kind of a family thing over there somehow. So when he came— How did he spell it? B-R-U-C-E. They had a homestead over there and it was called Bruce Weiden, and so he took that name when he came to America. It says here he used Bruce as his last name when he immigrated to the U.S., and he was a foreman at the old Moline Plow Company, and he sponsored Vic Pearson, which was my dad. So he came to him then? Yeah, he was born in 48 in Vermont. So he came to him, he came to Moline. But my mother didn't come to Moline, she came to DeKalb, that's where her brother was. That was a connection that they came on the same boat. They were sweethearts over there. So they came over on a boat, and the boat of course as you know they were segregated in those times, the women were in one part, the men were in the other. And they came to New York? No, they came to Boston. They landed in Boston. And then they took some kind of a train, I don't know which one it was, from Boston to Buffalo to Chicago. They landed in Chicago, and I don't think they even saw each other there. Of course my dad had a tag on him for Moline, and my mother had a tag on her for DeKalb. And as I recall it, that's how it happened. She found a train to DeKalb, and he found one to Moline. They were separated. But they knew where they were, each one knew where they were going of course. But she went to her brothers in DeKalb. He had immigrated maybe ten years before, see. Did he have a farm there? No, he worked in the, he was the superintendent of the steel mill in DeKalb. The, I think it was called, I don't know if it was Northwestern Steel at that time, it was a big steel mill there, or foundry. So he had established his home here. So your mother stayed with him then for a while? So she stayed there, I don't really know how long, but she stayed there, and then she took a position as, in those days they called them, well that's not the right term, house servants or maids, you know. She worked for some wealthy man there doing housework. I don't really know how long that was, I couldn't tell you. That was for an American family, so she had to learn English. And my dad came to Moline, and his uncle was the foreman of the Moline Plow Company machine shop, so he got a job there as a machinist. He was a machinist from, he worked in, Yarn Magen they call it down in Alisha First, have you been there? Yes. You know that company? Yeah, that's all steel. That's where he, he worked there part time when he wasn't out in the woods cutting lumber and stuff like that. So he had experience then in— Somewhat, yeah. And now your mother's brother, he was experienced as he was a supervisor? Apparently he had knowledge of steel, because Sweden is well known for their steel, you know, and he must have had some of that knowledge, so he, as I recall it, because he died when I was maybe twelve or so, he had some knowledge, but he was superintendent of that plant. And what was I going to say? And he retired on Sunday? No, he passed away before he retired. That was, yeah, she had some tragic experiences. Her mother and her father and her brother died within nine months, in 20, or between 19, 19, and it's in that thing there. But their parents, your mother's parents, they stayed in Sweden? Yeah, they were in Sweden, they stayed in Sweden. And she never got back to see them. She was going back, she never, and my dad never went back. But my father's parents died about 1908, so he had no reason to go back, even though he had, he had all these brothers and sisters over there. There was nine in the family. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. And my father was the fourth one. But just prior to my father coming over here, his sister married in Sweden to a man named Carl Hook, and they came to Moline, so they were here also. Although he didn't come to them, but his sister was here, I think just the previous year is when they came. My father came in 1902, I said. And then his younger brother came? And he came in, it's in there, in the front. Oh, yeah, he came quite a while after. It's about the second page. So he was much younger then? He was the youngest of the ten of them. His name was Ernest Leonard Pearson. He was the only one that came over, out of the boys? No, no. His uncle, Uncle Eric. Oh, and Eric came over. He was younger than my dad, but he came here before my dad did. But he was also, he settled out in the east, and he wound up making tools out of diamonds. I suppose his knowledge of the steel industry was pretty great. I think he came to Cleveland, then went back to the east, and he set up a shop, and he made these special tools to cut steel, you know, diamond tools. And he had a little industry there. His name was Eric. He was a little younger than my father, but he was here before my father was. Eric Pearson? Yeah. So he never came to Molina? Well, this is a funny story. My father had been here 44 years before they got together, before they even knew where they were. And my father and him and the youngest one got together in 1950. What year were you out, Eve West? 52. As a reunion they had, the three of them, that were in this country. How could they be separated like this? Well, my father and my younger brother weren't separated. He became a preacher, I mean his youngest brother. But he didn't get here in the— No, he was in Nebraska—he was a preacher in Nebraska and Iowa and Minnesota. But he lived here in Molina. Well, he lived here when he came. Then he got married— To one of the Strombach girls. Strombachs. I don't know if you've heard of Strombachs. The toy factory? Yeah. Yeah. He married the daughter of Ruth Strombach. I see. So he was an understanding minister then? No, he was—he went to argue a little bit. Just to learn the language, but he was a free church minister. And then he went out and had churches in Iowa, Nebraska, and Minnesota. And my dad and him had good relations. We visited quite often. But for some reason he lost track of his other brother in New Jersey. And he never wrote him a letter or— And it was some strange coincidence between somebody that they'd found out about each other. And they corresponded, and Eric came to Moline in 1952, and then the younger brother, Ernest, wherever he was, in Minnesota, I guess. So they met here. Didn't they—wasn't that the year your dad was 75? Yeah. They had a birthday party. Yeah. Yeah, on my dad's 75th birthday. All three of them and their three wives came. So you came then from— From New Jersey. New Jersey. It had to be—well, I know this was before that. This was before that because we were out—we saw him in New Jersey. Oh, yeah. They came earlier then. I don't know. It was in the 40s. Maybe earlier than that. 30s, when they found out about each other. But I think when they finally got together, it had been 44 years since they'd seen each other. That's a long time. Oh, yeah. It was a strange thing. Yes. You would think they would know each other, each one arriving home, but I suppose your father— My father would correspond to his older brother in Sweden. I remember that. But there wasn't too—they knew that he was somewhere out east, but there was just no connection. And this is kind of strange, but that's the way it was. So apparently he never wrote home to his sisters and brothers in Sweden, did he? Probably not. Not too much. But you see, in these nine people here, he was number six, and he didn't have too much to do with number one and two, which were still in Sweden, and three. My dad was four when he was here. And then there was a sister that finally came over here to visit, and she went back. And then there were these other—and then next to the youngest one, he had a tragedy. You know where Lesser Forest is there? And just west of it, there's a lake, Lake— Is that Lake Rimmon? Lake Rimmon. And my dad's parents' farm—not their homestead was on Lake Rimmon. That's Bruce Sladen. Right on the lake. That was last week. Well, that is, too. Just—well, okay. It was close to Rimmon. Well, anyway, this younger brother, he drowned. He was out skating, and then he disappeared, the youngest one. But that is sort of a little history of my father coming over here. So they kept in contact after they met, after 44 years? Yeah, because then about the year after—two years after we were married, remember? Three? And we took a trip out east, and we stopped and saw them. That was in 41. That was in 41, so— When they got together was in the late 30s someplace. Yeah. When they contacted each other, decided and discovered. So we went out and saw our uncle and his wife in New Jersey and saw his little shop, part of it. It was so secret that they wouldn't let you in there. Oh. Well, these little diamonds, you know, they swept the floor every night, every little bit of sawdust was— Was it a one-man operation, or was it— Oh, he probably had less than four or five, his son, and probably somebody else. But you see, making diamond tools, you had to be pretty trustworthy to work there, so he wouldn't let anybody in there. He wouldn't even let us in there. I mean, in the shop where he kept—where it showed how he made these things, I think he had a patent on them. And his son, is he running it now? Well, he passed away early in life. He was running it, but I think he passed away, so I don't know. I don't think any of that family is left there, unless the girl is. No, I think she passed away. He had a son and a daughter. He had two daughters. Two daughters. And the son, when we were out there, we met him, and he had a plane, and we took his plane. But— So he had made it pretty good then? I think so. And the other brother, the youngest one, he became a minister in the Free Church. And his name was— Ernest. Ernest Pearson. Yeah. And the last time we saw him, we went down to visit him. He was in Texas, Austin. Well, not the last time. No, that's the last time we saw his wife, Strombach. She was a Strombach girl. There was another tragedy. He was going to a church one night, and they had an accident, and she was killed. Well, she didn't die right away. Well, within three days, I believe. So there was Vernon Strombach. Yep. He's the brother of this Ruth. Vernon is Ruth's—was Ruth's— Brother. No. Nephew. Nephew. Oh, nephew. Yeah. Ruth and what was her— Vivian Strombach. Vivian is a niece. She's a niece. She is a sister to Vernon then? No, she's a cousin. Oh, goodness. What were the other Strombachs? Oh, Reuben. He's dead now. Reuben and Vernon were brothers. They run this— Well, Vernon runs the— The bookstore. Bookstore. And the firearm store is his, too? No, it's in a relation. That's the other—one of the sons, wasn't it? And he's dead now. No, not him. That was another one yet. Oh, okay. That's a different one. Okay. His son. My aunt, Ruth. Why can't I think of this fellow's name? Well, the one brother lived on 13th Street. He was a big—he was one of the forces in the Free Church here, the Strombach. Well, they had—they owned the Strombach— Yeah, the toy factory. Toy factory at the time, yeah. Broom handles and so on. Yes. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I met the man David Colson. He was a foreman there for many years, I think. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, right, right. Yeah, I know David. So there was that family. They belonged to the Free Church. So in this—also in this family, this fellow Bruce that came here, he had a daughter, and she married a fellow named Peters, and that was Peters Bakery. Are you acquainted with this area? No, I know, but I never heard of Peters Bakery. Well, they've been out of business now for maybe 20 years. Oh, yeah. But that was a big bakery in this area. It was on 15th Street. Was there a sweet owner there? Yeah, well, Peters—I don't know. Mr. Peters of Sweeties. I don't know Peters of Sweeties. His wife was Mr. Pearson's cousin, and their daughter is living here in Moline. She lives— Her name is Servine. Servine. She's married— Dorothy Servine? Dorothy's brother is married to the daughter of his cousin. So she is our, what, a second cousin? I don't know. Yeah, yeah. I think they're all in here someplace. His second cousin. Jane Peters, yeah. Jane Peters. That's kind of branching out that way. So my father had this other sister that came here first, and she married Kyle Hook, and that family is in Moline. And there's two— What kind of business were they in, the Hook? Well, they both worked for Jaren Company, the boys. And a daughter—one daughter wasn't married. She worked at the Moline Tool Company, Ostrid. And the other daughter, Anna, married a fellow named Johansson. And he had a heart attack and passed away about seven or eight years ago. Oh, it's longer than that. She's the same age as I am, maybe ten years ago. So they're still living in Moline. That part of the family, that would be my dad's sister's children. And they came the year before my dad came, according to that thing right there. My dad's youngest brother, he made a write-up about his history just before he died. And it's about a ten-page thing. It's really interesting. He gives that whole story, see? A little bit about his grandparents—her parents. But this other nephew, he went in and got all this stuff here. So he's got it in writing about this whole thing, like my dad's— What do they say then in the history? Just give them a little bit. Just see the first page. It's really—I'm telling you, I couldn't hardly believe it. Well, just this part, I was reading it a little while. You can read it. Well, he talks about this Brunsheiden, you know. You know what that would be. Yeah. Oh, here. Brunsheiden, yeah. It was his home for 12 years, and then at that time he had to leave. It was the family home for 30 years. Yeah. And by that time, my father had left, and most of the family had split up, see? Frathosen. Well, that's another place. And then this place here, Usterbeek, where is it? That's another page. Well, we stopped and saw that place. Here it is, Usterbeek. That's kind of the history of his father, see? And then he mentions—I'll just find it here. In apparently 1906, at Christentime, I received a letter from my brother Albert in Stockholm. He wanted me to come to Stockholm. He advised me I could find work there. Stockholm at that time had a population of 200,000. Before the end of the first week in Stockholm, the thing that happened was to decide the course of my future. I received a letter from Brother Victor—that's my father—who had been in America since 1903. The letter contained an invitation to come to America as well as money, a sufficient amount to pay the fare. And that following, I was on my way back home, and two weeks later I headed for the Great— On the homeland. So he sent a ticket in to him? Apparently, yeah. Yeah. But, okay. That was— Kopparåsen. Eller Kopparudden. Now, my father's oldest brother married to Bradenburg, and my father married to Bradenburg. So they were two—what do you call that? Well, the children of these became double cousins. Yeah. Because they had—their mothers were sisters, and the two mothers were sisters, and the two fathers were brothers. They had a double wedding then, or—? No, no. This was just— Between—years between. But you see, apparently, from that estate at Brussehuiden, there was not any work there, so they came to Leschefors, these boys. And that's how they got acquainted with the Bradenburgs, that lived in Leschefors. And it resulted in the first marriage, and then my dad got to know my mother, and then eventually after they— Well, they both came to this country, and then they got married, see? So there was that relationship between the Bradenburgs and two families. So part of the two families lived together here in this town. Well, no, the older brother never came to this country. Oh, he stayed here. No, he stayed over there. Right. He stayed over there. Oh. Yeah, he stayed over there. Right. But this other sister, Frida, she came a year before my dad did. She's the one that married Mr. Buck. Carl Hook. They tell about the wedding here and all that. And they lived in Philips Cod for a while. You know where that is. I think my dad was there for a while, too. And this is kind of a capitulation of the whole thing. So what kind of work was he doing then? He came on the—on Karmatoyov. Let's see. Yeah. I don't know if that's a ship that my father and mother came on or not. But this was in 1906, see. And my dad came in 1902. So he also came to Boston. Yeah, it says so. So it could have been that ship, but I— I know my mama used to talk about it, and I never wrote it down. And, of course, by that time I forgot about it because my mother lived to be 100, see. 100? Yeah, and just died three years ago before this. Before this fall. This August. Or she just died in July. And that was the same route that my mother took, so it could have been kind of the same. Could have been. And when we were in Boston two years ago, we went down and looked at that place where they came in. Oh, you're sweet, it says. This is his experience, see. So what was he doing then here in Moline? He stayed here in Moline all his life, or did he— This fellow? Yeah. No, he was only here a few years. He became a minister, see. Oh, that was the minister? Yeah, this is the fellow that became a minister. So he traveled to different cities, then, and places where they had the free church. Right. So how come he joined the free church? Well, he got acquainted with this Strombach. See, and they were the big— In fact, he lived in their home, didn't he? I don't know that. Oh, maybe not. He got acquainted with the Strombachs, and I thought that he had a room in there in one of the Strombachs' homes. I don't know about that. Because your father, what church did he join when he came there? Well, he joined a Baptist church. It was called the Swedish Baptist at that time. That was downtown, and it's now the Bethany Baptist. And after they got married, then they both joined that church. Well, I don't know when they joined, but they both belonged. Yeah, and then Carl Hook, who married Victor's sister, they're from the First Covenant church. So there were three brothers in three different churches. Yeah, right. So they're in the Covenant church, and this fellow was in the free church, and my dad was in the Baptist church, and that's where we are. Because we were a family of eight, see, or six children. And we all— So your father, now then, he started with his uncle down at the Moline Plow? Yeah, he worked as a machinist at the Moline Plow, and my Uncle Bruce was a foreman there. And those were tough days, you know, and he worked 12 hours a day. Like your dad, now, did he have any experience for iron work or in the Degrefforts? Yeah, he worked in ironworks, too. So he was more or less experienced in it. Probably in not exactly the same kind of work over there, because they made like— Well, you know what that plant was. They make spring steel, they make coils. A lot of wire coils in Sweden there, you know. We even saw it when we were over there. We had a short time, and then he took a room, you know, down in a rooming house way down there on 2nd Avenue. When my mother died, we found some cards that had come from Sweden, and we found the address. We went down there, and that house is still there, down by Farm Hall. And then it was— It was like a boarding house, then. Right, right, where a lot of these men stayed. They got a full meal and washing board. Apparently the group still knew their Swedish. They didn't know any English, and in those days I think they kind of stuck together. Was it easy for him to get a job at that time? Well, apparently, because he had a pool with his uncle, see. So as far as I know, he didn't have any problem that way. And he was a hard worker. He was one of these guys, he always had to do two days' work every day, you know. He couldn't stand to see somebody idle. And he got into trouble with that all the time. Because he thought some people over here didn't appreciate work, see. And he was of the old school, see. So he worked at the Moline Plow, and then for some reason he switched over to John Deere one year and worked there for a short time. And then he decided, I don't know why or just how it came about, but he decided that he was going to go west and do some farming. He was not married then? Oh yeah, this was after he'd been married, no. So how long did he stay here then before he married your mother? Probably one to two years. So then they moved into their own flat? They were married in DeKalb. And then they came down here and they had an apartment. And then, like I say, he was a jack of all trades. He built himself a little house out here. He bought a house, just a little thing, and he built onto it. So they lived on 29th Avenue, right two doors from where his sister lived. So he lived there until 1909, which would be from four to nine, that would be five years. And how did he get on from Peckinpah to the job? Walk or streetcar. It was a long distance though. In those days they walked. Everybody walked. 29th, give him a 29th Avenue. I remember my uncle would walk. When we came back to town, he would walk from there downtown where my dad would take a streetcar. It was a nickel, you know, five cents. So the streetcar went all the way up to? It went to Prospect Park, see, and they were only two blocks from Prospect Park. So that was the main line, the streetcar. Transportation. Sure. So, you know, for a nickel you could get down there and nickel and come back. So there he stayed then for five years, you said, at the house? As I understand it, he lived there for five years. And in 19—I was born in 1909, August. And in March 1910, they pulled stakes and went to South Dakota. There were three of us in the family then, my brother and a sister and myself. He, in the southern part of southeastern South Dakota, he moved there. Beresford? Right. Beresford. We were from Beresford. That's where I lived. How did he get the idea to go out there? I can't put that all together, but I think that he had a friend who had lived somewhere around Remond. His name was Norder. That had come out here. And I don't know how that communication came about, whether it was from here to Sweden to Norder, to him, or how it was. But he knew this fellow. I don't know his first name now. Norder. Which was from somewhere around Philipsdade or Remond. And he went out there to scout it the first year, or the first few months, and met him. And he decided, and I think he made arrangements to settle on a certain farm. And he came back, and then he pulled stakes and went out there. And he settled on a farm they rented. So your dad apparently had saved some money then to make the move? Yeah. Not very much. It didn't cost much in those days. It took a few dollars to set up. It couldn't have been much, because he also said that he had some other problems. And I don't know about this, but he worked at the deer company. So he worked at Deer at that time? I think. And he was in the millwright section. You know what that is? Setting up these big machines. I don't know how it happened. So he had to work with other nationalities too down there? Yeah. Well, there was an accident. Which I think that he was a witness. But I don't think I want this recorded. Oh, well, if you don't... And I think that he felt that he couldn't stick up for the company. No. I suppose they were driving them hard in every corner they could. Immense precision at the time where it wasn't worth too much. That could have been a whole year ahead of time. But then he decided to leave. So he went to the Dakotas. And he decided to farm. So he set up farming. And he did well for quite a few years, because things weren't good for him. And like I say, there was just about nothing under the sun he couldn't do. He had never been on a farm, and he went out there and he just... That's just remarkable. He brought all the equipment and he worked from sundown to sundown. And he made it pretty well. And of course, then I came into the picture. I was nine months when he went out there. See, I don't know anything about that. But it wasn't until the third farm that I can remember anything. So he rented land then? He just rented. He rented land. And the last farm they were really on, and this was... I can remember when he moved there, I was just about five years old, about 19 or six. And it was around Beresford? Yeah, Beresford was... Well, do you know the town called, or place called Dalesburg? Yes. That was our church, Dalesburg. Hobbs Corner or Knobbs Corner, what is it called? Hub City. Hub City, oh. Hub City. Sure is, right there. Okay, our Baptist church was the Dalesburg Baptist Church. Yes. And our mailing address was Vermillion, but then just a mile away it was Beresford, see? So we really... So you grew up around Hub City then? Yeah, just a mile from it. So you know the Limblums? Yeah, sure, I know the Limblums. A lot of Limblums in the Baptist church. Yeah, and what else I can say? Yeah, the community was known as Beresford and as Dalesburg, either one of them. Sometimes. That was Swedes? Oh yeah. Well, Swedes and... Did you talk Swedish to anyone? I didn't, I didn't, but my parents, they learned pretty quickly. Although my older brother, when he left Moline at the age of six, he couldn't speak a word of English. When he started school... Oh, he was older than you? Yeah, I'm the third one in the family. He couldn't speak a word of English when he got out to South Dakota and started school. And that was true of a lot of people. But he doesn't speak Swedish now. He felt free and pretty good out there? Yeah, he did all right. For until... from nine until twenty-one. That's many years. Yeah, and then through the war and all that, you know. And then the one year, it was probably twenty-two. When he was doing so good, he just decided to... he had 160 acres he was renting. Nice farm. So you were old enough then to... Well, I wasn't......handle it a little bit? A little bit. I wasn't old enough, they wouldn't let me drive a tractor, they wouldn't let me cultivate or anything, but I... Well, so you had a tractor at that time? Well, yeah, he bought a tractor. It helped with haying and all his haystack, you know, all that stack. And then he decided to... he was doing so good, he rented another 80 acres from the fellow next door. Hoyers. Because he had too much. Well, what happened in June and July, we had rain. Rain. In the latter part of June. The rain so hard it just destroyed... Washed it away. Washed all the corn out. So it had to be replanted, see. And that was a disaster. It was too late then, too. So that year, the corn was just nothing, just nothing. Because it was planted so late, and it was... Our farm, which was not low or anything, it was just practically covered in water. So that was a year that he... You see, in those days when you rented, you took so much, I think it was like he got two-fifths and three-fifths went to the owner, see. Well, there was just nothing there to speak of. So he decided he would get out. Sell the whole thing, then? Well, he sold all the equipment, see. He didn't own the farm, he rented it. No, I know, but I mean... So we had a big sale, sold everything. You had some dairy cows, or...? Yeah, not a whole lot, probably five or six. And that was my job to milk them. Oh, I see. I remember when I was eight or nine years old, that's what I did every night. You were alone to do it? Well, I did most of it, I don't know why. You spoiled them? No, no, they couldn't milk. But they had other jobs. Somebody would get the eggs, somebody would do something else, do the housework. And Artie would work in the field, see. Your older brother? Yeah, and he would do some of the milking, and I would do quite a bit of it. How about the separator? Yeah, the old separator. Bring it in and get the cream out of it, separate it. They sold the cream then? No, we didn't sell very much of it. My father had a churn, one of these. We'd make butter. And in those days, you didn't go shopping, you went trading. We would go into town, we'd bring in, we'd have these crates, we'd have 12 dozen in a crate of eggs, and then she'd have maybe three or five or eight pounds of butter. We'd go into this store in Vermillion. And in those days, you didn't shop, we'd go trading. So you went all the way down to Vermillion to buy? Oh yeah, that's 13 miles, 14 miles. We'd go there instead of Beardsworth. It was quite a business though. Well, we had a car then. And she'd get all that she'd want, and they'd figure out what the difference was, and that's what it was, the way it was, like butter, you know. I remember that so distinctly. So Vermillion was the city you visited? Yeah, that's where we got our... It was too far to go to Sioux Falls? Oh yeah, well Sioux Falls was way out there. Sioux Falls and Sioux City was about 35 miles. Vermillion was that close, that's where we went. Down the river. So my dad sold everything, had this big sale, and then we... In the spring? Yep. Had to be 22. And we moved into a little house, and another farmer's farm across the road. We had two houses. Really? Yeah, that little house. That little four... See, one, two, three, four-room house. There were eight of us in there. And... He contacted the county superintendent, and he got a job... Clay County? Clay County. On a road... A road crew? Road crew. Well, really not a road crew. He got the job of putting in these big concrete culverts. You know, these... For overpasses, overpasses. Yeah, he made a bid. Like I said, it was highly... He wouldn't try, you know. So he was experienced in that kind of work? Oh, yeah. He contracted with the county, and that was in the days when they started putting in these huge round culverts, you know. And nobody really had much experience with it. So we had... a pickup truck. He bought a Ford, an old 1909 or 12 Ford. He took it into town, and he cut in two and made a pickup out of it. Beautiful job. I should have said just a little bit before, he tried something else. He went in the meat market business. He was a meat cutter also. And we had a store in... Do you know where Greenfield was? In Greenfield. Storing... We had a meat market in Greenfield. This was only about a year. Conjunction with one of the neighbors, Erickson. And he was going to start a new system, a new deal. He said instead of all the people from the whole area coming in to buy meat, he was going to go out and deliver it. This was a new concept. Was he buying and then butchering his health, or did he buy it? Yeah, he'd buy it in Sioux City, and we'd go out and butcher it. I used to go out and help him. We'd rope a calf. He'd go out there and he'd skin it, and we'd cut it up. When I was 11 years old, and I'd help him. Oh, that was from the farmers then? He'd buy from the farmers, and also buy from the stockyards in Sioux City. And then he kept the meat and cut it up and sold it to the... Oh, we had a regular meat market, a great big ice refrigerator, you know. And you could buy the meat there. And he decided he was going to do something new. So he bought this old Ford. I remember, it was about a 1912. Took it into Sioux City and told them what he wanted. They cut that thing in two and made a beautiful pickup truck out of it with a great big refrigerator in the back that had ice in it. So he was going to stock that up every day and set up routes, set up free routes, and go out in the country and go from farm to farm and sell the meat. So the women didn't have to come into the... To the store. Store. So that's what he did one year. And Art would drive that truck, and I'd ride with him. And we'd go, we set up two routes. Clay County and I think we even got over, you know where Spink is? No, I haven't. The Brewley River. Well, the county east and the county west, we had huge routes. We'd start at 8 in the morning and then come home at 5 at night and had this refrigerated truck. Where did you get the ice from? Well, we had to get the ice from... Dry ice? No, no, this was ice from the... Regular ice? Yeah. Flux? Yeah, we had... Well, I think we got it from Vermilion. We'd haul that in. Huge. This is big ice. We had thousands of pounds of ice in there. And that was cold storage. The meat would keep in there. And then he would buy these quarters, what do you call them? Quarters at the... In Sioux City at the... Armor was there and Wilson Company and all those big packing companies. The meat packers. Meat packers. He would buy from them, and we'd bring it home in this refrigerated truck and then store it in the... Did he cut it to order? He would cut it. Any way they wanted? Yeah. In case it was too big a piece? Yeah. And I often wonder, well, how did he ever learn how to cut meat? But he did. So he would cut it, and then we would also deliver this. And that went on for about a year. But then the partner he was with, it kind of fell apart. He wanted to do something else. He wanted the trucking business. So my dad decided, well, he wasn't going to keep that up alone, so he dropped that. And then at that point, he got in contact with the county superintendent. It might have been by accident. I don't know. And he did some odd jobs for the county on the road crews. And then he heard about installing all these big concrete culverts. So they had a bid on it, and he bid lower than anybody else. Well, he could see how they were doing it. You know these large—they were about this wide. Cement. So they would dig a channel through the road, you know. And then they would roll these and drop them in, you know. And, well, you know, first they would dig it out and then drop them in and cover it again. And that was the system that they had been using. My dad saw, well, that's not the way to do it. And that took a big hoist, and it took about five men to do that, see. So my dad said, well, that's not the way to do it. So instead of digging a tunnel the width of that concrete block, he dug a tunnel just a little bit wider than the length of it. All he did was roll these things down and rolled them in, turned them around, and put them in there. And there was no backbreaking. He could put on the cover twice as fast as these other guys could, see. So he did that for a whole year. I'd go out there. I used to go out and help dig them. So he made a bid for the whole... Oh, it was the whole county, the whole county. Digging them down and cover them and everything? Yeah, yeah. And we put on all, for a whole year, we put those in. I even helped him on that, and I was only about 11 or 12 years old. He and Art, my brother and myself. Well, and that job got through. You dug by hand then? Oh, everything was by hand, just by spade. Everything was done by spade. We'd start in the morning. We'd put in the whole thing in one day sometimes. One in one day. Well, then when that finished, then he was acquainted with these county people and the maintenance, you know. Was he politically active? No, no. Not really political. Did you have to be a little bit political? No, no. The superintendent, he lived maybe six or eight miles from us, and he knew him. He was called the county commissioner. The county commissioner was the one he knew. I can't remember his name. He was acquainted with him for some reason. That's how he got into that. So he sold his idea then to the county? Well, that was his own idea. That's just the reason he could do it cheaper and do it faster. And we took those great big huge concrete blocks. You know, they'd come out in trucks and just dump them in the ditch there. And these other people would roll them up and then try to put them in from the top, see. And all he did was just dig it a little wider and roll them in there, wide enough so you could turn them, see. And it just went slick as a whistle. Well, when that got through, then they were having trouble with these. You know what the road graders are? They would grade the road. They had a huge tractor there that they were having trouble with. And they were talking about it one day, and my dad says, well, they couldn't find anybody to run that big tractor. They couldn't get somebody to operate it. It was hard to start, hard to run. And my dad said, I got a kid who can do that. Martin Art had just been to Sioux City. He'd gone to school. He had spent a year at Sioux City in an automotive school, see, automotive and electrical school. So he was probably about 18 at the time, or 17, maybe 16. So he took them down there to this big maintenance garage in Vermillion. And he said, here's the tractor. See if you can start it. So he mucked it around, and within 15 minutes he had it going. So he got the job running the tractor, and my dad had the job running the big maintenance thing in the back. So they did that for about a year, or close to a year. And then they had other jobs. This was a great—I don't know if you know anything about tractors—the old Rumley oil pull. I don't know if you know what that is. No, never mind. A huge tractor. The wheels were as high as that arch. Was there steam engine in it? No, it was kerosene. Burned kerosene on water. Was it an industrial tractor instead of a farm tractor? No, yeah, it was a farm tractor. But, well, it was a tractor they used for threshing and everything else. Well, towards the end of the year, then, they had some other jobs that they wanted done. So my dad says, well, I got another kid. He can run this big grader. Well, I was only—I was 13. So he took me out there one day, and the superintendent named Smith. He said, do you think you can run this? Well, I don't know, so I'll try it. So then I got the job of running the grader, and Art run the tractor. Then my dad had another job. He was out—they were trying to locate sand pits for Gravel Road, see? And he was doing that. He was going prospecting in different areas, digging to see if he could find sand, because he—well, he had an idea where that was, and he did. So then that was the last year I was there. I spent that summer on the grader, and my brother Art was on the— And you lived then in this— We had moved in—we moved from that little house to another place. That same fellow that I said in order that I think my dad had some contact with when he came from Sweden, I'm not sure. But this was a big, huge house, one of the most modern around there. One of the first houses that had a furnace inside, you know, a hot air furnace. And then we had electric lights. It wasn't one out of a hundred that had electric lights. We had an electric light plant in the basement, one of these Delcos that generated the electricities and all the batteries, 32 batteries there, you know. You know how that was. Who had installed that then? Well, this fellow in order owned that place, and we rented that house in. That was the last two years we were there when we were working for the county, see. So that was a modern house then? Well, that was. Well, it was an older house that had been modernized. Yes, but you had the modern— Yeah, it was one of the very few— I don't know of any other house that had the furnace in the basement. Do you remember the place north of Dalesburg, Alsen? Yeah. The Johnson farm there up there? You had everything, steam engines and— I know where Alsen is. You know where Alsen— There was even a post office. That was the place, too. Yeah, yeah. We'd go there once in a while at that store there. I don't know what the name of the fellow was. I believe it was Johnson. Well, anyway, that's part of the history. Then after— So this was 1924 then? In 23. In 23, you were working on the grate, right? Yeah. Then after that year, my dad felt, well, maybe I ought to go back to Moline, because he was a machinist. So— He kept in contact then with his uncle there? Oh, his sister and his uncle. And by that time, when we were living on this farm, it was 40 acres. Then he had bought some more machinery, and we had cattle and two— We had four horses, see? He had kind of got back into it. Well, then—actually, my sister and I, Ethel and I, did the work on that little 80 acres. We had 40 acres of corn. But then he worked on the— for the county, and later on I did, too. Well, he decided then in late 23 that probably he should go back to Moline. So he came back here by himself to check things out. And I don't know whether it was— He didn't have any job right here, but then he went up to DeKalb where his brother-in-law was, see? No, his brother was dead. Okay, where his— Well, the family of his—my mother's. And at that steel plant, then he got a job. He would have got a job right away. But that was a highly organized city, see? They were all union. DeKalb. DeKalb. Well, down here they weren't yet, see? Well, they were unionized. Oh, yeah. So right away they hired him just like that. Well, he could see right away. He could see the handwriting on the wall. They would have run him right out of town, the non-union man. So he came back home. So he didn't want to— So he didn't want to go to DeKalb. Or join the union, then. No, he would not be part of it. So he came back home, and then they decided then that he would still come back to Moline. He had no job or anything. So the whole family—by that time we were six kids. So in February—and then in February he had a second sale. We sold everything that we had then. Two cars, some corn planters and stuff. All the household goods. Everything in one day. We had a big sale. And he had arranged to come to Moline. So he and the family took a train from Vermillion. And my older brother and I, we still had that one car. We came over here and we drove across Iowa in the middle of the winter on this touring car. So that's when he came back to Moline. That's when I came back here. So then we were in Moline from then on. Did he rent a place then, or did he buy a house? No, he just rented. He never did buy another house. One, two, three houses until about the time World War came along. Then he retired. And then all of us kids—we were still six of us in town—we decided to buy him a place on 4th Street. And we bought him a little house. And then that's where they lived until they both passed away. So where did he start to work then? Moline Plau. When he came back? Yes. Yeah, he went right back down to Moline Plau. His uncle was already retired there, but he went back there and he worked there for quite a while. And then when they got slack, then he went over to this place called Eagle Signal. I don't know whether you heard of that. Yes, yes. Eagle Signal. My brother got into there.