 This is cassette three, side one continuation with Edwin Nistander, Omar Nebraska, cassette three, side one. Would they have been a financial outlay for the Emanuel home then, the orphanage to send you to high school? Did they have to pay for it? Oh no, no, no. It was only the food and the shelter then they saw no need for... Well, no, it wasn't that. She just didn't believe that anybody needed an education, a great big husky boy like you, you can go out and find a job easily. That's what she said. Did you say anything about it? Well, I complained about it, but then it didn't do any good. Sure, I didn't... You couldn't raise any, there was no council? No, no, no. I didn't have any weight. And to be honest with you, a kid 13 years old, he could care less if somebody steered him in another direction, why, he couldn't fight. You had to believe it. Sure, sure. So I went to work. And then when you met your father, well you were 16 when you met your father. Yes, but I was still in the orphanage. You met him when he came here to Omaha. And then later on you lived with him for a year and a half, was it a year and a half? No, it was a year, just a year. What did he, what did you talk about then? Could you see anything? We didn't talk very much. Dad was very quiet, very, didn't have much to say, he didn't, he wasn't inquisitive. He'd answer you if you asked him, but he didn't sit down and talk to me like you're talking to me now, ever. You found out that there was no use to start any... Well I'd ask him and I'd go over a lot of times to a Nylander who he rented from, that other cabin, see, and go over there and talk to him. He was real talkative. He was nice to talk to. Years ago, wasn't it common though, the kids had a hard time to relate to the parents and vice versa, they were shy for each other, I mean, to talk about things and... Well of course I don't know, you see, not having had any parents to remember, I... And no grandparents, you were never... Oh I had grandparents but I didn't know them. We were all alone there, we thought we were the only Ness standards in the world. I didn't know I had any relatives until, like I told you about my brother playing on the radio, you know, and Aunt Minnie listening on a crystal set, yes. Do you still communicate with those people up in the... Not anymore to any great extent. We, in Minneapolis, yes, some of my cousins write occasionally, I get a Christmas card from them, but it's like all the rest of the family. When you're separated and you're getting older and you don't keep up the contacts the way you would have if you were raised together, see. When your father, he died out in... I don't know, we don't know anything about it. No, I have no idea. I went, I made three trips to Colorado to try to locate him after he left. Now I told you, didn't I tell you how he, when he left up there? You went off to live with him in the cabin up there. Yeah, yeah, but then... And then you left for Omaha again. Yeah, and then I didn't hear from him anymore and he wrote CIS and work wasn't available up there in Idaho Springs, so he wrote to CIS at that time and asked for train fare to Nevada or Arizona, I don't remember which. Now didn't I tell you that or didn't I? No, no you didn't. Okay. Well anyway, he said that he thought he could get a job down there. And so CIS came and asked me, she said, well should I send him fare? Because she was working at the hospital and she had it. So I said, well CIS, unless he can assure you he has a job, it's foolish for him to run down there. He's got a place to stay there, he can stay as long as he wants to without any rent or anything, and all he's got to do is worry about feeding himself and keeping warm in the winter. And he does have a job whenever the stuff opens up up there, why, he works. And he saves his money, he doesn't squander it. So she wrote him then and told him that unless he had a job, if he had a job to let her know and she'd send the money. If he didn't, why, he'd better stay where he was. So he wrote back then to CIS and he says, this is the last time you'll hear from me. So we didn't hear anymore and the years went by. And finally after I was married and my wife and I went on a vacation, drove out to Colorado, as a matter of fact I think two or three different times, went up to Idaho Springs to try to locate him. The first time I went up there I met one of his old cronies who was in an old people's home up there. Not a lender? No, no, no, an old guy, an old bachelor that was a real good friend of his and he lived above us on the mountain up there. And I asked Andy, his name was Andy Olson, and I asked Andy what about Dad? I went over to this old people's home and I located him and he was sitting there on the porch with three or four others, chattering, you know, and he was half senile. So I asked him and he was sure glad to see me after I told him who I was because he didn't recognize me. And so I said to him, I said, where is my dad? Do you know where he has gone and do you know anything about him? And he says, no, he says, I don't know, he says he left and he said that's the last, he says he never wrote me or anything. He said, of course, I don't think Andy could even write. But anyway, I didn't have any luck that time and so I located a woman that lived up in the canyon that had a cottage, you know, right outside of the town, not way up in the canyon but closer to town. So I stopped to talk to her and she knew him because she had lived there for years and years. And she said, well, the last time I saw your father he was walking down the canyon with a satchel, with a, what do you call it? A capsaicin. No, no, it was a satchel. A regular suitcase. A suitcase. Yeah. And she says that's the last time I saw him. She says I never saw him after that. So the cabin was empty then, was the cabin still there? Oh yes, yeah, his stuff was all there too. It was? Oh yeah, he had what little he had and then his trunk was there and there was... And nobody was living in the cabin? No, no. And as a matter of fact, there wasn't anybody living in Nylander's cabin because Nylander had died and dad had written to me previously that he went in there one morning and found him dead in bed. And Ancoria, his daughter, the only daughter that he had left at home, had left before that. So he was batching, see? And that's, I think, is one big reason why he decided to leave there, see, and wrote CIS. But, uh... But not when he left so much stuff behind or wasn't there with the... Well it wasn't so much stuff. All he had there was a bed and he had the blankets on it and then there was a sink. He had one faucet, running water, cold water, that came from town, see? And outside privy, out... And then there was a cave dug out of the rock in the back of the place that was their wood cellar and it was attached to the house. So you could open the door there from in the house and walk in the cave and get your wood. Without going out? Without going outside. But you had to carry it all through the house in order to stack it in there, see? Because there was no outside entrance to the cave. But he, uh, disappeared then? Well he went, yeah, he disappeared. I never heard anything more from him at all. We never did. But like I say, I tried to find him and I couldn't find anybody that knew what had happened to him. And somebody told me that I'd better get in touch with the sheriffs down the line and see whether anybody knew anything about him. I wrote to the sheriff in Golden, Colorado. Not the sheriff, but the...yeah, I guess it was the sheriff. Anyway, I wrote to him and gave him the description and everything and he said, no, he says, we had found somebody hanging down here, but we never were able to identify him years ago. And he says, of course, I don't have any information at all to give you. He says, that could have been your father, but then we don't know. And so we just say it isn't. Because he probably didn't have any kind of identification on him or anything, yeah? Not much, anyway. Not much. He might have had a card or two, but anyhow, he was determined he was going to get lost, see? So he went down, he was on his way to Denver when he went down the canyon. And whether what he did in Denver and where he went from there, I don't know. Or even if he got to Denver. But he was pretty despondent. I guess he was pretty much a loner all his life. He always lived by himself after mother died. He took it awful hard. He tried to keep us kids, you know, for about three months after I was born and after mother died. But he wasn't able to continue it because he had to work. So that's how we got to the orphanage. So you never know what happened to him. I never know what happened to him. No, when I went back to Norway, you know, and saw the folks back there, they wanted to know what happened to John, too. You know, I want to show you some pictures of the place there in Norway. And I took a picture, I don't know whether I can find that particular picture, but anyhow I took a picture of the door on the original Norway farm home. And it's just a little low log cabin shingled with birch bark and then sod thrown on top of that so that the grass grew on top of the, you've seen them, and he had carved his name in the front door. And there was his birthplace? Yeah, that was his birthplace. He was born there, he and his brothers and sisters. So when he lived up in Idaho Springs in this cabin, he was probably lonely, but there was surrounding he was used to. Oh, yeah. He was able to take care of himself day to day. Oh, yeah, sure. You see, it was mountainous, up there in the mountains, you know, and Norway's mountainous. So he was familiar with it. Yes, and he, that's why, he'd work here long enough until he couldn't stand it anymore, especially in this hot summertime, you know. Work hard all day and then lay awake all night, just sweating, not sleeping. Of course, the places he had to sleep in, he had a boarding, he stayed at a boarding house down on Ames Avenue, and his room was up under the rafters. There was no insulation in there or anything. Tar roof? Yeah, sure, you know. Not tar paper, but asphalt shingles. Sure, or else wood shingles, it don't make any difference. He really got hot. So that was probably one of the reasons he left the lead too then, to come to a little bit better climate in the... Uh-uh. There was a lack of work. He left. No, like I told you, they had a strike there. They had a strike, yeah. And then a lockout. Yeah. And they closed the mine. So they broke the union. And then later on, they wanted to hire him back, see, all of them back, but no union. And of course, he would have gone back to work, but they said to him he had to have a physical examination. And he says, well, I took a physical examination when I started 20 years ago. He says, why do I have to have another one? He says, I don't want any part of it. And so he wouldn't do it. So he left. He was just stubborn. He was just crazy. He'd have passed his examination. He was just stubborn, and you couldn't sway him. My sister was just like him. So they were alike then? Oh, yeah. Did you not see any likeness with him then in your case, for instance? With me? No. Did you see anything that he did that you did the same way? No. A complete different... But mother, I could... He was like your mother, then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I resembled my mother, too. But your sister, she was like him? Yeah. And my other brother was like mother. And I don't know whether my sister Ruth was like... Oh, you mean the pastor, Parker? Yeah. Yeah, that's right. That's usually what happens when there are several children. One will be like the father, and one... Oh, yeah. Sure, sure, sure. You'll favor him. After all, you don't know which one you'll favor, but you pass your genes on to your... And some of those genes will be prominent, your mother's or your father's, see? And sometimes why they seem to be spread evenly, but very seldom. Usually why it's the other way. So your sister, when you met her in Portland, she gave you some advice? Well, she said I look like a bum, and she started crying, and so I tried to console her out there. I said, well, listen, sis, you just can't find a job, and I'm trying to find work, and I've taken every job I could find. And I said, I'm going on down to San Francisco, and I'm going to see if I've got a letter there with some money in it from Dad, and if I have, why, I'm going back to either Colorado or to Omaha. And I wanted Dad to send me the fare from California to Omaha, see? But he didn't. I got down there, of course, and there wasn't any money at all. There wasn't any mail of any kind, not even a letter. He didn't explain about the either when you came to Omaha? Well, I asked him. I said, I wrote you a letter. I said, didn't you get it? He said, sure, I got it. But he says, I didn't have any money to send to you. Oh. So... How about your sister? Did you get together later on in life when you settled down? Oh, yeah. She... She came here, too? She used to stay with us every time, all her vacations, she'd come out to the house. We used to live out on Fowler Avenue right below the old hospital, because Mama worked up there, see? So... What did she say then when she found you in a better situation with the company here and the electronic business and everything? Well, of course, she thought that I was rich, and of course I wasn't. And so she, in the meantime, was working back in Ohio. And she was a lab tech there. I don't think she did any more... After she left Emanuel, I don't think she did any more x-ray stuff at all. And anyhow, she was lab tech there in Ohio at the county hospital. And finally, she got to the point where she got laid off, because she was 65. Then she came to Omaha. Well, as a matter of fact, we were on a trip from Florida to the Caribbean somewhere, and then on the way back, we docked at Miami, and I picked the car up then, and Mom and I drove to Ohio, back through the east there, and stopped at Ohio and picked her up and hauled her in here, see? And she stayed with us for a while. But we made it plain that she was a lot better off by herself, and my wife couldn't take care of her, because the doctor had warned him not to. He had said that her heart condition wouldn't tolerate it. And so he says, if you take care of her, I'll have two patients on my hand instead of just one. So she got an apartment. I got an apartment for her, and she had some money. And she finally one day—of course, she'd come over here, and I'd go over there, and we'd go to her apartment. But one day, one of her friends called me and said, you'd better—she said, I've got a hold of Bertha. I called her this morning, I got a hold of her and talked to her, and I can't understand her. There's something wrong with her. So I says to Mom, I says, well, we'd better get over there. So we jumped in the car and went over, and here she'd had a stroke. And it hadn't left her incapacitated, but she had trouble with the one leg and difficulty walking. And when we found her there, she had the door locked, of course, and she couldn't get up off of the Davenport to unlock it. So I went down and got the apartment house manager, and he unlocked the door. And I got in there, and here she—she had to go to the hospital right now. So we put her in the hospital. When she came—got ready to go home, why, then, of course, we had to put her in a nursing home. We put her in a nursing home out at Good Samaritan out at Millard. And she died there. She was there probably two years, maybe three. And she was the first—or the last one to go after my brother. And of course, my other sister went when she was— HURST. Young. BELLINGER. Real young, yeah, four years old. HURST. So when you started to tinker around a little bit with this electronics now and radios and everything, how old were you then? BELLINGER. When I was in the orphans' home. Well, when radio first started, when—they didn't even have a radio station here in Omaha. We'd try to get WGN in Chicago or KOA in Denver. And I was building crystal sets then, see, making crystal sets. HURST. Most said during the First World War. BELLINGER. Well, let's see. HURST. Because the crystal sets were very popular in the 20s. BELLINGER. Well, crystal sets were popular before the 20s. HURST. Before the 20s. BELLINGER. Oh, yeah. This was around 1916. HURST. Sixteen. BELLINGER. Fifteen, sixteen. HURST. How did you get the idea? Or did you— BELLINGER. Well, everything—everybody talked about radio, you know, and crystal sets. HURST. How were you able to get— BELLINGER. Oh, in newspapers. They had these— HURST. Sets? BELLINGER. Yeah, sets. HURST. And you could get ahold of them. And what you did was you got ahold of a cardboard carton like an oatmeal box or something like that, and then you wound—you got a certain size wire and you wound the coil, and then you bought your crystal and you bought your little holder and your cat whisker for it, and that's all you needed. And an antenna. And I hooked up all the clotheslines in the backyard. I had plenty of antennas, see. HURST. Was you the only one at the manual and they had the radio? BELLINGER. Oh, yeah, sure, sure. HURST. What did they say then, the nurses? Thought it was a foolish idea? BELLINGER. Oh, no, uh-uh, no, no. HURST. It didn't interfere? BELLINGER. Oh, no, no. It didn't—it didn't cost anything, see. HURST. And you didn't ask anybody how to do it? You figured it out yourself? BELLINGER. Well, I figured—you saw it. I got the instructions in the newspaper, you know. And the newspaper would be just full of that stuff then, you know. Oh, yeah, radio was really in. Then finally the tubes started coming in. I've got one of those sets. I got one downstairs, a little three-tube RCA. HURST. You built it yourself? BELLINGER. Oh, no, no, no, no. HURST. You bought it? BELLINGER. It's a bought one. No, it's a bought one. No, I didn't buy it. Somebody gave it to me later on when I was in business. And it was an antique then, see. So— HURST. And how far were you able to put in the stations? BELLINGER. Oh, we'd get— HURST. Denver? BELLINGER. We'd get to Denver, sure. Denver and WGN in Chicago, and we got WCCO in Minneapolis. And then there was also St. Louis. And then after a while, they got a station in Des Moines, WHO. And then WOW came on here. HURST. How about the other kids? Were they also interested in the— BELLINGER. Oh, they were all— HURST. Only one? BELLINGER. Yeah, they all liked to listen. HURST. But you didn't work? BELLINGER. Yeah. I never had a pair of headphones. What I had was an old telephone, see, and I took that receiver and I just used it. That's all I needed. And I held that thing up there. HURST. So there was no speakers then? BELLINGER. Oh, no. HURST. You had to lend it to somebody else if they wanted to listen then? BELLINGER. Oh, yeah, sure. Sure. No speakers. Loud speakers. The first loud speakers were horns, Morning Glory horns. HURST. His master's voice, what was it called? BELLINGER. Yeah, yeah. That looked like a—it was similar to that, the first ones. HURST. And they came in the twenties, though? BELLINGER. They came in— HURST. Before the Depression? BELLINGER. About 19. HURST. Nineteen? BELLINGER. Yeah, 1919. I didn't have anything to do with them then. You see, I went to work for H.C. Knoll in 1920, either 1920 or 1921, and I worked for him for twelve and a half years. And we distributed Atwater-Kent radio, which was the best one of the bunch. RCA was the biggest outlet, see? But we had the line, and boy howdy did we sell them. Sold the line. HURST. The older generation, did they think it was a foolish idea with this radio coming into every home, or did they— BELLINGER. No, I don't think so. HURST. They were not suspicious? BELLINGER. No, I don't think so. Everybody was just astounded at getting a voice like that over the air, you know, all the way five hundred miles away. And it is wonderful. HURST. Yes, it is. BELLINGER. Of course, we didn't know how it happened, but I found out later, of course, after I got to studying it. HURST. Oh. BELLINGER. Yeah. HURST. So that was the beginning of radio transmitting? BELLINGER. Yeah. HURST. I remember the reading about the first transatlantic broadcast, yeah, but that was not voice, that was code. BELLINGER. The Morse code? HURST. The Morse code, mm-hmm. Oh, they had had that for years, you know. RCA was— BELLINGER. Yeah, that was in the late 1800s. HURST. Yeah, yeah. BELLINGER. The transatlantic. HURST. Yeah. And you have seen all this electronic more or less going wild with the new ideas every year or every three months? BELLINGER. Oh, yeah. HURST. What was it going to end? BELLINGER. Well, we don't know, but it's the fastest moving thing that I was ever connected with. I know that. I know when we first started in while we were selling receiving tubes and condensers and transformers and stuff like that for these old tube-type sets. And the first sets, of course, were only one, two, and three tube sets. And then they increased it, increased the volume on them, and finally the speakers came out, the Morning Glory speaker, and later on why the electrodynamic speakers, which is the kind of a speaker you see now. And it all moved very, very, very fast. And so when I finally got into the business for myself, we had a terrific tube business. We had the Sylvania Tube Line and General Electric. They were on for many years, though, with the tubes. Oh, yeah, sure. And they still got them, and there are still some things that use tubes, but not radios anymore. Because they're solid-state now. Yeah, the stuff—yeah. Of course, the early crystal sets were solid-state, too. See, that old crystal that you used was a Galena crystal, and the principle is the same as it is on a transistor, identical. It's a solid-state, you mean? Well, the crystal— There were no tubes? No, in the early days, there were no tubes. It was just that crystal, that one crystal. That was a detector, and that was all. And if they'd have gotten real smart, they probably could have worked out a way to use the darn things for amplifiers, and of course, they'd have finally wound up with transistors anyway, see? So you have seen a tremendous explosion. Well, then after receiving tubes, and then the transistors came in, and then after the single transistors, they got what they call a multiple transistor, or—I can't remember the name of it anyway. It's a bunch of transistors on one little plate. In other words, it's one transistor that's divided in a lot of different ways so that you've got everything on there, up to a hundred different transistors in this one circuit. I can't remember the name of it now, but anyway, that's what it is, and that's very prevalent now, and that is the reason that you have computers today. And without that, why, you couldn't do all the things that you're doing with computers. I don't remember, nor if I have seen, some of those testers, you know, for tubes in the drugstores in the 50s and 60s. People coming in every night. Do they still have them? No. When did they go out? Well, I'll tell you. We originally put out—we had— The interview continues, next slide. Cassette three, side two. So what happened now, you were instrumental in to store this item in the drugstores. It must have been a tremendous business. Well, you see, we were selling tubes, and of course, we'd call on the druggist, and the druggist, of course, was looking for business, and so we'd agree to put one of these units in his place of business, and he would buy the tubes from us. And each week or so, one of our employees would go around there and check the inventory on the tubes and fill in those that he needed and bill him for those that were gone, see? It was like a self-service then, because the customer did the testing himself when he came in. Yeah, that's right. That's right. But of course, a lot of cases, no woman would come in there, you know, why the druggist would have to do it for her. So it was all right. It wasn't any great big moneymaker, but it was something to really, really help the tube business. And then, of course, you had your picture tubes when they came out. Why did the tube blow in the first place? Well, it's just like anything else. Usually, the filament would probably burn out on it, just like it does on a bulb. Yeah. So they went out of business? Huh? They went out of business. They don't do that anymore. It's gone. You mean the testers? Tube testers? Oh, yeah, they're all gone. You don't find them anywhere anymore because nobody uses tubes anymore. It's the same way with the first TV sets that came out. They were tube operated. I got one. I'm downstairs. But they stayed in business for many, many years? Oh, yes, I should say so. But now today we have this, what do you call them, with a disc now. Oh. Disc on throughout all the regular records. Oh, you mean the compact disc? Yes, the one. The one I played for you there. There's already a tremendous amount. Oh, yeah, sure. It's going to be the number one. Oh, yeah. The regular records are out now. Well, they're still selling them. People are still buying them. A lot of people can't afford to buy the units. They're too expensive. Well, sure. Eventually, they'll come down. And $20 on each. $125 or something like that for a good player. And then besides that, you got to have your amplifiers and your speakers. But you get a good sound, though. Oh, yeah. I bet you. And no records to wear it on. No needles. No, no. That's all done by laser. So what happens to dealers if they have an overhead in a big stock of old records, for instance? Well, of course, they'll... They take the loss? They're going to take a lick. And if they've got too many of them, and the market suddenly dies, but you can still sell used records. They're still buying used records, people are. Of course, that might be the deal. So you sell your used records. I know there's an outfit in Council Bluffs that buys them. And there's some of them in Omaha here. And they'll pick and choose. I mean, they will buy everything you got unless you lump it all in one sum, see? But that's a tremendous improvement. Boy, the quality you get out of that is terrific. It's amazing. Yeah, it is. But you remember in the 50s, when you get the radios and amplifiers and you had all the different knobs for treble and tuning and bass and everything. And there was... You could do it, you know, woofers and tweeters and everything. The speakers were working. You heard the trumpet and the violin and so on. But then came an era in the 60s, they actually only needed one switch. And there was as loud as you can hear it. What happened there? The people didn't have the quality of values as the earlier generation. You see what I mean? In other words, you could set it in, you know, by hand. But later on, they wanted that blasting volume. Well, they still today have that. Well, I don't know. They go to the top. I never have seen any kind of an amplifier that you couldn't control the volume on. I know, but the young people, they don't care about those things. Oh, that's right. They just want to have the highest volume in the rest. Well, not all of them, but then a lot of them do. Because they say there's a lot of hearing trouble now because they have ruined their ears. Well, sure, sure, sure. There's a lot of hearing trouble because some of these people have been working in some of these factories that have been awful noisy too. Sure. And they haven't been using them. But it's interesting how one generation can see the value of these woofers and tweeters and they can adjust it just perfect. And then the next one comes on, they don't care about it. They just got to have it loud. Yeah. Well, it's like your kids, you know. When our kids were growing up, they had a little radio. They'd be studying their lesson and that thing would be blasting. I don't see how in the world anybody could concentrate and have that thing blasting. But your kids started with that too? Oh, sure, sure. They did that. Of course, it was radio. What is the idea with it, to have everything so loud? I don't know. How did it come about? I don't know. It's just, you know, it's these band groups and these players, you know, like the, what do they, what do they call them, the Grateful Dead is one group and a bunch of silly, they get it. People get over that. You know, every generation goes through some kind of a crazy quirk. I remember in the early days, we had the flappers. What was that? All the girls were flappers. They wore skirts clear up to here and they, hair cut here, you know, and it was a flapper age. And that went out and they grew older while they grew up. I don't think you have to worry much about them. I think the kids are going to, kids are going to go through those cycles and then they're going to wind up just like you and me now in our old age, see? Relax. Yeah. Take it easy. That was an interesting interview. I know.