 Yeah, we have the second October 1987. I'm sitting together with Ina Backstrom in Omaha, Nebraska. She was born in 1915, 17th of October in Costa, Sweden. And you came to the United States in... 27. In 1927. Uh-huh. Can you tell me a little bit about your father now? What kind of work was he doing in Costa? Well, my dad was with the, supposedly the diplomatic corps. I never could figure out. He was traveling all the time, but with the government. So I would assume that's what he would call it. I don't know. But he was with the government through Stockholm for years. And then when he married my mother, then he, she said, you're not going to travel anymore. And she, he then, they used to laugh about it because his father ran a plumbing company in Costa at that time. That's 50 years ago, you know, whatever, 60, 70 years ago. So then they, he said, okay, I'll go in with my father. And he just knew nothing about nothing. This is what they tell me anyway. And then he started working there so that they wouldn't have to travel anymore. So he stayed in Costa? He stayed in Costa in the plumbing business. How did he meet his wife? Was he only traveling then for the government? Yes, uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh, in Norway. Right. So all of our summers were spent in Norway, in Oslo. And right outside Oslo, there's a, the grandfather and grandmother in Norway had a summer home in Drubak, right outside. And so we would go there. So I spoke probably just as good Norwegian when I came here as, not as I spoke Swedish. And then it's the funniest thing was last year then, when we went there, I said to my husband, no problem. I'll speak, I can speak perfect Norwegian. Got over there, I could not understand one word they said. Do you mean they changed your mother? No, it's just that I had not kept it up, you see. But the customs were done. Because here I did nothing but we spoke Swedish and all the people I came to this country here were Swedes. And so, you know, isn't that, well, I was so embarrassed. But, you know, it didn't take me very long before I caught on. You were able to understand all of that. Oh yes, uh-huh. And then I caught on enough, but I thought that was so funny. Oh yes, I was sure I was going to do everything, you know. And I couldn't understand anything. Growing up now in a Swedish-Norwegian home, did your mother speak Norwegian often to you? Uh-huh, uh-huh. She did? Oh yes. But, and I think she spoke Norwegian the whole time, if I remember. Uh, well, I suppose I really don't realize it. No, no, no. But, um, he, uh, you know, when you're talking about family life and everything over there, you know, I can never, there was never the closeness there of our family like there seems to be here or like we have tried to portray in this country. I don't know, because dad was gone all the time, and mama was involved in everything and everything. It seemed like she went so much. And, I don't know. So when two of my aunts came over when I was seven, two of my aunts from this country came over. It was, uh, foster? Foster, yeah, uh-huh. Foster Anna and Foster Signe came over from America. They had gone over here many years ago. And, they asked my papa if they could have me. Now, you know, isn't this goofy? But, they were not married? One was married and the other one wasn't. So, the married one could not have any children. She was a nurse here. They both were nurses. And, so she asked if papa, if she could have me. And, he said, sure, why not? It would be a good opportunity for me to, you know, make something out of myself. And, I was only seven years old. Well, eight, I guess. So, by the time they put in for me and what have you, I was 12 years old. When they put me on a boat in Bergen, in Norway, and I was all alone. And, I came over here. And, my uncle then met me in New York. Were you scared? No, do you know? I don't think so. You couldn't hold on to it? No, I, for a 12 year old, I must have been very independent. I don't know. I was in eighth grade by the time I left there because I went to that nice school in Karlstad. I can't remember the name of it right now. And, I was in eighth grade. And, I think I was pretty grown up. You had not started the confirmation classes at that time? No, yes. I went to church, but I did not, I was not confirmed there. I was confirmed here. I was baptized there. It was so funny because I know I'll be talking to you, but when I went to nurses training here at Emmanuel, I started, I met my husband. He was two and a half years younger, and everybody here teased me so about robbing the cradle. So, I lied. So, at that time, now that was in 19, well, when I was starting nurses training, and I was 18 years old. I lied about my age, and I never thought about it for all those 50 years, practically, until I applied for my social security, and I was 67 because I taught nursing here in in-service education here at Emmanuel. And, I worked here for 41 years, but I lied all those years about my, even on my children's birth certificates, I am younger than I really was, you know. But, coming in from Sweden with the visa, how was the stay there? Oh, I was fine. I was fine, but you see, I never, never looked at those. I have my, no, and I still have my passport. You had no reason to show it to anybody else? Oh, no. So, you felt two years younger? Yes, and until I was 67 years old, and then I got a letter from the Internal Revenue saying, you wrote here that you were born, or the, whatever, for the social security, you said you were born in 1917 or 18, whatever I said, and I was born in 1915. Because that's what I really had down, you see, when I was, when I was, got my immigration papers, or whatever you call it, naturalization papers. They were correct. So, I didn't lie up to that time, when I was in nurses training. And then, from then on, I was off. So, I had to write to Karlstad, the Domkyrkan, and get my birth certificate signed right, so that I could prove that I was really born in 1915. But then, when you wrote to Karlstad, the Domkyrkan, you had all your names then, Aina, Kristina, Victoria. Yes, Victoria, yeah. Were you able then to drop Kristina? Oh, yes, I dropped Kristina when I got my citizenship papers here. So, on the back of my citizenship paper, it says, we have eliminated Kristina from Aina's name. I see. And then you also changed Aina to... Aina to Ina, uh-huh. Because the man that adopted, that took me here, this country, was my aunt's, my aunt's husband, was named Lof, L-O-F. And it looked so much prettier, I thought, to call Ina L-O-F, instead of A-I-N-A. Well, you took his name, too? I mean, huh? Yes, but he adopted you, though. Well, they really did not adopt me as such, but they let me take their name, because they did not... I didn't want the name of Johnson, because you would change it from Jonsson to Johnson, you know? So I kept, I took their name for Lof, and that became also, on naturalization paper, that also became a law, whatever you call it. Was he a German background fellow, this Lof? Lof? No, Swedish. Everybody, I came... His name was Löf, then? Löf, yeah, uh-huh. And then they changed it to Lof, you see, for this country, but then they... And how did you spell it then? How did you spell it? L-O-F. Lof? Just Lof, yeah. And... So he was a Swede. Where was he from? They were all from Skåne, so it was hard to understand them, you know? But they, but of course I had Auntie Anne, and she was from Karlstad. So then the English had to bridge it over when you were later on, along to that language. Yes, and then they sent me... You were not a Spanish-born either? No. And then they sent me to school, then, see here? And then they got a private lady, and they put me in third grade when I got here. Here, I was through with my eighth grade, but I couldn't speak English. What little English I had had over there, which was pretty good, I guess, but I didn't pronounce things right. You know? Well, you had a little bit of English when you were... Over there, oh yes. They, even then, they taught English in that school where I went. In the time you spent there. Yeah. So did you come alone, then? You... Yes, I was all alone. And they stuck... Of course, it was scary, though, to go on the boat. Yeah, but I must have been something else. I'm something else now, as you realize. No, but you're a peppy, Anne. But anyway, they put me in a double room on the boat. And I never left that double room for five days. I did nothing but throw up. You were sick. I was so seasick. Five and a half days. Finally, the doctor came in to see me, because all I kept, they kept giving me was oranges. And that's the first word... You were getting awards, then. I know. That was supposed to be what they were doing, then. So the first word I learned in English was sun-kissed, because every orange had sun-kissed written on it. But I... At five and a half days, the doctor came in to see me, and they carried me upstairs on the deck. And that was the end. I was fine after that. Of course, it was 12 days to come over here at that time. And there was no problems on Ellis Island at that time? Yeah. No problems on Ellis Island? No. And do you know how I wish now that I had? Then, of course, I was very grateful, as a child, even, that I didn't have to go. It was a terrible thing there, you know. Was they closed, then, or did you go second class? Oh, no. I went first class. But you see, what happened was that my uncle here is very... They were very in with the Lutheran Church of America. So he got in contact with the church there in New York. And they, the Lutheran member of the Lutheran Church of America, came on board and got me. So they just took me right off the boat, and I never got to Ellis Island at all. And how my grandchildren now keep saying, oh, Grandma, didn't you get on it? No. It was a loss, huh? Yeah. That was a shame. So, then, did you stay in New York for a day? Yes. Just a day, though. My uncle, who was a contractor, they built, you know, a big building. And he was there to get the granite for the Union Pacific building here, George Loff. And so we stayed there long enough to get his business done, because he came there to get me. And then we took the train from there and came home to Omaha. So you went with him, then? Uh-huh. And then you could talk Swedish, then? Oh, yes. He spoke perfect Swedish, uh-huh. No problem. But he was schooling? Yeah. But he spoke, well, he was schooling by mother, by his mother. Oh, I see. See? So he was a second generation, or whatever you call it. Oh, yeah. He was born over here? Oh, yeah. But his grandma, his mother, and father, well, everybody at that time were born over here, over there, practically. Just think of it, how different that has changed when you stop to think of it. I don't know of anybody except Gunner, practically, almost, that was born over there anymore. There's very few of them that... Because everybody has either died or they just don't come over anymore. My sister wrote, then I went through nurses training and worked as a nurse here. You stayed with them, then, in their home? You were... Oh, yes. I became, yes. Right there in Omaha. Omaha, here. Oh, yes. They had a lovely home out here in Fair Acres. And I stayed with them until I was, well, I don't know, probably 16 years old. Then my other aunt was married to an undertaker here, Aunt Cynthi. She asked if she could have me. It seemed like all they did was shift me around from place to place, which is not so good, but it didn't hurt me any. Yeah, but how did it work now? Because you were probably very peppy at that time, active. Uh-huh. Oh, yes. How did they... Because they were a little bit more reserved and quiet, didn't they? Right. But I was full of pep. Did they tell you how to behave, though, in America? Oh, yes. But they didn't tell me enough about everything. I had to learn a lot. But then I went over there, and then I babysat a lot, because she had two children while my other aunt didn't have any. So I babysat there, and I went, stayed with her until I graduated from grade school and then part of high school. And then she got tired of me or something, or the kids got older, and then my another aunt from Uncle Al's side, that's Auntie Ann, my real Auntie Ann, married Uncle Al Loft, while Uncle Al Loft had another, had a sister closer to Benson High School. And so she asked if she could have me. And really, honest to goodness, it seems like all I did was move, and then I would babysit or clean house or do something, even at 16, 17 years old. How did you react to that? Were you... Very well. No, I cannot... You were not homesick? No, never homesick. It was too nice here. My goodness, you should see. Did you notice the difference then between Karlstad and... Oh, yes. Except that, you know, I had it very nice in Karlstad. We went, you know, when we were there last year, we went to see Grandma and Grandpa's house. That's on, what is the name, 16th and...Hammarsgatan or something like that. And we went right by it, you know, and it's there. But the reason I didn't want to go in there is because everybody's dead over there, you know. All of my aunts are dead. And they were having some kind of a doing there, so I didn't want to disturb them. So then I went to my one aunt's house over there, Lily. I can't remember her last name now because they're all dead anyway, you know. And it has been sold and gone, but we went into that house to see it just for fun. But, you know, everybody's... Anyway, so my sister, in the meantime, got married and moved to Gothenburg. Then she wrote to me when we were...Ted and I were married and we were living down by Creighton. And poor as church mice because I was putting him through law school. He went to work, working part-time, and I went through nursing. How old were you then when you went down? Well, 24 I think it was. So you worked a few years then? Oh my, yes. Well, my. Yeah, a couple of years. After the schooling then, you were confirmed in the Zion Church? No, Emmanuel. Emmanuel. Emmanuel Lutheran, down on 19th and Cass. Were they church goers? Oh my, yes. Do we have to leave here? No, well, we're going to. I don't really... So were they too strict according to your thinking? Well... Did you go often to church in Kronstadt, for instance? No, no. Except that there was a church close by, and I can't remember. It was not where I was confirmed, where I went to, where I was baptized. It was not where we went for church to on Christmas or anything. But there was a little church close by our house, and that Mama sent me there, so I would get some church. I remember that very well. And I remember very well getting my... Was that Mifunshus, perhaps? That's what it was. Mifunshus. Right. I'd forgotten that. That's right. But I went there, and I was very happy there. We had a good time, and a lot of my friends went there. How did you feel coming into the Emmanuel Lutheran here with your aunts? Oh, very well. I was very accepted, because everybody was a foreigner practically at that time. In fact, they even had one Sunday, or was it every other Sunday of the month, they preached Swedish. So it was very nice. Did you meet other girls in your age group? Oh, my yes. None of them? And they were all Swedish, of Swedish descent practically. Did you chum around together? Oh, my yes. Did you go to any dances, Donatina? Oh, well... Palestinian? They were... My aunt and uncle were kind of... They wouldn't approve of that? No. No. There were so many things that they didn't approve. I wanted to join the... Through the Eastern Star, I wanted to join Job's Daughters. Who gave you the idea? Or how did you get the idea? Oh, my other uncle, the undertaker. He was a Shriner. So he said... Oh, he was an undertaker? And he said, Uncle Harry, he said, why don't you join the Job's Daughters? And my uncle that had taken me from Sweden said, no, I don't want her joining any Job's Daughters. So I never got to do that one. But I had a good time anyway. I didn't date, however, until I was in training. So what did they say now, by dating? Here comes a girl from Sweden. Yeah. Worried, of course. Yes, but you know... So you didn't bring home Italians and Polish? No. No, I didn't. What did they say about that? Oh, they didn't mind. Well, I'm sure they wouldn't mind if you came home with a date. I suppose so, or a black or something, I would imagine. But there was no... Not in those days. No. No. But I don't even remember that I even had any friend that wasn't a Swede or a Dane or Norwegian. So they were centered around the Church? Right. Oh, our whole life was centered around Church. We talk about that so much now because things have changed so, you know. So you didn't go to any dances then? No, I really did not start to go to dances until I met Ted. And then we would go with all our friends, our couple friends, you know. And then I learned... and he taught me how to dance, I think, because I did not go before that. No? No, because you were too young when you went to... Yeah, and then I went to nurses training, you see, and... My undertaker aunt and uncle had a summer home in Minnesota, in Glenwood, Minnesota. So every summer I would go up there with them and then I would help her with parties and work like a maid, really, you know. So she paid me that last summer, she paid me so much a week. And that was the money that I used to go into nurses training. And it was only $40 for three years to get into here for nurses training at that time. Three years? Uh-huh. And then when I came back, Sister Olive called the house and said, Ina, we have raised your entrance fee to $90, and of course I almost died. And my Aunt Anne Loff went up here and paid the other $50 for me. So then Sister Olive called and said, everything has been... is cleared, you can come to nurses training. Who gave you the idea to be going to nurses training? Well, my aunts, but both my aunts were nurses here. They were also RNs. So when they came over to this country and they came to Bertrand, and they stayed there until they were old enough to go into nurses training. And they went to Nicholas N. Hospital nurses training, and that is no longer. So they worked every day then, when you were here? No, so then, yes, but no, neither one of them were nursing. They were both married, and in those days, you know, nobody... no. You were not supposed to be married then if you were a nurse. Well, no, but nobody in those days would work after they got married. What was the reason for that, do you think? Was it advising? I think so. I think so. So teachers, they had to quit. Right, everybody. There was no written law, though. Oh, no, oh, no. It was just a... I think that everybody felt that if the husband couldn't support them too bad, you know, because... and that came out even with our... with Ted and I, when he graduated from law school, became an attorney, and he said to me, if you want to work, Ina, that's up to you. Out of all of our friends, I was the only woman that was working, and I worked all my life, all the way through everything, three days a week, because I loved my nursing. And I didn't care, and he didn't care. He was very open about everything, but he was the only one I know of that... Even of our friends, some of our older friends today, some of those women have never worked, because that was the way it was in those days. But neither Aunt Cyndi or Aunt Deanne worked, after I came to this country, anyway. And... Did you start to work before you went into nurses' training? Well, no, not doing anything. Did you take any housework? No, no, I just worked for either one of my aunts. Did they tell you to do that, or...? Well, they just told me, yeah, that was my living. Yeah, but I mean, when you came now, and you got to 17, 18, did they tell you to take housework? No, no, no, no, no. You would refuse to do that? No. Well, I was never told to, you see. I worked at my aunt's. I just did the stuff for my aunts, and that's it. But they were not paid, though. Well, see, I never got paid for my... When I worked for Aunt Hilma, and I lived there until I graduated from Benson High School, but I helped her babysit her little kid, and Grandma was crippled at the time, Grandma Loff. And so all I did was just stayed there, lived there, got my... It was so funny, because when I went into nurses' training, when I went into nurses' training, I had nothing, and I mean nothing. So they said, you'd have to have so many slips and so much underwear and what have you. And my one aunt made the slips for me, and my other one bought me some underwear. They had a little party for me. And then each week, somebody would give me... You were always short of a cash stone? Oh, yeah, always. All the way through. Didn't that bother you a little bit? No, sir. No, sir. It never bothered me. You know, when they talk about things today, of our people, young people or somebody having such a terrible background that it is showing up of the way they are today, I can't understand that, because who could have been more shoved around? You know what I mean? Never had really the basics or whatever, and it never seemed to bother me, because I had everything I needed. And then, for instance, when I graduated from nurses' training, they had a formal dinner. And of course, I didn't have any clothes. I didn't have any formal. So my one uncle, Alof, who was not really my uncle, but I called him that. They were so nice to me. Gave me $15. And at that time, that's a lot of money. And I remember going downtown and buying this formal for $15. So it seemed like always things happened, came up. So I was okay, you know. But then when... Have we got this on here? When I worked then to put Ted through law school, I got a letter from my sister, Ingeallid, in Gothenburg. Her husband was a, and is, I understand, a glassblower. Well, coming to Omaha and be a glassblower, forget it, you know. So your sister wrote to you then? Uh-huh, and wanted to come over here. She wanted... The feeling of that time, I imagine, and I think it still is, that they think that we have a lot of money. And she wanted to come over here with her husband and two children, two boys. Her name is... Ingeallid. Ingeallid. Uh-huh, and you know that I don't even remember what her last name now is. I'll tell you why. So I wrote and said, we can't do Ingeallid, you know. I'm putting Ted through law school, and we're living in a three-room apartment right across from the Creighton University here. And I said, we don't have room, and we can't afford it. We could hardly afford to live the way we were, you know. And she wrote back a nasty letter, and she has not written to me since. And that was in 1945, 46. But right after the war, because Ted went to war. And you never met Ile? No. So when we were over there, we didn't even go to Göteborg. I felt kind of funny about it. And it's a funny thing, too, because she had a chance to write me, or do something if she wanted to get reacquainted, you know. But because one of my distant cousins here, I got a lot of relatives here from the Mead and Wahoo and what have you. And one of them, he's a schoolteacher at Omaha University, went to Göteborg and called them. And not a word was said about where, how could I get a hold of Ina or anything. So forget it. Isn't that goofy? Yeah. I don't care. But she would refuse to understand your predicament. Oh, yeah, that's right. But probably did not believe me when I said it, you know. It's just that I didn't want to bother, probably, see. And that's too bad, you know, because except, like Ted, my husband, said, where could we get him a job here? He could not live in Omaha as a glassblower. We would have to do everything, you know, and get him readjusted and, you know. So you would think, though, after so many years, that it would calm down a little bit. Yeah. But you never written to her either. You don't have her address, I suppose. Yes, I do have her address because I gave it to her. And what happened in the meantime, she would write to my aunts, my two aunts, until they died. And then when they died, I got some of the mail. And so I did have her address, and I have it home someplace. Was she younger than you? Uh-huh, uh-huh. She was born, she was two years, oh, no. She was only one or two years old when I left Sweden or Norway, you know. So she was just a baby. But at least she knew that there I was, you know. But, you know, when Mama and Papa died. What year did they die? Now, you see, when Mama and Papa died, Mama died first, and then Papa died. He was 80-some years old. He died of old age, I guess. But then my two aunts were still alive. So when they died, I got the message that Papa died. And Papa would write to me all the time. Was it after the war? Uh-huh. No, it was before the war. Did you correspond with them often? Oh, yes, with Papa I did. Oh, yes. And Mama, too. Uh-huh. They would write to me. But there was never any. And, of course, we see at that time we could never afford to go over there. How I would have loved to go back at that time, you know. But there was no way. We didn't have any money. And your sister, you never corresponded with her? Never. I did up until that time. Because she would write to me and say... I still have the letters. She would write to me and say, If you have any clothes that you don't need anymore, would you send them to me? Maybe they would fit me, and stuff like that. Because I'm sure that they felt that I had everything, you see, in those days where they didn't. And we were not... Because I don't know what she... We had a nice home. We had a nice everything. It was so funny because we moved into... When Papa found out that my mother was pregnant with Inga Lil, then he said, Well, let's move. And we moved into a real nice apartment in Kostal. And I remember they had an outside veranda porch. I used to go out and sit and play when I was little. So when we got off, we went to the hotel now, last year. That's the first thing we did. We walked down the street and the building was gone. It was gone. And they had put some other big thing there. And I never saw... That's what I couldn't see. But Grandpa's house was still there on the Hamsgatan or whatever it's called. And some of the other buildings. But that building was gone in the middle of town. But you never felt the urge then to seek out your sister? No, not after she wrote and said she didn't want anything to do with us anymore because she felt that I was lying. Did you get the feeling through her letters that she was in dire need of help? Oh, no. Oh, absolutely not. I think that she just wanted some nicer things. Your overflow of wealth. Yes. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Yeah. And we didn't have anything, my goodness, you know. So this... You went to the nurse's training there at Emmanuel. And was that during the Depression? Yes. Uh-huh. I came here in... How did that affect your uncle, for instance? He was a big... Yeah, a contractor. Not really. There were still some... enough because they still lived in their house until they died, you know, in that lovely home over there. Did they complain about the hard times? No. I remember going to the grocery store with them and buying practically a whole trunk. He had a car. Not everybody had a car. He had an old Essex at that time. And I remember going to... buying groceries, and she had just piles of groceries for $5, I remember, at that time. That was in 1928, 29, and 30, you see, and then 31. When I went into nurse's training, I went to nurse's training in 36. Oh, 36. Uh-huh. So you were in their home then during the Depression. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. You never dared to ask for a few dollars to go downtown? No, sir. Was it about your address or something? No. Well, my aunt... we laugh to laugh when I think about it now. My aunt would take me down to Penny's downtown, and she would look in the basement for me. It was during the Depression now, for shoes, and I would get them for a dollar. But they wouldn't quite fit me. So to this day, of course, I have bunions on both my feet, but they never bothered me or anything. But I remember so plain how, even in nurse's training, I wouldn't have any money, so I could never go anywhere. But somebody would call and say, one of my aunts would call and say, if you walk over here, I will give you some money. And one of my friends and I would walk over to my one aunt's house, and she would give me like a quarter or fifty cents. The interview continues on the next site. Next site. This is cassette two, this is a continuation with Dinah Beckstrom, Omar, Nebraska. Sight two. Yeah, but to have that kind of a background, I'm always being shoved around from house to house to house, from my aunt to my aunt to my aunt. That is what I want, because you were very active in your mind to move on. Oh, yeah, and I had a good time always. Did you feel that you were put down on by them? By them? No, can you imagine? I can't ever remember. So you felt the closeness to them? Oh, my, yes. And at Christmas time, you know, they just showered me with presents, you know, like... Did you call them mom and dad? No, aunt and uncle. I never called them mom and dad. The mom and papa were over there, and they, it was aunt and uncle. Did they introduce you to their friends as your daughter? Oh, no, never, no. And then when they died, even, you see, I never got anything out of their estate or anything. The only way... Not at all? No, because I was not mentioned. And... Why? You've got me. I don't know. But before they died, my aunt and uncle gave me many things. So I have many things brought down from that family down. And then when my other aunt and uncle died, she made a will. And you see what happened there is my aunt, Singley, the wife of the undertaker, took care of auntie Anne when she died. Uncle Al died first, and her estate, so to speak. So then when that estate was settled, there was so much money left. But if you can imagine this in the olden days now, instead of some of that money given to me, they sent some of the money to papa in Sweden. In Sweden? Yes. So he got some of that estate from auntie Anne. Because they had no children. They had no children, but I was not legally adopted. And evidently, I don't know... They didn't have a will written then? No, evidently not. See, I can't... The lawyers took care of it, and you were a company outside. Right. I was out. So then my aunt, Singley, also got some of that money from the loss. I never will forget that. That was probably the only time I was hurt. But didn't you feel left out? No. No, really not. Because, do you know, things have never mattered to me. All my life, I have always gotten a bicycle. I've always had everything that I needed, or whatever you call it. And I never cared, evidently. Because then when auntie Anne died, and auntie Anne's estate was divided, and auntie Singley got part of it, and my dad got part of it in Sweden. So the money that she got, I never will forget. She called me. I went to her house. She was old then, of course, but I mean, in her 70s, like me. And she said, with the money that I got from auntie Anne's will, or auntie Anne's money estate, I'm going to take my grandchild to Sweden. I almost died. I was so hurt. That was probably the only time I was really hurt. Because why didn't she say, I'll take you? I was, at this time, I was in nurses training, or out of nurses training. I was nursing. And she could have taken me, but she took her grandchild instead. No, she was going to take her grandchild. And if you, I always have a lot of faith. I always felt that the good Lord looked down on me, or something. Because she, in the meantime, if you can imagine, got cancer. So she got kind of sick. And the daughter that she was going to take, this was a terrible thing, that she was going to take to Sweden, the granddaughter, got meningitis. And she was nine years old. And so none of them went. And the money went, it was never used for what it was supposed to be used for. If all I can remember is that really the only time I was really hurt by something. Otherwise, I don't care. I had a good time. That's probably the best attitude, because there's nothing you can do about it. Oh, right. I remember going, all my relatives had a lot of money here. So I never, it was always, I got things, I even got a fur coat, one of those lambskin coats when I was in nurses training, to keep me warm, because it got so cold all the time. So I got everything. But there's always the little cent, you know, you can spend yourself on what you want. I know it. I never had any. You never had that? I never had any, except that now and then Uncle Al and Aunt Anne would come up to the hospital here, and they would maybe give me a dollar. But if you realize a dollar today is like ten cents. Then it was a lot of money. I could go to a movie a couple of times, and I was very frugal, you know. But I worked a lot, you see. In those days, we worked, we took care of the patients. They had no, very few RNs, no LPNs at that time. The students did all the work. So I would work like a month of nights, a month of days, a month of 3 to 11. So you really don't have much time to be goofing off, you know, running around and everything. And then when I met Ted, when I was in... When did you meet him? Well, I went to our church, you know, the Emanuel Lutheran Church. But Ted went to Zion. That's okay. Ted went to Zion. But through Luther League, you know, I met him. And then when he, his father, worked up at Emanuel as the head of the... He was the only one, in fact, of the maintenance. Well, painting and all that type of stuff. So during his college days, he would come up to Emanuel and work during the summer to earn a little money. And so I saw him a lot. And so that's how we started going out. I remember when we used to have dates. He loved sweets. To this day, we've been married 46 years. He loves sweets. And he would take me out on a date. We would go to a movie for 10 cents or 15 cents at that time. Did he have money then? No. He would work for his father. So that's how he got the money then. But he didn't have... And of course, all his money went for college, you see, to go through... Did he go to college here in... No, he went to... down in Missouri. Can't even remember the name of it right now. And then... That was up until we met. And then he decided, after we met, that he would come to Omaha then and stay so he wouldn't leave me. And we went together from then on. And that was when I was in the last year of nurses training. So that was in 1938. So what did your aunt and uncle say when you brought him home the first time? Oh, they didn't like him. They didn't want me to get associated with... because they wanted me to move home. So when I was through nurses training in 1939, Auntie Anne wanted me to move home to her house with them. Why I was... They would rather see you at home than marry you. Oh, yeah. They didn't want me to marry him. And, of course, you see, he was going to be a lawyer. He was not anything wonderful at that time. He came from working people. But, I mean, they were very well fixed, let's put it that way. But I couldn't... You see, I never cared about any of that. So, I don't know. He was a precious man, and he still is, a darling. But we would go for a date. Then there was a drugstore by our hospital, Kenwood Drug. And we would stop there, and he would have a soda for 15 cents, and I would have a bowl of cream of mushroom soup. Because that appealed to me. So there I... for 10 cents I would get a bowl of mushroom soup, and he would have his soda. But, you know, it didn't cost much, except we didn't make much either. When I graduated from nurses training, there was no job at Emanuel. I wanted to stay here at Emanuel. Because I loved bedside nursing. You mean there was no open air? No. For an RN. Why? Oh, they had all students, you see, and just a few RNs. Cheaper than. Cheaper than. And, so there were no... So I worked for a year doing private duty. And they sent me, you wouldn't believe... To private homes? Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And to other towns. And that was the outbreak of polio here. So I did a lot of polio work. I was sent to Grand Island and took care of a lady for a long time in an iron lung. And in the meantime, then, Ted was going to school, of course. He would come and see me. That was before the war, at 39? Uh-huh. 39. Uh-huh. So there was a big outbreak of polio then? Of polio then. Because I went... and I went many places to take care of patients in the iron lung. Uh-huh. And they didn't take them in then to the hospital, rather than have them in the... No. I went to the hospital in Grand Island. I did private duty. And then while I was there, the lady requested that her... that we would move her to her house. They had a great big lovely home in Grand Island. Well, they would have had to to have a private nurse all the way around, you know. And we moved her in the iron lung to that house in Grand Island, I remember, in 1930. That was in 1940. Because I didn't... we did not get married until 1941. Because I wanted a year to have fun and have some spending money. So that was the first time you had money on your own then? Right. And you know, all I made was $60 a month. $60. But do you know that paid for... for... well, phone was $5 at the time. The rent in that apartment we rented in Omaha with two or three other girls just cost hardly... it was $25 a month. What did you do then with the money? How did you disburse it? The first thing I bought was a fur coat, if you can imagine. I went down to Nadelson's, I think it was, and put money down on a real fur coat. And I paid every month like two or three dollars. Oh, yes. Yes, yes. Why did you buy... was there funking or stoners? It was cold. I was cold. I'm a very cold person. And everything... we went on the streetcar, you see, for everything. We didn't have a car. So everything was on a streetcar. And I just wanted to be warm. That was the only thing I can remember that I even ever cared for. So then the war broke out. Did your husband be drafted then? Yes. While he didn't want to be drafted, he went and signed up with the Air Corps. And he left me on... was it February? And we'd been married two and a half years at the time. See, we were married in... he left in 43. In January or February of 43, I think it was. And we'd been married about two years by then, you see. So you were married in... Zion Church. And had your parents then, or your... Aunts, my aunts. Yes, they were all there. We couldn't afford... You sweetened up a little bit then, so they acknowledged his presence? Oh yeah, oh yeah. Well, really, not really. And my senior uncle Harry just loved him. But Auntie Anne never really took to him. And I don't understand why she didn't, but that I didn't care. That didn't bother me any, because I didn't have much to do at that time. But this week, what a little bit withdrawn, like a pool of... I think so. I think so. Why is that? How can they go on so many months and years without... I don't know....holding up? I don't know. How did your husband feel about it? He didn't care. I have a precious man. He could care less about anything. So, okay, they didn't like him. And he was a very Christian. He still is. We went to church. We've gone to church all our life. Our children were raised, you know, in church. And we still have very... I work a lot in my church still. And I think the thinking back, you get that from when you were young. I really... Because they would drag me to church, a junior mission band, and I started singing in a choir. I sang in a choir for 25 years when I finally decided to quit and sit with my husband instead of always going up to the choir a lot, you know. But... So, you were married then, and you rented an apartment. Yes. He was still going to... Law school. Pre-law at that time. And then, of course, he got admitted. Then, okay, it was all the pre-law until he went to war. And you had to pay for... Schooling....tuition and... Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. And he worked part-time in the evenings, and any job he could get, he would... It was not enough, so... Oh, no. Oh, no. No, no. No, no. And it's so cute how he will talk about it now. There has never been any talking in our house about money. From the day he started making a lot of money, it was all given to me. He never took care of the bills. He never took care of money. So the check went into the bank, and I took care of everything. To this day, he never says, what are you going to buy? What are you going to do? Because now and then, he will tell the children, Mama can have whatever she wants, because there were days when she had nothing. This was true. But we had a wonderful time. I never cared. So you never came into this, you know, a person that never had anything. I mean, they usually go wild. No. You never did that? No. You were still restricted. Always. And we still are that way. But you were not able to save anything on your first income, though. Oh, no. Sixty dollars a month. No, because when we first had Teddy, then Teddy was born... Are you married? Yes. And we laughed because... I know I'm going to be on that. We laughed because I tried and tried to have a baby, you know, and I was working, of course, and I knew I shouldn't have had one, because I had to work, but all we wanted was a baby so badly. And finally, and I think it must have happened the night before he went to the army, because I got pregnant and I had Teddy, my oldest daughter, Andrea Jean, in October on my birthday. So, and of course, he was in the service, and he wasn't here when I had that baby, but he came home long enough to hold her when she was baptized. And then he went back, and then he called me, and I was nursing her at the time, and he called me from someplace in the east, and he was with the Air Corps, and said, 6 o'clock in the morning, I said, I'm leaving you, this country, and going to Manila in the Philippines. And of course, I did nothing but cry, and that was the end of my nursing the baby that dried up, and I never could have it. She couldn't nurse anymore. But do you know, while he was in flight training, down in Texas, Houston, Texas, I was pregnant, and he called one day and said, why don't you come down here? I was working all this time now, getting, already getting better. Who took care of your baby then? Oh, no, I didn't have her yet. So that was before? This was before. So he came down, and I said, okay, I'll come down to Houston. So I came down to Houston, and stayed in one room, because everything, you know, there were so many people. Did you see that big fire? And I stayed there for three months, and then he had to leave and go to California. I can't remember. They sent him someplace else for more training, and then I came home. In the meantime, my one aunt died. No, she was sick. She didn't feel good. And then my other aunt, I wrote her and I said, could I come and stay with you when I come back from Houston? I was pregnant, but I will go back to work, because I was going to work, you know, and I love my nursing. I worked until... And she wrote back and said, I never will forget this, but I don't care. She wrote back and said, no, I don't want, I'd love to have you come, but I don't want a baby in the house. So that was that. And then I thought, well, what in the heck will I do? Then, you won't believe this, I had the most darling aunt that was a sister of Uncle Al Loff, who is no relation to me now, Al and Torreson. Anna wrote to me and said, Ina, we have an extra bedroom. We would love to have you come and live with us. Now, they were no relation, no nothing, Anna and Oscar Torreson. And they had four children, and they were all gone. And I went there, and I worked out of their house at the Emanuel, took the bus every day. And then you lost your baby then. No, and then I had the baby in October. And then I stayed home. And I stayed with Debbie, with Teddy then, because I didn't want her to, she didn't have a papa, you see, she just had me. So I stayed with Aunt Anna until the end of the war. And then, when Ted came home, then we moved into an apartment. How were you able to survive though? I mean, you couldn't work then. Oh, no. So much came from the government each month. Seventy-five dollars a month, I think I got at that time, which took care of me fine. I paid like twenty-five dollars to Aunt Anne, and whatever, you know, I needed. Did you visit your uncle, Harry, you know, or your... Oh, yeah. Oh, yes. I would see them all the time. And what was so funny about that, after that baby came, darling little girl, you know, how that Aunt Cynthia asked me a thousand times, don't you want to move over here now, and be with me? And I said no. So you felt it was only temporary. Oh, yeah. And I also figured you didn't want me then, why should I come now? And, you see, she was the only baby in that whole family, and there were seven of those aunts and uncles at that time in the law family, because none of the children were old enough to get married and have children. So they all went nuts over that little Teddy, you know, and doted on her, which was very nice. But, no, I stayed with the Taurasans and appreciated it all my life, because when they both got sick, I did a lot for them and went over and took care of them and bathed my aunt every week of her life for eleven years, because I appreciated so much she had done for me. No. So then after the war, your husband came back. He came back, and we rented a cute apartment full of mice and you name it. But we loved it. We had a good time. I know, we'll forget we were sitting in the reed and there was a mouse coming across. But your uncle, now, he was a contractor. Yes. Couldn't he arrange a building for you of pretty good shape? I never, no. You never asked him? I never asked him. And I, and it just, I... Were you too proud to ask him? I think so. Or shy? Yeah. No, shy. Ha ha ha. Never shy. Ha ha ha. It's too proud, I think. But then he died. He died before my aunt, you see. And... No? And of course, I don't know... You were not as close then to your aunt as to your... Oh. No, I just never, no. Really not. After I married Ted and had our own life, I never paid much attention. We did go with them, though. Like on hunting trips, Uncle Harry would ask Ted because they were, Aunt Cina and Uncle Harry were very close to us. But Aunt Anne, and Uncle Al died and Aunt Anne, no. Then Aunt Anne got sick and she was put in, finally, how old was she about, when she finally was put into a home. And so I never paid much attention. I was always too busy, you see. I was working all the time and then I went to work when we got married then, you see. And then when I had Teddy and Ted came back, I went to work, and I worked 3 to 11, or nights, to make money so that to pay for his schooling. And then he took care of the baby. And when I went, 3 to 11. And then when he graduated, finally, I mean, and then when he graduated from pre-law, then he went to Creighton. And then in 1948, he graduated from Creighton. But I still worked my time. I would take Teddy to school in the morning at 9 o'clock, 8 o'clock, and then I would take the bus up to the Emanuel, and I would work until 2.30. So they were so kind to me, you know, and let me do whatever I wanted to at that time. And then you had your second daughter. Yeah, and then I got pregnant and had two boys in between time. Two boys. Two boys, but they both died at birth. I bled on hemorrhage and hemorrhage. And we wanted some more children so badly. And Ted, at this time, was working and going to a law firm and everything, but he didn't like it very well. So then he quit that and went to be the lawyer for a company, and that was very well. He was with them for 18 years and loved it. Then they wanted to send us to New York. And Ted said, no, forget it, we don't want to. So he went into another, to the government here, and became the, what did they call them, lawyer in charge of... Of city government? Yeah, no, the national government. Oh, I see. In the Corps of Engineers. He became their lawyer, and that's where he retired from. But in the meantime, you see, then we had the two boys, and we still didn't make a lot of money at the time. But we wanted another baby so bad. So then I finally got pregnant again with Debbie, and when it was a month before she was due, I said to the doctors, because I have a lot of guts, as you notice, as you realize, I said to him, I want you to take this baby a month early because I don't want to have hemorrhage and I don't want to lose this baby. So they did. They took the cesarean section, and I had Debbie a month early, and I am so grateful we have her. And by this time, Ted was doing well, and we bought our first house, and then we bought our second house and our third house, and after our third house, Ted was sick of it. We lived there 16 years, put our kids through high school and grade school, high school, and the oldest one was going into college, and we bought her a car, and she wanted to be a schoolteacher. And we sent her to college, and then Ted says, I've had it with all of this, keeping up a house, mowing the lawn, all this. Let's move into a duplex. And that was when we sent Debbie to nurses training and college up in Minnesota in Gustavus Adolphus. Is that Gustavus Adolphus? Beautiful college. We sent her up there, and then she got a college there and her nurses training in Bethesda in St. Paul. So we have deep roots up there. And they are both married now? Oh, yes. Debbie is an RN. Debbie is a nurse, the young one. And our oldest one went through college and has got her master's in teaching. She's teaching the gifted. She's married, was divorced the first time, married for five years, married a young man who drank too much. And Teddy was raised with us where there was not much drinking, no nothing, anything, and she couldn't take it, so she left him. And then she met a darling young man, Catholic. She turned Catholic for him and got two boys, 14 and 11, the two boys. And Teddy in Minneapolis married, and he is the vice president of a bank here in Omaha. That's Teddy's husband. And Debbie married a civil engineer, and he and two brothers own an excavating company. And he decided eight years ago that he wanted to be a farmer on the side, so they bought a farm, and they farmed 400 acres, and they're working themselves to death. He's only 36 now, and they finally decided they can't take it anymore. He can't work full time and farm also, raising all these animals and everything. So... Is that close to Omaha? No, in Minneapolis. They live in Minneapolis, 30 miles out of Minneapolis in a little town called Greenfield, Minnesota. And they have two boys. So we go up there every other month, and we babysit when they all want to take trips, when they want to... Europe, last year, we went up there and babysat for a week, and Teddy and Pat go to Maui, and we go and babysit for them. It's a lot of fun. And we retired, finally. When they brought home their first dates, did you interfere with their thinking and philosophy? No. No, isn't that terrible? We laugh about it. Terrible. We laugh about it now, because now, when my grandchildren... I go nuts with them, you see, because my oldest grandchild, he was called constantly, such a darling boy, and I just don't like it, you know. And then Teddy will say to me... I nicknamed her Teddy because I was afraid Ted wasn't coming back home. So I would... She said, Mama, why are you worrying about them? You never worried about us. You see, I was working all the time, and even then, you see, I worked three days a week, regardless. And when they were going to school and college and high school, everything I worked. And I figured that was good spending money for us, you see, regardless, because I could buy different things for the kids, you know, how they want all these things and what have you. And I remember Teddy had those dates, and he would bring her home. She was in high school at the time. Cute little thing. And they would sit in the driveway. And finally, I couldn't take it any longer, so I would go and go... on the light switch, and she still talks about how terrible I was, but that would mean to her that she better come in. I couldn't take it any longer. They were sitting out there. But they had real nice boys, and I don't know. We were very blessed, I think, also, because I have a very precious husband who is very... While the kids had such respect for him, I will put it that way, that they would never have done anything to hurt him. Whether they would have hurt me, I don't know, because we have a wonderful relationship, but it never was that way. They would always say, I will never want to hurt anybody, hurt you. So they never did anything that was wrong, so to speak. Now, neither one of them smoked. Well, Teddy tried it, she told me, but I never knew it. I probably would have killed her. And I used to spank them and spank them. Just think how we used to spank the kids in those days. And now they say, go to your room. I would never say that. I would say, go and get the switch. I'll get you, Teddy. And it didn't hurt them. I was never switched, however. I can't ever remember. But did you ever get the feeling that... There are many cases like this, an aunt went back to Sweden to pick up one of the... when there was a large family. Yes. And they were to take the burden off their sisters and brothers in Sweden. But don't you think there was the feeling that you were going to be a help rather than a child to them? Probably. To help them out in old age. Could be, yes. Because in your case, it's much like... they didn't want you to get married or get close to anybody. Oh, right. My aunt, certainly she wanted me to come home. She wanted you to take care of her. Oh, right. It was your duty to do that. Oh, right. And they would never understand that you would like to have your life for yourself. No, no. In those days, everybody did that. Just think how they... They wanted to go back. Yeah, that I would take care of her. But, you know, then Ted's mother and father died, and then there was the mother, but he had a sister. So the mother moved over home with the sister, which was a blessing, if you would call it that. But she helped them a lot. But I don't know. Ted and I, it seemed like we were independent, if you want to call it that. You were lucky that you found a guy. Right. Compatible. Oh, yes. Darling man. Uh-huh. Would have been different, you think, if you had met an Irish boy. Oh, my. Italian, different religion. I can never remember. I don't think I ever dated anyone that wasn't Swedish. And why that was purely accidental. But, you know, there were a lot of people that came over at that time. See, that one man is dead now. That was the nephew of Carl Anderson here in Omaha. Now Gunnar would remember them. And Arvid. And he finally got married. And Arvid they sent for his brother. What the heck was his name? And then I used to date him. But I'm real glad now that I never, you know, that I just married Ted. I'm just glad that we found each other because it turned out to be really neat for me and him. How about your daughter now? She's changed her religion. Yes. Very happy being a Catholic. And the children both are altar boys and very active in the St. Venceslaus Church here. Do you visit the church? Oh, we go there a lot. Yes, so whenever the boys, I know it, isn't that something? Whenever the boys do something or appear, we will go to Mass with them. And do you know, we've been going to church so long, so I know everything, of course, about the church. We say, we think we do. But they and we are almost the same anymore. You mean the Lutheran church? And the Catholic church. They sing now, you know, where they never used to. We went to a Catholic prayer something there not very long ago. And do you know, it used to be that they end in the middle of the Lord's Prayer. Now my daughter would go like this, don't say anything, you know. You didn't finish? No, they never used to finish the Lord's Prayer. Why? For the Kingdom and the power and glory. I don't know, they used to quit. So she would go like this, so I wouldn't be the only one in the whole church going for the Kingdom and the power and glory. Now they say it. We went to a meeting.