 Down at the railroad station in Moline, when the two young ladies from Sweden got off, but they were there, my father and his friend were there to meet the two ladies from down in Blekinge area of Sweden. So as the two young ladies from Blekinge greeted my father and the friend that were at the railroad station then, my mother and my aunt got off the same train, they were coming here, and they had talked en route. At first they'd seen one another three or four places, but they hadn't gotten to talking. They came in the same ship, but they got to talking finally, and then they introduced these ladies from Småland to the rest of the, to my father, to my father and his friend, and that's how they got acquainted, and then I don't know, because they all came to Moline, they gradually saw one another again, but they came from Blekinge and Småland and didn't have any idea that they were going to be seen. You didn't want to see each other, yeah? No. Yeah, I'm sitting together with Margaret Swanson and Carl Swanson in Moline, Illinois, and we have April 24th, 1986. So that's how they met then, your parents, but your father, he came apparently earlier than the... Yes, I wish I remembered that, but I don't know what year he came. They never mention anything about the reason he came over. Oh, sure. He came over to avoid the Army, conscription in the Army. So he was 19 when he came in and all of that, and then my uncle had been here before. Well, my, yeah, Uncle Olav. And then they talked to him about coming over here and work with John Deere, so then that's how that came about. So John Deere was known early in Sweden, then? Oh, sure. It was the password. That's right. It brought them over. They just put a label on their shirt, John Deere, Moline, Illinois, and that's where they dumped them off down here in Moline. My father was seven, our father was seven years older at least. What year was he born? Well, I was looking for those passports and I didn't find them. So he came then and... Seventy, seventy-two, no. Did he board an airplane with somebody or... Yes, yeah. I was... Boarding house down here. I was asking somebody about that the other day. It was this, what was her name, Swanson. She was Swanson too. Oh, I've forgotten her name. Well anyway, she had a boarding house for these Swedish men. It was someplace, because I was asking where it was, between 13th and 14th Street. No, it was on 5th Avenue. Was it on 5th Avenue? Oh, that's what I think, 5th Avenue. She had these meals for these Swedish men and that's how they got acquainted. So... But they didn't stay there overnight though. She didn't have a full board for them or... I really don't know about that, whether she had rooms for some of them at one time or not. Emily, Emily Swanson was her name. But that was no connection with this Swanson. But they have relatives. She was here, Moliner. Was your father the only one that came over from that family? No. No, no. All of his sisters and brothers, but one sister. Oh, I see. So they came even before... Oh, that's probably came before. This Uncle Ola, who was a homesteader in Minnesota, got his land. Alpha? Alpha. A-L-P-H-A. So he was here in Moline, was married, and had at least... There was one child died here in Moline. They had a couple of children here. And then he must have decided that was better... Well, for homesteading. Better to go to Minnesota. But your father was not interested in seeking a land off to Minnesota. In the farming. No. No? Well, I think it was because he got that job with Mr. Bongren, don't you? Could be. My father, there was a Mr. Bongren here in Moline? I don't know. What was his first name? The older man. Oh, I can't tell you. His son had a jewelry store right here next door to this store, actually. Bongren? Bongren, B-O-N-G. His brother was for the Svenska Amerikana in Chicago. Do you know anything about that? I don't know about that brother. But this Mr. Bongren was a photographer. So my father was working as a photographer. I don't know whatever he got. I think he just learned from the beginning. I don't think he had any experience in Sweden on that. So he quit Deere then? Well, he hadn't worked at Deere then. I don't think so. He worked at Deere and come in later. I think he worked at Deere at the very beginning, I think. And then he only took pictures, you know, for like in the churches. And he had a camera on a pedestal. And he had a... We had an attic full of all kinds of equipment. And he had a dark hood over there. Yeah. And he always developed his own pictures in the dark. So you remember that? Oh, sure. Well... In our basement. We had all that stuff at the house. Equipment, sure. But he wasn't taking pictures much. Not commercially. Well, we remember. So this Bongren, he had a family portrait store then in... I think he had it. But you don't remember Bongren? They all remember him by sight and talking to him. He was quite... He was a little bit of an artist too. He made pictures, you know. Oh, I see. And his store was on the 4th, 5th Avenue? Well, it could be down in here. I don't know just where. But Gunnar Bongren, his son, had a jewelry store right next door. Here on the 7th, 6th Avenue. But he's dead. He's dead now. So the whole family is gone then? Not much, yeah. Well, he had a daughter someplace away from here, but... I don't know. So there where your father started then. Yeah, I kind of learned. And there where he made his living on then. Well, he wasn't married at that time. He was single. Yeah, but he developed pictures, you said, after you remember. Yeah. So he continued with the photography. Well, on a hobby basis. On about a hobby basis. So while he was married then, what kind of work did he do? Then he worked at Deere and Company. Deere? Yeah. Then he went to the Rock Island Arsenal. And he was on the Rock Island Arsenal prior to like 1917. Then we went out to Eddystone, out near Philadelphia. Pennsylvania. And he worked at the Remington Arms, making parts to the guns, you know. Oh, I see. During World War I. World War I. So one family had to transfer out there? We all went. We all went out there? Yeah, I was born in 1941 and my mother took us. Oh, so you were in the, how old? Five, six, seven years of age? No, I started school out there. So you weren't even in it. Carl's two years younger than I am, so he hadn't started school then. But I started school in Chester. Chester, Pennsylvania. And how long did you stay out there? Well, until after the war. Four years. Oh, I see. We came back in 1919. Four years, I think. So there was his livelihood throughout his life in Rock Island Arsenal? He stayed with them? Primarily. Then when he came back here, then he went with Eagle Signal. Eagle Signal on the traffic light. So he was doing what you call an electrical field, coil winding, that type of thing. I see. So he didn't stay with Arsenal then? No, no. For some reason or other, I don't know what happened there. After he came back here. So you went to school here. You didn't start school out there then? Oh, sure. You didn't? I went up through fourth grade. Fourth grade. In Chester, Pennsylvania. So then when you came back here, you had to finish up your high school. At Moline. I went to school here at Erickson School first, from fifth grade. I was in fifth grade, I guess I skipped a grade out there, whatever it was. Fifth grade through seventh, and then we had the old Central Grammar, one building. All the eighth grades from the whole city came to the one building, Central Grammar School, which was up on the, behind the old high school up here on 16th Street. Well, you went to that Central Grammar School too. Oh, sure, sure. I was two years younger. You lived around this area, or you lived up on the? We lived in the west end. On the west end. Third straight A on the corner. Third straight A and 11th Avenue, on top of the hill. And at that time in high school, did they offer any Swedish classes? Swedish was taught at Moline High School. Was that the teacher, Graham or? Anna Graham, Anna. She was a very good friend of my aunt. Was she an old lady? She used to come to our house. We thought she was. Well, I suppose we thought she was, but she probably wasn't so old at that time, really. She lived in an apartment upstairs right across from First Lutheran Church, you know, right where that promontory is, Mexican place, but it was a beautiful apartment up there. I remember going up there many times as a kid with stacks and stacks of papers to be corrected, all over the tables, you know. She had so much homework to do, but she was a friend of our family, Anna Graham was. She used to come to our house for dinners. So she was only the Swedish teacher? Yes. And the subject? German. German. And Margaret taught at Moline High School. Oh, yes, I know that. I didn't want to come to that, but she was born in Sweden or this Anna was born in Sweden? Anna Graham, I can't remember where, but she was from Sweden. She was a staunch Swede. You had Swedish for her, too? Yeah. Did most of the Swedish kids take Swedish now? It seemed like it. I don't know. I think most of them took it. Was there an easy course for you, for instance? Well, not any easier than anybody else, because I'm... It was the grammar we had to learn. Yeah, but we didn't learn Swedish in the home. But you had no trouble with the pronunciation, though, like the Americans that were born here? No, not at all. Because you had your home and your parents, did they speak Swedish? No. They didn't? They didn't speak Swedish when we were back in Moline. When we first went out to Pennsylvania, I'm sure they talked Swedish, because, well, they talked Swedish when they didn't want us to know what they were saying. Why did they speak Swedish out in Pennsylvania? There were no Swedes around. But did they speak it there in Moline? Well, by that time, they had learned English better, you see, and they were... Between the two of them, I think they must have spoken Swedish. But around us kids, my father didn't want to have any Swedish spoken. He was American. He wanted to learn the traditions and American ways and speaking. My father didn't have a brogue. My mother carried a brogue. What do you mean? In her English? Sure, she had a brogue, a Swedish brogue. So she clung more to the Swedish than she... Well, she didn't have a chance for education. She didn't have... How many children were you in the family now? Three. We were just three. Another brother, what was your sister's name? My sister, he was in an automobile accident out there by the downs. Oh, I see. A Greyhound bus stopped and the light, the sun was shining in his eyes, and he didn't catch that until it was too late when he hit the corner of the bus. He was killed instantly. Was it when he was young or...? Well, they had their children and everything. Well, it was close to his 50th birthday. They were going to celebrate his 50th birthday, weren't they? On the same day, I think. But he had three children. So your mother, she was more... Was she homesick for Sweden sometime, you think? No, they never talked about going back for a visit. No, they couldn't afford to. It was hard times then. In Gipenga. But they never went back. Well, mother went back... In 1933. That was the first time mother went back, when the three of us went back in 1933. It was the height of the Depression, though. How could they afford to go then? Well, no, it was 1935. Because I graduated from all of you in 1933, and I saved enough money. Oh, I know what. Mother went back to Sweden before she got married one time. I think she did. I think so. So she had the sisters and brothers left in Sweden, though, right? Oh, yeah. These two ladies, my aunt and my mother, were the only ones that came over here. Call them girls in those days. They were girls, but ladies. There were 11 children in that family. So when we go now, we have... I was there last summer, and we have cousins galore. No aunts or uncles left, but all cousins that are married, and they have children. So we have lots of people over there. 1935, you went over the whole family then, the three of us. No. Not that. No, he was dead. He died in... 1933. He died in 1932, wasn't it? Well, he would have reached his birthday. Was he in an accident or anything? No, because he died of pneumonia. Oh, I see. He worked on Eagle Signal on 3rd Avenue there, about 19th Street. And they had a new building, and it was drafty. And he was up on the top floor, and he got pneumonia. I made the first trip over with my aunt in 31, and I know I urged my mother and my father, because my father was very sentimental about Blakey, and he could tell us everything about the farm and the treehouse and the trees and all these things. He had a very warm feeling for Sweden. Did he talk more about that later in his life? Well, it would have been when we were grown up, he would tell us about those things. I didn't remember hearing about it when I was very young, but he always talked about those places in Blakey that he remembered. So I thought after my first trip with my aunt that I was going to get them to go. But then he said no. There were hard times. Couldn't plan to go on that trip. So after he died in 35, I determined that my mother would go back. And you talked me into going. Well, I see. So were you able then, first time, 1931, to speak in Swedish when you came over there to meet your cousins and your aunts and uncles were living there at that time? Oh, yes. Lots of aunts and uncles were living at the first trip. Oh, yes. I could talk Swedish. I forgot this a long ago. I could talk Swedish because I studied Swedish at Augustana College, too. So I kept on. Already then, I mean, very early in your life, you were able to converse in Swedish freely? Well, not before I got into studying it. No? Because we didn't use it at home. We didn't use it. It was not used at home. But if somebody come to your home, some Swedes, you understood what they said. We could understand them. But we didn't like it very well. People talking that language, we didn't like that very well. You were young then and they were old. Yeah. So people came over then for parties and coffee and... Oh, a lot of people that knew that they were Swedish would come. We always had company at our house on Sundays. On that front porch, there were always people. Were they a nation or just... No, mostly people that knew that we lived here and there was a connection. They weren't relatives because... Did they come far away or... None of those relatives came up. None of our Swedish relatives came over here until later on. We've had visits from cousins, children and different ones. And so you went to high school and you continued... Augustana College. Augustana College, both of you. And you are brothers too? No. No. Was he older? Two years older than I. I see. We were two years apart. So he went out in the working world immediately and after high school. He graduated in 1926. From Augustana? No, he graduated in 1926 from high school in January. I graduated in June of 1926. In Augustana, I graduated in 1930. And Carl graduated in 1933, didn't you? 1933. From Augustana. So did you have to work then during summer break? Oh, sure. We worked our way through high school and high school. And we also worked during college. I worked at Fisk & Luthry store along the corner a block down here for Saturday, nine in the morning until nine at night for $2.50. A day? Two dollars for that one day. For that one day. And then I'd use that for my sorority dues and that kind of thing that I didn't get any other money for things from home, you know. Excuse me. You had to pay for your tuition, too, and you lived at home, though. Tuition was very inexpensive. $70 one semester and $90 the next. Because of the church, you know, we were members of the Lutheran Church, and there was a discount, and the tuition wasn't high, and we could live and eat at home. Otherwise, we'd never been able to go to college. So you took the streetcar then? No, we walked. Bicycle, right? I walked from 3rd Street to Augustana College. You never used the streetcar? From 3rd Street to Moline High School we walked all the time. Even after I was teaching, I walked from 3rd Street and 11th Avenue, Moline, to John Deere Junior High School up there on 11th Street. Always. And I'm glad we did have to walk because it makes you stronger. It makes you look better in old age, you know. No, but I think it's good for you. People don't believe it. I was a jobbing. That's the way of life in those days. I had a bicycle. We didn't ever have a streetcar ride. There was a streetcar that went up and down 4th Street, I guess, at one time. But we didn't ever. We used to go out on the streetcar out here to the park. But there was nothing connecting East Moline with Rock Island then? Oh, yeah. There's streetcars down there. Streetcars. Streetcars, oh sure. So you had to transfer in if you wanted to go to Rock Island, for instance, or 54th Street, for instance, if you took a streetcar. Could you go on the same ticket then all the way to Rock Island? I think so. I don't know. We didn't use streetcars. You didn't have monthly tickets, you can remember. We didn't use streetcars, no. My father walked to work. We walked down to the church. Who traveled with the streetcars then? Oh, lots of people. Because people talked and used the book, then why did they use the streetcars? That's for the Yankees, I think. I don't know. The Swedes. You know, the buses had trouble today to find passengers. They did the same thing years ago. Oh, my gosh. Oh, dear. So this is a walking city. It sounds like we lived back in ancient history. I hadn't thought about all this. So your mother, she never worked after she got married? No. What kind of work did she have before then? She worked in the family or? When she came here, I don't know whether the Duane family was the first family or not, but I know she worked in the home of. Will Duane? Oh, no, no, no, no. Margaret. Margaret was married to Will Duane later. It's a family that lived right here on 16th Street. The man had a hardware store down here. Quick. Mr. Quick owned a hardware store, and the family lived right up here. My mother was just two or three years older than this younger girl in the family, and, of course, she liked her very much because she could work through my mother and get little favors of one kind or another. In fact, it was such a close relationship, I'm named after that Margaret, the girl in that family. They usually did the years when they found a good friend. She was English? I don't know how long she was in that family, with that family, but she must have just done work around the house because they had this Margaret was just two or three years younger than my mother because my mother was 16 when she came. They had older sisters that were working and so on, so I suppose she did things around the house and whatever. But when she married, there was no more work then? No. It was the custom, more or less, at that time. Oh, sure, sure. The wife should stay home. Take care of the family in the house. Take care of the family. So did they rent in the first years then, or did they buy a house? They didn't buy any house until they came back in 1919, or 19, maybe 1921, maybe. We came back in 1919. 1919. I think then they must have bought this house. About 1920 that house was bought, I think. But otherwise, we were, they must, they rented. Because I was born upstairs of a house on 7th Avenue and 44th Street, Rock Island. And you were born there, too, I guess, for 7th Avenue and 44th Street. Harold was born on 6th Avenue and about 45th, 44th Street, down in that area, right near the church we still go to, St. John's Church. But it was Zion Church then. But they rented then, at that time. Where was Grace located? Just one block from. One block west. It's an old remnant of the building. It was a pretty church, but it's too bad, it looks very bad now. It's been run down. So there was the English church and Zion was the Swedish church. Was the Swedish church. So then you didn't have too far to walk then for Sunday school? No, when we lived down there, is that, well, let me see. Either we were born there, then we didn't even go to Sunday school. We were living on the hill in Rock Island, up on 42nd Street and what avenue? 18th Avenue. 18th Avenue, when we were walking. That's after we returned from Pennsylvania. We lived for a while there. Then they bought this house that we're talking about. 1920 or 21, we must have gone into that house. I suppose. So then you moved to Pennsylvania, so your younger years were not spent here in Moline then? Well, just four years out there. So you didn't play around in this area? How far did you go from home when you played with your playmates, for instance? Did you go downtown? Over to Stevens Park, I imagine. Stevens Park. You mean from this Third Street A house? Yes. Well, Stevens Park and down to Erickson School, and there was a playground around the school. But we stayed on the hill and played in our neighborhood. We had a corner house. And over there where the Bethany Home is, that was our baseball diamond and football. We played our football. And we used to go coasting over on those hills. We coasted. They were real steep hills on them. Did all children from the families around there join together with playing, like the Belgians and the Germans? We had a lot of Belgian people up in that area. There were not many Mexicans then, too. No. They were often Silvester Mexicans. Yeah, yeah, and Silvester. But there was nothing in this area. How about the Belgians? Did you play with them? Oh, sure. Rolly-Bolly and... No. Why didn't the Swedes do that? Well, the Swedes stayed together. They more or less mingled together, and the Belgians mingled together. They had the rolly-bolly clubs, I think. How about baseball, though? Didn't you have Belgians on the baseball team, for instance? Softball. Well, they didn't play baseball? Well, you played with whoever was in the neighborhood, what nationality they were. We didn't think about there being Belgians. There must have been some Germans along there, too, and there weren't... I don't think there were too many Swedes. But rolly-bolly was not played other than by the Belgians. Belgians, and then right across the street from our house, they had a building, and then the Belgians would come there and play rolly-bolly, and then they also had... They'd shoot the arrows, clay birds. Oh, I see. So we'd go over and watch them. Well, it was a big, empty lot there, but did they have a building, though? They had a building, some kind of a red building there, wood building, but they'd shoot these clay birds, see, and these Belgians would... Play bow and arrow? Yeah, sure. But you never taught them? We weren't included in that. Those were Belgian people. They were Belgian people, but we'd go over there and watch them and listen to them talk Belgian among fighting among themselves, you know. We learned a little of those Belgian swear words. Oh, so you picked it up. But your parents wouldn't understand what it was, so you got away with it. Oh, yeah, we got away with that. You tell me how many Belgian words you knew. I didn't know any. But I had very good friends across the street from us. The Corrine family. Mr. Corrine was mayor of Moline at one time, and he was a postmaster of Moline, and we played with all those children. They're not from the Swedish background, are they? No, they're from Belgium. They were both born in Belgium. And their mother talked Belgian in their household. I heard Belgian spoken. How did they differ now from their household? Did you go into their houses at the time? Oh, they had nice houses. Well, the Corrines had one of the nicest houses in Moline. It was just a catty corner from where we lived. We had a corner house here, and they had a corner house up. They had very nice things. Were they eager to be Americans more than Belgians, you think? Did they cling on to the name? No, they were loyal to Belgium because the old uncle sold all the passports to all the Belgians and sold all the tickets to Belgium, so all the Belgians would walk. They walked again all down the street and up to their house, and right up there they got their passports because he had a big thing nailed on the tree that said, you know, Belgium. He was a Belgian consul. He was a Belgian consul. That's the old uncle, Cyril. Mr. Corrine was the father in the family. They had a family of five children. Mr. Corrine worked down in the downtown of Moline, but the old uncle, that was his business, was handling all these Belgian people. I don't know if he spoke much English, did he? I think he always talked Belgian. Do you remember, Carl, the Swedish-American, no, Swedish-Atlantic, when they played soccer? Oh, sure. Did you play any soccer? I didn't play any soccer. I was too young, or I was interested in my baseball team there playing West End ACs. So you weren't in for that? Yeah. Basketball? Well, I played a little bit in college, intramural. I didn't play any varsity. You weren't the athlete, huh? Well, I wasn't. I went out from Moline High School for football. I weighed 119 pounds, and I lasted one season, and after that, after I got hit by those big 180-pounders, I said, that's enough for me. So they were big at that time, too, some of them? Oh, boy, yes, they were plenty big. I took a dive, and I took one coming down the field, and I said, I'm going to get you. Oh, dear. And he hit me right in the pit of my stomach, and I fell flat, and the coach came over to say, Mama, I'm mad at him. So that made the blood pressure rise a little bit. Yeah, boy. You better turn that thing off. Yes, but how would you like a sport like football instead of soccer? I mean, it was more smooth. Soccer wasn't popular in those days. It wasn't? Oh, no. There were very few around here that played soccer, like Magnuson, Gus Magnuson. They came in 1920s, late 20s. Yeah, and see, by that time, we were... Soccer wasn't a game around here for a long, long time. And so then when I went to Augustana, I was working my way through school. They didn't play it there. And they didn't play it there. When I went to Augustana, I was still working my way through school, working in a grocery store. And then our fraternity would play a little basketball. And the Belgian people, they were not interested in soccer either, the ones that came? No, no, not those. They were interested in roly-poly and shooting pigeons. And they also raised pigeons. Oh, yeah. They raised pigeons. Raised pigeons, you betcha. But the Swedes didn't. No, the Swedes didn't. They had chicken coops, though, in the Belgians. We had the chicken coop. Oh, my father would go out and talk to those chickens, just as if they were really listening. They were like pets to him, rather than... He was fascinated by chickens. So you got some eggs there every week that you could go out and pick those and break a few eggs? Sure. Fresh eggs. It's all built up now. So you could have a cow there and... We had a cow. He bought a cow so the children would have milk, plenty of milk. And then I didn't want to drink milk. Why? I didn't like that. Because of the hot, that hot milk or whatever it was. Or milk. Just because... I didn't want the... How about him? Did he... I think the rest of them drank them, but I didn't like it. Yeah. No? So, and your mother made cacao then? Yeah, she could milk cacao. Oh, yeah. And she had to take care of them because your father was working... She probably did most of the work, I think. So she liked all that kind of thing. She lived on a farm in Sweden, and she said as a young girl, she would be the first one up in the morning so she could get to the loom to weave. Or, because she knew later on she would be doing other things. But she did... She was an early bird, and she was very ambitious and liked to get things done. She didn't want to waste her time. No, she got up real early to get to the loom to weave. And then she'd have to go out and help hitch up the horses. I don't know where those older brothers were. They were brothers, but she always talked about how much work she did. She was a worker. My mother was a hard worker. Did she weave anything over here? No. No, she never had a loom over here. No? Mm-mm. But she knew what to do with them. But this cow, did you have to take it out in the pasture? Oh, we didn't. Yeah, there was a pasture back there, but we probably didn't have that cow more than a couple years. Hard to say. I never even thought about it. So you had a calf then one year? Because otherwise the milk would dry out. But you don't remember that? No. So you don't remember the cow? I remember the cow, but I don't remember any calves. No. So there was an interesting... Yeah, but the Belgians, now, why did they keep all those pigeons instead of having chickens? Did they have both? Well, probably they had both, but they were... Because the chickens... Pigeons were more important. I know they were great. That was a hobby, I think. Sure, they always had those big baskets, ricker baskets, and they were always taking them out and clocking them for time. That was a big deal up around 7th Street, around those taverns, you know, those guys got together. And they were betting on it then, I suppose. It was like a racetrack. I suppose, at least they were timing them. But all those Belgians were up around 7th Street, you know, all had pigeon houses and pigeons, and that's their sport. Oh, sure. But they had them enclosed in coops, so they didn't... Yeah. They were down the halls or anything like that. Sort of little ladders up to them, and then they were built up. It's funny now when you think about that. They were all over that whole West End. But the Swedes had nothing to do particularly with pigeons. And I don't think the Swedes mixed with the Belgian people so much. We were friends with that Koren family. They had children the same age we were, so we were with them. Your parents were at the... No, no. So I mean, I can't say that we grew... Well, we grew up with Belgian people around us, but we didn't mix with them. And then up at Stevens Park, we didn't spend a lot of time there because, well... I don't know why. We had other things to do. Well, I suppose that when you're growing up, you know, a lot of new adventures coming up every day. Yeah, that's right. And then with the Belgian people, they had the religion, being Catholic, so there was a dividing line. Yeah, that's a dividing line pretty much. Were they also... A lot of Swedes were Republicans, do you remember that? Oh, yeah, sure. All of them. The Belgians, were they Democrats? Democrats. So there was another dividing line. There was another dividing line. Two divisions. Two distinct marks. But there weren't many Norwegians around. We didn't have many... Grew up with many Norwegians. And not Irish. Well, we had the Lundy family across from us were Norwegian. Lundy family was right across the street. We were always fighting against the Norwegians, you know. Norwegians and the Swedes. So were there actually a Swedish clan, if you say so, in Moline? Were there just Swedes? Well, you would say a clan would be maybe the members of the Anfellers, the 583 Lodge. Yes, but I mean, were they living now in the houses, were they living in the dwellings? You know, like where you live, for instance. Yeah. You had the Belgians just a few doors away. Belgians, Norwegians. Norwegians. So there was not one section of Moline that were only Swedes? No, the Swedes were kind of settled out around, I would say. Probably was a section of Swedish people. But it was not noticeable. You see, we were at the west end of Moline and all our activities were down to the church, which was on 7th Avenue and 45th Street. So we didn't think of a division line, particularly between Moline and Rock Island. I think we had as many people down around from the church to the college and in through there were our friends, much more than coming east into Moline. We didn't go up around Salem or Trinity or Pershing. It was far away. It had nothing to do with them. We were born down on 7th Avenue and 45th Street, and so the first friends that my parents made were all down through that area. And how about when you were saying you were going downtown? Did you go to Rock Island or to Moline? No, then we went downtown. We walked downtown. We never went to Rock Island. Never went beyond Augustana College. It was too far away. So this was the business center. Oh yeah, we grew up right in this area. How about the Halvega market? Have you heard about that? Halvega, halfway house they call it, between Rock Island and Moline. You never heard that expression, Halvega? No, I never heard it. Was it a street or a house? Well, it was apparently halfway between Moline to Rock Island. And they called it Halvega, you know, years, years back. Some old-timers have mentioned that. We never heard it when we were young. Never heard that. Because you were not too far away from it then. I couldn't, I could be. I think it was right in Moline. Halvega, halfway to what? To Rock Island. Oh, halfway to what? And then halfway to Moline. I never heard that expression. No. Have you heard about Oklahoma, though? Up around 24th Avenue and 5th Street? Moline? Yeah. I've heard the name Oklahoma, but I never particularly associated it. So there was cobb pastures way, way back. Oh, sure. And they moved out, they call it, they moved out to Oklahoma. Oklahoma, yeah. Because it was too far west. Yeah. So you never heard that? No. No, there are some old-timers I've been talking to. But they've been there, like you said, no, in other words, you didn't communicate too much with the people. No, we used to go out to, when they had a Maypole out at Prospect Park, that was where you went. Oh, they had a Maypole there? Oh, they had. Who put that on? Oh, that would be the Swedish, probably the odd fellow Lodge or some ladies or something, but oh, yeah, we always went to see the Maypole. So that was in the 20s? Mm-hmm. Your parents, now, did they belong to Viking, Vasa, odd fellows? No, only odd fellows. Odd fellows. 583. Oh, and they was for insurance, recently. And then for fellowship. For fellowship. But they weren't really Lodge people. No, but they never belonged to any Lodge. Only father, right? Well, there was some ladies group there. I don't think they ever belonged to any Lodge. Well, they were not Lodge people. Oh. No. So you went to the church, and how about you? You never joined anything either in the Swedish? No, I never joined any of the Lodges. So Rupert Caskey never approached you, I understand, if you remember. Oh, they want me, Rupert Caskey approached me, but then there's others who approached me about the Vikings, too, you know, when they were down here on Fourth Avenue. The Vikings. Yeah, down here, yes. Yeah. And the 583, it didn't particularly appeal to me, you know. And Lodges, I just didn't, I was trying to make a living. Well, I think our parents thought the church and the Lodge didn't mix. I kind of think they did. Well, in those days, it's true. I mean, I don't know, but I think that's maybe what was behind it. How about the Swedish-American newspapers? Did they have Svenskammerkornar in the Tribunen? Do you remember that? Oh, sure, we remember them, but we never subscribed to them. I don't think we subscribed to any of them. We would read it from time to time, you know. Well, my father was an avid newspaper reader. He'd sit for hours reading, but I think he was always reading the English paper then. Oh, I think so. Was he interested in politics? No, not for running for politics. He was a very quiet man. Yeah. I went and ran for precinct committeeman. You did? As a good Republican. Yeah. But that's the extent of my politics. That was after you went through college and you were in your own business then? After college, I guess it was. So you went through college then two years or four years at a time? I was straight through, four years. Four years, straight through. And then you went to teacher's college? No, I started to teach right after four years of Augustana College. At the hearing? No, it was very difficult to get a job that year. 1930, oh, that was a terrible time to get a job. Carl took me, we did have a car then, and he took me all over the state looking for jobs, you know, and apply for all these jobs. So many were ready to be teachers and there were no jobs. Very difficult time to get a job. How much did you get a month down there? Oh, well, I was only there those fall months because John Deere Junior High School opened in January of the next year and I got in at that school, John Deere Junior High School, the first year that it opened. And then, so you spent a few months down in Illinois City. Yeah, that was... You boarded that with some family? On a farm. I think it was, I think I earned, did I earn $45 a month? Something like that. $45 a month I think I earned and paid them, I came home every weekend, Carl would come out there to meet me, but for those weekdays I'd pay $20 for a month. I think I paid $20 for the chance to stay with these people, the Nelsons, and I earned $47 a month. And it was a one-room schoolhouse then? Yeah, it was a one-room schoolhouse. So you got the grades? Yeah, that was quite another experience. It was the introduction to the school system. But I was fortunate to get in at John Deere at the opening. They had all my records here, but there wasn't any way to get a job in Moline. And it was in 1930? 1931 it opened in January. But before that you went home to Sweden, you said? I didn't go home, I didn't go to Sweden, home, I'd never been to Sweden. I didn't go till June 1931. To Sweden? I went to Sweden. And then you started school and after you came back here in Finland, Holland, to John Deere? John Deere. But I had taught one semester, a fall semester out in the countryside and a spring semester in Moline at John Deere. Then I went to Sweden that summer with my aunt. She loaned me some money and I paid her back later on. You paid too much money for something. That was a great trip though, because in those days we went all through Europe and all the countries and then up into Sweden. I don't know what it could have cost. It wasn't inexpensive. Well, it was expensive for that period of time, but not compared to now. You continued four years through Augustana also, and then what kind of business did you go into then? When I got out of Augustana, then I was a route manager for a jewel tea company. I see. Traveled with a little truck, house to house. Selling coffee and tea? Jobs weren't any better in 1933, were they? Getting a job wasn't easy then. You had $17.50 a week. They furnished the truck though. Oh yeah, they furnished the truck. So you sold wholesale or retail? Retail. Bulk? Just... Or you had it in packages? It was all packaged. No cans? No, no cans. So then you drank a lot of coffee. Every place you had to have a cup of coffee. No, I was never a coffee drinker. I don't remember people... I don't think people gave coffee. That's a Swedish custom. My aunt in Sweden used to give everybody coffee. Everybody that came for any kind of errand to that area. I knew that back... But that wasn't an American custom. People didn't do that. I don't think they did. We had regular route, and we'd go out every two weeks, you know, to see people. How long did you do that job? Until I went to Sweden. From 33 until 35. So did you dare then to take off from the job and go to Sweden for instance? Well sure. I'd saved enough money. I used to save $10 a week out of the $17, and I had enough money. They were going to tell me they were going to go back in 35, and I said, Boy, I'm going to go back too. The word had spread, huh? Yes, but were you sure you wanted to have the job back? No, I didn't want to worry about that job. You didn't care about that? No, I didn't care enough about that job to keep it. That was just a job because you had to have one. Yeah, lucky to find one. So you made a visit then. And you also went with them? Oh sure. And my mother and my aunt. We were four of us on the Cooks. Did we go on the Cooks on that time? Yes, we went on the Cooks on the back on the Cumberland. You'd remember better because I've been on all of them I guess. So was it like your parents had told you about it in Sweden? In other words, what they had earlier described for you? They didn't talk so much about Sweden, but they really treated us royally. We were special because we had come from America. So your mother was happy to come back? Well, that was the first time that she had come back after many years, you see. And her sisters and daughters were still living on the farm? Oh yeah, all the aunts and uncles. And they had big farms. They were all very prosperous with their farming and with their land. And they had beautiful homes. Was it something that they did differently, you think, in the homes? Or did you see anything unusual that you're not used to? Compared to Molina, for instance. Well, the beds were so short that I... Terrible beds, of course. Old-time... Did you have to have an extension? You probably didn't know about those. It would be pushed together and all the bedclothes put in them and the pillows and then it would be covered with a beautiful lace spread over the top and then the bed would be taken apart. I had to put my feet outside of the bed. I think they gave you one of those long ones they had in the kitchen. Have you ever heard tell of those long beds that had... You could lift up and put bedclothes down in it and then there was a pad on it. We had good food, I can remember that. Oh yeah, wonderful cooks. Wonderful experiences in Sweden. And then you came back and you had a job at John Deere. I taught at John Deere. For how many years? I went over to Moline High School. So that was a junior high at John Deere? That was a junior high. And I went over to high school in... 1942 I guess it was. Was it 1942? Could be. And the subjects you taught then, was that... I taught English at John Deere. And then I got the chance to go to the high school to teach Swedish. Well she was old and retired. She retired? Anna Graham died. She died? Was she retired before she died or was she in teaching when she died? I think she was in teaching when she died. So one of her students took over then? I used to go over to this apartment that she had over here and she had just reams of papers to be corrected, you know, on all the tables and so much work to do. But yes, I think she... Well I didn't get in there right away because I know Dr. Ander's wife, Ruth Ander, substituted for about a semester or so and somebody else was in and I wasn't even thinking of it. But they persuaded me to think about it and asked me if I would come over and I didn't think I was equal to it or capable but... And I went into Chicago. One of those summers there was a very good course at North Park College because there were some men who came directly from Sweden. Söderbeck? Well Söderbeck was one of the... I liked him very much. Wonderful person. So then I did start teaching at the high school in... 1942 to 1945. Was it during the war? Oh no. You started in Moline High? I was like 42. What war are you talking about? I mean Second World War. It was during the Second World War. Sure. Maybe Second World War. So how was the interest then? Was it going down then for foreign languages or was it still... No. The people were... The big problem was the spread of languages, the number of languages. Spanish and French and German and Latin and Swedish. There were five languages and really hard to make big enrollments in all of them. But there was still a distinct interest. Spanish was taught in Moline High School. Mrs.... I used to have a Spanish class right next to me, next to my room. I think we're named now. But still, all those subjects were continued for a few years after you... Then there came a period of time when there weren't enough students to really fill all those classes, the great choice they had. So I know they'd sometimes start a Spanish class and then they'd get the few people together and they'd say, well now you have to decide are you going to take French? You might have to switch over. But that was a little bit later. Well, it was about that time because I remember my nephew was in high school then and he started about one year of French and then he had to switch to something else. So they didn't have quite enough enrollment to keep classes in all those different subjects. So about Swedish, you continued with the Swedish anyway? Yeah, I was at high school about three years I guess it was. And then I went to Rockford. You got to call them from Rockford? This friend of mine had been teaching Swedish there and she was going to... She was not going to continue because of illness in her own mother and father family. And so I, well, got into it before I even knew it I guess. I didn't apply for it. They asked me to come up and interviewed me. You were also teaching a class in English up there in Rockford. So how was the interest in Rockford? Was there bigger or greater potential? Yeah, well, we were teaching all the same languages, Latin, German, French, Spanish, and Swedish. Same set up of number of languages. And there was an enrollment of Swedish except I did teach one English class I think. And I had to help in the library. That was an extra job because I didn't have a homeroom I think. And did you stay until the retirement? Then I... Yeah, yes, I was in Rockford until I took an early retirement. And you, Carl, what did you... After the coffee and the tea selling, you came back from Sweden. Yeah, well, then I came back from Sweden. I went into... I was a claim adjuster for an insurance company in Freeport, Illinois, automobile insurance company. Oh, it was the Rockford? Yeah, and I stayed there until 42. And then before that I was an agent for the Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company for a few years in there. And then I moved up to Freeport and was at Freeport until 42. And at 42 I enlisted in the Navy. Oh, I see. You were doing the war and you were away from Moline. Oh, sure. Way off in the Pacific. The Pacific on a destroyer. I was an enlisted man then. And then I applied for officer's training and came back to the States here. And then I went out on a Navy fleet tanker. And then I got enough points to get out of the Navy in 45. So you were on that hospital ship some time? I was on the hospital ship. I was still a reservist, I mean an enlisted man in the Navy. And then that training in Florida was after that? Oh, sure. Then I was officer's training down in Hollywood, Florida. And then from there I went out on the Navy fleet tanker out in the Pacific. Where the fighting was really going on. I was on the destroyer out in Bougainville when we were right off the coast firing. So you saw some action then? Oh, yeah. I never was hit. But we were in line of action with three light cruisers ahead, four destroyers, and three more light cruisers. And we were shooting over at Buca, shooting over, silencing out their guns. And then we were out in the Pacific and our ship was the second in command. And we were preparing to make a right-hand turn and our skipper didn't make the turn. And we hit another, side-swiped another destroyer. Oh, dear. This is what you told me to be ready for. Yeah. Some people are going to come to see ethnic something or other. There's nine of them. But they're supposed to be studying ethnic something or other around the community. And so where are they taking them? But he made these appointments all up. They were going to come back. So you came back then after the skirmishes were over at Tumulene? Back to Tumulene, yeah. And then you started out your own business or how did you get started? Well, let's see. Then I worked for Iowa Illinois Gas and Light Company in Rock Island. I was in the commercial lighting department. Commercial lighting department. And then after that, they discontinued that phase of the business. And then I went into business here in 1938. What is paint and souvenirs? Paint. Well, we started out with paint, see. And then... Did you start a paint also yourself then? No, no. I brought a fellow out that was in the paint business here under the name of New Enamel Paint. And then that company went out of business and then I went in with selling Sherman Williams and DuPont, see. But you didn't do any actual painting then? No, no. I didn't paint. Only selling the products? Just selling the product, uh-huh. And then you went into doing taxes on people and tax time? Yeah, I didn't know the Republic work. I've always done that. And you ran for precinct committee man once? Once. Why did you give it up? Oh, I can't remember. It's probably one of those little phases. I mean, you also closed the city hall, you know. You had the inside line there. Yeah, but precinct committee man is a matter of just working in your own little community or in your own area. They tell you where the potholes are, you know, the chuck holes and everything. Yeah, well, that's... So after I saw that, that was before I went to college and then I didn't bother anymore. So then you have... So, like Moline, the businesses, they were down on the 3rd Avenue. You remember that? Yeah. All the streets were down there in the... I mean, all the stores. All the stores were on 3rd Avenue. There was nothing on 5th? No, no. What was on 5th then? Countryside, I guess. There wasn't any building. I can't remember that in any particular unless... Some of the banks... I can't remember of any banks particularly. But I remember most of the businesses were down on 3rd Avenue. That was the main business avenue. And then gradually, as I got older, you know, in high school days, then all the banks and the stores were up on 5th Avenue and 15th Street, 16th Street. And then you had all the big businesses, Moline and International. I mean, John Deere. John Deere was... International and... Yeah, John Deere and International. And they made the city grow. That's right. What do you think about the Moline now? Well, the only thing you can say is that since the time we've had all the... The malls have come in. Businesses have been gradually moving out. Is this because of the parking, you think, or what? No, I don't think it was parking. It was kind of a fad. I think when these malls came, it was kind of a fad. And... Then they got a promoter in here, and he was talking about the future. Moline would be having the businesses like the various insurance companies and office companies. And they were talking about Moline converting into that type of thing away from the retail. And then, of course, when your big stores like New York store and Carson Perry's and Penny's left downtown, well, then it becomes... The drawing card isn't theirs. And so the town has just gone downhill, that's all. And the parking meters haven't helped us a bit. That's a hindrance to us, too. They still like to have that. Do you think the businessmen should have something to say about that? Oh, they were so indebted by the fact that they tore down so many buildings on 4th Avenue. They had to buy those buildings and tore them down. And their indebtedness was so great that they need some revenue. I notice Rock Island now is talking about getting rid of their parking meters. Maybe Moline will, too. Who knows? No, they've done some of them, you know. Yeah, and then... 3rd Street, or is it 4th Street? Yeah, 4th Avenue. 4th Avenue. 4th Avenue. Of course, the thing is that now they have more parking lots than they ever had before. But then they don't have the business downtown. They used to go on Saturday night, too, elbow to elbow, up and down.