 My dad's other brother is still living. He's 96 years old and he lives in Florida though. Anton Cardell is his name. And bless his heart, he's doing real good. What did you say? 11th of September 1986, and I'm sitting together with Kenneth Cardell in Rockford, Illinois. He was born the 5th of January 1919 in Rockford. And your father now, Carl Siegfried Cardell, he came from Ireland you said? Carl Siegfried Cardell, yeah. Yeah, it was your father. Yeah, I never knew his first name was Carl until I grew up. They always called him Siggy. And I never knew my real name. In fact, my name was Knett, K-N-E-T, Siegfried Cardell. So when we went down to the courthouse, they had a record of it there to get my birth certificate. She says, you can change your first two names, but you can't change your last unless you go through court. I said, well, I've gone by Kenneth Siegfried Cardell all the time. So I got a kick out of that. What they had recorded down there was Knett, K-N-E-T. And I couldn't figure out why my aunt, I always used to correct her husband, Uncle Axel, no, Axel, it isn't Knut, it's Knett. And now she was right. What kind of name was that? I don't know. I never heard of it before. It probably was a short for Kenneth. Oh, Knett. So that was your nickname then? No, that was on the courthouse records, but she changed it and we signed the papers. We didn't have to have anybody there. That's when my wife and I. So you had trouble getting the birth certificate, you said, because you were born in the house, you and your sister. Yeah, that's right. I was born in the house. They had no records of you. What did you say? They had no records of you. No, except we didn't know it until I had come to go into the services. And then I had to prove I was an American. And they told me that I had a record down at the courthouse that I was born. But that's all. I never did have a birth certificate. Yes, but how about you were baptized when you were born? Yeah. In what church were you baptized? Salem Lutheran Church. Salem Lutheran. And, yeah. They had records of you, though. They should have, but I don't know if they did or not. Although I did go to their 100th anniversary here a couple, three years ago, when Zion had the anniversary of all those that had been confirmed. I won't say. Yeah. It had to be Zion where I was baptized, but that I'm not sure of either now. Because that's where our family group went. You were baptized and confirmed there. I was confirmed there anyway. I know that. In Swedish or English? No, in English. Here's a joke. I went to school. The principal came home from school with me and said to my folks, Please, Siggy and Freda, talk English to the kids because it's hurting Kenneth in school. I can't talk Swedish today. I speak from my mouth. So that's what he said? Huh? So that's what he told your parents? Yeah. To talk English to you? Yeah, to my brother and sister. I'm the oldest, and then my sister and my brother. But they told my parents to talk English so they would have it easier. It was hard on me in school. In fact, I had to stay back a grade. Oh, I see. So you talked Swedish to your parents all the time then? At that time, yeah, but we didn't after that. No. How about your brother and sister? You were three? Three of us, yeah. One brother and two sisters? No, two brothers. No, me, my brother, and sister. One boy and one girl. Oh. And you were the only one that spoke Swedish in the family besides your parents? Could your brother speak Swedish too? No, he talked a little bit. He spoke Swedish a little bit. In fact, the truth is I think he can talk better Swedish today than I can. Why? Because he's associated with some Swedish people at Sunstrance, I think. Oh, I see. They played around. Because we who are here in this country, no matter what country we come from, we think we can talk the mother tongue pretty good, but we don't. Just like the only thing I can say in Swedish, we taught ourselves, we have blaskimund. I'll never forget an Italian guy, an Italian singer. He got snowbound in a mountain in New York, the Catskills. It was an Italian community. Every other Italian come up to him and very proudly start talking Italian to him. This guy says, that was the worst snowbound I ever was in, he says, because I couldn't understand a damn thing any of them were saying. They all thought they were talking Italian, see. I had a friend, Folkey Johnson, that he just passed away. He'd been in this country three years, and his cousins who were in the Merchant Marine in Sweden, they brought their wives and they got on the train and come out to Rockford. Folkey just very proudly says, well, now, if I say anything in Swedish that don't sound right, you stop me and correct me. Folkey says, Kenny, I couldn't talk. He'd been here three years. So that's why I'm conscious of the Swedes in this country that think they can talk Swedish, and I know better, because I've experienced enough. But no, my parents, like I said, I know very little about them. My mother come from a family where your kids and my kids were fighting with our kids. In other words, her mother died when she was small, and she had a brother. And then her father remarried. He married a widow who had a couple of kids, and then they had some of their own. So that's where that saying came from, your kids and my kids are fighting with our kids. But that's all I really know about them, except that my mother says her brother was a big 6-foot, 6-1⁄2-foot tall guy. My dad, I know from him, from my cousin, Bert Carlson, he lives on 27th Street. There were 13 in my dad's family, and my dad was the oldest. So my dad and my the three oldest came to the United States, but not all at once. They all came on their own. Your dad came first? Yeah, he was the first one here in 1904. And he came to Rockford? Yeah, and he came to Rockford. Why did he go to Rockford? Did he have any relation here? Yeah, yeah. He had an uncle that had a farm. He had come a few years before, and he came to the farm. Out at Pecatonica? No, out at Perryville Road, just off from Cherryvale. And he went to Gonzales School and learned how to talk English, and then went to Browns Business School. And he had a garage down in Cherry Valley. It's in the Cherry Valley history book, Cardell's Garage and Whoopie Doo. So he was a mechanic then? Yeah, but when they got electrical, he quit. He says, I'm not an electrician, but he says, I'm a mechanic. So then he took a job at Sunstrands and worked there until he retired. Then he retired out to Colorado. He says, I'll never live long enough to see and do all the things I want to do in Colorado, even. So he left Rockford and went to Colorado? Yeah. Alone? No, no. My mother and my sister is a widow of World War II. She went with him with her two kids. Out to Colorado? Out to Colorado. In Denver or? Well, it's a suburb of Denver. When you say Denver, it's just like my daughter, when she was a stewardess with TWA. She lived in San Jose. But that's a suburb of San Francisco, so we always told everybody San Francisco. They know where that is. And just like Denver, you know where that is. Was it in Golden, Arvada? We were at Golden two weeks ago. My niece, my sister's daughter, is 43 years old, a grandmother. But she just went up and down Pikes Peak for the eighth time. And they said to me, when we were out there a year ago, Uncle Kenny, before you die, you got to see me go up and down Pikes Peak. So we went out there two weeks ago. And she went up and down. I went up there and froze to death. It was still cold up there, huh? Yeah. I was just looking at the pictures of them now. And like you said, Golden, I got a picture of a friend on the main street, welcome to Golden. Coors Beer. That's where my niece, who went up and down Pikes Peak, works. But she don't work in the beer part. She works in the porcelain plant. That's closer to downtown Golden. And so she goes downtown for lunch sometimes. So your father, he died out there and is buried out there too? Yeah. Why did he like Colorado so much? Because of the mountains. It reminded him of Sweden. He says, I want to be in a country that reminds me of where I grew up. Yeah, but the island, you know, where he comes from, it doesn't look like Colorado. I didn't think so either. That's what he told me. That's what he said. Did he talk much about his home country and the place he came from? No, never. He came from afar? No. I don't know just how it was. There were 13, and my grandfather was a captain in the Swedish Army. And whether they had a farm or not, ain't that a shame? I don't know. Now, my cousin, Bert Carlson, he would know all those things. But I was amazed. Here a couple years ago, a couple of my dad's youngest sister and one of the youngest brothers came here, and they were my age. I couldn't get over that. They spoke to you in English then, or were you able to understand them? She didn't speak English, so my cousin Bert translated everything. I didn't even try to talk Swedish to her, because I know better. Why? I can't talk Swedish. I can't even say a whole sentence hardly, other than just a couple of favorite phrases. But you understand them when people talk to you? Very little now. Very little. I can follow a little bit. So that darn teacher in your school, he ruined the whole thing for you? What did you say? If the teacher hadn't told your father and mother to speak English to you, you'd have been able to speak Swedish today, perhaps? Yeah, very possible. But you had trouble then when you went to school? I did have it. Were you mixing up Swedish and English? I couldn't understand. English. English. I got things mixed up. When I was a kid, there was an Arnie and Stewie Johnson that came from Sweden, and they were 11 months apart in age. They put them in the same class, and they kept me back, and I was their interpreter. I'd turn around and talk Swedish to the teacher and talk English to them. I'd get all mixed up. But that was in second grade, so you see that's a long time ago. In what grade were you held back? You were held back one year, you said? One year. There were no kindergarten in those days. First grade. They made me repeat. The first grade? Yeah. But then you had no trouble, though? Well, I can't say I didn't, but I did all right. I passed. That's how I get a kick out of them. My kids had the same thing. They had low grades. My son's a computer engineer. My daughter, she became an airline stewardess, and they both had to have high grades in order to get that. Vicki had what I call vitamin deficiency in school, Ds and Cs. But when she went to McConnell Airline School up in Minneapolis for stewardesses, she got a B+. When she went to school for TWA, she got an A-, so she had it, but she didn't care. My son, the same way. He had Ds and Cs in school, but when he got out and got a chance to go with TRW, if you've heard of them, he went out to California to school. The manager of the Rockford TRW service people, the engineer people, his wife bumped into my wife and says, We got a letter about your son on the bulletin board at the office. Oh, why is that? He got the highest grade of any kid in school, and they ship him in from Hong Kong and all over. And he had vitamin deficiency. That's what I jokingly called it, Ds and Cs. But when it came down to the real thing, he'd come through, and he's been doing good ever since. He's 40 years old now, and bless his heart, got a boy and a girl. I got a grandson that's going to be C. Cardell in professional golf. He went out for he's 15 years old. Last year he went out for golf, and he made the varsity the first year. This year he went out for golf, and he was automatically on the varsity. He got one around 18 holes in 71 and 74 for qualifying. Professionals don't do much better than that. What college is he going to? No, that's what the teacher he's in high school. In high school. But that's what the teacher told him. He says, Ricky, you keep up the low scores like that, and he says, you can name any college you want to go to. They'll come begging for you. So Ricky told his mother, I got to work on my grades too, because he says having a good score in golf is one thing, but he says being on the team you got to have good grades. But he got to see it this way too. There's the only low score that's going to qualify him. He doesn't have to have a high score there in golf. The lower the score, the better it is. You see what I mean? Yeah. But he's been playing golf with his dad ever since he's four years old. Were you interested in sports too, or golf? I was on the Swedish Tumbling Troop, S-A-G-C, Swedish American Gymnastic. Here in Rockford? Rockford, yeah. It's disbanded now. It got disbanded about 10 years after World War II. Who was the leader there? Barney Reinhold was one of the leaders. And you get a kick out of this. The president of the Swedish Gym was a Jim Cameron, a Scotchman. Yeah. And Jim is still living too, bless his heart. But when I first joined was just when they changed the rules. Before that, you had to be Swedish to belong to the Swedish Gym. But then they changed the rules, and anybody could belong. And then after that, over half the members were not Swedish. Were the Swedish people not interested to belong to it anymore, or what happened to it? Because there were a lot of kids like you growing up, you know, Swedish parents. Yeah, that kind of thing petered out somehow. After the war? Yeah, after World War II. In fact, I got married before World War II. And Vasa, my folks belonged to all these Swedish clubs. Vasa, Vikings, Sweden? Yeah. IOGT? Yeah, SM and SF. Yes. Well, anyway, they told me that I could belong to Vasa, but my wife couldn't. I says, I don't belong to Vasa anymore either. He says, yeah, but you're a member. I says, I just quit. I says, you can't take my wife. Well, then when I come back from World War II, we got a letter saying you now can belong to Vasa. And also your wife? Along with my wife. So you joined in again, or what happened? But I never joined again. I was raising a family then. My wife, we never had our kids until after the services. My wife was a nurse. I jokingly call it, she was a panhandler. Nurses, they handled a lot of pans. But... What nationality was she? German. German. You know one of her relatives too. Do you remember a World War I ace, the Red Baron, Baron von Richthofen? Yes. He is my wife's second cousin. Is that true? That is a fact. My father-in-law's mother and the Baron's mother were sisters. So that made my father-in-law and the Baron first cousins. That makes my wife second cousin. There is one thing. My father-in-law's mother was the youngest in the family. And Baron von Richthofen's mother was the oldest in the family. That's why there was about 20 years difference between my father-in-law and the Baron. Back in 1936, my wife and her folks went to Germany for a visit. They went to the museum of Baron von Richthofen's. My father-in-law was walking up with his father and that over there. There was a guard. There was a guard that was at the Baron's museum. He walked over to my father-in-law and says, Sir, I know you're from America. Are you by chance related to the Baron? How did they know that? He looked so much like him. He asked him right out, Are you by chance related to the Baron? He says, Yeah, he's my first cousin. My mother and the Baron's mother were sisters. My wife never talks about her, Baron von Richthofen or anything. In fact, I read a book about him, and he was kind of an aristocrat. He was a good pilot and all of that, but a green Canadian pilot come up and got a lucky burst and shot him down. But while he was in his heyday, he told generals off even. That's what the book said. He just didn't care who he said what to. But there was one bad thing. If you were an American pilot and he was having a battle with you, you know, in the air, but you got away, he'd single you out and continue the darn battle afterwards when you were up again. And so, like I say, he shot down 80 airplanes. How did you meet your wife? I mean, there were so many Swedish girls, you know, brown ones, blue, white and everything. Why did you single out this rapid? You get a kick out of this. When I was a young fellow, they used to do a lot of roller skating. The Swedes? No, not in Sweden. You know, around here, roller skating rinks. The Swedes too? The Swedes went to them like everybody else. Well, anyway, over in Belvedere, there was a roller skating rink, and my wife was a nurse at Highland Hospital in Belvedere. And she and another nurse got off duty, and they were tired, but they didn't want to go to bed, so they walked over to the skating rink. And they stood, when a girl stands up by the entrance to where they go, when they get through skating, they danced. And the skating time was over, and they were dancing. And a couple of guys walked up to them and asked them if they wanted to dance, and they said no. I said to my friend, what's those two girls standing up there for? When you go up there, that usually means you want a dancing partner. So I said, I'll fix that. I go over, and I take her by the arm and say, come in with me for a minute. And I walk out on the dance floor and start dancing. I didn't say I was going to dance with you. I saw you going, saying no to all these other guys, and I just figured you'd have to walk off the floor now. So she continued to dance. Well, then afterwards, I went up and I apologized. I said, I just did it because that's when her girlfriend told me that we had been working long hours of nurse's duty, and we didn't want to go to bed, so we went out for a walk. We didn't intend to go dancing. And I talked a little more, and I said, you won't believe this, but you know what I'm going to do tomorrow? I'm going to make a parachute jump. You were going to do that? Yeah. And this girl that my wife was with did most of the questions. Well, where do you do that? Up in Madison. Wisconsin? Yeah, the state capital. And she says, why do you want to do it? I says, well, I'm doing it kind of like because there was a dare. I used to love to dive off of high places, bridges and towers and stuff like that. With parachutes? No, no, swimming. Oh, I see. And I said to my buddy one time up at Clear Lake, Wisconsin, I says, there was a platform 15 feet up, and then another 20 feet was a ladder, and the thing wiggled. And then you had to climb up and then down to get a little platform to dive off. And I said to my buddy, I says, see that airplane up there? Boy, I'd like to jump out of an airplane someday. Oh, Kenny, you wouldn't dare to do that. That takes a lot of guts. I says, oh, yeah, I could do it. And I did. It cost me $20 back in the 30s. So, anyway, I got talking with him, and I says, well, look, we're going to go home now. Why don't I drop you off at the hospital? My wife says, no, no. And I says to her girlfriend, I says, what's the matter with her? You're tired and you want to go back home now and you'll sleep good tonight? Well, she don't want to go. And we went over somewhere else just for a minute in this skating place. And when we come to go out, here they were going out of the area. I says, I think you're foolish not to take a ride back to the hospital. I says, I'm going right by the hospital. And then this other girl says to my wife, my wife's nickname is Bunny. Bunny, I'm tired, and if you want to walk back alone, fine, I'm going to take the ride. Well, then Bunny says, I'll get in with you then. So then I dropped them off. And we pulled up in the front there, and we talked for a minute. Bunny started asking me about the parachute jump and that. How would you like to go and see me jump? No, no, I don't know you. I says, well, you would. You know me enough now. And one thing led to another, and finally she says, well, okay. I says, I'll have to pick you up early in the morning because we've got to be up there. And so I picked her up, and we went up to Madison. And it was a semi-cloudy day, clouds and clear. And the airplane, we went up a little over a mile, almost 6,000 feet. So they'd see the airplane, and then they wouldn't. And pretty soon when I bailed out, I come down through the clouds. But she was with the pilot's wife waiting for us to come down, see. She says to the pilot's wife when she first saw the parachute coming through the clouds, there it comes. She called me it. So when I got back, the pilot was back before me. So when I got back, he was standing there laughing. He says, you know what your girlfriend called you? I says, no, what? He says, she pointed up and said to my wife, there it comes. Well, that was our first date. Were you the only one jumping that day? Yeah. The only one? Yeah. But how did you practice now for this thing? I mean, wasn't that a risk? I got up on a table like this and jumped off the table and pulled the ripcord and kept doing it. And you followed your own parachute too? And then we packed our own chutes. I helped the jumping instructor pack the chutes. He was a professional parachute rigger, which I was in World War II. And he lived out of Milwaukee, and he came to Madison to pack parachutes. And that's how I got to meet him. He was there one day when I went up there to see about making a parachute jump. He's a parachute rigger, and he's also a professional jumper. How could your parents, your mother and father, take this now? I mean, here you're meeting a German girl, completely out of the Swedish area, and then jumping out of an airplane. What did you say? When I made the parachute jump, all I said was, I know I can't stop you. I know I can't stop you, you foolish boy. Did they have to sign for you? No. You were old enough. I was old enough. How old? 1940. That was before the war. Oh, yeah. So, see, I was 20 or 21 years old. So you didn't have to have a signature from your father or mother? No, no. But they didn't like it, though? No, he didn't care for it, but he says, I won't try to stop you. Just like I used to smoke. He says, I don't care for that, but I won't try to stop you. I quit when I was 19 years old. When did you start to smoke, then? 16. Corn silk. But he didn't stop you. You stopped on your own. I stopped on my own. I just decided to quit. How about drinking, though? Did you touch liquor then when you were younger, too? Oh, Dad used to make glug and all of that, and I used to steal a little extra bit of glug and share it with my buddies and stuff like that, but we never drank, really. You were never drunk or anything like that? Oh, no. I've been drunk, but I never was drunk then. You stopped smoking? Yeah. And never smoked since? No. No snuff, either? No, and that was popular then. On 7th Street? You better believe, Snooze Boulevard. That's what it was called, Snooze Boulevard. Your father-in-law, was he drinking, smoking, or snuffing? Well, he made home-brew beer. He made glug, and he never inhaled, but he did something worse than that. He'd put a cigarette in his mouth and never take it out until it was short. Every darn pair of pants of his had burns in them. My mother says, Thank goodness ashes are clean as far as germs are concerned, are disinfected, because she was forever cleaning up ashes after him. But he didn't actually want you to start with anything like that at all? No, he didn't care for me to smoke, but he told me, If you're going to smoke, don't inhale. I said, I'm supposed to do like you, Dad? Swallow it? Because every once in a while, he'd... Naturally, you'd get raw smoke up there, but he never did really take a... like that. I never saw him do that. But he never took the damn cigarette out of his mouth either. Were cigarettes smoking popular in the 20s when you were growing up as teenagers? Were they using a pipe more than cigarettes? More so. Pipe and cigar. Because cigarettes was too expensive then to use? Well, when I smoked, we used to use Bull Durham and Golden Green and things like that. They were roll your cigarettes. All yourself? That's why this Leon Durham that plays with the Cubs baseball team, I always call him Bull Durham. But, no. The other reason why I never smoked a lot, nobody, it wasn't popular in those days. Nobody smoked a pack a day in those days. How about in the school now, when you were in high school? Were they smoking then? Very, very few, but there were some. Very few. It isn't like it is today. They couldn't smoke on the school ground, though? Oh, no. No, no. They got kicked out. But I know kids that did smoke. But I never got excited about it. When I did smoke, I never smoked a lot. One reason was I couldn't afford it. If I bought a pack of cigarettes, that lasted three years. Side two, continuation with Kenneth Cardell, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So, what happened now with thisette when it came down there? What did your girlfriend say now to you after you came down and folded up your parachute and went home to Rockford? What did she say? She was kind of excited because that's something that was new. There weren't too many people that did that. It was a daring experience, though. Actually, that was my second parachute jump. Second? I had made one before that. And you were never scared? It didn't scare you to look down there in the open hatch? Did you walk out in the wing to do it? No. I was scared. But my first parachute jump, they took the side off of the plane. They had me crawl out, get out, and it was with struts. And hang on the struts. And they says, now, between that farmhouse and that canal, I want you to let go. I says to them, we're hollering because the motor roared. You tell me when to let go, and I'll let go. He hollers out, okay. And he said, let go. You know what the first thing I said to myself? I let go. I was so surprised that I let go. I says, I let go. Well, then I pulled the ripcord. And then you got to hang on to it, otherwise it comes free. So I pulled the ripcord, and I says, I'm holding on to it. He warned me not to lose it. You can't do that. You let go of it, and it just goes, falls away. See, it isn't attached to you anymore when you pull the ripcord. But on my second jump, when we were way up, he had a tough time seeing where we were, but he finally got it figured out, and he says, I'll circle around one more time. This was a smaller airplane, a Cub, with just like a saddle and a horse saddle, one little stirrup. Well, I got my foot in the darn thing, but then I couldn't get my foot out to turn around to jump. So I says, hey, I'm stuck here. I can't turn around in this damn step. He says, well, you got to let go right now, otherwise we'll have to go around again. I says, okay, and I just let myself fall back. And when I was doing it, I looked at him, and I winked at him. He comes down and he says, God damn you got a lot of guts. That's what he said to me. I didn't realize I was doing it. But in the excitement, somehow or other, and I was falling back, I just winked at him and kept going. And when I pulled the chute, that was a perfect opening. I just went right into a nice little row, I don't know what you want to call it, coast. But I missed the airport by a mile and a half. You were not able then to, you were not experienced enough then to do it right. Yeah, but a crosswind caught me. I was practicing turning the chute to steer it and that. And the airport was here, see, and I would want to face, go towards the airport. And I went and I wasn't going towards the airport, I was going this way. Oh, no, I got a crosswind. He told me about that. You might catch a crosswind today. Well, then I landed, I tried to land in one open field. I aimed for it. All of a sudden, I realized I was going over. I steered different and shot over a patch of woods into an open grain field. I then moved it so that I kind of slowed down. And I landed within five feet of a fence, and on the other side of the fence was a fruit orchard. The top of the parachute went on the fruit tree. But while we were coming down, when I got up and I was going to start bringing the chute in, here was two farm kids sitting on the fence. They said, did you see me come down? Yeah, that's why we're here. We saw you coming down. And so the one helped me get the parachute out of the tree, and I told the other one to tell him to go ask if his dad had a telephone, go up to the farmhouse and have your dad tell him that I'm okay, that I landed and everything is okay. So when we get up there, here he is. The guy is all right, but I don't know where the airplane crashed. He thought I had bailed out of an airplane. It was crashing, going down. So they thought you were the pilot. Yeah, he thought I was the pilot. So finally I said, let me talk on the phone. It was a crank phone. That's how long ago it was. I kind of thought he was a little bit excited. He told me three different things. But they were real nice, and then we just waited until a kind of a van come and pick me up from the airport and brought me back. But this was your second jump knot. Yeah, yeah. How were you experienced to land? I mean, you've got to do it in a special way so you don't break your bones and legs and arms. Were you really experienced to take the bouncing? I was expert in landing because I belonged to the Swedish gym, Trumbling Troop. And the instructor says, that's in your favor. Because when you tumble and go over horses and all that stuff, you learn how to fall down. So you never hurt yourself then in the... No. In fact, I was an assistant instructor in parachute rigger school because I had made a couple of parachute jumps, and then I was pretty good at tumbling and that. And I showed my instructor what I could do from the Swedish gym scene. He says, I need you. He said, I can help. You can help me. Because there is what they call a parachute roll. You jump off a 20-foot tower into a pile of sand, and you go into a roll. And I was kind of helping him on that. So I was pretty lucky. I got a pretty good deal. Were there any more young people like you from Rockford that became parachutists? Were you the only one? No. I ran around with a bunch of Swedes and Norwegians, but the Norwegians were ski jumpers. And they told me I was crazy jumping out of an airplane. And I told them they were crazy going off a ski jump. Yeah, Bob Uppergard. I'll never forget him. He had distance every time. But one thing that's against you is if you wave your arms when you're going. And he was an arm waver. But he always had the farthest distance. But he got penalized because of poor... Style. Style. Form. Form. But he used to say I was nuts for jumping out of an airplane. Then World War II come along and... Did you ask for parachute school then when you came out in the Army? You were drafted then. Well... 1942 or 43? 41. 43 is when I went in, yeah. Did you ask for parachute service then? I got the Navy. And then you ask for your schools. I was a machinist before that. Did you work at Sunstance? Yeah. I started there in 39. Well, anyway... Everybody that worked at Sunstance got a deferment unless they went down to the draft board and signed papers. Wavering deferments. My cousin, Bert Carlson, and I went down and signed papers and they said... If you're physically fit, even the president can't keep you out. Well, that means I was a volunteer. I wasn't drafted. I volunteered to go in. Well, then when I went for parachute rigger school, they put me down as machinist mate instead. Machinist school. And I went back because we could ask to do that. I said I'd rather strike for parachute rigger school. And I said the reason why is I worked on the machine 12 hours on and 12 hours off. Every 13 days I get one day off. And I said I want to get away from machines. Well, they said that's your best qualification. But I used to make parachute jumps. I'd like to try parachute school. Well, I don't know. Well, then I left and the next day I asked my commanding officer, Can I go back to strike for parachute rigger school? I went there. He said I got your records. You signed papers wavering deferments, didn't you? And I said yeah. So then he went in and the lieutenant commander, he's the guy, the next step is he wears scrambled eggs. But anyway, he come out and he says, I hear you're pretty anxious to make parachute rigger school. And I told him why. I didn't want to work on machines. They were driving me crazy. And I said I think I can do more good in parachute rigger school. Out of 160 of us, only two of us made service school. Out of 160 guys in boot camp, the other guy was a little Jewish lad, LeCounts, had an IQ of 160. He was a genius. They gave him quartermaster school and I made parachute rigger school. I had a great big strapping guy come up to me. He says, God damn it, Agent, I'm a lieutenant in a state police force. He says here you make parachute rigger school, they won't even give me anything. What IQ did you have? Huh? What IQ did you have? Me? Yeah. About average, 118 I think, something like that. I was just average. But you made it. Huh? You and the other one, you made it. Yeah, oh yeah. And then I went to parachute rigger school. See, what a parachute rigger is, is nothing but a serviceman. He maintains all life-saving equipment, parachutes, para rafts, you have to sit on a raft. And then if they're in the water, they take the raft out and pull a CO2 capsule and it opens up the raft. And that was my job, was to maintain life-saving equipment. Your strategy was to jump yourself, though, to be able to jump. Yeah. That was your interest. I made my third parachute jump in parachute rigger school because when you graduate, you had to pack your own chute and go up and jump it. If you refused to do that, no matter how good your grades are, they wouldn't let you be a parachute rigger because you don't have faith in your own work. And if you want to know the truth, I was scared that third jump. I was supposed to bail out at 2,000 feet, but it was 1,800 feet when we finally did bail out. I had 11 seconds to live if the chute didn't open. What was that? Corpus Christi, Texas. But I was lucky. I had good duty. I went and I got shipped over to Hawaii. That wasn't a state in those days. And I didn't work in the parachute loft. They took six of us and had us learn sea survival training. Anybody that didn't have survival training in Pensacola, Florida, or any stateside that learned how to be a pilot or a radio man, they had to come through us. So we lived with the Marines for three months learning sea survival training. The only time I packed parachutes is when the fleet came in and they needed a couple extra hands. So then they called us in, and then we'd help repair parachutes and that. But other than that, there were six of us. There was martial law. You had to be off the street in Honolulu by 6 o'clock, but we didn't. We had ships sealed on our passes so we could come and go anywhere we wanted to, restricted areas or not. I got a kick out of that. Then during the war, where did you see action? No, I didn't. I was an instructor in the survival training. Then I got a letter from home saying my brother-in-law got killed in the Battle of the Bulge. I went up to volunteer for further fleet duty, and he got my records and says, we got you classified as strategic material. We can't let you go. Your brother-in-law, was that your wife's brother? My sister's. Oh, your sister's husband. Sister's husband, yeah. He was a Swede? No, he was German, too. So he was fighting against his own people then? Huh? So your brother-in-law, he was fighting against his own people then? Right, right, in the Battle of the Bulges when he got it. Here's a funny thing that happened. My sister had a boy and a girl. They were brand new, 11 months apart, 1 and 2 years old. And one night she woke up and all she saw was blood in front of her. And she lived with my folks then, with the two kids. And she ran into my parents' bedroom and says, something's happened to Al. Al just got killed. All I can see is blood. So then my mother and sister stayed up all night that night, and my mother's kind of psychic anyway, and they decided that in five days they were going to get a telegram saying that Al had got killed. And it came? Yes. The old bear. And he had his choice between Army and Navy because he didn't like ñ he couldn't swim. He didn't want to go in the Navy. But he got killed in the Battle of the Bulges. But my sister knew the day he got killed. God bless his heart. Was he shipped back to Rockford? No. No, he's buried in Germany or wherever it is. I think it's there. But my sister says, I don't want to go through that again. That's why she didn't want him to be brought back. So she was left then with two small kids? Yeah. They took care of widows of World War II very well. And like I say, her daughter is 43 and a grandma, and her son is 42, because there's, I think, 11 months difference. But she went out to Colorado with my folks when they retired naturally because she's living with them. And so now she's a native of Denver area. So she didn't remarry? Never remarried. How did she meet her husband? Was it through your wife? I really don't know there. That I don't know much about. Were you married when you were in the service? Yeah. You were married then? Three weeks before World War II, we got married. And I told my wife, I says, this was on November 15th. We got married on my parents' wedding anniversary. My sister and I stood up for each other when we got married. And being in the wintertime, I had already been out to Pike's Peak the year before on a trip, four of us guys, and we drove up Pike's Peak. There were seven watering stations, and we had to stop at every one because the car would boil over. When I was out there two weeks ago, there's only two. Cars are better now. The only car that could go up Pike's Peak then was a Ford V8. It was a cold-hearted motor, evidently. But anyway, gee, I forget what I was going to say now. Oh, yeah, I told my wife, I like Pike's Peak so well, we'll go out there next summer on our vacation for our honeymoon. We'll have been married 45 years this November 15th, but my wife has got a picture of me 45 years later, honeymoon. My son married an Italian girl. My grandson and granddaughter are half Italian, one-fourth Swedish, and one-fourth German. That's how fast it changes. When I was a kid, when you said somebody's name, you always figured out what nationality he was. They don't do that anymore. What did your mother say when you brought home Adeline for a date, for instance, and told her, you know, this is my date or fiancée? She didn't at that time. I don't remember saying anything. But before that, she did say, Kenneth, I hope someday when you marry a girl that she's a Swedish girl. And all I says, Mom, I says, I hope for your sake she's Swedish, but if I have somebody that isn't Swedish, I hope you'll still like her. Oh, I'll have to. I remember that. But she never said anything about my wife. So it worked out fine then? It worked out real good. Where did you marry now? In what church? In the Parsonage of... Salem? No, Zion. Zion Church. Was she Lutheran too? She was German Lutheran of the Missouri Synod, and I'm Swedish Lutheran of the Augustana Synod. Did you stay in the Salem Lutheran Church then? Well, Bunny, we belonged, we stayed active, and she even was in the choir while I was in the Navy in World War II. In the Swedish church? Yeah, she sang, but she didn't sing Swedish. She was just there for English service. But then when we came back, there's a Tabor Lutheran Church right up here, and we joined up there. We were married by a Reverend Knox at Zion. And then a Reverend Anderson was the one who confirmed our kids and baptized our kids at Tabor. So how long did you stay in service then during the war? Just two years. Two years? Yeah. Not quite two years, actually, which I'm not sorry for. I had buddies that had been in four and five years. I'm grateful that I only had to put in two, or not quite two. And many never came back? And many of them never came back? My brother-in-law was one of them that never came back. And the sad thing was we were just starting to be real brother-in-laws, real buddies. When you came back then after the service, did you continue to jump out of airplanes parachuting or you dropped? No, I had done it. That was enough. You proved you could do it? I proved I could do it, and that was it. It was a foolish thing. But then what the kids my age in those days did, they had motorcycles. They'd go down the highway, and they'd brag about they'd ride the black line. Cars coming both ways, and they'd go right down the black line, in other words, the middle, the tarred line for the middle. They bragged about that. But that was good, you know, and they were brave. I never cared. I never owned a motorcycle. I never got excited about that kind of stuff. What were you doing during the Depression, the hard years when people were laid off from the factories? Well, one thing, have you ever heard of the CCCs? The camps? Civilian Conservation Corps? Yes. I was in Company 3686. I lived on Isle Royale up in Lake Superior. We broke ice to get into the island and to Siskiwoot Bay, and in the fall we walked out to the Army tug to get out because the ice was four inches thick, and you can walk on four inches of ice. They couldn't let the horses go out on the ice, us guys, and they only wanted two of us together at any one time. But I was in the CCCs for a while. How long? About a year and two weeks. And you stayed all the time after that? No. Went into Skokie Valley, Illinois, Camp Skokie they called it. That was a major CC place. There was about eight or ten CC camps there with about 180 guys to camp. Well, then I was in a traveling company, so they said we were supposed to at first go out west to fight forest fires, but we didn't. They said Company 3686 is slated for Isle Royale. There were two CC camps on Isle Royale. Isle Royale was 44 miles long and between 8 and 11 miles wide at its widest. And we were in what they called a raw material camp. We cut trees down and made cedar shingles for the roofs and stuff like that. And at Camp Rock Harbor, they built log cabins and put the roofs together. Although I got a month's duty over at Rock Harbor, too. I liked that. That was fun. And now it's a national park. How much were you paid then? You hit something that I just thought about the other day. We get $5 a month, and $25 went home to the folks. I couldn't get any of that back. The other guys, the middle of the month was their big payday because the 25 would come back. I had to give $2.50 out of my $5 and mail home. And here about three years ago, I woke up one morning and I says, Kenny, do you realize you worked for a whole year for $30? That's the truth. $2.50 a month times 12. That's all you got. I got $30 for one year's work in cash. I never thought of it that way before. The folks needed the money, and I gave them half of my $5. I've told my grandkids that. Oh, that was different in those days, huh? But I never heard. Did your dad work during that time? He was an automobile mechanic, and he could only work part-time in that because things were so tough. Like there was an Olsen & Linden grocery store. He repaired their service delivery truck once in a while. Well, then he got credit for groceries. He never got paid in money, but he got credit for groceries. So that's how he did it. And he, for farmers, he would help repair tractors and get them ready for spring plowing, re-grease the wheels and all of that. He'd give them a half a hog or half a dozen chickens or something like that. Where did they live here in Rockford, closer to downtown or up around here? My folks? Yeah. Did they have their own house? They had their own house in Rolling Green. Rolling Green. 1939. I had to sign for my dad because he had gone bankrupt like a few million other people. Your dad? Yeah. What happened then? Well, then that's why he was on relief and that. But he could repair cars, but he couldn't get paid money, so he got paid in food. How did he get bankrupt? Did he own the garage? He had the garage down in Cherry Valley, and the farmers didn't have any money, and that was most of his customers. And they loaded him down with so many hogs and half cows and that he couldn't do anything with them. You can't buy things that way, so it ended up he had to file bankruptcy. So you had to help out and pitch in? Yeah. Did they foreclose on the garage then and the house? Well, the house was after that, bankruptcy. He couldn't sign for a loan then? No, no. I had to sign for him. I was of age. At least they accepted me. Well, it ended up in the end when they finally got okay. Hugo Olsen was president of Sunstrands. His son Bruce Olsen was afterwards. Well, Hugo came over from Sweden about the same time Dad did. Hugo Olsen, Swan Hillman, and all them guys. Well, anyway, Hugo says to Martin Hawkinson, I know Siggy Cardell. I'll personally sign for him, too. Because even though I had signed for him, it was doubtful that he might not get it, see? It was FHA. You get a kick out of this. $3,900 FHA loan for a house in Rolling Green. A new one? A brand new one. And Martin Hawkinson was the builder? No, we did all the work ourselves. My dad's uncle was a carpenter, and actually he was a cabinet maker. And so he helped us put the hardwood floors, and then he told us what to do, and we did it. And the house is still there? Yeah. But $3,900 FHA loan. Before he moved away from there, he was paying more for taxes than he was on the house. Yeah, I imagine you're going to want to go. So you were able to pull him through? Yeah. The depression? Yeah, see, I was working at Sunstrands then. So when you started at Sunstrands, there were no unions then there at Sunstrands? No, no. They came in later? No, that's why I'm hard of hearing, because nowadays when you work in the test lab, you wear big muffs and stuff like that. Well, they didn't have anything like that in those days. Then who were you hearing? I wore a hearing aid. Oh, I see. But I buried so many buddies, I just don't let a fight bother me too much. In fact, like I say, my cousin just passed away, the one that told me my dad was 16 when he came over. I never knew that. So there was hardship? Huh? So there was hardship? Yeah. A lot of hardship, yeah. Did they lose any money in the bank and all? Did you have any bank invested in the bank? No, really no. Dad did, I think he had $80-some. I had $17 that I lost. In the bank? Yeah, Citibank, Broadway and Seventh. It was in the savings account. I don't even think we got interest on the money in those days. But, no, a lot of our friends lost a lot of money, though. Wow. Tough years. Yeah. We were lucky because Dad kept food in the house because he could help work on this and that. He still helped the farmers get their tractors ready for spring plowing. In those days, tractors didn't have rubber wheels. They had lugs, steel lugs. The highways, they weren't highways, the roads, all said tractors with steel lugs have to go on the side. They can't drive on the road, it'd chew it up. And they were gravel roads anyway. How about your brother now? What kind of work was he doing during the Depression? My brother? Yeah. He's ten years younger, so... Ten years younger, so he didn't have to work then during that time? No, no. So you were actually the breadwinner in the family then for a while there? Yes. They had to depend on you? They did, really, because they had to get the money from me to buy the house and everything else. So when you came to Sundstrand, what kind of work were you learning? I was an all-around machinist. I started out in the drills, then I went to the lathes, then I went to the mills, then I went to the test lab. Because I could do all that work myself in the test lab, if you needed something to be machined, if you needed something to be machined, I'd come in at night and tear down a production setup, do my work on it, and then set it back up again, and then morning we got the part ready to build a test stand. So they liked that. That expedited it. And I did that until I finally left Sundstrand. How many years did you work there? Fifteen and a half years. And then it was Union? No. No.