 Yeah, we have 10th of August, 1987. I'm sitting together with Carl Anderson in Detroit, Michigan. And he was born 1913, 23rd of May. And both your parents, they were Swedes? Both my parents were Swedes. Do you know when they came over here? Their father? My father was a sailor, and he came into this country, I believe, from the West Coast, or could have been on the East Coast. And he sailed mostly around the world at the time. He came in this country about 1905. Now, he was caught in the earthquake in San Francisco, which I think was 1907. 1906, I believe it was. It was in 1906? Well, whatever. Anyway, I know he was in the country at that time, when the earthquake happened. My mother came from Sweden. Her mother was already here, and she settled in Hartford, Connecticut. My father and mother met in Hartford, Connecticut. My father had contacted, it isn't malaria, it's, what's the other? Typhus? Not typhus. There's another thing that was going on when he contacted when he was in China. Yellow fever? Not the yellow fever. Well, anyway, he was in the country, and he had a yellow fever. It'll come to me later. But anyway, after he met my mother, he came down with this high-fevered thing, and he was given six months to live. And he left the Connecticut area and went up into Canada and stayed up there. In the meantime, my mother and her sister, who was married and with a child, had come to Detroit when the automobile industry was starting up in about 1911 or 12. And she came here intending to stay just a short time and go back to Hartford. In the meantime, my dad had got cured from his, gosh, I can't think of what it was. I can't remember. I can't remember. But he had this feverish thing. I'm not thinking of a small one. Something in malaria, what was it? There was a thing at that time. They were trying to find a cure for it. Wasn't it smallpox? Malaria? My mind is blank. But anyway, he got it, but he contacted and he would come up every once in a while and get feverish. And the doctor HURST Well, did it happen in the summer or did it get the cold? VAILE Well, it depended on the time of the year, and the doctors had no cure for it. And the only thing they told him to do was get up in the cold climate. And then when he was up there, he stayed up in Canada for about two years or so. HURST He was alone then? VAILE What? HURST He was alone up there in Canada? He was alone? VAILE Oh, no. Well, he worked on the farms. He worked in the wheat belt. The wheat belt up in Alberta. I think he was up in the Alberta area. And when my mother came to Detroit, they were corresponding. They were not married yet. And so he decided to come down to Detroit where the automobile industry was starting up. And he came here and they decided to get married about 1912. And I was born in 13. And then as the automobile industry built up and up, and that's a time when you could go from one job to another. And he always had a job. And he ended up at Hudson about 1915. And he worked there for the number of years until he retired. HURST Did he get a relapse of this sickness again? VAILE Well, no. It didn't seem to come up anymore. I'm trying to think of the name of it. Malaria? No, it wasn't malaria. It was ‑‑ I can't think of it. But anyway, he settled here and they raised a family. My sister was born about 1918. That's about the summary of it. And what Swedish background we had was through the church. HURST So they married in the Swedish church, then? VAILE Well, it was on the west side. HURST The Bethlehem. VAILE The Bethlehem was not ‑‑ the east side was not established yet. The east side was established in about 1919. And it was the Bethlehem church out on the west side. But my parents never became a member of the church. And then when they built on the east side, then they took me. I mean, this is the tradition that the parents had. And raised their children up to their confirmation in church. And after that, they could make their own decisions. And that's the way I was handled and my sister was handled. HURST I see. But they never became members. VAILE They never became members. She worked in the church and with the ladies groups and so forth, but never became a member. There were members of the lodge, the Vasa Lodge. HURST Were there members of the lodge too? VAILE No, just the Vasa. HURST Just Vasa from lodge. VAILE Yeah. HURST So you were baptized then in the Immanuel? VAILE No, it would be Bethany. HURST Bethany out there. VAILE That's right. I assume maybe I was not baptized in that church. I could have been a pastor from a local church on the east side because the Swedish background people did not establish a church until 1919. HURST And it was established on what was the name of the street? VAILE Beneteau. HURST Beneteau. VAILE Yeah. The chapel. HURST And when did you start to attend there? VAILE Well, I would say shortly about in 1920 when they started Sunday school in that. I was about six, seven years old. HURST You went to Sunday school then? VAILE I went to Sunday school. HURST Was that in Swedish? VAILE Everything in the church service when I first started as a kid was in Swedish. Then it gradually changed. One service a month was in English. Later on it was two services a month in English. And then it went to three Sunday. Then finally Swedish was dropped. HURST What about confirmation classes? Were you instructed in Swedish? VAILE No. I was instructed in English. The only Swedish I had was when we had a summer class. HURST Four or five weeks? VAILE Yeah, something like that. Four or five weeks and they tried to teach us Swedish, which I balked against it. HURST You did? VAILE Yes. I don't know why, but it's one of those things. Why should I learn another language? How do you tell a five or six year old that? He said, I'll learn English. HURST Did you pick up any Swedish in your home village? VAILE No. The only thing, I understood certain things in talking. HURST What they said? VAILE What they said. Or because I knew of the incident, something about the incident, and I could piece it together. Or they said enough English in their Swedish that I picked it up. That was the only way I picked it up. HURST Your sister, now, was she the same way? She didn't want to? VAILE Well, yeah, she lives out east now. She's married and lives out in Connecticut. So I don't have really the close contact. HURST What I mean was she was growing up together with you? VAILE She had no inkling for the language either. HURST The area where you live now, was it particularly Swedish? VAILE No. It was mixed. It was in the manufacturing area, you know, where all nationalities were in the neighborhood. We had few Swedes around us because we lived close to the church, and there were Swedes living around. But we wouldn't say it's a—where we lived was totally a Swedish neighborhood. It was a mixed neighborhood. HURST Which nationality was the dominating then? Irish, or Pemmins? VAILE Well, it was pretty hard to say. It was strong in a little of everything. A little Italian. HURST What about the Polish people there? VAILE Well, Polish, but Polish were stronger up in Hamtramck in that area. They had their areas where they were condemned, but not in this area. It was more German and Irish, and it was settled in there. HURST So there was—you don't remember any particular Swedish area there in the Klaren or—? VAILE No. The thing is when my parents went to a Swedish picnic or to the Vasa meetings or something like that, or Vasa doings for children at Christmas time and so forth. That was the only time. HURST There was no neighbor that you could call Swedish then? VAILE No, not that I know of. HURST Do you remember going to Lapeer? VAILE I went up to Lapeer, yes. My father was in Annet going up there and starting it. But he was stubborn, and he dropped out. HURST So he didn't buy any property? VAILE He bought a piece of property there, and they changed the rules. He thought there was no dues if he paid for his lot, and he didn't like the setup, so he withdrew. So they gave him his money back for his lot, and he stayed out of it. HURST But he still belonged to Fram Lodz? VAILE He belonged to Fram Lodz until when he died. HURST Was he an officer of the Lodz at any time? VAILE That I can't remember. I don't think he was. HURST So did you become a member then of the Emmanuel when you got older? VAILE When I was confirmed, I was automatically a member. HURST Did you stay in the Sherstown? VAILE Well, as a kid you kind of dropped away from it and you come back. And I come back and went on up, and then when we moved from Beneteau up here, I went away in the Army for five years. HURST Oh, that was during the Second World War? VAILE During the war, yeah. And then when I came back from the service, and then when I married my first wife, although I didn't marry her here, I went out to Omaha, Nebraska. Her father was out there at the Deaconess Institute. That's a Swedish background in Augustana service. And we were married out there. HURST I see. What kind of work was he doing at the Emmanuel? VAILE Pardon? HURST What kind of work was he doing? VAILE He was retired. HURST Oh, he was retired. VAILE Yeah. He, I went out the year before to see him, and he had Parkinson's disease, you know, because I wanted to find out if I married her, would we take care of him. And when I saw the situation there, that they were taking better care of him out there than I could ever give him. HURST He was a resident then at the Emmanuel? VAILE Yeah, he was a resident and retired there. He worked in the laundry part and the maintenance part there at the Deaconess Institute. And all those things have changed over the years now. HURST So you married your first wife, Vivian Nelson, in the VAILE Nelson. HURST Nelson, after the Second World War? VAILE After the Second World War. HURST And then you married in the Emmanuel Church? VAILE No, I went out to Omaha to get married. HURST And you married out there? VAILE I married out there because her father was there, and I didn't think he was the ability to travel. I felt that I'd go out there and get married because we live in Detroit, we'd see my parents all the time. When vacation time came, I would go out and see him until he passed away, which was a couple years after. HURST So you married in the Augustana Lutheran out there? VAILE The Augustana Church out there, in fact, the church on the grounds. HURST Well, it was the Deaconess grounds, you know, they had the children's home, they had a hospital unit, and they had the teaching for the Deaconess school, and they also had a church in there. And I went to that church, and we were married in that church. VAILE And then you came back to live here in Detroit? HURST I came back and lived in Detroit. VAILE So you served five years in the service? HURST About five years, yeah. VAILE You were overseas then? HURST Last part of the war. I went in in 1940 before we got into the war. I served the first year in Selective Service. I served one year, I was over 28, so I got out at the end of my year. VAILE You were drafted then? HURST Well, you consider I was drafted, but I volunteered to go in and be first in the call instead of waiting for my number to come up. VAILE You could select your VAILE Well, you're trying to select your thing, you're trying to get your year in. I had trouble with my leg walking, but I passed the examination and I went into the service. I thought I'd do the one year, nobody was thinking about war for the United States, and get my one year in and get out, and I'd be done. And I did get out about November 22nd, 23rd, and I was holding a home a couple weeks in December 7th, and we were in it. Then I was called back into the service and stayed all the way in. VAILE So what kind of work were you doing then before the war started? HURST I was working at Hudson's as a guard. I worked up in the trim shop for a while, too, but I got into the guard because it was more steady. Work at that time was a seasonal thing. When production was high, everybody working, and then when production was down, you were laid off. And I looked at the guard service and I liked that a little better and I went in there because it was more steady. VAILE So you remember the depression and you were ready to start work during the depression? HURST Depression? VAILE Yeah. HURST No, well, I wasn't really working during depression because I didn't get the job until after we were coming out of the depression. VAILE Oh, I see. So it was harder to— HURST Yeah. I got to work in about 37, 38. We were just coming out. VAILE And at that time there were no unions or any— HURST No, there was no unions. VAILE They were starting right after— HURST Yeah, they were started up, you know, that after when I came home from the service and that. VAILE What did the people, the Swedish people say about the unions? Walter Ruther, he was big here, of course. HURST Yeah, he was a hero at that time. Well, you got to understand, too, the makeup of the automobile industry was different. That foreman in the area of the car making, he was the king. And he wanted to make production and he wanted the younger men. When the men got a little too old and couldn't keep up with the work, he was laid off, they had no comeback. We had no Social Security at the time. Now I'm talking before the war. And there was no, you know, helping of the person. And that brought on the union, a lot of the union. VAILE So the foreman, he was, like you said, the king. HURST He was the king in that area of his—he had to get that production out in his area. VAILE And he was an instrument of the management. HURST That's right. VAILE How old were the people then when they started to slack down a little bit, in the 50s? HURST Well, it all depends. Some people slowed down at 40 and some slowed down at 50. VAILE And off they went. HURST Well, if they weren't hired when they come back the next season for being called back, they weren't called back. They were just out or had to find something else. It was really rough in those days. VAILE So, well, nowadays, you know, if you're over 50, it's hard to get a job. HURST That's right. VAILE In those days it was worse because they couldn't let them out much earlier. HURST That's right. It was physical work. VAILE And it was hard work. Like your father now, did he— HURST My father was a maintenance man, a steam fitter or plumbing like, but it was rough plumbing. And he worked hard. He knew his trade. VAILE But to be on the assembly line— HURST Beyond the assembly line was tough. VAILE It was really slave labor. HURST That's right. That car came out fast. And when you figure a car a minute and put those pieces on— VAILE I can't understand how they could do that day after day after day. HURST That's it, hour after hour. And those cars accumulated. If you had a production line that was producing, say, 70 or 80 cars an hour, that's a little more than one a minute. Now if you took 80 cars and counted them out, how much space that would take. That's only one hour. Two hours, you'd double that space. Three hours, eight hour a day. And then before the war, it was 48 hour a week. It was eight hour a day and a half a day Saturday. And that was a 48 hour a week. That was a long week for those men. But they did it. When you first went in and started, it was really rough. You got hardened to it. And after that, you eased into it. And you learned shortcuts. HURST So what, just five hours a day from Ford started? That was in 1918, 1919? VAILE Was it in the 20s, right after the war? HURST Maybe it was in the 20s. It was shortly after the war, I think. And that was up in Highland Park before he moved out to Rue. That was the big thing. That drew in people from all over the world. VAILE So what was the intention of Henry Ford there? Had there been a piece of work before? The workers? Oh, how could he guarantee five hours a day? Did they slow down then, or did they work as hard as before? HURST Well, that I don't know how the plan was. You got to ñ when a man worked eight hour a day at 50 or 60 cents an hour, and for eight hours, that was, say, at 80 cents an hour. And eight times eight is six dollars and 40 cents. Well, it would be less. It would be about 60 cents. Well, let's say 60 cents an hour, and eight hours, that's four dollars and 80 cents, roughly. So that's what the men were working for, is about 60 to 65 cents an hour. Now we're just talking about production workers. But then again, you could go out and buy stuff for a lot of money. Now like on Saturday, my mother, I'd have to take my wagon with me. My mother would go up to the corner store, and I can remember for a five dollar bill, she could fill that wagon and take home groceries that lasted for the week and still got change back over from the five dollars. Now today with the economy, you can take 30 or 40 dollars into the store, you can carry it out in your hands, and you still don't have any money left over. See that's the economy changing. Sure you make a lot more per hour, but you also spend a lot more. But what I was thinking about here is that let's say they had five fifty cents an hour, and ten hour work day. There was ten hours work day then. Yeah, about ten hours. It would be five dollars. But they probably had less than five dollars, because these five dollars, they went all over the world, you know, you just think they got paid five dollars. Ford's theory at the five dollars a day was so those people could have money to buy his car. That was his theory. That was the bottom line. That was the bottom line, to buy his car. The thing in studying, who affected us most, and Ford is one of the higher ones because it took us out of the rural area into the city, and from the city back out into the rural because we could travel. And we could travel all over the country. They made work for making the roads and so forth. That expanded us. So how long did they continue the five dollars a day because they had to go up then? Well, I don't know. I haven't studied anything on that line. But it went for a period of time. Then when the unions came in, they were trying to raise the wages and so forth, and cutting down the work periods and things like that. So when they got five dollars a day, there was no talk about union organizing or anything like that? No, not that. They were happy then? No, it was more than they ever thought. That's right. But then everything else went up, started to climb, and the five dollars didn't mean too much. So the twenties, they were quite good then? Well, it was quite good, but you also came into a little depression, and naturally when the stock market failed, what, in 29? And then that just dropped the bottom out of everything because everything was built on paper money. You were a millionaire, but it was only on paper. So then the factories and the mills and the assemblies, they shut down completely in the twenties then? Just about, yeah. Because my dad, when he was working, these men in maintenance, they agreed to work just two days a week. Mother could set the table. I never knew a really hard starving time. It wasn't the food I wanted, I wanted something better, but I didn't starve. I had bread and milk on the table. And my entertainment was to go down to the river, go swimming in the wintertime, go tobogganing or something like that. Anything that was free, you entertained yourself. You made out. Did you do anything before you started to work? No, just went to school, that was all. When you came back after the war, you had no trouble to get a job? No, went right back to where I left off. Was it easier for you because you served in the service? Well, I didn't really try to get a different type of job. I thought I'd go back. I was making pretty good money. I was living at home at the time and things were very comfortable for me. So you started at Hudson then? Yeah, went right back to Hudson. I stayed there until they folded up and moved up to Wisconsin. That was the one that became the American? Became American Motors, changed to American Motors. Hudson and Ashen. That's right, and Calvinator. And now it's back in Detroit again? Well, it's back with Chrysler now. So then you got more involved with the church later on then? Pardon? Did you get more involved with the Vanderluten Church then or is that in later years? Well, yeah, in later years because I moved into the neighborhood. After I got married, I was living further away, but I was looking to buy a house in this neighborhood. And there had to be one that come up. It was very hard to find one, a house in this neighborhood. Was it in the 60s or 70s? No, in the beginning of the 50s. Oh, this place was crowded. Work was plentiful here. Work was good. Who was moving in here? Quite a few Swedes? Well, some Swedes moved in here because the church was located here. They were coming out of the Beneteau area and moving up here close to the church. Why did they move away from Beneteau? Was there changing neighborhoods? Well, it wasn't so much, well, part of it was changing neighborhoods, part some of these men had worked and got better wages, better jobs, better income. Their wives wanted a better home and things like that. Now down there, there were framed houses. Now you look in this neighborhood, you will see it's brick houses. Go by the way the city was built, you know, it was framed houses. And then in the 30s, if you could get a house built in the 30s, they were well built in brick because wages were cheap and so forth. And that's what made it. And the old church was also framed? It was a chapel. It was a framed chapel. And when they made the plans to move out here, you know, to raise the money and so forth, it was a tough struggle because they started in 29 and we went right into the Depression. You couldn't get nothing. We were in a tough. I can't remember the time when the income of the church for the whole year amounted to what we take in one Sunday here now. That's how close it was. But I wasn't on the board or anything, but I knew of it and read the records and these men who kept it. So it was relocated into this area on Shannon's Park in 19— That's right. —about, what is it, 1939, 38, 39, just before the war. So what happened? You were not able to construct it before the war though? This was the—it was built before the war. Now but you remember, it wasn't this section here we're sitting in. It was just the church. This was an empty lot. This was—this is the education building or— No, it's administration office and the gym, kitchen was designed. It cost more for this building than the original church, twice as much. Going up so much then. Pardon? Going up so much. Yeah, that's right. But now what I was thinking about, I said my father's disease, it was typhoid. Well, typhoid. Typhoid he got. Now to show you, when I went through an operation for my hip about twenty years ago, I had an internist taking care of me. And I was put under ether on a Tuesday and I didn't come out of it until Saturday. But I knew people were around me. I could hear them. They changed my bedding and they couldn't understand I was sweating so much. And Monday this internist came to me and asked if I had tuberculosis in the family and I said no. He came back to me Tuesday and asked again if I had tuberculosis and I said no. And when he come in Wednesday, he said, was there any typhoid in the family? I said yes, my father had it. He said your father gave you typhoid. So I had the germ in me but it was dormant because the antibiotics surfaced it. And he said your father left you with a present. So I had the typhoid germ in me. But it didn't hurt anybody or anything in the family. So you got too much medication? Well I had to get a lot of medication, you know, to keep anything from happening. Because I sweated so much they didn't understand it at the time when I was under because I was sweating and fighting. But when I came out of it, I was all right. I was calm. Nothing's ever affected me. But he said just watch it in case of anything in medicine in the future, be careful. So they wouldn't give you so much? Well, what do you call it, antibiotics won't hurt me, penicillin and so forth because I'm not allergic to it. Some people are. So you had a close call too? Well I had to find out. But you never had any recurrence? Reoccurrence, but my father had it when I told you before he got married he went up to Canada. At that time the doctor gave him six months to live and the man lived way up until his eighties. That was a wrong prediction. Well, it was a wrong prediction. You can't believe the doctors all the time. No. That's what they knew at the time. So you had an accident with your hip? I had it when I was about seventeen, I put my hip out of place and I was diagnosed wrong. And I walked so bad I went to another doctor and he saw my hip was out of place. The first doctor didn't realize it. Did you play football? No. I just tripped coming off one of the streetcars in Detroit and just dropped quite a way and landed on one leg and just pushed it out of the joint. No pain at all. All my pain was in my knee. And the doctor that operated on me said that when I come out of it, he said, no hard sports, no baseball, no football, but go swimming. Do all the swimming I wanted. But he said as the years go by you will be very much in an arthritic condition and things will happen. And well, in the meantime they developed this replacement of bones and so forth. And so I looked into it and I had an operation. And I was heading for the wheelchair anyway. So I went and had the operation. But it hadn't been too successful with me, but I would not hold back anybody because where I have not been too successful, other people have been very successful. HURST And it was because of only diagnose in the beginning. STEELE Yeah, it was diagnose wrong in the beginning. That's one of those things. That's life. HURST So you had no sports then in your ñ STEELE Well, in my early years, no, I didn't take any part. Just swimming is about the only thing. And yet I went into the Army, served my five years. But I was on limited service at times. I was attached to bomb squadrons and things like that and doing administration work. Because for every man that's up in the front line, you got to have ten men in back to service them. And I was one of those ten in the back. HURST Boy, you can't be that many. STEELE It takes about ten men to keep that one man up in the front. HURST Ten to one. STEELE Ten to one. You had a million men in the U.S. service, was on the front line. And you had an Army of ten million men. HURST It sounds almost unbelievable. STEELE Well, you check it. HURST You have. STEELE That's housing and everything else and supplies and supporting that man up in the front. It's a ten to one percentage. HURST So do you remember if there were any Swedish sports activities in Detroit? STEELE There was sports activities. Soccer was pushed. And when I was in school, they gave a lot of soccer, too. HURST They did? STEELE They did. I was surprised when I go back on it. But it wasn't as top as baseball was when I was a boy. Football was there, too, in high school, but it wasn't pushed as strong as it is today. Now basketball is coming forward a lot more than that and more expertise in basketball. And they play it different today than they did when I was a boy, because as soon as the basket was made, you came back to the center and re-jumped for the ball. Now today, as soon as the basket is made, they push the ball to the sideline and it goes right out into play. See, it makes it a faster game. See, all these things change. HURST A lot of goals. STEELE That's right. But soccer was there, but like I said, I didn't participate in it. My father talked about it, and from where I got in as a fellow on the shuffleboard years back played soccer here in Detroit. And when we went out to the Bossa Picnic and that, there's always a soccer game. HURST But there was no league here, though, that you remember of? STEELE I can't remember. There was probably a league, but I don't remember it. I wasn't involved with it. HURST It was not noticeable in the local press, for instance? The newspapers didn't write about it? STEELE No, I would say no, unless it was a local thing, something close. You know, like you had a neighborhood newspaper that would put it right up. HURST I thought they were sort of free press. STEELE Try free press and that, no. Soccer came back a couple years later, but now it seems to die away again. They had some up at the Silver Dome and that. They had soccer players from South America and that come in to play league, because South America, well, Mexico, Central America, and Europe was more famed for soccer, because I picked that up in stamp collecting. Soccer is more prominent than baseball or any of the other sports or our football. HURST But it never caught on here? STEELE It never caught on, no. Not to the general public. It would catch on to the few, but not to all of them. HURST Do you remember the Olsen brothers, Carl Olsen and the others? STEELE I know Carl, especially in the shuffleboard, and they're playing and they're soccering. HURST He was a soccer player. STEELE Yeah. HURST And he tried to push it. STEELE He tried to push it, but it just, like I said, it didn't click with the general public, because you can't go into an ethnic group and expect to push it out. And this is also something that was famed in Europe, and yet it didn't come over here strong. Sure, you had the Hungarian teams and Central European type of teams, and you can see that you talk about baseball, and you look at soccer, and over in England, the riots, and that. I don't know about Sweden, but I've read some big riots in these big champion games. HURST How about the second generation or the first generation born here? STEELE Yeah, I'd be first born. HURST You'd be the first generation born here. You didn't have the particular interest for soccer? STEELE No. HURST So you didn't play it then? STEELE I didn't play it, no. I played a little, you know, a kick that was in school, but I didn't know the fundamentals and dribbling and so forth like that or taught any skill. HURST And your father was not interested in it? STEELE No, my father was not interested. HURST So it didn't take on? STEELE It didn't take to me, no. HURST Because I see in other places, the sons of the emigrants... STEELE Some other places it would take. It would be a local thing. Polish were very famous for their soccer games up in Hamtramck. HURST I see. So they had leagues, they were... STEELE They had leagues and so forth, yeah. And like I said, they played it. Maybe the Swedes played against them, but I don't recall it. HURST And so what had happened over the years? Now the Swedes, they got old, of course, the ones that came from Sweden. And did you ask any questions from your parents about what they came from? Did they talk much about their... STEELE No, they never did talk much about it. See, Dad was a black sheep of his family. Like I said, he sailed around the world, worked on ships and that before he came to this country. And he left his family. His brothers and sisters were well educated. And as I understood, my grandfather was supposed to be a well-to-do man in his area in Sweden. I don't know what you call him, a leader or something. And from what I gathered, a farmer and so forth. My dad did go home one time about 1905 or something like that. But he was not accepted. I can see the difference of people coming from Sweden. When they come, they shake hands, they bow and things like that. It's a little touchy thing. They take their hat off and that. My dad was an independent and rebel. He left his hat on and so what? And take me as I am or forget me. See, my dad was a different type. Was he a Democrat? He was a little of everything. He just wanted the man in there would do the most good for the people. How about your mother now on her side? She came from Holland? She came from Holland. Her mother was already over here and she settled in Hartford, Connecticut where she met my dad. And she worked there and I said she came to Detroit because of her sister. And automobile industry was just starting up and they came here and what was thought there was only going to stay here six months or so, she stayed for the rest of her life. And she never went back to Sweden? She never went back to Sweden. My dad went back to Sweden after the war, but she never did. Did he have any correspondence or contacts with her? Well, there was a little correspondence because that's what made his trip to Sweden because one brother or two brothers died or it would be my uncles. And he wanted to go back there. But dad went back. When he came back here, he was disappointed. And when it dragged out from my mother, it was not the same Sweden what he knew as a child, which is the same as to me in Detroit. Detroit is not the same as when I was young. It's different. I got to accept the change. And dad could not accept the change. He expected everything to stand still. It's just like when the Swedes come over here, when you come over here in that period of time, say from 1900 to 19 or before the World War I, 1913, there was that ethnic thing. And then people hung on to it. But the people in Sweden didn't hang on to that. They changed. And so when people go back there, hey, it isn't the way we were taught when we were here, things have changed in Sweden. But we stayed the same. And people don't make that change. You got to take the change. So if you go back to the old neighborhood where you were born, there's no way you can adjust to it in your mind what it is. It's changed too much. It's changed too much. In fact, where my parents had property, Chrysler has taken that over today. The house my mother and dad were living in, and when she had the break-in, she said, I'm going to get out of the neighborhood. And she went east to stay with my sister. We sold the house. That house was deteriorated and tore down within two years after they moved out. That's one of those things. So what kind of changes have happened now? You, the Swedes were living in, well, you were a Swedish family now. Who bought your house? What kind of nationality do you mean? You mean the first one you were born? Well, in the area where I was born and that, it was sold to a real estate people who fixed it up, and they sold it to a colored family. And it was more to get the mortgage out of it. And they couldn't handle the mortgage, I guess, and they just dropped it, and the house deteriorated, and the house had to be torn down before Chrysler's even came in there and took it over. It's like a battlefield in that area. Those houses and streets that I knew and walked as a kid are all out weeds or house deteriorated. The school I went to is torn down. The buildings on the avenue where the business is torn down. There's none of my old, the only landmark one would be the church chapel. But when I went up there and saw it here about a year or so ago, they added on to the back, but it didn't change the front. It was still there. But many of the things in the area is gone. The Polish people now and the Irish, Italians, were they able to live on longer than the Swedes in a particular area? VILSACKA Well, they were up in Hamtramck until they come in there and HURST Yeah, that's the Polish area. VILSACKA Yeah, that's the Polish area. They, you know, it was this Chrysler, General Motors come in there. They called it a pole town. They were buying the property out. And then the city of Detroit buying the property out, and that squeezed a lot of those people out. So where they dispersed to, I don't know. But a lot of them have really dispersed. HURST Because they were a big group, though, the Polish people. VILSACKA Yeah. HURST And they stuck together. VILSACKA They stuck together. Irish pretty well stuck together, too. But now most of them are separated. And HURST Spread all over. VILSACKA That's right. Now the thing is to get along wherever you live in your neighborhood. HURST So, but the old people, they do retire, you know, in the area where they lived the last 20 years. VILSACKA Most of the old people have, yes, if nothing happened to the neighborhood so they could live there. HURST The younger people have to be careful over the schooling system, where they're going to send their kids. What do you think about it? VILSACKA The school system in Detroit, when I go back to when I went to school, you went to the school in your neighborhood. Now today they disperse them all over. HURST You don't know where you're ending up in Detroit. VILSACKA Well, that's the thing. The parents don't have close control like they used to. Now, like when you went to school in the neighborhood and your parents wanted to see the teacher, you'd go to that teacher who was only a few blocks away and talk to her. Now you may have a child here, but that child may be bussed half a mile, two miles further away, and they don't have the transportation to get there. HURST So the PTA doesn't work so good today, then? VILSACKA It doesn't work too good today. HURST So there are different politics and ideas. VILSACKA That's right. It's a different type of thing today. HURST So the old community unit is not there anymore than it was. VILSACKA No, to me it isn't. And then you also have to see about work and so forth. The work is not here. The economy, so they can get the tax-based money. That's where they're hitting hard in Detroit. HURST So is it good then to have a factory close by where you live? Is it more better? VILSACKA Well, when I was young it was a different thing, yes. HURST All the factories were close at hand. VILSACKA That's right. Because I lived down near Jefferson in that area, and that's where Chrysler's is and so forth. And Hudson's was there, Continental Motor was there. Briggs made stampings for the Chrysler people and things like that. They were all within a two-mile radius. You went five miles out, you would come across some of the other plants. But there are also history plants. There was a Hupmobile company that made the Hupmobile car. They've gone. What's another one? I can't think of any right now. And then there was other. There was parts, made parts for the cars, motor products and things like that. They're all gone. So things are changing all the time. Ideas are changing. HURST So it's hard to know where you end up. VILSACKA That's right. And the companies have got to see the bottom line. They've got to make a profit. If you don't make a profit, you can't stay in business. That's in Sweden, too, as well as the United States. HURST So 1940 and 50, Walter Ruther, he was a big name and an honor name by the workers. VILSACKA By the workers. HURST Why is it today now? Do they have a man like him again to stand up like Bieber, for instance? Is he the same? VILSACKA Well, that I don't know because I'm not that close to it anymore because I retired there about ten years ago, twelve years ago. HURST You belong to a union, though? VILSACKA I belong to a guard union. HURST Oh, that's a special union. VILSACKA That was a special union. Because there was something in the Taft-Hartley Law, the guards could not belong to the same as the UAW. We had to be a special unit. HURST Yeah, because you had to VILSACKA Yeah, because in case of strike, we couldn't combine, so they would shut us up and jedercode. Because there was a line to books to make food to mean there's pros and cons. But you see how the automobile industry, they went overseas for their stuff, and it's hurting our economy now. How it will be five years from now, I don't know. I look at the conditions under Reagan, our national debt is so deep, I'm worried about it. Maybe I'm wrong, but I think our national debt is deeper now than it was when Carter was in there. But it doesn't seem to bother anybody. Well, that's the trouble. Nobody bothered, nobody listened. But when do we come to pay for it? My next generation, my grandson is really going to pay for it. I won't pay for it because I won't be here. But I have a couple of grandchildren. It's going to hurt. But if they don't pay the bill, what happens then? Will they be bankrupt like the Feds? I don't know what it will be. They'll print more money, it will be in inflation. If we didn't have the Social Security in this country now, we could have been in a depression just as bad as we were back in the 29s. HURST That's how we worked. SATTERWHITE That's right, because it was that little bit of money. To me, that's what I'm living on today, very carefully. Sure, I got a little pin money on the side that I hang on to, but I try to live within my Social Security. As soon as I go beyond my Social Security and I dip into that reserve, I'm going to hurt. I may dip once or twice, but if I do it continually, I won't even have a reserve. And then if Social Security folds up, which they were thinking of, where will I be? But if it wasn't for Social Security, I don't think a lot of these things would have hung on as strong as they have. Sure, we had setbacks, but not as bad as we couldn't handle it. HURST That's probably why the economy is like it is today, if it's any good, because of the Social Security people. I mean, they have a check coming in every month, and they're able to turn things over. SATTERWHITE It depends on the individual and how you can take care. And if you can do it and stay within your spending, fine. If you spend more than you take in, if you get $900 a month and you spend a thousand in ten months, you're going to be a thousand dollars in a hole, and you can't do it. Just like when you're working, you got so much at wages, and if at the end of the week it isn't how much you made, it's how much have you hung on to at the end of the month. That's the way I always figured it. So I was lucky. I didn't demand. Unfortunately, I had a wife that didn't demand. HURST So what it takes to tackle the problem. SATTERWHITE Years ago, all I thought about was working, raising my children, getting an education. Now that they're all married and away from home and that, the only thing I want today is a little money, but I want my health. My health is more important today than anything. HURST How is this year's targeting now, Emmanuel? SATTERWHITE Amazingly good. We are amazingly good. This pastor that we got now came here in 1980, right on the first day of the year in 1980. I gave myself three years. I talked to my wife. I said, in three years, if this man can hang on to the church, fine. But I think if we fold within three years, then I'm thinking of transferring to a church out where I'm living. The first two years, I was giving him pros and cons, figuring he had to know the people and so forth. And I took care of the books, and I knew roughly what the incomes would be coming. And amazingly, he started to pick up at the end of the second year, started to pick up a little bit. We have colored people in here now. They're good. They're strong. A lot of the white people have moved away, transferred, deaths and so forth. But those that we have left in the white group are strong, and they're staying with it, and they're building. And you can see the thing, well, you don't see it during the week, but you probably talk to some of the people. And some say yes and some say no. But I say yes, we have made progress. We are holding on, and we're staying in the neighborhood. HURST. So Chandler Park is a stabilized area, then? GILBERT. Well, it's a nice area, but it's changed. It's practically all colored in this area. HURST. What happened to the Swedes, then? Did they move to the suburbs? GILBERT. They moved to the suburbs. A lot of it's up towards Farmington, that way. HURST. Northwest? GILBERT. Northwest. HURST. But they are still members, though, coming in every Sunday? GILBERT. No, not ñ most of those people joined churches out there. A lot of people out in St. Clair Shores, where I live in that, joined churches out that way. I, myself, because I was staying here with the church, I told my wife I'd rather stay here, as long as the church doesn't fold. If the church folds, then I'd have to think different. Then my ideas have changed, too, because since then my son, we had the child, and my grandson, they joined the church up at 13 Mile. I told my wife, I said, well, before I'd take any church, a Lutheran church, because of all these mergers and that, one's about the same as the other. Now, since my grandson is a member of that church, I'd go to that one. HURST. The only thing that you had left was the Lucia Festival at Christmas time. That was the only thing that was in Swedish. And then the women would, at Christmas time, would do a little Christmas thing. We used to have the Ludfisks dinners and so forth, but these were more getting older. And put on a Ludfisk dinner is tough work for women that are up in their 60s and 70s now. They can't come here and spend three days preparing and then cleaning up after. It takes everything out of them. And that Ludfisk dinner has fallen away, but up at some other places they do it, up in Farmington Way. Then the Lucia Festival and that is dropped here now. This last, I think last Christmas was about the last service they had in that Lucia. They were separate things. But it was the Swedish background that handled it and tried to re-run it. But those things are dropping away now. But up in Farmington, they picked it up and some of the women from this church, they go up there to that. And they say they enjoy it very much to sit there and enjoy it, then sit there and work and be so tired they can't enjoy it. So I don't blame them. Those things, like I said, these are the changes we're going through. We're not young anymore. But you have to accept the reality. You have to accept it. That's right. That's reality. The members not enjoying the menu the last couple of years, are they Lutherans or different denominations? Well, there have been different denominations, mostly in the colored people that join, are Baptist background. But the thing that amazes me is their giving has been very, some have been very good. Others I can understand financially, but mine is not to question their reasons or why. But usually when their background and their father was in the ministry someplace or another, they're very good givers. It's amazing. And they feel comfortable with the music and the singing? Well, our music is changing gradually. Yeah, but you're still having the green hymnal, though. Yeah, you have the green hymnal there and so forth. But you're doing a different thing. Old Detroit folk mass. That's right. And this, all right, this, Harris is our director of music here. He's a colored fella. But they went over and did a lot of things. It's just something they inserted into the book. Only for the Detroit churches? Yeah, this is only in Detroit area. You had a special edition published on the printing? Well, it's just a little booklet. No, but it's in with a big book, though. No, it's glued in. Oh, glued in, I see. It's glued in. See, there's the regular book right there. But that was glued in. And he has adopted all the music? Yeah, it's a setting by James Harris, which was the, and this Butler. They worked. But this Harris is our music director here. He taught music here in Detroit Public School. But then he dropped out of music and went into administration work now. So he's an administrator. So you got paid professionals to? Well, that was a very, now, there's where you got to give Hile credit. This director of music was over at the Hope Lutheran Church on the west side, and they folded. Now, he was offered, I guess, money, as I understand, from other churches. But we're getting help from an area office or the senate helps us pay part of his wages, and we pay part of it. That's my understanding. Otherwise, we couldn't afford him. And he's got a lot of freedom here with his music, and he brings in children that play music and things like that. He has a full-time job, then, I say? Well, most of the full time, but he's also an administrator in Detroit Public School. That is his main job. Music is a sideline. But he taught music, so music was his thing. So he takes care of the music, and the singing and? So you got the, well, when he came, he brought several colored people with him who were singers and so forth. And these are the things, like I said, it's reality. It's a change we have to face. Now, some people, up against it, I don't know. They don't accept it, but I have to sit back and accept it. And the church is still here? Well, you know, the church is still here. That's the main thing. And we're hanging on. We're doing good right now. What will happen when Hile passes or goes away or transfers, I don't know. Again, I hope we pick the right man, because it's the church that's the center, not the pastor. Well, you got to have the right man. Well, got to have the right man for the leader, but also you got to have the congregation, and if you do, they'll do it.