 This is cassette three, side one, continuation with Richard Chilane, a writer for the Deloitte. What kind of improvements have been made over the years when you came into the picture in 1926 for the original machine? How did they improve it? The actual knitting on the machine, nothing was done to that. It was the same principles. Same principles, set up on the machine, when it knocked it out, set up for another sock, it did the same thing. The only improvement, I would say, what I would call an improvement was the fact that we had an advertising company that wanted us to get something different with a work sock. And so this Howard Monk, who was the head of that department, asked us if we could put a red tip in the heel. I was called in on it, of course, and sure we could. That was a case of we had to change the milling on the wheel that went around because we had to accommodate another yarn change when it was in the heel, see, knitting in the heel. So we had a yarn change. We set up in the toe and knit that, then we come back to the foot, knit that straight, then we went into the heel, we had a yarn change into the heel, and then when we got so many strokes in the heel, we had another yarn change and put in a solid red dye or orange red heel tip. And then out of the heel tip, into the white yarn again to finish up the heel, and then into the body and finish up the top. So that made a red tip in the heel. Was this like a trademark then? A trademark. I think we applied for a patent on it, and I'm not sure about it. Yeah, I think we did, because we were the only ones in the work sock business that could do that, and then we had an advertising campaign. And instead of tying these socks up in a bundle, we had cartons printed that were folding cartons we could open up and put twelve pairs of socks in there and close them up, and it was a colorful deal. It was, it showed the brown and white sock with the red tip in it and that sort of thing and printing on it, logos. And from then on it was called Nelson's Red Heel Rockford Sock. And that got us a lot of business. And then somebody, some woman, I don't know who it was, got the idea of taking a pair of those Rockford socks and she made a little monkey out of them. And one of the heels of the sock was the face of the monkey and he had a red mouth, you know, with that lips. And the other sock was his rear end, had red on that, see. And she had arms, you know, and legs and all that. And that kind of took off. And I, she was going to get a patent on it, but she finally sold it out to us and I don't think we paid her much for it. I don't know how much the company paid her, but paid her off on it. She was sappy about it. And we began selling a lot of those, a lot of socks that went into that. It was an outfit in Chicago that made up a kit. And they'd have two pair of our, or a pair of our socks and then they'd have the red yarn and the thread and everything that goes into it and put it up in a kit and they sold it to people who wanted to make these, this kind of stuff, you know. And they were regular work socks? Regular work socks, exactly, yeah. The, for instance, the rib top and the white part of the rib top and part of the body, they'd cut those, I think in four pieces or two pieces, I forget which it was now, turn them inside out, sew them together and pack them with cotton, either cotton strippings or whatever waste they could find, stuffing on, stuffing, see. And they made a nice little monkey. And we had a lot of those. There was a sideline. There was a sideline. We didn't, we never made any monkeys or anything like that, but we sold the socks for them, see. How was the turnover over the years? Years ago, you could see the housewives sitting home and even the kids, you know, to mend the socks and the heeves and the thing. When did people stop to do that? Could you see a difference in the production when they stopped? You know, some people had stitches on their heeves and the socks. Well, I think that was prevalent when I was there because, see, we had a guarantee, a little ticket we put in the toe of the sock, and this sock was guaranteed. If you found any imperfection in it, you sent it back to the mill and we'd send you three pair for every pair that you sent back. Was there a certain time they were supposed to— There wasn't any time limit on it. That was the problem. So when there was a hole in it, they could send it back then? If it was due to manufacturing, see. How could they prove that? Or how could you prove otherwise? Well, a lot of times they did get a sock that maybe had a weak part and there was a drop stitch that started, so they got a run in it, see. Well that was all right, but we'd get socks back there that stunk to the high heaven, they hadn't been washed or nothing, just like a board. And a lot of them were mended, cross-stitch mending in the heel, but they had mends about that big around that had been mended with grocery string. And we'd send them three pair, but we kept track of everything we sent out and where we sent it. Then pretty soon the same guy would come back with another one. And then it didn't work? That didn't work, no. Then we called a halt to it. No repeat business. Yeah. So we kept records of those things and there were some two-timed us pretty good, but we finally got rid of it. And then in later years, oh, I would say, I left in 73, but I would say about 65, around 60, in the late 60s, we did away with any putting those tickets in there because we were printing all those tickets too. And it was a job to print them because we printed them on what they called bread wrap. That was a paper that came out that was glazed on one side and was very thin, like a tissue almost, but it was polished on one side so you had a good printing surface. So we printed these things, they were about that long and about that wide, and we printed those on a sheet, 48 of them on a sheet. And then you had to jog all those and integrate them and put them on a shears and cut them so you cut between them and not on them, you know. It was a job because I did a lot of that when I first started there. But then that kind of fell by the wayside and in the later years, I mean, we still had Nelson Redhill Rockford Sox, but there was no guarantee ticket in. But a lot of people that didn't have a guarantee ticket in, that had guarantee tickets years ago, they would still send them in if they had a hole in them. And we replaced a lot of them, but it wasn't a $100,000 deal or anything like that. What happened when the machine, all those links, the bushings and the pins started to wear? Could you see any difference in the stitching if you had the chance to? Oh yes, yeah. Because it became a slack. Well, see on the Nelson machine there were no ball bearings. The main bearing on the machine comes down from the shafting above. That was a pulley about that big and about that wide, and there was two of them right together. One was a drive pulley and the other is when the machine turned off was a loose pulley that just went around, see. So there was bushings then rather than the main bearing? Well the big bearing down here, and that was a poured babbit bearing. We poured that bearing. And when that wore it was the idea of getting, chiseling that out and putting a new bearing in it. But you see the machines were oiled about every three hours. So there was a crew taking care of that all the time? Well one knitter took care of anywhere from twenty-seven to thirty-two machines depending upon what he could take care of. It was all he did, all day long? Yeah, that's all he did for eight hours. And if you had a kid coming in like when I started to knit down there on vacations, I only could run fifteen machines, but I couldn't keep up with them because the socks were coming out pretty fast, you know. But there were some knitters that we had that were very, very good. And we had one there, a fellow by the name of La Sala, who was an Italian man, but he could run thirty-two machines and read the Chicago Tribune at the same time. But if a machine stopped in that knitting room that was in his set, he could hear that. And he'd just put down the paper and he'd walk right over to that machine and find out why it stopped, if it failed for some reason or other, start it up again, go back and pick up the paper. And then he knew just the time to go around and lay the socks that came out. There was a kind of a little bin down here that he laid the socks when they dropped out. And there would be about, oh, when he'd lay the socks, there would be three or four socks that had dropped out. And he'd pull those out, stretch them out, and lay them. So he'd go around the thirty-two machines and he didn't have to do much for a while. But it was a good job. We had men working there for years and years. How many machines were on the—you had more than one floor? What? You had more than one floor? Well, the old shop, I don't know, I think they had two floors there. They had them on two floors. But now we just see this building that we built in 1926, that was just a single-story building with a sawtooth construction, you know, with skylights that you could open, see? And that building was, oh, about, I would say forty percent of it was knitting rooms. And in that knitting room there was, I would say, and this is kind of a roughly guess, three hundred and fifty, three hundred and seventy-five machines. They were real close together. If you look down those machines, you don't see how anybody could get in between them because these bars were going out back and forth, you know? But they were staggered, so when you went this way and that way and that way, back and forth, see? So you didn't run into the, what we call the pitman arms that go back and forth, because all they got to do is hit you a couple of times and you got black and blue spots. The reason for keeping them so tight was that because of one worker should have a smaller area to walk? Yeah, well, you'd walk, smaller area to walk, and you'd get more machines on the floor. And they were all manufactured locally, then by you and the machine department? At some time or other, not during my time. No? No, there was no manufacturing of knitting machines. There was replacement of parts because we used to get castings from the different foundries in town like wheels and other casting, what we call hook bars, and in the guts of the machine that we had, that we had the machine shop that we machined and sawed with eight-inch circular saws, gang saws, like on an 80-needle machine, that'd be 40 saws just so far apart that would saw this hook bar. Forty on one hook bar and forty on the other, that's the 80-needle. 90 needles, 45, 100 needles, 50. So we made all the parts to the machine when they were replaced, but as I say, of late years, they were just, you would say, patching the machines. I mean, they weren't putting in any new— No replacements were new machines then? No, no new machines, no. So when they were sold out then in 1973 after you left, what happened then to the new company? Why didn't they—why were they able to keep going? Was the machinery too old or—? Well, they kept going. They're still going, but— They don't have the same capacity as when you left? No, no way. I don't think they've got—oh, last I heard the total employment was under 100. Now, I don't know what it is now, I couldn't say, but when I was there, our women and men totaled around 225. So they lost some customers then? They must have. They must have because they—and as I say, I can't speak except through the grapevine that I hear people who have been down there and say it looks like a graveyard down there compared to what it was, see. So you don't have a desire to walk down there and take a look at it? No. No, I don't. Because—oh, I'd like to see what was going on in there, but—because it would bring back a lot of memories. So there's only a shadow of the past then? Well I don't know whether you want to say a shadow, but it certainly isn't the up-and-coming thing that it was when I was there and the years that I spent there. But you'll have to remember that that is a different time and place as far as hosiery is concerned. There's been so much increase in the manufacture of hosiery and the acrylics and poly—via polyethylenes and all the different man-made fabrics that it's changed a lot. And it's also changed the machinery. Oh yes, sure. Now I don't know of any sock today made less than a 180 needle sock or 160 needle sock. Most of them are 220s. I mean the ordinary black hose that you have on is usually 220 needle unless you get into real fine silks or that sort of thing, but very few men wear silk socks anymore. So the less needles you have, it would be a looser sock then? What? It would be a looser sock then if you had less needles? Well that would depend on what you were knitting, the size yarn you were using. For instance, the gauge of needles that we used were what they call 12 gauge and 18 gauge latch needles. That's a needle with a hook on it and a little latch that closes and opens as it goes up and down in the machine. And so it goes up and takes the yarn. When it brings it down, that latch will close because that needle has come through a stitch, see, that latch will close and pull the yarn through that. When it comes up again it takes another one and pulls it down and that's the knitting operation. And a 12 and 18 gauge needle, that's what we used and that run, the 12 gauge needle was on the 80 needle and 90 needles. We used a 12 gauge needle there and we used an 18 gauge needle which is a finer needle on 100 needle machines. And then it depends on the size of yarn that you used to knit. Now if you load up those needles with a heavy yarn, you're going to get a heavy sock. That stands to reason. But what we tried to do to make a sock that had a nice feel to it as far as the fabric was concerned, but which wasn't hard to put on and was stretchy enough, you know. As I say, when nylon came in, of course, with the athletic socks, that was a boon to it because you had that elasticity to it that you didn't have before. How about the late 50s or even early 50s with the bobby sock? There was a craze throughout the country, high schools and colleges. Oh yeah. Did you follow along with that trend then? Yeah, we were in that trend. In fact, we had the original drawings of a cartoonist that had a cartoon. I can't think of the name of it now, but it was a very famous cartoon about the bobby socks where they used to wear one brown sock and one blue sock and all that sort of thing. When that craze came in, we were making these random socks, I was telling you about, where we'd take a skein of yarn and dip it half in a color and the other half was white. Some of them we did some of the stuff that we dipped a blue on one side and turned it around and put dye on the other side, yellow on the other side, and where the blue and the yellow dye run together was green. We knit socks out of that, and they were horrendous as far as the looks of them were concerned. But these bobby socks, they'd buy them, you know. Yeah, we sold quite a bit of stuff. Harold Teen. Harold Teen? I don't know. The cartoonist? Huh? Well, there was the cartoon, you mean? That was the cartoon. Harold Teen was the name of the cartoon. That's why Teen, he was a teenager, see? But that run in the Chicago Tribune for a long, long time. How long did it last, that craze? Ten years? I would say, and I don't think it was ten years, I think it was maybe seven or eight years, seven or something like that. How did you get this, if I call it craze? I mean, did you have people checking the feel of the people across the country, what they were looking for? Or did you have your own scheme to produce? No, we didn't initiate any trends as far as that's concerned. That came from our sales offices, either New York, San Francisco, or Chicago, or what the trade was looking for, see? They had the lookers. Yeah, so we'd acquiesce to that. I mean, we—but when stuff started out on the East Coast, if there was any craze that started out there in the way of odd-looking socks and that sort of thing, Fred Cooper would have us on the phone right away, and we're going to make some of these, let's try this, try that, try this, and he'd have, I don't know how much stuff for me to work on, you know, to get samples out. But when they brought this idea up now for the board of directors, could you decide immediately on the spot to make five dozens or twenty-five dozens to try them on in the market, or did you have to have a meeting about it? Oh, no, no, we didn't have a board meeting on anything like that. I mean, they— Test the market only. That was testing the market, and that wasn't a board meeting because it was—the expense to do that wasn't too high, you know, and it was just an everyday thing that happened. If we had a—for instance, when we went into the circular machines and bought circular machines, that came up at the board meetings because those machines were, oh, about eight, nine hundred dollars a piece, just a common circular machine. And if you bought on a circular machine, a set of machines was around eighteen machines because they knit a lot faster. And so if you bought eighteen machines, well, that was quite an outlay of money, so that would have to come before the board, that sort of thing. Where did the trend setting start in all this? They always say, you know, the Midwest is following the East and it goes West. Did it come from the West? Did anything start in the Midwest, for instance, early Rockford, or was it from the East? Who set the trend? Dr. Bobby Salk and—the Tube Sock, I understand, they came out of Rockford from your hand. Well, it did as far as I'm concerned. I didn't—I had never seen a Tube Sock before in my life. But Bobby Salk, they came from somewhere else. You don't remember? No, I don't remember where it came from. Now, it may have come from Bear Brand, I don't know. Bear Brand is down in Louisville, I think. It's Louisville, Kentucky. I'm not sure either about that, but Bear Brand was a big hosiery mill. And they had—Bear Brand made the Buster Brown Sock, and they had a picture of Buster Brown and his dog, and that was a solid black sock or a solid brown sock. And that came up just under the knee here. Over the calf. Yeah, it was over the calf, yeah. But they made other half-hoes, and they still do, I guess. So you were not in the women's hosiery business then, with Nylons and the— No, no. We had—we made some women's hosiery. But that was all white, I think. And we had a—we only had a few machines on it, because they went to insane asylums. I mean, where the people were half-cracked, you know. And there wasn't any style to them or anything. It was just the idea to have socks on them, and I don't know. They couldn't be too long, because they didn't want anybody to tie them together and hang themselves on them and all that sort of thing. I would think women's hosiery would be a good business, because when there was a run on it, you know, they had to throw it away. Yeah, that's right. In other ways. That's right, yeah. But is it different? Well, see, the Burson Knitting Company, they had a machine that Burson made up, and he took the Nelson machine, which had one big pattern wheel on it, and Bill Burson put another pattern wheel over here, so he had two pattern wheels. And instead of knitting the sock straight on the front with the heel in the back, he turned it 90 degrees in the machine and knit the—let's see, how is it? Yeah, part of the front. But the idea was when he had two wheels and he could control both sets of needles, then he could narrow that down and make a thin ankle, and then go up and add them two and make a calf. And he made the first women's seamless hosiery. And that was made—most of it was cotton, but he did have some what they call lille. I don't know what the mixture of yarn was on that, but that was a little fancier. And they did make some silk hosiery for women. But that was, as I say, Burson's Seamless Hosiery was the name of the stuff. And they made a lot of that stuff, and they employed a lot of people in the South Main Street plant. The Burson's Seamless Hosiery was in vogue for quite a while, but then someone invented full-fashioned hosiery. What does that mean? Huh? Full-fashioned? Well, instead of knitting a sock on one machine, a full-fashioned machine has anywhere from ten—I think I've seen as many as fifteen—knitting sections that are all on the same machine. And this sock comes out flat. It's knit the toe and everything, and it's all aside, and there's this great big wide thing here. And then they take that and they seam that up the back. And that's the style of hosiery women had that had this seam up the back, that they always had to have their seams straight, you know, and all that. That's full-fashioned hosiery. And that was in vogue for many years. And we had, as I say, the BZB Knitting Company, Brown, Zia, and Burson, they made full-fashioned hosiery. And then the other one, the Doyle Boys down on South Main Street, they made full-fashioned hosiery. Well, that went along for a number of years. How many, I can't say. But then when nylon came into the picture, you can still buy full-fashioned hosiery, but it's quite expensive to use it, to have them. Because on full-fashioned, knitting flat like that, they can put lacy patterns in there, you know, and some of that full-fashioned hosiery sells for maybe $20 a pair. Real fancy stuff. But then when nylon came in, nylon was knit on a circular machine with no seam in it. And nylon was knit just straight, right from the—they knit the foot and the heel, and then from then on it just goes right straight up. But they are what they call pre-boarded. After they're knit, they're put on aluminum boards that have the ankle and the thigh, the calf, the knee, and the thigh that goes out about like that, see? And they put those through intensive heat, just about ready to melt the nylon, but it doesn't melt it. But it gets to the point so when that is stretched out to those dimensions, as I say, in the ankle, the calf, and the thigh, the stitch is deformed in there. And when they take it off of that, when they take it off of that after it's been on there for a while, it's set that way, and then it cools down, that stitch stays in that position, and that's what gives you the fashion or the hosiery, the different diameters in a woman's hole, see? And so they stay that way, there's nothing that will take it out, unless you get that up to that heat again, and then it probably will melt, see? This sounds like a complicated production, or did they pay to do all those? Oh yeah, well it's cheaper to do because you take on full fashion holes, that's got to be knit, the whole thing is knit, and then after that, this seaming up the back isn't cheap, and you have to have experienced operators, because if you put out a pair of woman's holes and they pull it up, this is before pantyhose or anything like that, and they pull those stockings up and fasten them on their garters, and they look around here, and that seam is crooked, they'll never buy that pair of holes again. So the tension that you sew with and what you sew with is very important, and the gal who runs that through the machine, because those run through these overcasting machines pretty fast. How was the accident rate in a factory like yours now, with all those machines? Very little. Once in a while, I don't remember, offhand I can't remember anybody taking anybody up to the doctor or the hospital or anything like that. I had first aid room there, and I took care of that, because I had taken Red Cross first aid. I could teach first aid, I mean, because I had gone through the whole rigmarole. But I don't remember, oh, Alvin Stolgren, once he was running a punch press down there. We had one punch press that we were running, and he was punching out on strip material about, oh, maybe eighth inch thick, about that wide. He was punching out some kind of parts, and he'd punched out quite a few, and he had just a few more left, and he went over and he picked up a piece that looked like the same thing, you see, he thought it was cold rolled, and it was tool steel. And when that hit the punch, the punch went that way, the tool steel came this way, and went right into his chest here, made a hole there about that deep. In fact, it stuck in there. But he didn't bleed much, and we took him to the doctor. I patched him up, took him to the doctor, and the doctor looked at it. He said it was, he put some kind of a zinc ointment out, I think it was, to draw out anything that was in there, and he went right back to work as far as that's concerned. But our accident, prone accident, was not much at all. Atencio They were safe machines then? Cooper Well, no, I wouldn't say they were safe machines, because if you stuck your finger in one of those things, it would play hell with your finger, I know that. Atencio But you didn't have to do that, though, in other words? Cooper No, no. It was, the closest they got to the machine is when they stopped the machine, and they got an oil can, and they went down those two sides with an oil can. That's about as close as they could get to the machine. Otherwise you could get hit if you got, take a kid starting in there, he'd get jabbed in the butt sometimes with one of these pitman bars, but after he got jabbed two or three times he knew what to do to keep out of the way of them. Atencio How about the women operators, now, were they safer than the men? Cooper Well, the women operators, they, no, I don't know. Atencio There was no difference perhaps? Cooper No, there wasn't too much. I thought we had a pretty good record on it. I know we had, our insurance rates were way low, so it wasn't, we weren't, our experience evidently brought them down because I know Tuvi was very pleased with it. We were in some big, it was a big outfit, factory mutual, factory mutual insurance, and our insurance rate was very low. Atencio So the insurance company, did they come to inspect your factory once? Cooper Oh, you said it. Atencio And make recommendations? Cooper You said it. They were there. Atencio Safety guards and everything on the machines? Cooper And we had to put on some safety guards and that sort of thing, which we did, but that was in the early years that I was there. And the only problem we had with that was these big insurance companies would get a kid out of college that had a degree and put him on safety inspection, and the main thing he had to do was to make a name for himself when he came in any place, see. And so they'd just nitpick on things. And some of them we would appease them here by doing something partially, and the next time they came through, it wouldn't be that same kid, it would be somebody else, see. And so I just told them, well, this is what they wanted us to do, and we did it, and so forth and so on, and got by with it. Because if you did everything they wanted you to do, now an old inspector like the state inspector, the state of Illinois, we had no problem with him at all, because he came through and he'd look things over and there was no problem there. But the insurance companies were the ones that were tough. Atencio How about the dust problem? Do you have any of the old Jones ripping apart the left hand? Gilbert There is a dust problem, but in knitting there isn't a problem there is in a carding or a spinning mill or that sort of thing, because you don't have a lot of loose. All your stuff is in yarn, it's twisted. And while you have dust, what we have to do is clean off the steelwork above the machines, because in the wintertime when it's hot, that hot air goes up there, and if there's any dust in the air, it lays right up there, see. And so we have, we did with the compressed air, we'd go through the knitting room periodically with long wands, compressed air, 160 pounds of air on them, and blow down all the dust on the machines and then blow all the machines off on the floor and then take it up with a vacuum cleaner, see. We kept a pretty clean place, see. The state was kind of tough on that, too. I mean, they wanted that steelwork to be fairly clean, but if there's a lot of stuff hanging over the side of it, you better get it off of there. Atencio And were you running two shifts or just one shift? Gilbert No. Originally way, way, way, way back, Nelson Knitting Company run two 12-hour shifts. Men worked 12 hours. Then 12-hour shift, they were around the clock, see. Then there was a small one, the eight-hour law one, in effect, and you had to pay overtime for anything over eight hours. Then it was two eight-hour shifts. It was a shift from seven to three and three to eleven. From eleven to seven, there was nobody there. Atencio So when you look back now and look at John Nelson's invention, isn't it kind of marvelous, though, that this man a hundred years ago could invent this complicated machine? Gilbert Yeah, it is. Yeah, he did a good thing. Atencio It looks like he got the message from heaven to do it. Gilbert Well, I don't know where he got it, but as I say, the fact that he wasn't a mechanic, but he evidently knew how to knit because he used to watch his wife knit, see. And that's why he was wondering. She was sitting there knitting socks for him, see. So he evidently knew something about it, and he wanted to get a machine that he could put in a home that the women didn't have to sit there and knit. And of course, there was a machine that was made that was turned with a crank. It's a little round one that they sold a lot of years ago, but it was never particularly successful, because there was nobody to fix them around. And when they were gone bad, why, if you weren't a good mechanic, why, you couldn't do much with them. Atencio So his invention really turned out to be a valuable product for people. Gilbert Yeah. Atencio And you've been part of it for so many years. So your father worked there for sixty- Gilbert Sixty years. Atencio Sixty years, and then you worked for twenty-six to seventy-three. Gilbert I worked there for forty-seven years. Atencio So that's over a hundred years, sir, in the stocking industry. Gilbert Yeah. Atencio And there was a Swede that made it possible. Gilbert That's right. So if you try to make a machine that you can make it work, you have to have a lot of experience. And I think that's what Gilbert did. He made a machine that was made by a Swede. And he made it work. And he made it work. And he made it work. And he made it work. And he made it work. And he made it work.