 She said, we haven't got any brothers, so our name will be gone. So I did. And I had a brother too, Axel. And I sent for him later on after I was gone here. I had a good start with painting and stuff. So we were painters all the way through, you see. He was, he measured the earth, you know. We got a piece of land, Noah's got a piece of land from the government, and they sent the men up to measure it and divide it, see. And so many miles and so many, you know, so many everything. So he was there, and he got the piece of land, you know, big piece of land, and nice, really nice. And, but he was a good-hearted man. You're my father's father. He had a hundred years' talent of gold, you see. So he bought a money to a man, and he paid him and everything, paid him and everything. And somehow, I don't know how that happened. Yeah he borrowed, and yeah, but that don't, that don't stem it in, you know. If he borrowed, yeah. But anyway, he lost the whole outfit, you know, all the everything. And we bought two boys, we weren't 21 yet. So if he'd been 21, we could have contested it, because it was a crooked deal. Crooked, a crooked deal. Well, it, it, they had no right to take the whole piece, you know, for that kind of a money. It's just a few hundred dollars, see. And somehow, he got stuck with it, and they took the place from him. Oh, lots of tons of woods and wood and forest and everything. And they had a nice farm, and a big barn where he had cows and everything. All everything disappeared, you see. Everything. Alfred Olovny-Ren, who's sitting and telling stories, he was born in 1890, on the 12th of August, in the inner Åsdalarna, and came to America in 1913. And now we are in Port Wing, Wisconsin, and it's the 11th of April, 1986. And everything in building. And some of the days, he dropped everything and made a casket. A leek shista. Oh, I think, fem kroner for a leek shista, my dear. It's a lot of lumber in it. And it's paid, and they fixed him up nice five dollars. So he had an awful time to make a living, leaving nine kids. Nige stykken? Ja, ja. So... Er du elst? Var du elst? No, I was in the middle. Sehr mild. I still got two sisters in Stockholm, and I don't know where I got the eddes of one in Eskilstuna. Her husband worked in one of those knife factories, you know. Knife. No, no, he didn't work in a knife. He worked in where they made farm machinery. And he was selected to do the selling. So he sold all machines to foreign countries. And he went with the machine to show how to use it. Det var din bror? Ja. Vad hette han? Han hette Carl Gustafsson. Carl Gustafsson? Ja. Vad hette han, Gustafsson? Du hette Nureen? Nureen... Ja, vi hadde ingen Nureener runt oss. Det var min mor. Hon ville att du skulle ta det namnet? Ja? Hon ville att du skulle ta det namnet? Ja, hon ville. Hon ville ta det, så jag tog det namnet. Min bror också. Vi var två Nureeners. Axel Nureen var han. Han dog... Var det... Till... 15 år sen. Ja, men de andra syskonen nu, vad hette dom då? Ni var nio barn i familjen? Ni var nio barn i familjen? Det var yngre. Sju... Sju... Sju flickor och två pojkar. Och flickorna, dom gifte sig under två andra namn naturligtvis, ja. Det var Berta, Agnes... Berta, Agnes... Berta, Agnes... Och Maria... Albertina... Jag vet inte hur det heter. Det är ett fint namn. Albertina... Karin... Ingeborg... And Anna. Du kommer ihåg allihop. Oh, there were seven, wasn't there? There were seven, yeah. You see, I can't remember who it was. You know, I'm 95 years old, so I lost my sense, you know, just a little bit. I wouldn't say so, but... Inte mycket då? Jag märker då ingenting. I lost something. Vad heter det nu... Du fick hjälpa pappa då, att vara en av dom två pojkarna. Hjälpte du pappa att snekera? Snekera? Kristina. Fint möbelsnekare. Cardart... The fancy stuff, you know. Fick du lära dig detta också? Fick du också lära dig detta? Well, we picked it up, yes. I took it up after I got the crippled disease. I had to retire. I lost my legs. And I'm card all those birds, you know. Jag menar hemma i Sverige nu, fick du hjälpa pappa? Fick du hjälpa pappa hemma i Sverige? Oh, ja, vi båt, vi var boys. We were handlagnare, du vet. Det var det. That's what they call them, handlagnare. That's what they call them, handlagnare. He's a... He handed all the material for the carpenters and all that. Carried it on. När du var hemma i Sverige nu då och arbetade, hur gammal var du när du åkte från hemmet till Sverige? I worked all my life. As far back as I remember. You know what I did? I felt sorry for daddy. Even a seven-year-old boy understood that he had an offer from the Fidi family. So, in one spring, a bunch of farmers came from Värmland, from Finnmarkarna, farmers. They wanted children to take care of the herds. So I took one job, see. And I got good food, and I lived good, and my father didn't interfere with me. Now I had to do a little thing in between. What did you get for your payment when you took care of the herds? I got 25 öre on Saturday, on a week. I learned my trade, too. I learned my painting and everything. He was a good painter. And the grading and everything. Who was that? The father. So we were... We learned our trade with our father. So he did it? Yeah, we learned a good trade. And thoroughly, we knew what to mix colors and everything like that. So, I told you, when I came, and then I joined the army when I got there. I was sick and tired of everything, and I had to get away from home for a while. So I joined the army. Where, in Stockholm? Yes, the dragons. And Livrimentus dragons? Livrimentus dragons, yes. And what year was that? 1912... 1913... 19... 1921. Well, the 19 wasn't the full year. I was too young, they said. You better go home and grow a little bit. So... Did you want to retire? Huh? Did you want to retire? You didn't retire? No, I retired. I retired myself. So I got 80 kronor for that. And I was surprised when I got this. So then I bought a pair of boots for it. I had to be fancy, you know. And... What did you like? We got a big palace too, you know. I had the biggest door in the palace, they got. And the north corner, north east corner, that's where the king was in and out all the time. So he played a game with me. He thought I was just a kid, you know. He was supposed to play with me. He bought a Ford in 1910, I guess. 1910. And he was crazy about this Ford. He wanted to drive it all the time. In and out, in and out. Well, you know, a guard has to run when he comes, you know. And give aktu and all that. Go to Kurn. And sometimes I didn't have time to make it. One time, especially, he laughed. Boy, he had a good time when he saw me running. He wanted to see me run. So... And the last minute, I followed him all the way to the fort. But then he slacked down a little bit. And I could see his wife in his eyes. And I guess he could see mine, too. And, well, like that. And he answered me. The first time they ever done anything like that to me. So I was proud. By God, the king answered my call. It was nice, you know. It was uplifting to go out in town, you know, and be a guard and all that. And you meet a lot of dumb people when you have a guard, you know. Dumb people? You see, I was a guard one Christmas night. And I had order to direct all people that had packages had to go around. They couldn't go through the castle. So then he got mad. And some of the men was drunk, and they were going to hit me. So I just took a saber and put a right smack in front of him. Put it in front. So then he quit. Yeah, didn't like that. I know, I wouldn't like it myself. The point is a little bit sharp, see, and it goes through the clothes. So I had him too little bit, so he was little bit, he got red in his face. What did you think about the military service in Stockholm? Was it interesting? Well, oh, I loved it in Stockholm. I loved the life, I loved the military, and I got a kick out of it. It's cavalry, you know. So I just loved it. And then when I quit, I was the corporal in there. And now that's so, we got along pretty good. And then I get loose, and there were three boys. We went together to buy clothes. And then I was standing in the corner in the torii, and looking around, and looking around, and say, I lost my home. I had to get it home now. I had to get someplace to stay. I was in the army three years, so I had a home. I had food, everything I needed. I had time to, food in right time, you know. So we had it good, very good. Was there good food during the First World War? No, no, no, no. There wasn't good food, but plenty of it, yeah. And every day was different, every day. Wednesday was herring, salt herring, but they had good herring, and I loved it. And green beans, and a big biscuit. Gröna ärter? Du menar gula ärter, väl? Hade de gröna ärter? Ja, gröna ärter, ja, de hade de. Yes, oh, they're good, you know that? You betcha. But with herring, salt herring, you just fit it up nice. Så det var bra. I loved that. Men saknade du inte hemmets mat, då? Saknar? Du hade det väl bättre när du var hemma? I did sakna herring when I came, when I realized one day in Stockholm, I have no home. I have got no place to eat. At first, I thought of that, you know, because, you know, I had the money, but I had to buy clothes. Civil clothes. Du hade varit tre år då? That was 1912. Ja, 1912. Hadde du... 1912, yeah, 1912, ja. Hade du inga tankar på att gå tillbaka hem då till Nås? Varför kunde du inte åka hem till Nås igen? I went there for vacations, you know, quite a few times every Christmas and 1st of May, I tried to get away. Men när du var i Stockholm nu, saknade du inte hemmet då och mammas mat? Ja, yes, at first, first few days, you know. Men sen var det då? Then we got acquainted to it, we got a nice company, very nice company. And I was Gotembler, you see. Var det det? And one holiday, Swedish days, all the regiments were out in town, you know, drinking and all that stuff, and I was the Gotembler. So I said, no, I can't drink, I don't want to break my heart, you see. And, ah, was it, don't burn on me now, you see. Go ahead, go ahead, here, push the glass of beer in front of me. I drank it, then I got drunk. Then I felt so bad, oh, I felt bad, I broke the plate, I broke it, and I felt bad over that. Vilken lås tillhör du? Nås? Lås, Gotembler lås. Vilken lås tillhör du? I had two nås, for now, they were at home. At home? Ja, ja. I joined when I was twelve years old. And I said, my brother and my father, they drank a little bit and they got unruly and all that. And so I said, I'm not going to be that. When I grow up, I'm going to be sober. I couldn't say, what's the idea of being drunk and you don't know what you're doing sometimes. So, that went through my little head, see. And so I came back four more times. I came home, you know what they did. When I was ready to go in the farm, they had a tailor there, they had a shoemaker, they made boots, they made a costume, good cloth, heavy, good cloth for the winter. And sixty dollars, sixty cloth. And that was something for the kids to go home. So, the first thing I did, I gave that to my daddy. All together? Yes, and even to my nanny. You didn't keep anything for yourself? No, no, no. I had some. I picked berries in the meantime too for them and they paid me for the berries I picked. So, I had that money. I had a few, yeah, a few crowns I guess. So, I didn't keep anything with us, and daddy needs it. And he was happy about it. He looked at me, and boy, isn't that something for a boy on your side, bringing home money to me. And so I was proud of it. And four times, and then I got more money later on, as old as I get, you know, and I know where to go. See, it's a trick, you know, you take a bunch of cars, you know, you don't know the country. You take some out and get some bete for them. Bete. And I did. And the age of the hudder, it was so big it almost hung from the ground. So, they got a lot of milk, I tell you. And one time we came to a lake, and the lake was an island. And an old woman was fishing too, against the stained roofs. And my bell car looked out in the lake, looked at that island. It was a nice green island, you know, wood and all that stuff on it. So, she's standing there wondering, wondering, should I, or shouldn't I? Yes, she did. So, she walked in and started swimming, and all the rest of us followed her. The rest of us was a bunch of sheep, about 25 sheep. And they're playing and playing, you know, and they've never been in the water before. But they all swam, you know, and didn't lose any of them. But I was scared that time. Well, I couldn't do nothing. She walked out and they followed her. I couldn't do nothing. Where was this, somewhere in the Dalarna? Yes, that was the Finnmarken. The Finnmarken? No, it was Finnmarken. No, it was Finnmarken. No, it was in the Finnmarken. Those Finns were old-time war prisoners. And they got a piece of land from the government. And I'm telling you, they had it nice. And they had a lot of woods with them, virgin timber. And they were the best farmers around. They were proud of doing something, and build up the land. So, they are, I bet you, I would like to see them now. They are, the only standing people, you know. People who have enough. Sometimes I think of a Swedish word. I don't know, they took it from the government. I'm not so sure about it. They are from the Finnmarken, they had beautiful girls too. Oh yes, oh yes, that's true. I didn't care about freedom, seven, eight years old. And you were too young then? No, I didn't want to go with one, you know. And then they said, oh look at that, he's going with the first one. I didn't want that. I didn't want the people to talk about anything like that. But when you get older, you get older with the years. When you come from the military in Stockholm, then you can look at them. Well, then I was a man then. I was 31 years old. I took a picture when I was 31 years old. How was it, did you often go to church in your home? Did you often go to church with your parents? You talk, yes, I went to church, but nobody went to church in Sweden. You go to church, maybe two, three people sit there all by themselves. And I was disappointed, I didn't think that was nice. Sweden was the backbone of the Lutheran church. And that's where my Nairin came from, that's where the name Nairin came from. My brother, he went to the government and found out where did the name come from. He wanted to find out. And they explained to him, Nairin, the original Nairin was from Rhine River, Rhinelander. He joined the Swedish Army marching through. You know the story about that. He joined the Swedish Army marching through. He was with them and they won all the battles after he joined. And finally the king got killed. They took a daring raid, you know, they said this raid is going to be the last one, we're going to ride over them. That's where the fastest army, fastest cavalry came from. Fastest cavalry in the world was called, you know, Gustav Adolf. Gustav Adolf. And they got the name for the fastest cavalry in Sweden. Was it because you were recruited to the Livregemente Stragoner that you wanted to follow a family tradition? The good riders, yeah. I guess I was the best one in training. You know, the captain, he was the trainer. He always said, look at me, look at number eight. I was number one, you know. And look at number eight and do what he does. Boy was that proud. Eventually I got the fourth priority. So you were bra? Yeah, I got so proud of that. Well, maybe the rest of them don't like that either. So I didn't pay any attention to it at all. I just forgot it. You know, they've done the army troops. Do they? I was in the signal corps and I learned the alphabet and everything, no time. Telegraph, alphabet, and all the rest, two, three, all different ways. With the light, the blinking lights and all that, that was a tough one. And two flags and then one flag. One flag, there was a telegraph alphabet, you know, there was the same thing, same as that. That was with one flag. One short and one long. And one long, I mean, that's A, I remember that. I remember A, that's all I remember. You can't remember everything. The brain isn't big enough for it. We had a maneuver up north. And we rode all the way to Dalarna. We did that in one day. And then we settled down in a little town and we're going to have a maneuver against the Dahl regiment. And the cavalry, the Norland's cavalry, was going to fight against us, you know. We were the cavalry from Stockholm. But I was older, we patrol, we signal patrol was the spying patrol, the whole thing was the spying patrol. We would ride ahead and see where the enemies were. And now I had to think a little bit and see where the enemies were. And we did that for four nights, four days and four nights. We fought the other patrols, you know, just like we were married. And fight the other patrol away. We didn't want any other patrol to get in our way. So we had to, all of a sudden, had to fight. And the lieutenant said, you were out, and then out we went. So who was best now? Norland's dragons or Livregiment's dragons? Who was best? Best? Best. Oh, I was sick. I was sick. I was best at shooting. I took all the three prizes in the squadron. So I had that, and then the last one we did, we shot 6,000-12,000 yards. 1,200 meters. And then I got a trip and I got the gold medal on it. Not 1,200 meters, it was 200 meters and 300 meters. Huh? It was 300 meters. It was 1,200. 1,200? Yeah, you couldn't see what you shot at. No, I understand that. We lined up a lot of Tiger Panthers on the line, and that's what we were shooting. So I had a trip. One of my Tiger Panthers just crashed in half. It was long bullet, it was. So lieutenant said, boy, you got the gold medal. Well, that's nice. I didn't get excited or anything like that. After all, it's only a medal. It's gold, you know. Do you still have those medals? They disappeared. You just cast them in, and they're sure. No, you don't keep anything like that. I'm kind of... I feel better about it now. It would be nice to have them. Your father now. Our father? Yes, your father. Did he often go to church with mom? Mom and dad. He... Mom and dad? Yes, mom and dad. Did they go to church? Oh, yes, we went to church. At the village house. Village house? Village house. And the Baptists? They go to church, we wait for the village house. And the Baptists? Well, that's about the same thing, you know. They mixed up religion. There was religious people, but different sects. And they went to village houses. You could find everything. Then you had service in army, and they were pretty good. They were nice. Where were you confirmed and baptized? In Norsk. Norsk, yes. Church? Norsk church, yes. We went to church for the priest one year. The last year at school. We went to church, it was called Vånerberg. And you know, I don't even remember one part of it. Intrigue? No, no. That was a Lutheran ministry took over the school. So, when we... We met in Sakerstien, you know what that is? Yes. Yes, yes. It was a select ministry, you know. But one of them was so heavy, he could go through the Sakerstien door. So, then... The priest was so unholy, so they took him. Unholy is very good, you know. In Wärmland. Unholy, that's Wärmland språk. I mean, anyway, I'm talking about the maneuver now. We were riding four days and four nights, my horse got so tired. We almost lost one. In the middle of the night, dark, you know, and we come to look. We missed the horse. And the rider. The rider lay in there, he's sleeping. And the horse was standing in the grass. Oh, boy, that was a tragedy. Was he surprised when he woke up? Say, what happened? You fell off the horse, you got so sleepy. And then, when it was over, he said to Lutheran, he said, We have to go back to the main force now. They're going to attack it. Kullsprut. Kompaniet. Kullsprut. Kompaniet. They're going to attack it. Well, I said, my horse is going to stand there. They're going to jump seven fences high. This is page two, cassette number one. Oh, yeah, we're going to get food in a minute. In a minute, we're going to get food. Page two. You're starting to get hungry? You're starting to get hungry now? No, no, not hungry. No, no, no, no. You don't have time to get hungry. We had breakfast, you know, up until nine o'clock. I couldn't eat. It's crazy. I couldn't have left the food go until half past tomorrow anyway. They feed it too early. I don't feel like eating that way. Sometimes the food isn't good either, you know. So, anyway, we came to the place, back to the main force, and we joined up and we were upstairs, ready for action. And finally, they were out, and then off we went. The first two fences went good. We jumped aboard. The third one, the horse before, kicked on a rail. You know the rails on the Swedish... Yes, yes. Yes, yes. And my horse was supposed to jump that, you know. And the rail went right through his two hind legs. So he was pinned down on the ground. He couldn't move. The two hind legs were right next to the boat. So we had an offer to get the thing on. And the lieutenant was there too, and he said, well, I told you his horse was too tired to do this. But he had to be around, he said. Yeah, well, that's all right. But you've got to think about the horses too. At that time, I talked back to the lieutenant. We were not supposed to do that, but this time I couldn't hold myself. So then he said, you have to go back to the horse hospital about half a mile up north. So you walk over there and put the horse in the hospital. Stay there with him until he gets there so you can move him. I stayed two weeks. And I met all the boys from home. They were in the terrain, so they took care of food. And two of them were butchers. And I worked with them, and they were there. They took care of the meat. And he said, do you want the steak for dinner? He said, absolutely, if you have. I haven't seen a steak for so long, so maybe I won't know what to eat it. Oh, yeah, you're going to get one now. I'm going to pick out the really good. I know you would, I said. We've been working with meat so long. And he was a good butcher, very good. He was the oldest butcher in the mall, and I was one of the youngest. And that's kind of a gruesome affair too, to be a butcher. You come in with horses and big bulls and goats and bucks with the horns. You can get anything between the horns. So he had a thing that he hid it, and then a little nail or something between the horns, and into the brain, see, that's how we knocked down the goat buck. And the horses, they had to shoot them, of course, in the brain. I don't remember what they called it, the thing that they shot with. I don't remember what they called it. You mean the wages we had? No, I said when you wrote down all the fences, what did the farmers say then? Oh, they had nothing to say about that. This was rented from the farmer, and he got paid for it. So he got paid for everything that got ruined. And I don't know why the heck he had seven fences. So he must have added two, if you know. He must have enjoyed it. And he liked to see the boys fall off. So that's it. I stayed, I stayed, I felt good, I had good food, you know, everything, so I felt very fine. And finally I had orders to take the horses to the station and take them in. They had a horse train that came through, so all the horses. And I went to Stockholm with it. And I came to Stockholm, and I was trying to take the horse out. There was a man looking around the corner of the car, the railroad car. And see, how in the world am I going to do that, get the crippled horse out of the, out of the car, out of the truck or whatever it was. So how is that going to go? Well, finally I got it, and there was people standing on the other end where he belonged. The whole family was going to America. And there was boys, and my wife was sitting on the other side. Funny enough, she was in, she was out there. And I didn't know that. I was in Stockholm, and I went with the horse, took the horse out. Her brother looked around the corner and see how I was going to do it. And then somebody, I remember, came and looked too. But I didn't pay any attention to it. I rode away when I was ready, you know, down to the king's stables, you know, with it. And with the horse, you had to put him in there. They had a lot of work to do on it, yes. He wasn't healed. But he was healed enough to move him. And now I had to think a little bit. You said that your wife was standing there waiting for you to go to America. You didn't know your wife at that time? You didn't know your wife? No. You didn't know her? No. Yes. I'll tell you how it was. A funny thing happened. That's for Ripley. You know Ripley? Yes. Believe it or not. I went back to the raider. That year I was through. That was 1912. And I went home. And I was just like the rest of the young people. No, wait a minute, wait a minute. I went to America. That's it. When I got through with the Army I sent in the king, you know, to go to America. He had the OK there. Because I was the number one military service. Who gave you the idea to go to America? That's why I joined the Army early. I thought I could make it early. But they didn't like it. So they said you go home and grow another year. So I went back, you're in already. All you need to do next year is come right into my office. So I did. And they gave me 80 crowns. You invest yourself. I didn't know that. I didn't know that. I didn't know nothing. I wanted to go and get away from the whole thing. I didn't want to do no more painting. You were tired of it. Not that I hate painting. You were tired of it. I figured another life, you know, that goes with it. A different life goes with a painter. It does. You imagine. So, and, and, you know, this was in this country then. No, no, wait a little bit now. Before we come over to this country. Who, who gave you the idea to go to the United States? Oh gosh. That was everybody's idea. Everybody. They think it was a good idea. Well, they always talked about it. So there was no discussion about it. We just went. And it was 14 boys from our town that went at the same time. And next time it was 14 girls. Well, I said, who in the world did this kind of thing? What is this for? I didn't, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't go with any of the girls as far as that's concerned. It didn't make any difference to me. So anyway, we, well I joined the young people, you know, and we went to dances and salons and drank once in a while after I broke that, you know, I wasn't scared of that. But very lightly I didn't drink, I didn't get drunk or anything like that. So, and one dance, it was in a big dance hall next to the auto drive on the south side, that you could see the lake and everything. And it was a big one. So I was there, I had a dance, and I had a dance with the girls sitting right across, you see. They have a long ways to go. So, when I walked and came to the middle of the hall and had a look to the left, there was a girl sitting between two girls. I thought, oh, you must be a pretty girl. That time, you know, I had dark eyes. So I said, would you like to dance with me? She said, why, sure. She could talk English, you know, before I could. She came one year or two years ahead of me. They went to America, they were on their way. They were going to catch a train to Guttenberg to get the boat to America. It was 1912. They had to carve the horse. 1912. 1912. Yeah. Yeah. No one else, yeah, it was 1912. See, now I had a birthday on the ocean. Now, how did that go? It must have been a long 1912. Longer than the rest of them. So when you came back then from the military in Stockholm, 1912, then you went home to Norse. And then you said you met a lot of young people that had decided to go to the United States. So how did you get the ticket? Did you have enough money to pay your own ticket? Yeah, yeah. My father put out the money. And it cost $250. That's all. It wasn't much, you know. So I promised my mother, according to that price, I might be back in three years and say hello. And then she died in the meantime. Oh boy, what a sad boy. I lived on 63rd Street in Haraldstut. In Chicago. Yeah. I went down there and I met a boy from home. Oh, hello there, Alfred. How are you? We have been looking for you, he said. You know your mother died? Oh, that was the first time I know. He had a letter from home. And right away they wrote, you know, after he died. And they know when probably he'll see me. So, and that was a sad affair. Oh boy, that was really sad. And then the youngest sister died from struma. Struma, is that how you say it? It swells up, you know. Goitis. And she had a couple of days and she came out just fine. And all of a sudden the thing started up again and went directly to the heart and to the liver. So when you bought the tickets, where did you buy the tickets? Somewhere in Falun? Falun? Did you buy the tickets in Falun? No, in Norse. In Norse? You bought them there? Oh, yes. So you took the train there? I had to have a press certificate from the priest in Norse. What did he say? I went to school there. What did the priest say when you wanted the press certificate? What did he say? Well, goodbye now, Alfred, he said. I hope you get well in America. I hope so too. So I tell you, well I tell you now, I cut off, I was, I lived with a fellow, a tailor. He was the only one that I know from, who knows, he came from Norse. And he had a shop on 63rd and Halsted. You came to him? Yes, a tailor shop. How many of you left Norse when you left? How many of you left Norse at once when you left? How many? Yes. There was 14 boys left. At the same time? Yes. And next door there was 14 girls. Did you have a big farewell party for them? Huh? Did you have a big farewell party for them? Oh, farewell? Oh, yes, that was a sad one. My mother could hardly come out in the face. And so my younger daughter, Berta, no, Maria, that was the younger daughter, she married Carl Gustafsson in Eskilstuna. Oh, yes. And she's an artist, she paints pictures, paints about two, three hundred every Christmas, you know. And then you came to Gothenburg? What was the name of the boat? Yes, say that, you good pastor, let me see. Yes, there was a boat just across the North Sea to England. No, that I can't remember. No? Yes. From Liverpool, was that? Yes, yes, yes. My mother and father said, scream now, so soon as you come to Liverpool. Did they say that? Yes. They didn't even have five cents for the postage stamp. Well, I couldn't have gotten it if I wanted, but we had money, we had something, they took care of it for us. What did you have in the racing bag when you left? What did you pack in the bag before you left? Did you have a big bag or a small bag when you left? A bag. Yes, a big bag. No, no, no, a regular size of a trunk. And you had it? Yes, yes, and then we had food, you know. What did you have in it? We ate, we ate long porridge, you know, we had food, we ate, we ate ham, we ate rice, meat, and nothing but bread, cake, so we lived good. And we built the boat, we put it in order, you know. I see. Yes, and then I don't know what to say. Yes, you were in Liverpool. Yes, I came to Stockholm, that's it. Yes, but what was the name of the boat from Liverpool to New York? Was it called Lusitania? Scania. Lusitania. Scania. It was sunk by the German submarine, sunk it later on. And you went on it? Yes. You went over to Lusitania? Lusitania. Yes, and was it a boat you took? It was a boat we took too. I think it belonged to the same company as our boat. Do you remember the journey? Was it a good journey? The journey was a storm. Oh, I was scared, you know, there was a lot of cracking in the boat. It was cracking a lot. I said, this thing is going to sink for this storm. But we went through. We went through the storm. And I never seen anything like it. You know, the waves came like big mountains, and the boat had to go through it. And then in New York, do you remember Ellis Island? Ellis Island, do you remember Ellis Island? No, I didn't go to Ellis Island, I went through to Detroit. Detroit? That's a different word. I came on a Canadian line. Did you see that? Yes, and that went up to New York, to Detroit. Did you see that? So Detroit was the same as Ellis Island. We went through the same thing. You had to find out your health, and if you had any sickness of any kind, and all that. And how much money you had. Well, I had $25, and you had to have $25 when you get off the boat. So I had that. And the sea should be heavy too. And from Detroit, you took the train to Chicago? Yes, to Chicago. I never seen so many stumps. That kind of a country, they took all the timber off. And there was no green stumps all over. So I said, oh my goodness, is this America? Yeah, sure, America. Don't you like it? Oh yeah, but it's so different. Look at the country, everything is ruined. Look at all the timber, everything is cut down. They didn't cut down the timber, you know. They left it. And if you cut down the tree, you had to plant another one. But that don't go here. I used to tell the farmers, why don't you do like you do in Sweden? Plant pine, then you have good forest in 75 years. And then it's big enough to harvest. Get timber out of it. Oh yeah, no. There was too much effort, you know, to save land for that purpose. Yeah, but you gain on it. Look at that. What you get in 75 years, you get timber. And they let it go, and all the junk grows. You can see that alongside the road, all the junk grows up. No trees, there's no value in it or anything. It's good enough to burn it up in a stove, you know. But as far as value, it isn't there. But now a big forest would have been lots of wood. Oh, you get a good return on timber. There was an old Jew. He was preaching to me. Yeah, preaching, you know what I mean. And he said, if I was young like you, I'd go to Sarth and buy cheap land. The cheapest I can. Because Sarth is a real pine country. The pine grows good on that kind of land. And a certain kind of pine too. It had a name on that pine. We painters have trouble with that kind of pine. We had to shellac it before we could do anything. Jackrabbit. Jackrabbit? Pine. Pine. Oh, that's what you call it. Anyway, the wood you had to shellac it before you could do anything with it. Even stain. You had to have a stain that covers. And that's what they used on that. And we made some pretty darn good jobs there. Wait a minute before we get to the work here. You came to Chicago then. I came to Chicago. Who met you there? Who met you in Chicago? Who did you come to? Oh, there was Moberg on 63rd and... Halsted. 63rd and Hermitage. And Hermitage. That's way up on 63rd and way up on the other side of Western Avenue. So I worked for him a couple of years. But then somebody told me, Say, as long as you work for the street you'll never learn English. Yeah, that's right too. If I wanted to learn English I had to go to Art Event and look for a job. But I couldn't talk English so it was pretty hard for anybody to hire me. Well, I said, I didn't say anything. I let them talk. I could say yes and no and all that. I knew where to put it sometimes too. And time went on and I got better and better. And finally I did good work. And those big companies, they kept me. I did that because these people at the Institute, they couldn't talk English. He said, you do such good work. So we keep you for that. So that's what helped me. My skill helped me. So I got through that way. But I'll tell you first how I got started at all. That's a good story. Oh boy. I stopped at the tailor's. He had a man come in. He was the boss over all the streets in Chicago. You know, that's a big job. Look at all the people he hired. All the street cleaners and everything. So I went in the setting and they had his suit. They had a press. Then he talked to him, this man, that man came from Sweden this week. You don't happen to have any work for him. Oh, excuse me. So he said, well, he said, I can look into it. Aha, what is it? Oh, did you find? No, I got it. So he couldn't find it? I can look into it, he said. And then before he left, he stood there thinking and all that. He told me, send this man over. I know it's all right. Send that man over to a certain spot in Chicago on the south side. And I'm going to put 500 war prisoners to work. Italian war prisoners. The Balkan War was over at that time. 19... The Balkan War was over. Man, that was over. So they had 500 prisoners. The Chicago bought them. Bought the prisoners. They bought them? And there was a bad time in Chicago, there was hardly any work. And then they bought 500 war prisoners, Italians. And this man, he was the boss. He took them over. And he said, I was standing on the corner and out in the field was all the 500 war prisoners. And you know how the Italians, how he talks and laughs and carry on. And they sound like a beehive when you listen to that heap of people. Sound like a beehive. I couldn't hear, you couldn't hear what they say or anything like that. And laughing a little bit about it. Italians are laughing people. So... Let me see it now. You know, he said then to his companion, I don't know what he said, that time I didn't. And... Let's see now. You know, it runs away from me sometimes, you know what I'm talking about. Oh, you take your time. Does it do on you sometimes? Oh, sure. Oh, you're not old enough for that. Oh, yes, I am. You just take your time. And, well, it isn't, it is no trick. I have nothing to it, he said, to put 500 war prisoners to work. Because I gave them a shovel and they pick each one. And then he said, Italian boss, take over. And they talk Italian, so my word is over. But that's sweet, he said. What can I do with him? I was alone. And they said, well, he came over and he asked in English, you know, I didn't know what he said, what I could do. So I couldn't answer anything, I didn't understand anything. So he said to his companion, it is a painter working on the second house from here, north. If he's a painter, he might be a Swede. So he said to this nigger, you know, go over and talk to that man and ask him if he's a Swede. And if he, tell him I want to talk to him. And he did, by God, he was a Swede. And he came over and he talked to him, and we two started to talk Swedish, you know. And he asked me, what can I do? Well, I can do anything those guys are doing. I give him a shovel and he pick and I go to work like they do. Doesn't make any difference, I want a job, that's all there is to it. In Swedish, I said. And that time I could talk Swedish. And I said, well, I was. So you got the job then? Yeah, I got the job, but they wanted to find out what I could do. So that Swedish painter, he asked me, what can you do? Well, I said, as I said, I could do anything they do, but they don't want that. You can do something else. Well, I can cut wood, I can nail them and nail it and cut it and mason and cut it. And I did quite a bit of carpenter work, so I know I can handle that. Oh, well, I'm going to sell them to what? Oh, this, what they want. Carpenter. Carpenter, he wanted a carpenter. So I was a carpenter. I wanted a job from a painter to a carpenter. Well, anyway, now I had to think again. You know, this is a long time ago. How long did you work with this job then? This was in July, I guess. July, that was. July in the fall. And I worked until Christmas. And then he asked me, say, you haven't got a job now, he said. I know he said that. And how about working for me, I understood that. I'm in the coal business, he said. And you're good with horses, so you can drive any place. I can trust you with the horses. So, when I was thinking about coal, you get black every night. And if I'm going to wash that black off every night, I think it's going to reset with my skin. So I said, well, I'll think it over, I said. Well, I'll have Sweden. I'll think it over. I learned a little bit in the meantime. But, of course, I didn't go. And I got a job in a piano factory.