 He was a sailor, your father. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But you don't know where he came from, do you? No. October 1987, sitting together with Mrs. Eppel-Hallin in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 2 August 1903 in St. Charles, Illinois. Your parents, now, both of them came from Sweden. Your father was a sailor, you said, and he came here on the boat. They never mentioned where they came from in Sweden. I suppose they have, but, you know, it's been so many, many years, I've forgotten. No? So you have no idea? No. What happened? Did they have any brothers and sisters there? Oh, yes. My father had a stepbrother in St. Charles, Fritz Carlson, and my mother had one, two, four brothers and one sister. Yeah, and they were all in St. Charles, Illinois. Why did they settle in St. Charles, do you know? Oh, I don't know. You know how they used to come years ago. First one son would come, then another would come, and then they saved money for the other ones, and that's the way they come. I don't know how they landed there. I really don't know. It didn't turn too far from Chicago, of course, you know. How long did they stay there? In St. Charles? Did they stay there for good all their lives? My folks? No, we come to Rockford in 1914. 1914? So you remember St. Charles, then? Oh, yes, yes. But it has changed so drastically since I left. The church now they belong to, was it a Swedish church? Yeah, Bethlehem Lutheran Church. Bethlehem Lutheran Church. You were baptized there? Yeah, uh-huh. Confirmed to? Yeah. No, I wasn't confirmed there, but my sister was. Yeah, in Sweden. You were three sisters? Yeah. Did you talk Swedish in the home? We children didn't, but my grandparents and my mother did. My sister went to Swedish school, and she can't talk at all. So I don't know what to, it's harder for some. I understand some. My husband's folks are a whole lot more Swedish than mine, because they were over in the Swedish area, you know, we're all Swedes. And that was all Swedes. As I say, my husband couldn't even talk English when he went to school, which is too bad, because that's a handicap. But he talks very fluent English now, and he passed away. He died in 81. Yeah, yeah. He was born 86. He was quite a bit older. Yeah, yeah, seven years. So you met your husband then here in Rockford? Yeah. You went through high school here and confirmation then in Rockford? I never went to high school. My folks, you know, we couldn't wait till we got out and made a living. So I just went through grade school. What kind of work was your father doing? Well, my father worked for the Ropert here in Rockford. That was, they made stoves and stuff. And he didn't have any trade exactly, of course, yeah. So what did you live in Rockford on the coast? No, we lived on the– Well, believe it or not, when my dad would come here first and got a job, and he got in a little hotel across the street, a very small one. And then he didn't look very hard, I don't think, for an apartment, so we moved in there. And then finally we moved on the west side. And I say, it's strange. I said, I come to Rockford, and I'm going to be carried out here. It was right across the street. You see, the town has expanded and built up so tremendously. You lived there as a young girl then, on this side? On the west side, yeah. I was about, what was I? I don't know, 1914, 1903. I was about– And this was not the Swedish side of Rockford? Oh, no, no, it's all on the east side. But the Lutherans built this. So we have quite a few Swedes here. And now they're coming back to the west side. But as I say, we have some very, very– Ella Johnson and this Mrs. Weston, they're very, very Swedish. And I think this Mrs. Weston would be a wonderful person to talk to. Yes, we will try to see her. But she is leaving in the latter part of November, I know that. And Mrs. Johnson, I think she'd be thrilled to death because she is so Swedish. She was so thrilled to have the Prime Minister come and visit her, you know. So coming into the Prime Minister's visit a little bit later, you know, which church did he attend here in Rockford? Zion or First? Who? Your parents? My folks– I was confirmed at Trinity Lutheran Church. Trinity Lutheran? Yeah, that was an English church here. Where's the one down there on– On Second– on First Street, just over the river. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And there was not a Swedish church either? No, no, but they had quite– It was in English. Well, it's kind of a mixture. Why did they join their one? We were confirmed there and we didn't talk Freedish. So no, my younger sister and I– but my older sister was confirmed in St. Charles at the Swedish church, yeah. But you see, my folks have never been in amongst the Swedes. Like, my husband's folks, you see, they come to the east side and they were very, very Swedish on the east side. Of course, now they are. So your parents, they didn't belong to Vasa or Viking? No, no, no, no. Only the Trinity Lutheran Church? Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh, yeah. So how did you meet your husband though? At a dance. Did you go over to the west side or did he come to– Oh, it's– we had a Harlem park, yeah, amusement park here. And my husband, he had a meat market for many, many years. Oh, I see. And then the Depression come, he bought a farm. And then we were on a farm for 10 years in Durand, Illinois. I see. You've been a farmer's wife then. Yeah. You trying out the hard life. Oh, yeah. It wasn't that easy though during the Depression. Oh, no. He bought a farm– you're not taking all this down, are you? Well, I like to listen to it, but it's interesting. He had played the– some kind of thing on the market. And he won 2,000– Stock market. Well, $2,000. And it wasn't the stock market. It was some other kind of a market pertaining to that. And he was going up in the building and he met an attorney he knew. And he says, gee, what am I going to do with my $2,000? And the attorney says, well, gee, he says, I got a farmer auctioning off. Why don't you give me your $2,000 and see what I can do? And he got a farm for $2,000. But you can imagine what kind of a farm that was. It was run down awful. So we– And you didn't see it before he bought it? No. He didn't see it either? It was an 80-acre farm. It was all– Well, he knew it had to be run down for $2,000. But you didn't expect to make a living there, though. Well, we made it go. You moved away from Rockford then? You had any children then at that time? Yeah, I had a– I only had one boy. He was eight, yeah. And– What year was that? 19– What was it? 1934, I believe. Depression. Yeah, sure, it was depression. And the house wasn't livable. I cooked in the basement, and we crawled up a ladder to the second floor. Oh, no. I experienced– But it goes. My husband was– You must have felt a great love then for your husband, because, you know, anybody would have left– Well, that's what my– Left them cold out there. Yeah, but what would I have done? Cash with a child. What could you do? Yeah. Well, you could have moved back to your parents' though, or you didn't want to– Oh, no. No home is big enough for two people. No, no. I wouldn't go for that. It was your home out there. Yeah. For 10 years we lived there. Then my son was lucky enough to win V-12, the college program, you know. And he went to the Navy. And we didn't have much help. He was just between my son and his father that did the work. And he didn't get– He kind of got sick. So then we had to sell. And then we moved down the east side. So your husband, Aggruner Hallin, he came from Sweden. No, no, no, no, no. He was born in Rottenburg. He was born in Rottenburg, yeah. And that's the one side that's related to the prime minister. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He had no experience from farming, though. No, the only thing– He left home one summer, and they had relatives up in Sebeka, Minnesota. And he spent one summer– And he liked it. And my husband was a very capable man. He could do anything. He built my son a home, and he remodeled. He could do electric work and plumbing. He could do anything. And he didn't have that much education, but he was a brilliant man. He was a brilliant man. And like I say, education is a fabulous thing to have, but you have to have determination and know-how to get along in the world. So he was not afraid to tackle anything? Oh, no, he could do anything. He was in the meat market, you said, previously. Many, many years. Did he make money there? Oh, yeah, he made– Oh, yeah. He was considered one of the better markets in Rockford, he's on Kishwaukee Street. But you see, the Depression come along, and then all the chain stores come along. Oh, yeah. So he saw the light, then, that was time for– Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then he never worked for anybody after he got out of the farm. He did miscellaneous jobs, but he never held a job. But he repaired our house and built a home for my son and did odd jobs like that. But we made a lot, we got along. So how did he start out? Did he have to buy some cattle and dairy cows? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. We had milk cows. And did he milk or you did? I tried once and nothing come. Nothing come up? No, towards the end, they had a milking machine. And then he raised pigs, and he had– He went out and did custom work in the fields with the cutting hay and stuff. But we made it. But it took quite some time, though, before you made it. In other words, you had to live in some savings store. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Did you see there was a possibility to make a living on that farm? You said you cooked in the basement for– Yeah, until they fixed the kitchen, I'm sure. So he did the fixing himself, then? Well, no, his brother was a carpenter, and then he did have some fellows come in and do some of it. But it took a good year, year and a half, for the house to be completed. But after it was done, it was fine. Nice house. Oh, yeah. How far away is Durand, not from Rockford? Oh, about probably 20 miles or something like that. So were you able then to go back to your parents and see them and– Oh, sure. It didn't take long. What did your mother say when she came down in the basement and saw you standing cooking there? Nothing. Well, I'm sure she said something. Oh, I don't think so. I don't think so. They didn't come out too often because they didn't have a car, you know. I cooked on a little gasoline stove. But everything, everything works. Years ago, we had to do things like that. Like the children nowadays, they don't know what it is to sacrifice or do anything like that. I have two grandsons. Oh, my gosh. Do they believe what you're telling them? Oh, yeah, yeah, because my son knows it. Do you think they– your son knows, but– No, no, no, yeah. I think the children know. They all know their dad can make– their grandfather could make anything because he made them toys and he made a boat. No, no, no, they realize that. So he always had time for those small things? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. No, as I say, he was a fantastic guy because he could– he'd get on the roof of the house, you know, in the cold weather and fix chimneys and everything, so everybody knew who was up on the roof. They could see him, yeah. Was he a strong fellow or– Oh, yeah, he was a tall man. Oh, yeah, yeah. But he– he was fairly in good health. Was he a relaxed kind of a guy or– No, he was very high strung. That's why he could never work for anybody. Yeah, when he'd come back from Rockford, I meant from the farm, he had all kinds of opportunities to go and work for some of the better– well, there were Italian run, of course. He don't particularly care for the Italians, but he could never work for anybody. He always worked for himself since the time he started. No, he would be too high strung to work for anybody else. But not starting this farm. What kind of a fellow was he then? Was he more relaxed than when he was looking forward to all this– there were problems ahead of him, there's no question about it. Oh, well, we had problems. He was not afraid to tackle them. Oh, no, no, no, uh-uh. Did he complain about hard work or complain about he made a bad deal or anything? No, uh-uh, uh-uh, uh-uh. And you didn't complain? No, no. So you were more relaxed than when he was? Well, I don't know if I was relaxed, but– You never asked him, you know, is this the right way of living? No, I don't think so. You never questioned that? No, because we had to do it. Because we didn't have too much money. A little money he put in the farm, so we just had to. The farm had been for sale for years and years and years, and that's why they auctioned it off. But no, I don't know where it went. And my son helped with the haying. My son was wonderful, of course. Helped with the milking. So he had to learn how to very young then– Oh, sure, sure, sure. But that doesn't hurt him. And he became a little farmer, too, then? Oh, no, no, no. Yeah, but I mean, to start with– Oh, no. Oh, yeah, when he graduated from high school, I said he got into this V-12, and that was college. And he graduated from college, and then he was with Sunstrance for many, many years. And then he left there, and then he was in various places up in Wisconsin, and then he got a school where he taught girls to be secretaries for doctors. That was his last business. Now he's going into real estate in Florida. So you were growing up with him as the only son, of course. I mean, you could teach him to do it. Oh, yeah. Did he complain at any time when he was young on the work on the farm? No, uh-uh. He never complained? He was happy until we moved there. He's a fantastic young man. I don't know what I'd do without him. Oh, he's so– He's so conscientious. I said, the Lord's been very good to me, so I can't complain. So you were happy that next year on the farm– Oh, I wouldn't say I was happy, but we made it go. You made it go? Oh, sure. We made it go. Oh, yeah. But you know, during– You weren't– Were you here during the Depression? No, I was not. Well, you don't– But you know, there wasn't much choice. You had to do the best that you can, and we did. We probably went to Beloit one night a week, went to a show and bought our groceries. No, the youngster, he never did anything. Because he went to the school with the other youngsters, and they didn't have anything more than we did. And you know, it's different when you go to high school now. The kids got to have clothes. You know, everything changed two or three times a week, and they want so much. So, no, there's a different– Now, my daughter-in-law, she's a lovely girl, but she was brought in a family with money. Now, she's got to have everything. She's got to have everything. She went to Lake Forest, one of the better colleges for girls. North of Chicago. Yeah, and you see, she wants everything. And now, my son was harder for him. So he will look, you know, at a dollar or so before he spends it, but she don't have– she won't do that. So I say it was a wonderful upbringing. I oftentimes wish that– One thing we always regretted, my son tried desperately to get a swimming pool in the Grand High School, but he never did. So when my son went to the Navy, he didn't know how to swim. I said, I have regretted that all my life, because we were to blame for that. But you know, you never know. But he got by. Yeah. So he never complained about swimming? No. Do you think he was proud of his dad now? Oh, yeah. Yes, yes, yes. He made the toys that you were thinking about? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. No, he's very proud of his– Small wagons and– Yeah, he's very proud of his father, yeah. No, no. Did your husband have any correspondence with Sweden that you remember of? Yeah, he has an Aunt Eileen over there, Danielson's. And then, the latter years, he was corresponding with Binkt and that family. He never did with the father, of course, because I don't know. The father must have been quite old, too. The mother, I guess, just– Binkt's mother, just– Binkt is the other brother, and I'm more familiar with him. I think his mother died not too often. Or is she living? I don't know if she's living or not. In Sweden, you mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But you didn't have any visits from Sweden that you remember of when you were– Oh, yes. Not from– The boys had been here. It was after the war, then? Yeah, yeah. Oh, no, not before, of course. No, the latter years, of course. How about your father and mother-in-law now? Did they have any connection with Sweden that you know of? Because they came from Sweden. Yeah. Well, I don't know if they did or not. I don't please her, because I think probably all their family was over here that I know of. Did they talk Swedish most of the time? Oh, yes. Not latter years, but when they had friends from Sweden, they all talked, yeah. So they were on the Swedish side, even though they were under– Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Did they belong to different organizations? Well, I think at one time they did, many years ago, but towards the latter part, I don't think they did. You know, during the Depression, there was a socialist club here in Rockford. Oh, yeah. Do you know if your father-in-law belonged to that one? No, I don't know that. I don't think so, because he wasn't a man to get around. He wasn't? He worked and come home, and he was content. What kind of work was he doing? Oh, furniture factories. You see, that was Rockford was known for years ago, furniture factories. He didn't want his son to come back to Rockford and start in the furniture after that? No. Oh, no, no, no, no, because my– He wanted to be independent. Oh, yeah, because my son– I don't know how he got started. Well, he had an uncle that had a meat market, and I think he helped him a little bit, and that possibly fascinated him, and then he did it on his own. Yeah. But standing in the factory, that was not his business? No. So he felt pretty good then, out on the farm and freedom? Oh, yeah, yeah. He could do what he wanted. And as I say, when we left the farm, he never got a job. He was home all the time. He did a lot of odd jobs, you know, fixing the houses and built a house for my son. He drove cars, you know, for some of these automobile places, you know, from one town to the other when they sold them, and just things like that. But we always got along. What you don't have, you don't miss. I'm awfully glad to be in here. I like it very much. So he was healthy all his life then? Oh, yeah, yeah, up until the last couple years, he wasn't too well. But he never liked doctors. He didn't have confidence in them. No? Uh-uh, he never liked– uh-uh. And he complained terrifically, oh, months before he passed away, of awful, awful pain here. And he– they wanted– he died very– I took him to the hospital, and he was dead at night. And they asked for an autopsy, and he was full of cancer. And my son still thinks to this day this was cancer that was bothering him. But he never complained. He never complained. And he didn't want to go to doctors, right? Well, he went to a doctor, and then he quit smoking. And my son thinks he was told to quit smoking, but he never smoked after that. But he never said anything else. And my son talked to one of the doctors after, and he says, I surmised it was something like that. Now, whether my husband knew it or not, I don't know. But he was absolutely full of cancer when they did an autopsy on him. But he– but you know, he died on the 1st of January, and he was up on the roof of a house around Christmas, fixing a roof. He was an unusual guy. Yeah, he was unusual. Where did you live in Rockport when you came back from the rent? Did you live on the east side? We bought a house at 1040 East 8th. East 8th. It's a lawyer's office now. No– yeah, yeah. Because before we went on the farm, we lived on a– Well, that's close to where the Hillman lived. Swan Hillman? Oh, no, Hillman's way, way up– It's way east. Yeah, way up in the hill. Oh, yeah, yeah. We've had some wonderful Swedes here in Rockport. P.A. Peterson, Hillman. You remember P.A. Peterson? I remember all of them. I remember him coming to church once in a while. He'd always come with carpet slippers. So he came to the Trinity Church? Trinity Church, oh, yeah. He was a member there? Oh, yeah. How about Lee Living Faust? I don't remember him. You don't remember him? No, no, I know of him, but he was another very– yeah, active Swede here in Rockport. No, we've had quite a few. Did your husband mention at any time there were many växjötar, as they call them here? Who? From Västergötland. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. I think there's quite a few of them here. He didn't belong to Växjöta-gruppen? No, no, no. No, he didn't belong to any of those Swedish clubs. When did you realize that you had a famous person in Sweden that was going to be the prime minister? Well, we didn't consider him famous. You didn't? When did you know about him? Oh, well, as I say– Early 60s? Well, I suppose he was working. We knew he was working for the prime minister. You know, we've known that for many, many years. You know that? Oh, yeah, but that never affected us. I can't get blown up because I have somebody that's a prime minister where somebody would be big as– no, and as I say, my son, he'd been over there. He'd been in his home and everything, but we didn't think anything of it. That was just a job for him, and it's just luck with– Yeah, but it wasn't a job, though. I mean, he's the leader of the whole– Yeah, now, yeah. I think it's fantastic. I said, I wish my husband was here to know it. Did he know about that when he– No, he was dead the night– Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But– Did he mention any time that he was– that he had the famous– No. Relation over there? So how was he related now to your husband? Well, they were really cousins. Really? What are they cousins? Yeah, because their fathers were brothers. So they had this all mixed up in the paper, you know. Yeah, I read that. Yeah, but that's fine. But they were cousins, then, were they? Oh, yeah, they were cousins. Yeah, they were cousins. Yeah. He's so down to earth. Of course, I don't like our president. And look at the difference between Reagan and him. And one of our girls in the building, which was very good, she wrote a little article in the paper. She said, you know, we had a prime minister here in this country, and they couldn't even show him on the TV with Reagan. But he said, we got somebody over here now, maybe from a little country, that's begging for money. And they had him on the TV. And he said, here, our prime minister come over here just for friendship, which was true. He didn't ask for anything when he was over here. But all these people, other people, are coming over and begging for money. And they were on splashdown on the TV. But no, I don't know if he saw him any more than that day. I think he talked to him, from what I understand. But then they had an open house for him at the White House. You don't know what they talked about when they met? No, no, no, no, no. But don't you suppose they talked about various things, you know, according to the country and stuff like that? I don't know. That's just what I read in the paper. But he didn't say anything personal to you when you met the president? Oh, no, no. I didn't talk to him very much. No, no, because he come up and talked to me and spoke to me when we were at the party, you know, that Saturday night. But then here, he didn't have much to say to me. And there was too many other people. Oh, there was all the time, yeah. Always somebody, yeah. Everybody wanted to touch his hand. Oh, sure, yeah. But everybody thought he was absolutely wonderful here. And I was so happy, because you know, too, as well as I do, a lot of people say, oh, those Swedes, those Swedes. Rockford built, Swedes built Rockford. But now it's practically all Italians on 7th Street. Yeah. So you felt kind of proud then? Oh, sure, sure, sure, sure. He made a good impression? Oh, he was wonderful. Yeah, he was absolutely. Yeah, he was wonderful, yeah. I'm so happy that they all accepted him so, yeah. Because there are a lot of other people that aren't Swedes here, too, you know, that thought he was awfully nice, too. So your husband, what kind of political affiliation did he have? Was he a Democrat or? Democrat. Democrat. So you voted both for Roosevelt and during the Depression? Mm-hmm. Never been a Republican? No. My folks were Democrats, too. All of them? Yeah, yeah. I don't know, I always think Democrats are more hardworking people. The Republicans all got the money. They're all rich, most of them. There are Democrats that are, they're wealthy, too, as far as that's concerned. But I think a majority of the Swedes are Republicans, so, yeah. So, and you had to go through a hard... Oh, yeah....time there, 1934. But you know... You didn't lose any money, though, in the bank or? Oh, yeah, when he was in the market, he did. He did? Oh, yeah. He, years ago, when you bought stock in a bank and when the bank goes under, you not only use your stock. Say, for instance, he had $5,000 in stock. He lost that, he had to put up an additional $5,000. To pay the curators. Yeah. So otherwise, he never had any stock in banks or anything like that. Did he have stocks in the security bank on Broadway? Yeah. That was the one. Yeah, yeah. It toppled over. How did you know about that? Truman and Gustafson. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, they always say, the ones that were instrumental in putting it over was Blomquist, a furniture store, and National Lock. Oh, I think, I forget his name. Hoagland. Hoagland. They claim they were the two that put it under. They borrowed so much money. Yeah. And the little guy has himself a... Oh, sure. Isn't that the way it is today? Yes. It's terrible. Did your husband or you or somebody in the family talk about the welfare system in Sweden in the late 20, 25 years? Who? Talked about the welfare system in Sweden, how good it is compared to the United States? You never discussed that. But you gotta socialize now, don't you? Yes. Well, everybody knows about that. They claim that's a good system. What do they, what do the people in Rockford say about it? Is it good or bad or? Well, I don't associate with too many Swedes, but everybody, what I've heard, gosh, you're taken care of from the grave to the, from the birth to grave, but you have, they take an awful lot out of the pay, don't they, for people that work? The cost of course. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But otherwise, from what I understand, that you're doing okay over in Sweden. Nobody criticizes it. Is that what people say when you talk about it? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But as I say, I don't associate with that many Swedes. What do they write now in the paper here, Rockford Star? Are they pro-Republican or are they more Democratic? Oh, they're Republican. Republican. What do they generally say about Sweden? Oh, they don't have much to say. The only thing that I remember that, you know, you had a falling out during the Vietnam War, and now of course you're getting back in good graces. That's the only thing that I have heard here. Yeah, yeah. And I think they were justified. We're not right. I don't think our government is right today. Gosh, look at the mess we're in in the stock market. Oh, God. It might be another depression. Oh, were they all forecasting that? It's terrible. I don't know. And then of course now, you see, we have so many people on welfare. It's just terrible. Oh, the welfare is awful out here. I suppose you have it too good. What could be done about it? Do you think people have it too good, though? Well, I think they're too lenient. There are a lot of people hungry. We know that. Oh, yeah, I know. But I think there's a lot of people on welfare that shouldn't be there. They should work for them. Oh, yeah, they should. My father worked for WPA. Do you remember that? They were on welfare a little while. He was sent off on road work. Yeah, uh-huh. And they had to work for a little bit. I think they should. And now, you see, welfare is taken care of. And all these girls that have illegitimate children, it's terrible. They would rather have that than go to work. They should put a stop to that. No, I think our government is wrong in a lot of respects. But as I say, I'm getting older. I don't think I'll ever have to worry, God forbid. And I don't want much. But there are a lot of people that are in a bad, bad way. A lot of people in a bad way. Do you think that this government in this country pays too little attention to the common man? Oh, I think so. I think so, too. Well, maybe I'm crazy, but all these people in Congress, you have, they're millionaires, most of them. They take millionaires to get in there. My husband also, they should have a farmer in there. He said they could run it. And you know, they know what hard life is. Now, Bush was on or some of the others. Well, we didn't have much. We were poor. Reagan says the same thing. But is he considerate of the poor people nowadays? He's not. He's out for all that he can get himself. I'm sorry. But as I say, it doesn't make that much difference. What do you think about those religious people now running for president, Ted Robertson? Well, I don't know. He can't be any worse than the others. The only thing I don't like about him, he laughs too much. Did you see him? I don't think so. Do you have cable at your house? No, I don't. Channel 12? Well, he was interviewed by one of the guys. He was good, but he laughs too much. But some people say it's a winning smile. Well, no. You don't go for it. I don't go for it. I don't go for it. I like him. He seems to be a down-on-earth guy. I think he's honest and all that. But I like Paul Simons. I think he's- He's a regular guy, though, isn't he? Yeah, yeah, yeah, a little low-tie. No. No, no, I like Paul Simons, yeah. But now if Bush gets in, me talking politics. But how about this Jim Thompson? He has a Swedish background. Oh, yeah, but he's no good. They vetoed a lot of that stuff today. Did you see that in the paper? Well, you know, I knew that- well, I didn't like when he ran the fourth time. He promised every- The interview continues next site. Next site. This is Saitou, continuation with Ethel Alene in Rockford, Illinois. Saitou. So do you believe there could be another depression like the one that was in the 30s? Oh, I hope not. God, I hope not. Like your mother now. She had an insurance on your- Uh-huh. And we had a bank, First National Bank, here and right on the corner. Was it life insurance? No, she just- Well, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, the life insurance was my sister, but she had put it in there, and then she bought some stock from the Commonwealth Edison, because my brother-in-law worked there, and she lost all that. She never get back a cent? Uh-uh, didn't get anything. What did people say to them when that happened? I mean, there must be a tremendous- First of all, the dollar was worth so much at that time. Yeah, yeah. It was a tremendous- I know. If you had a dollar in your pocket. But when they lost hundreds and some thousands, 15, 20 years savings, went on the drain, what did they say? What could they say? That's why a lot of people went out on WPA, and they lost their jobs, had to go for welfare and everything. So there was too many of them, so people probably never discussed among themselves. No, uh-uh, uh-uh, uh-uh. But if you discussed with somebody, when you were old enough, so you remember what they said, were they afraid to talk to others because they felt like you were not a good businessman? No, no, no. I don't think anybody- No, in this country, they say what they please. But of course, they had a lot of arguments. They always say, we never should talk about politics and religion. I think that's the two worst things you can talk about. No, but to clear the air, though, you've got to have criticism. Yeah, I know, but for an intimate group like friends, it's a bad policy. Because you know what they do. Because I'm going to say something somebody else isn't going to like, you know. As I say, now- You think that's the fault with American people, that they think they are so good, you know, so they don't have to discuss the fault? No, I don't think so. The average American person, it's very common. I don't think we're high-hat or anything. Now, everybody's fantastic in here, just wonderful. You're in this place, I mean. But when you go out to the political life- Oh, I don't go out to the political life. You remember Jim Thompson? He was the Attorney General of Illinois in Chicago. But I don't- Everybody said he was so fair, you know, and square, and he should be the presidential nominee and so on. But he didn't turn out that way, though. Why? Don't you think- They have a lust for power. I think that's why everybody wants to be president. Gosh, they're right on the top. Now, I thought it was a sad state of affair when they had a movie actor for our president. But he was re-elected, but it's on its charisma. That isn't running the country. And you've read so many articles about Reagan now, that he'll start a meeting, then he turns it over to somebody else. But I think he's trying a little bit harder now because, you know, there's been so much criticism. It's too late now. Oh, yeah, I know that, yeah. But he should have never been elected the second thing. He's too old. Well, you know the background of your relation in Ingvar Karlsson, the prime minister, and you know what he has done, the way he came up over the years. I mean, this guy with experience. And then you see this movie actor coming in there and running the whole world, so to speak. There's a lot of difference there. Yeah, because just he was a governor, and then he got to be. But you see, they- He doesn't have the respect that he should have. Well, they like him. You see, he's got charisma. He smiles a little bit. But you have to have somebody that's down to earth. Now, they make fun of what's his name? Simon with his bow tie. So what if he wears a bow tie? He's down to earth. It isn't your looks that put you- It shouldn't put you in office. It's what you know. So as I say, it's just one of those things. But don't you think this movie industry and TV in later years, I mean, they have formed the thinking among people. You've got to look good. Oh, yeah. You've got to talk well, of course. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. And they forget about what the guy knows. Yeah, yeah. I'm so afraid that we're going- Well, we are in a war, according to what they said last time. And how do these Iranians think? They can come up and bomb all our stuff and then we aren't going to retaliate? My gosh, now they're going to do something else and then we're going to do it again? It's just going to escalate. Oh, I don't know. I'm so glad I have no youngsters going to war yet. How many great-grandchildren do you have now? I have two little great-grandchildren. I have two boys and two little great-granddaughters. Yeah, yeah. So they visit you often then? No, not very often. Now, I'm going to... I'm not a traveler, but my son has already bought my ticket to make sure I go down there. I was there last year before and I was so cold, it was miserable. And I was sick when I came home. So I always said I'd never go again. Well, now my younger grandson's going down there. So they have made arrangements, I'm going with them, and we're leaving on the 11th, and I will be there 10 days. So I hope the weather will be nicer. But otherwise, I'm still contending to stay in Rockford. I just don't like to travel, that's all. Do you have good health? Oh, I'm having problems now, but otherwise, I can't complain. Gosh, when you get to be 84, you know, you've got to have aches and pains, I guess. Yeah, well, you know, a lot of people in their 60s have problems. Oh, yeah, even earlier than that, as far as I'm concerned. Oh, no, no, no. So you watch TV and read the papers and follow along with them? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then we have a lot of activities here in the building. Now, today I went down for exercise class for half an hour, no, an hour. And usually I go to the Y on Fridays and we have a social hour, we have exercise, and then we go in the water. I don't swim, but there is so much stuff if you only want to take it. We have Vespers here and every Tuesday night we have a Bible class here on Monday noon. Oh, they have so much stuff here. And the Synod office is located here now, the Illinois Synod. Yeah, but it's... Don't they have the main center here? They have something downstairs, but I don't think it's a Synod, is it? Yeah, it's a Synod. Is it? Well, it's right down here in the building, yeah. On that side of the street, yeah, yeah. Your relation on your husband's side, were they interested in sports, for instance, like soccer playing, running? That I don't know. That I've never heard. Your husband was not interested? No, no, and my son, my whole family. They like to watch it, but they don't participate. No participation? No, no participation at all. Because you probably remember in the late 20s and 30s there was a Swedish soccer team here in Rockford. Oh. You never know... No, uh-uh, uh-uh, uh-uh, no. And your husband was not interested in it? No, well, he watched ball games and everything, but he never took part, no, he never took part. Oh, many years ago, of course, when he was younger, he was in a basketball team, you know, like kids are. That's the only thing I've ever heard him... And he loved to play golf, he loved to play golf. Did you have a Swedish-American newspaper? No, his folks did, yeah. My husband could read Swedish, but I couldn't, no. And my Swedish talking is very, very poor. I can understand some of it. Just so it isn't too, you know, fluent. So that makes a lot of difference than to live on the west side of Rockford and to be on the east. Because you're not mingled with Europe. Yeah, that's true, too. And then you see, we went to an American church. But you see... So you belonged to Trinity during the whole time? Oh, yeah. My younger sister and I, we were confirmed there at Trinity. I mean, your husband, did he also join the church? No, I don't think Gunnar did. Because there was no church in Durant that you joined. Oh, yeah, we went there once in a while. Yeah, because my son was confirmed at a little Durant church. Yeah, a very small church, country church. There was not a Lutheran church, though, was there? Yeah, Bethlehem, they called Bethlehem church, too. There was no Swedish back then? No, no, no, no, no. No, the biggest majority were Irish up there. Oh, Irish Lutherans? But not in our church. But the biggest majority of people up there. Yeah, yeah. He had a friend, Alenus Larson, that had quite a big family that lived in Durant, too. But now, that was on his mother's side. Yeah, yeah. And then he's got two cousins down in Cullum, Illinois, and that's on his mother's side, too. Otherwise, the Hulleen family wasn't a very big family. And mine is very small, too. Have you been in Sweden? No, my son has. And not to hospital, either? No. How about his parents? Did they go back to Sweden? No, they never went. No, I don't think they ever had the money to go. They were just hardworking, you know. And she had borders like everybody else. My mother did, too. They all worked. You know, when I marvel nowadays, when my folks come over, well, my father could, because he was on this boat for many years. But my mother come over just as green as she could be. She went to work in housekeeper right away. How did they do it? Now look at the Cubans and the Spaniards coming over. They got signs all over and everything, helping them do everything. What did the Swedes get years ago? Nothing. So you've got to give them credit. They're a bunch of hardworking people, of course. Most of them are. I think they all are, yeah. So the third and fourth generation, they are reaping the benefits from the pioneers. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. What they did. Have you been out to the museum here in Rockford? Yes. Were they politically involved, your husband and his parents? No. My son was here in the city. Did you ever hear of an Ernie S. Wing? There's the one with the hammers and the– Yeah, he's dead, of course, now. He and a group got together and tried to fight tearing down the old courthouse, you know, because, oh, they tried– What was it? Committee 100 or 1,000 or something like that. They worked desperately hard for that, but they were defeated. The courthouse went up because– The courthouse would have been an antique. It would have been a wonderful thing nowadays, but you know how people are. They want everything bigger. It was too low. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. And they're going to build so many buildings here. Down here, we aren't going to have room to park. Just across the back, they're going to build a state building. And all the offices from all these other buildings will go in, and there's going to be a terrible bunch of offices vacant. And then they're going to build, oh, a $12, $15 million high-rise just, oh, about a block from here. And it's going to be up in the slant like this. One apartment here and then up like that. But now, according to the paper, the stock market might put a little bit shabash on it, of course, yeah. It's going to hurt a lot of people, I think. Yeah. Are you– It's too bad you can't talk. When the prime minister visited this country a month ago, your son was invited, and his wife and family– No, just the wife and him. To Washington. So he was along on the dinners. What did he say then when he came back? Was it a tremendous experience? Oh, yeah, it was an experience. You know, you had to have a tax to go to Washington, and he didn't want to, of course he did. And, of course, my– They weren't too impressed with Washington. It was nice. The biggest thing they raved about was this countess's dinner. You know, 400 people. That was a tremendous thing. Everybody– It was at the White House? Not the– The countess's dinner wasn't. He has a– The ambassador to Sweden or something like that. Oh, he was the one that put it on? Yeah. And they had about 400 people. But he was also at the Reagan's dinner? No, no. All they did was have a kind of a reception, and they got– They were treated to a highball. That's all they had there. But they had a dinner for George Shultz. Then he was with. Then he was with. And then they had a reception for Ingmar, I suppose at the– Is that the embassy or something they have in Washington? Yeah, yeah. That was the four things he was with. Yeah. And then, of course, he was at Juan Otisi. Yeah. No, the kids got along fine. Yeah, and she's wonderful, his wife. And you know, how many prime minister's wife would work two days a week? She's a librarian. He was here, and he was telling about– When he went to Northwestern, he was going to school, and she was working. He said, that's why I'm so thin. And, of course, that went over a bit, too, of course. But he had a lot of humor. Oh, yeah, yeah. He's humorous. No, I think he's fabulous. I think it's just unfortunate we can't get somebody like that here. It is unfortunate. Because he's– I think he's fantastic. He's so– He's always got his shirt unbuttoned, you know, and what it goes out of. No, I think he'd come here with his shirt with no tie on. He didn't put on at all. That's the trouble with our politicians today. Yeah. You've heard of Lynn Martin. Her folks just lived two doors over from me. Yeah, yeah. That's her stepmother. And they showed him at the apartment. And they come in, you know, and they opened our clothes closets, and they looked under Morley's bed. They have to be careful, of course. And they had– There was a security there. Yeah, security. You know, they was following him all around. Yeah. If anybody was– People have to put things under their bed, and Mr. Morley said, Well, if anybody's got room to get under my bed, that's something. But they even looked into my clothes closets. The doors are closed, yeah. But it was tragic when the other prime minister was assassinated. Why did they do that? Because he didn't like what Sweden was doing or something? Well, one never knows. Yeah. Oh, I don't know. There's so much grief in this world. It's something all the time. Yeah. This was the end of the interview with Ethel Halin, Rockford, Illinois. End of interview. And we have 23rd of October, 1987.