 Yeah, we are 20th August 1986 and I'm sitting together with Erik Ekbom in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1906, 22nd of January in Husqvarna and came to the United States in 1909. So if we start now with your father here, Reinhold Ekbom, what kind of work was he doing in Husqvarna? Well, he was originally from Västmanland. His father was a miner and he was a miner. He went back, he joined the army in Sweden when he was about 17 years old and served three or four years. What regiment then in Stockholm? Yes, Coast Artillery. Yeah, in, what's the name of that? Vaxholm. That's it, Vaxholm. That's where he was. And then he was out of the army and went back and worked as a miner in Norberg. Then they were going in Husqvarna, up in the hill there, they were going to build a powerhouse to generate power for a paper mill in Jönköping. So they had to blast through the rock to get the water to flow into this mill that they were going to, this powerhouse, which is still there, but I don't think it's in operation now. But it seems that the original contractor brought over a group of masons, not masons, but stone workers from Poland or Czechoslovakia. And they had so much difficulty doing the job that they had to get rid of them. And then they went up and got these miners who were in the business of blasting, and that was my father's job. He was more a dynamite specialist. He prepared, like his father, before him. They said, here, we will drill. You drill there, and you drill there. And it was all with a hammer and a star drill, you know, in those days. And then they would go down after the hole was deep enough, because now they got this electric drill and they just go... But it took a long time to get it all. Then he'd put the dynamite in, and then of course the miners would... But his job was to spot the places where the dynamite was to be placed, and then place the dynamite and shoot it. And then he was done until the next job. That was my father's job, and my grandfather's job. And I remember my father used to say that his father had a pretty nice job, because he would get up in the morning and go down there and space out where the dynamite is to be placed, and then he'd go up and take it easy for a few hours, and then back down again. I remember he mentioned that quite often, so I thought that his father had a pretty nice job. But anyway, as I said before, these Polish and Greek or Slav stone men, they didn't or couldn't complete the job. So then they had these men from Nuremberg, these Swedish miners, and they came there and blasted the tunnel. So he is listed as a tunnel worker on his certificate when we came from this country. He was referred to as a tunnel arbetare. And then he met my mother there. And then he went back to his place and came back, and they were married, and he worked there in Hyskforna blasting foundations for houses, you know. In order to get a basement for the house, they'd have to blast the stone. So that was his job while he was in Nuremberg. And then he had a friend from that area who had gone to Canada to work on the railway that they were constructing across Canada. And he spoke of the good money and big money that they made. And he was living here in Rockford, this friend of his. So when we originally came here, it was the idea to settle here, then he would go up in Canada and work on that railroad and make his living and then take care of the family coming back here or whatever the future was, I don't know. But before he could get up there, this friend was killed through a dynamite blast. And I guess he figured that's not the best way of making a living, way up there, and to risk his life, as so many of them were hurt when they built that transcontinental railroad through Canada. So when he got this America thought in his head, that it was through a friend. That's right. Was he without a job in Sweden? No, no, no. He was working. And he said he did regret leaving Sweden because he was starting to work or he was working for the city of Hiskona, which he said was probably better off than if he went here. But he did go here and he thought, well, after he worked here, then he got into the furniture work here. And then he says after a number of years, he probably would have been better off had he stayed in Sweden. And I remember at that time, there were so many men leaving Sweden with their families that the king or the government was quite concerned about the outflow of these good men. Did your father mention the general strike in Sweden in 1909? It was a big strike. Oh, yes. Two strike in, yeah. Two strike in. Yes, yes. He mentioned about that. He talked about that, yeah. But he was not affected? No, he didn't come here because of that. And of course, as you know, many of them leaving Sweden so they won't have to go in the army, you know. He didn't have to leave for that because he was in the regular army there. But there was something else that connected with him leaving, but the thought drifted away. But anyway, he got into the furniture work here. Were you the only son then in the family? No, no. I had a brother, Holger. Then I had two sisters. And I had one sister passed away back in 1935. But my brother is still living. His name is Holger, H-O-L-G-E-R. And here in Rockford? No, he lives in Tennessee, Bristol, Tennessee. And then I have a sister, Hilder, and her last name now is Berzelius, B-E-R-Z-E-L-I-U-S. She lives in Largo, Florida. She's 83 years old, I think, now. Well, so we stayed here in Rockford, or my father worked in the furniture industry. And his job was, at the beginning of making furniture, he ran the rip saw and the crosscut saw. So he had to start from the beginning then, a complete new vocation. Oh, yes. Yes. He did work in a foundry in Sweden for a while, too. There was that big foundry there, and then there was that little foundry. And that little foundry was right up there with this powerhouse, where they built the powerhouse. And that was a little foundry that my mother's sister was married to the man who founded the little foundry there. Well anyway, he worked in the foundry here, but he didn't care for that. Then he worked also, he tried as a laborer for the bricklaying construction, but he didn't care for that. But he did finally settle into the furniture. Oh, yes. I'm going to go back now. When my father left Sweden, as I said a few minutes ago, the government was quite concerned about so many good men, people leaving Sweden. And he received a letter, special, as no doubt others did, that the government would have appreciated very much that he would stay. Did you ever hear that? Yes, yes. There was an action against immigration. Huh? There was an action against immigration. Yeah, but why would he receive a letter? Well, they probably had his request for leaving. Yeah, yeah. They knew that, so they tried to avoid it. He received a request, and I always felt that the government considered that he was too good to leave the country. Yes, he was a dedicated person. Yeah, and they didn't want to lose him. So did he receive any offers? No, he never mentioned any inducement, no. So then he worked here in Rockford as a rip saw and a crosscut saw in the furniture. Was he able to pay for his own ticket for the family then, or did they send it from here? No, no. He borrowed money from, he borrowed a little money from a relative there, and then of course paid it back. But that is how he got enough money to take, there was three children then, because the one brother was born here, a brother born. How about your mother now? Was she foregoing leaving Sweden, or did she? She never said much. No, she never, she never said. Oh, my mother, when she was 16 years old, she had two brothers living in Texas, in Austin, Texas. So that would be, she was 16 years old, she was born in 79, she would have been 1895. She lived for four years in Austin, Texas. Your mother? Yes. Where her two brothers had left Sweden years before that, no, uncles, they were not brothers, they were her uncles. One of them was a tailor and one was a farmer, and they lived in Texas, in the area of Austin. But she lived there four years or so, and then she returned to Sweden. Why did she return to Sweden? She just didn't care for, Texas was hot, you know, and I guess there was some Swedes down in there, but not enough. But she never, I don't recall that she ever gave a reason for leaving. She never mentioned after coming to Rockford, going down there again, or? Oh, we went back down again. For a visit? A visit, yes, she did. Oh, yes, because she had a sister, by the way, excuse me. She had the two uncles, and then she had a sister living there. Yeah. So my father, back in about 1926, they rode down to Austin to visit her sister in 1926, in Austin, Texas. So well, now you want a little further from there. Then in 1916, we lived in Rockford from 1909 to 1916, and then a group of men decided to build a furniture factory, or start a furniture factory in St. Joseph, Missouri. And because, no doubt, my father was proficient in his particular job in the making of furniture, he was asked if he wouldn't like to join this group to go down there. An added inducement was not only better pay, but they would be able to buy stock in the factory. And as I remember, my father, the pay then was around $3 a day, and they offered him $3.50 a day. It was pretty good though. Yes. So he decided to take his family five, six hundred miles. And you remember this move then? Oh, yes, I was with. You were 10 years old then? Yes, we went down by the train. Yes, that's right, I was 10 years old. And we took the train down, and my father had been down there for a month or so, and was working there. And then he met us at the train, and he had rented a home for us to stay. And we lived there for four years. But there were a few Swedish people down there. We happened to live next door to one Swedish family. And they had, it was at St. Joseph, Missouri, it was about 40 miles from Kansas City. And they had a Swedish church there, a little wooden church. But very few Swedes lived there. And I think the factory didn't quite take off as they expected. How many left the rock for then, of the Swedes, to go down there, St. Joseph? Oh, I can't say that there was... I would say that's pretty close, yes, because we visited the different families. Some were single, most of them were single men. There was one other married family, two married families with children that I can recall. But there were several mostly young Swedish single men. And at one time, four of them lived with us. So my mother had four children and four boarders to take care of. And you can imagine what a job it was for her. And in those days, down in there where we settled, there was no indoor toilet, you know. There was no basement in the house. So all the cooking had to be done in the kitchen. And in the summertime, that got to be pretty hot. And all the washing. Who was the leader of this group now, or the factory? Who was in charge of it? Now, the only name that comes to my mind of the people who really started it, and he was superintendent and was a stockholder. His name was Warner. His last name was Warner. And he was a Swede? Oh, yes. Yes. Yeah. And they had ideas that they, you know, they was making a lot of money in the Swedish industry in Rockford, in the furniture industry in Rockford at that time. And that line in St. Joseph, was that household furniture? No, no, that, yes. It was like, it was dining room sets mostly and buffets. They made the buffets and they made the dining room tables. They didn't make the chairs. And I remember my father, I got the table next door. He took out all the lumber for the buffet and then bought the chairs from some other company. But the buffet and the dining room table was made right in the shop where he worked. And we have the table and we have the buffet, and it's fumed oak. Beautiful, beautiful. He took out every piece from the beginning as it went through the factory. And my mother, during World War I, my mother, besides taking care of the boarders and the kids, she worked for a little while in this factory. And so did I when I was only about 11, 12 years old. I wasn't supposed to. But I remember sitting down at noontime with my mother and father and having our lunch together. But that was during World War I, see. No, no, World War I, yes. That's why my mother was working. There was a shortage of men, they were being taken into the army for World War I. So that was, they had hired women and somehow or other my mother, despite taking care of all the kids and all the roomers and boarders that she had, she was able to do a stint in the factory. What kind of work did they do then? Well, they kind of... Polishing? Sanding the buffets. So they apparently had pretty good order then, coming in from other... Oh yes, they were doing pretty good to start with. Did they sell to stores then or did they sell direct to the customer or how did they get rid of it? No, they sold it to the different stores, you know, not direct to the customers. They sold it just like they do now and have always done, mostly to the big stores. So we stayed down there for four years and then came back here to Rockford and my father started back in the Empire Furniture Company. What happened to this furniture factory in St. George? Well it... Folded? Yes, it folded. I was down there about seven, eight years ago and I wandered around that town because some of the sharpest memories that I have were at that time between 10 and 14 where I played as a boy and I hadn't been back since we left in 1920. And I spent a lot of time just walking all over that town. It too is like Rockford today. They had a great big packing company, Swift, and that was a backbone of their industry and business and that disappeared. And the town never did progress after that and I remember when I was there how similar... I remember the downtown as it was when I was a kid. So not much has changed then? It's changed just like Rockford downtown, their downtown. All those nice big business houses, you know, they're kind of empty or boarded up or changed into small businesses and I couldn't even recognize the town and I think so often of the many people who have left Rockford and who come back and expect to go downtown and see the same buildings that were there when they were kids. But of course that is not so now and it's almost unbelievable. My gosh, where's that, where's that, what's this? So that was kind of a little disappointing but I found many of the old landmarks and one of the most interesting sites that I recall was they had a great big... You see St. Joseph, Missouri was the starting place for the Pony Express. You heard of that? Oh yes. Okay. And it was what they call, the nickname for the town was the drummer town because it was wholesale houses. That's really what the big part of that town was, wholesale houses. And I remember one summer I worked in one of the R.G. Dunn companies down there in the office as an office boy and thence when the salesmen would go out in horse and buggies to all these small towns in an area around St. Joseph and sell their merchandise right from a wagon or collect orders later to be shipped. So it was really more a commercial town in that respect than a manufacturing town. That was St. Joseph, Missouri. So there was no one of the other Swedish families that stayed behind? No. They all came back here? They all came back here, yes they did. All the single men came back here too. So then they had to start anew here in Rockport? Yes, but they were all experienced. Your parents, did they buy a house down here? Oh yes, yes. Well we lived on 9th Street and then we lived on 7th Street over the stores where so many people lived in those days. And then back in 1923 there was a house that had just been built, nobody lived in it, on a corner of 10th Street and 22nd Avenue. And there we lived for over 50 years. Over 50 years we lived there, my mother and father. And my father, he passed away in 1966 at age 87 and my mother, she lived to 1975. She was 96 years old. And we sold the house there back in about, I think it was 1973, we sold this place that we lived for all those years. And of course, and that's interesting, I worked at the Thayer Action Company where they made piano actions just right down the street here on 18th Avenue. They had 500 people working there. And now it's being torn down. It's been vacant for maybe 15 years or more. It seems that they found that they could put, assemble the actions down in Mexico much cheaper. So they moved everything from Rockford to somewhere down along the border in Mexico. And that ended that business. And then right here, you can almost see the place from here, National Lock Company, you know where that is? Well, you know, there was at one time, there was over 3,000 people working there. And then there was the furniture factories up on 18th Avenue and Kishwaukee Street. And then there was Mechanic's Universal Joint Company by 10th Street. Right back then was the Rockford Drop Forge Company. And of course, there was the Thayer Action. And then there was the Rockford Cabinet Company. And then there was the Rockford Sewing Machine Company. Not the Rockford Sewing Machine. Well, it was a sewing, free, it was called the Free Sewing Machine Company. And I think at that time, probably, say back in the 20s and 30s, even 40s, 50s maybe, might have been 10,000 people working. Now there's hardly anyone working there. Was it easy for you then, coming back as a teenager, to get a job in 1920? You went to school then? Oh, I went, yes, I went to school. No, I went to business. I went right up here to the corner. I went to school and graduated. Was there Rockford College? No, this was Turner School. It was a grade school. I finished and graduated from the grade school. And then, somehow or other, somebody got to my father and decided that he should send me to business college instead of high school. So from that class there, and Turner School here, I think there was four, four or five of us. We didn't go to high school at all. We went right to the business college. So it was possible to do that at that time? Oh yes. We paid so much. It wasn't too much, but I learned more in one year in business college than you would learn four years in high school, as far as business is concerned, you know. It was all concentrated. It wasn't all the other things. But I wasn't even 16 years old when I finished down at the school, so I couldn't really go to work. So then I had to go back to high school. Then I had to go to high school. So I was in high school for six months. And then I got a job at the Thinger Action Company in the office. And then I was receiving clerk there for a while, and then I worked on the assembly line for a while. And from there, then came the depression and laid off, until finally we were laid off completely. And then I picked up the paper and found they were having an examination for the police department. And I thought, well, I got nothing to lose. But there was an awful lot of, a lot of fellows wanted to get on the department in those days because there was no work to be had anywhere. Were you a citizen then by that time? Oh, yes, yes. Your father took out citizenship? My father took out papers for to be a citizen of the United States as fast as he could. And I can say this, that he had no great desire, if any, to go back to Sweden. Because I remember he used to say, nej, fan fattige Sverige, because Sweden had nothing for him as a young man. And you know, as it was in those days, you could be the smartest kid in school, but if your father was a minor, forget about it. And the dumbest kid in school, who probably could hardly learn to read and write, if his father was well to do and in a very governmental position, he went into a governmental position, you see. So that caused a lot of people to leave Europe, was that caste system, that you were pegged, you had no chance to do anything. And my father was, well, he was a socialist in those days, you know, they were looked upon the same as communists. But I remember he read all kinds of periodicals and newspapers pertaining to the workers, you know. And at that time, that was a big thing after that stew strike in Sweden, you know. Then many of the people that came over here, they were of the same group. And there was a club organized here in Rockford called the Swedish Socialist Club. And from that club, we came to Mayors. How could that happen, though, with Blom and Hallström here, being elected on the socialist ticket with all the church people in Rockford? Did they vote for them, too, because they got in the... Many of the church people... So it was a person rather than the party they were affiliated with. Hallström, now was he actually a socialist then? Oh, yes, he was, yes, he was. In fact, Hallström, a bunch of the children of these Swedish socialist workers, they had a club on 7th Street, and the children, and I was one of them, we had Sunday school, but we didn't teach religion. What other subjects were you... Socialism, socialism. And I remember that we were called the Future's Hope, that if, when we grew up, it would, much of this capitalism would be wiped out, and the workers would find their right, would get their just dues, because the person, to these people, my father included, they felt they were persecuted by the capitalists, the wealth. And so many times they say they use a human being, and when he is of no profit to them, they cast him aside, don't worry about the kids that he brought, or his wife, or anybody, the shop completely forgets him. But the horses, they keep them, they feed them, they worry about them until they can get in business again. So they treated their animals better than they did the human beings. And that didn't set good with these Swedish workmen that came here to Rockford, they had no use for this organized capitalism. Who was the, as we call it in Sweden, braständare, you know, putting fire under this movement, was there a special person here in Rockford? Well, Holt, no, Herman Holsten was one of the... He was one of the... One of the most outspoken men. He was a young immigrant. Yes, yes he was. He came around the same time as you. Yes, pretty close to, yeah. And he was a brick mason, and as were several in that socialist group here that I remember as a kid, there was many construction labors. In fact, the biggest construction man in Rockford, his name was Sjostrom, at that time it was rather a small company. But as time went on, it became a big, and is today still a very, very big construction company in making big buildings and bridges and roadways. And he was a socialist, even though he was, because at that time he was small. And Herman Holsten, of course, when they started their party, they called it the Socialist Party, then they called it the Progressive Party. They didn't use the label socialism. Well, there was a ticket he gave in, that's amazing. Yeah, on the Progressive, I think it was the Progressive Party. And after he served about two or three terms, later on then came Holsten, or Blum, and Blum was mayor for several terms. He was an educated person, Blum, though. Yes, he was a pharmacist. He was a pharmacist. So Holsten, though, he was, as we call him in Sweden, gruvarbetarer, or mason. No, no, he was a bricklayer. But he was not educated to what he was going to do. He was, I think he was just self-educated. And Blum, of course, being a pharmacist, he probably graduated from some college or university. But he was a socialist. This Sunday school, now, who was the teacher? Well, just Herman Holsten. He was one of the teachers? Yes, he taught the principles of socialism to us kids. Was he aroused by the movement, or idealistic in the... Oh, yes, oh, he was very... they were all idealistic, all of them. Every man was... they were good, strong... There was a group here, you were in St. Joseph at the time with your family, but there was a group here during the First World War that had to go to Brinewell in Chicago. It was part of them, yes. They actually had to serve time then. Yes, I think the only one that I can remember, Herman Holsten, he was one that marched in the parade, and they grabbed him up, you know. So was Frank Nelson, he too was a bricklayer. And I think they went to Brinewell, but I think Herman Holsten, he joined the Army. Oh, I see. Yeah, he joined the Army, so he wasn't in on it. But Frank Nelson was, and several others, Mart. But that's the only one I can remember. But there were several that had to go to Brinewell in Chicago because of their participation in this parade. Yes, and it was against the war then. You heard about it, yeah, that's right. I heard rumors about it about 20 years ago. That's right. People are probably dead. Yeah, no, no, that was so, that was so. I heard about it quite a few times. Some were deported to Sweden, they couldn't return again. I don't remember that part. I never heard of them being deported, but there were several of those fellas. There was another word to describe, they were not, they refused to join the Army. And they had a name for them then. What is the regular name for that now? Desserters. Huh? Desserters. Dessert, no, they weren't dessert. Against it. No, no, no. They, uh. But they were against joining the war though, I mean the effort to. I know, but you see, I can't think, there's a very simple word, but it slips my mind. Many of the young men who refused to serve in World War II, they went up to Canada, you know. You mean the Vietnam War? Both Vietnam and World War II too. And what was the name of them? Tax evaders, not tax, military evaders, they evaded military. Yeah, and they went up there and many of them are still up there. And then there was one of the presidents says all who wanted to come back could come back and they would not have to serve time. But many did come back, but many never did come back. So, do you remember Harry Anderson? Yes, I do. He just died here about a year ago. He was a communist though. Yes, yes, yes, I think you would say he was, as I said to begin with, at that time, even though you were a socialist, you were looked upon with the same thing as a communist. But communism came later, but there wasn't hardly any of these socialists that I recall that ever became communists. Oh, they agreed with him and they might have said more power to you, but it was a little bit too strong for some. He told me Harry Anderson, this was quite a few years ago now, that he was the chairman of the communist movement in Hartford. Yes, I think that's so. And they were going to have a meeting at Arbetarklubben. I think it was a group of all the Swedish fellows, they were playing card up there. They were going to meet an hour before. And the FBI came in and arrested all those old people, but he came a little bit too late. He came away and he had to go to Chicago for a year. He couldn't be in Hartford anymore. Oh, is that so? I don't remember that. But he sang with us down at Lyron. We had a chorus there for many years and Harry sang with us. He was a good speaker. Yes, yes. Very articulate. Very good. Yes, he was. And David Killeen is another one. He was another one. You bet he was. Now you're talking about these people that I'm talking about. So you remember those? Oh yes, I do. They were the original socialists here in Rockford. Yes, and they were very... But like people like Harry Anderson and David Killeen, they were well read though. Yes, they were. They were well read. Yes, they were well read. They knew what they were talking about. Yes, they read everything they could get their hands on. Did they try to instill also in you, the young people, to read and open your eyes for... Oh, I think they did, yes, but not as much as Herman Hallstrom. He was really a... He was the one speaker that I can remember that talked to us children. Did he talk to you in Swedish or English? Oh, it was English, if I remember. But I guess it wouldn't have made much difference because almost all of us could... Understand Swedish....talk Swedish, yes. So parents, did they go with you then on Sundays for the Sunday school or did they... I think sometimes they did. They'd have to take us down there for the most part. Was it a big group that met down there? Then they probably met somewhere else at the same time. Because the thing that I remember most about that group was that they had a lot of parties and they always had coffee and dup after and they always had a beautiful party for Christmas for us kids. They'd have a Christmas tree, you know, and an orchestra, a couple, three, four pieces and they would dance around the tree and they'd have somebody that would speak. And I'm trying to recall the name of another one who was very active in that group. You see, I can almost see him here, but I can't recall his name. He was kind of pretty well educated too. And we would sometimes be at the meetings where they would discuss these things and this one man, he not only discussed socialistic ideas, but also things about chemistry and many other things along those lines because he was so well read. He was so well read. When they talked about Sweden to you youngsters, what did they stress then? Like Halstead, for instance. Did they have something nice to say about Sweden at any time? No, I don't recall that they had anything nice to say about Sweden, no, because I think most of them were happily away from Sweden. They didn't mention names like Branting, you know, the socialist? No, I don't remember that. They didn't use that? No, they were just out and out socialists fed up with the system. They said the system was all wrong. They were union, you know. And they wanted you youngsters to be a war. Oh, yeah, absolutely. They wanted, yes. And they didn't like war at all. To them, war was the most unnecessary thing, and that workers should fight workers, to them, made no sense at all because they never gained anything at all from a war except a lot of dead and a few medals. And they were very against war. My father was more so against war than the average person because I remember how he talked so much and how he hated war and all the things that he felt that it was these well-to-do big business that made wars, you know. To revenge on. Yeah. But he was not afraid to serve in Sweden or for military. He was not afraid to go into service in Sweden, no. I don't know why he went in. He went in when he was about 17 years old. I don't know why he probably... Maybe there when he got the idea that there was something wrong with the... With the system, yeah. Well, you know, Sweden was pretty hot after that big strike, you know. The working man was coming into his own as far as Sweden was concerned. And I was brought up. It never rubbed off on me, but I had never been able to ignore it. It's like with social mis... like with religion. As a kid, my father was a free thinker. So he never joined the church at all? No, no. No, no, no, no. And you were not confirmed that he was in the church either? No, no. I was not confirmed. He... He had no particularly dislike for the church. But he, like many before him, hated the connection between the government and the church. The church used... You know, the government used the church to hold the people down and to obey the royal commands. And between the... All the priests were practically appointed by the king or the kings, you know. And they were beholden to the government. And these Swedes of maybe a hundred years ago or many years before that saw the connection. How if the government didn't ring the poor man, then the church rang the poor man. And the government told the preachers what to preach and how to preach. And I'll go back to my grandfather who was a lay preacher in the Baptist church. And as far as the Lutheran church, at that time a Baptist was just a devil. He was up in Westmanland? Yes, in Westmanland. What was his name? My father? No, this preacher, Baptist preacher. Well, he was a lay preacher. He was not a regular... That was my father's... My father's father. Can you recall his name? Oh, yes. Same as mine. Erik Gustav. So he was a Baptist, but I remember, I didn't think anything of it at the time, but when I read Moberg's books, they had a woman who was a Baptist, and the rest of them looked, they belonged to the devil. No question about it. Oh, you can obey to God if you like, and you can believe in Jesus Christ and all that, but that doesn't do you any good because you're a Baptist, and you belong to the devil. You know that. And so I was brought up with that feeling that the church had always took orders from the government, and they don't care what happened to the human being as a human being. They can preach compassion and honesty and goodness, decency, and all that, but if you didn't do what the church says, forget about the hereafter. You were going to hell, you know. And that didn't set with these people that I'm talking about at all. They will not take that as a good thing. Well, you have read Swedish history, and you know that there was an awful lot, because I remember in certain Swedish songs how the people hated the church. I mean, there were people who absolutely... The cleric, you know, cleric clergy. I can't think of the particular song, but in this particular song, it just... probably Bellman wrote it, and it was just... they hated the connection between the church and the government, church and the government, church and the government, of course, and that's what this country was founded on, complete separation, because these people who came here, even as the pilgrims, you know, they too resented the fact that they had to take orders from the government, and that's why they came here, these religious groups, and set up their own beliefs, because they hated the connection between that. And some people you can talk to now, they say, oh, no, no, that's not so. The church has always been pure. The church has always been good. The church would never do anything like that, but oh, I never doubted for a bit. But there were many Swedes who came here, they said that the church we have here now in this country is going to be freer, and it's not going to be like Sweden. How did it turn out, though, with the Lutherans and the Covenants and the Baptists? Then they started to split among themselves. Oh, yes, yes, they did. Which one is the freest church, though? The freest church? Because they didn't like the Lutherans, they didn't like the Covenants or the Baptists. Okay, the freest church is a church that many of these socialists went to, Unitarian. They went to that church? Oh, yes. Not my people, but like my generation, decided that church was more like a church that we can believe in, because you see, Unitarian, you've heard of the Unitarian Church, it's a small, I mean, denomination. The Unitarian Church does not believe that Christ was divine. They believe he was a man, just a man. And they believed in his teachings, that what he spoke and what he talked about was so hard to live. And a socialist could go along with that, because there was no connection with the government in any way at all, you know. The government had nothing to do with that Unitarian. And many times, the Unitarian Church has been almost listed as communistic sometimes, but because they are not. I belonged to that church for a while, but I found that the majority of the members were so much better educated than I am, I couldn't keep up with them. They were very educated. How did you know it was them? Did you have to go into a discussion with them? Why did you feel uncomfortable with them? Oh, yes. I felt uncomfortable with them, because I figured that my intelligence was limited in comparing to the average of the members of that church. Did you stand up and give witness sometimes? No, no. Why did you do that? Well, they would talk about certain subjects that were so far away from my understanding that I wasn't equipped mentally to stay with it. Now, that's the feeling I got. They were, you know, in the other churches, it didn't make any difference whether you understood it or not. You know what I mean. And that's what I say as a kid. I remember going out with church kids, Sunday school kids. I went to Sunday school, regular Sunday school, and some of them were the meanest and the toughest kids. And I said, how the hell can you say you believe in Jesus Christ and you lie, you cheat, you steal, you'll hit, you'll hurt? But you see, the kids, when they're young, they go to Sunday school, it doesn't enter them. It just goes right by. They just have to go to church. Pa said, you've got to go to church. You've got to go to Sunday school. They don't hear anything, they don't listen to anything, they don't believe anything, but they had to go to church because Ma and Pa said, you've got to go to church. And I remember we lived down in Missouri, they were Catholics, a lot of German, Polish Catholics. And like being the son of a freethinker and listening to a father who's a freethinker, and I'd look at those kids, and like I said, they'd lie, they'd steal, they'd cheat, and yet, oh, they would go and kiss the hand of the priest, you know, and bow down, and they'd go to Mass, oh yeah, they had to go to Mass, you know. And as a little kid, I thought, they should be the kindest, most decent people because they believe, oh yes, I believe in him, he's my savior. And yet, not all of them, but just enough of them to let a little fellow like me realize that, hey, what is this religious business? And then as a little kid, I used to think, if that's so good, if that is true, why do they fight each other? Why is there a Presbyterian, why is there an Episcopalian, why is there a Luton, why is there a Baptist, why is there a Methodist, why are they all split up? Can't they get together? But no, and then, here's the Lutheran church, and they get to fight amongst themselves, so they build a church over here, they don't want to go to that church, you know. And you take a little kid with his little two-bit mind, that didn't go together with me, see? What did you, what kind of lessons were you taught now about kindness to your next man? Oh, well... What did he say about that? Oh, they taught... You should be honest... Absolutely. And honor your father... You betcha, they stressed all that. They didn't care. You don't have to believe in Christ, you don't have to believe in God at all. Be a good, decent, kind, considerate, hard-working person. That is what you... No lying or anything... No cheating, no lying, no... No, no, no, they didn't teach those things. Were you reprimanded sometimes by church people that you should go to Sunday school? No, no, no, no... They never... No, they have never... They have never... Of course, I'm not... To the average person, I'm not outspoken as to how I feel. No, but I mean, you were a young kid, I mean, you were... No, no, we weren't, we weren't. I went to Sunday school, oh yes, I went to Sunday school. So there you saw the difference? Oh yes, my father, you know, I remember... Was there a Unitarian church then, or what church did you go to Sunday school? There was a Methodist church. I had a friend of mine whose family belonged to a Methodist church. And he said to me one day, he says, you know, he says, if you go to church and you join my church, he says, I'll get a knife. Because my Sunday school teacher says that for every one he could bring in Sunday school, he'd get a knife. He says, so I'll get that knife. What are you laughing at? This is an interesting inducement, you know, to get the knife. Yeah, that's right, that's what it was. So then he said to me, he says, and I got one other boy I'm going to bring, and if I get a knife for him, I'll give you that knife. Well, I never got that knife. You never got it? I never got that knife. And I thought, well, you're a liar, you son of a gun. But I did go to church, and I listened. In fact, I got baptized in a church because one Easter morning or something, they said, all those who want to be baptized, step forward. And I says, well, with my upbringing and my father, you know what he said to me, I've certainly never been baptized, so I volunteered, and I went up. And when I got home, I told my mother, my mother said, you've been baptized, she said. So I've been baptized twice. But I assumed that because of my father's thought. And then I go back. I went to Sunday school. So when I come back from Sunday school, my father would say, what have you learned? Well, I don't know, we sat there and we talked about this and that, I don't know. Then what do you go for, he said. What do you go for? What do you go to church for? Well, I don't know. I guess I told him, and the other kids go. So one day I come back from Sunday school, and my father said to me, he says, what did you learn today? What did you learn today? Oh, I learned about Moses, and I learned about Daniels and the lion. That's good, my father said. That's good. You see, he had no objection to religion. If you behaved yourself, and religion was not used, he saw no reason or purpose for it in his life. He was content to go along and just be an ordinary person. But I remember him saying to me, and I'm not too sure about this, but at least that is what I felt about him, don't ever argue about religion to another person. Don't ever try to get him to think the way you do. What you think about religion is good for you. You may not need it, but that person may need it. You may be able to live without a hope of a hereafter. You may live a life with no fear of hell, because you don't believe in it. You don't believe in any of that. But that person that you try to convince to think like you, needs that religion. He cannot meet life's problems. He cannot steer his course without that belief. So don't you try to convince him unless you can give him something better than he's got. And you probably, with your feelings, you're not going to give him. You probably don't need those things, but he needs it. So don't try to take it away from him without giving him something that's good or better. That's my father's philosophy. And he stuck with it all his life? Oh yes, yes. I remember my mother. My mother used to say, my father would talk and argue religion with somebody. There were times when, one particular time, he had a friend in, and this friend was talking about the Bible and all that went with it. And then Pa says to him, because Pa had read the Bible apparently, he knew the Bible. He said, you know in the Bible it says that you can say, I believe, and you can sit on that hill up there, and you can see the people down in the hell cooking and frying and crying and begging, because they didn't accept Jesus Christ? You believe that? My father said, I do. How are you going to feel when you sit up on that hill, because you've been saved, when that good and fine son and daughter of yours, who could not accept, who could not see, are burning and frying. Will you be happy then? You believe that? Are you going to be happy up there, knowing that your good son, because he says, I don't believe, is going to fry? Be happy, he says, if you can, under those circumstances. You know, he says, you believe that, huh? And I never forget that, because it stayed with me that, he says, anybody that would believe that, that his own son, that he thought the world of, a son that was loyal, honest, true, caring. Well, who says, I don't believe? No, I don't believe. Not so. He's just as right as you are, but according to you, only you are going to heaven. You have to go to hell. No. If he's good and decent, he'll go to the nicest place, the same as anybody else. But the church says, no, good works will not put you in heaven. If you're honest and decent and kind, it's not enough. You've got to say, you're true today. And that's all you have to say, you're true today. You'll go to heaven. And Paul says, no way. And that's the way most all socialists thought, you know. They were strong believers. Yes, well, they were socialists, they were religious. How were they looked upon? They were good working people. Yes, they were, very good. How were they looked upon, the white insurance people? No, I don't remember at all.