 This is cassette 2, side 1. So, Britta, was she with you out in the yard there, or in the orchard to help you? No, no, it was the government that took care of her. I teached her, so she didn't need to go to any schooling. No, because she teached her like they had a schooling in Sweden. Yeah, stay at home, and then the blacksmith daughter was there, and took the same thing that we have in regular school in Sweden. The blacksmith's daughter, yeah, to be a partner with her. She was very fortunate, then, too. Oh, yeah, she was a wonderful girl. But how did you get in contact with Britta so closely? Well, they come over down to me. She'd like to talk to you. Yeah, sure, because I flew with them. So she could never go outside the estate, then, to a fortune teller? Oh, yes, she can do that. But she didn't have any dates or other boys, then? No, no, she couldn't have that, because she had an engaged boy. She was engaged? She engaged them when they lay in the crib. So then I said, well, I tried to get so much talk to her, you know, have a good time. We had a good time, her and I. So she didn't care about the other guy that... No, I don't think so. So then, in the wintertime, we were skating, you know. And the guy who took care of the coach, he'd come out and say, Britta, come here, your boyfriend is here. So I said, well, Britta, you'd better go. No, no, we go around more. You see, they were all around that house where they lived. So we went around, and then he came. So I said, well, Britta, you'd better go. No, we're going to go around once more. Yeah, but what does your boyfriend think about that? I don't care. Yes, she said it in Swedish. I said, I don't care. So I said, well, now we go in. So he'd come down. You know, I was a little banged up. He'd come down and say, I'm going to take off your ice skates. Oh, no, you're not. Steven put them on, and he can't take them off. So I have to take them off. So I thought, yeah, but that's... That really takes the cake. That her boyfriend can't take off the skates, and I have to do that. So then in the afternoon, they always have coffee, afternoon coffee. So then Britta went out in the yard. So I said, well, have you got your boyfriend? I don't care. She said, oh, yes. So we started to talk, you know. So then he said, well, I got riding this afternoon. Oh, she said, you like to ride with me? Yeah, I said, I take a horse and I ride with you. So we were out riding, and her boyfriend talked to the old people of the... riding out around the back. So I told her, well, you can't do anything like that. I don't care for him. Do you have any friends? You can't do anything like that. I don't care for him. Do you think that arrangement between her and his boyfriend was by her parents? Yeah. She didn't pick him? No, the parents... The parents arranged that? Yeah, sure. So he was a part of Uno Grievo? Yeah, sure. So then I said, well, I don't like that. At your mother, they'll get mad at you. Yeah, care. Because I'm more fun with you. You were not afraid to be fired, though? No, they didn't fire me because I hired out for a year. Well... Could they fire you then, any time during that year? They were liable to... Oh yeah, they can do that, yeah. But you couldn't quit, though? No, I couldn't quit. What would happen then if you had quit during that year? You mean when I come to the United States? No, in other words, when you worked for them for a contract for one year... Did you have a right then to quit any time you wanted? No, no. You wouldn't do that? No. It was against the contract? Yeah, because you hire out for a year, you have to stay there. If they had a little hard disk, you have to do it. And the landlord or the one that hired you, he was also liable to keep you? Oh yeah, sure. But you were never afraid... How about Julio Scherner himself, though? Did he talk to you about this? No, he was a nice... Because he probably understood it, though. Yeah, he was a nice man. He never said anything to me. No? No. When he just came, he said, well, good morning, and so on. I said good morning. But nothing about Rita? No, no, he never said anything. But his mother did. She did? Mm-hmm. But she never led you to any place to stay? No, no, no. Was she the only child? Only girl. She had two boys, one girl, yeah. So then we had... Schnabel's fight. And I forgot my gloves. So I said to Rita, why don't you... Why don't you... fight? Yeah, she said, you don't have any gloves. I said, no. Well, you can have mine. Because, she said, I don't care much for that. It's no fight. So I got them, and you see, I had a bigger thing on the G-head. So one of them split. So... It was Sunday, we had a Schnabel fight, and we had an awful good time. So then Rita said, well, let us go skiing. So her and I, we were skiing. I don't know, I think I had more entertainment with her, you know, than her boyfriend had, see? So that's why I guess... It sounds like that. Yeah, sure. So, that Monday, it was Sunday, so that Monday morning she sat on the porch, so she called me. So... So I said, well, it's just... So you know, you call me every time. What have I... What wrong am I doing now? So she said, well, it's just... You had a Schnabel fight. Operators lost. They were all at their paces. Well, I said, I figured you can take that away from my wages and buy a new pair of gloves. No, she said, I won't do that. But I can't understand that Rita and you were so much together. Well, I said, I better ask your daughter, not me. Because if they come and talk to me, I'm willing to talk to them and have a good time. Yeah, I says, I like you all for well, I don't know. Because when you come here, 14 years old, I had just been in the... in that kind of business just for six months. I had boys that had been year and year and a half. And I picked you. She says, I don't understand it. There's something I knew, I just like. I just like. So I said, well, that's a good thing, you like somebody. Yeah, I says, I don't know. Because when I saw you, you have that little cane, you swing and then you have a cigarette in your mouth when you come up walking up here. So then she asked me, what's your name? When I hire out. I says, Stefan. Oh, she said. So we were talking. So then she said, well, what's your name again? I said, if you read the Bible, then you can find the name Stefan. If you study the Bible, but I don't know if you do or not. I have nerve to say that to her. So she laughed. She didn't ask for your last name? No. Only the first. So then she said to me, well, you know, I showed the report I got from that fellow I helped when I was younger, you know, in Engelholm. At Treger's Lair. Yeah, see. So she had that. So then she said to me, well, I'm going to write if I hire you or not. So I come home to my ma, so I said, well, I don't think I can get that job. There are boys who have been for years and years and have more experience than I have. So she said, well, you try anyway. So they don't make any difference, she said. I asked the first time, I told her I got letters to come up. I got the job. So then I went up there. Bought a trunk, you know, put my clothes in and everything, went up there. Did you see Britta at that time? Oh, yeah. She was a little girl. Yeah. She was a little girl and well-arranged. Yeah. But you didn't say anything to her? No, no. Just when they come down and talk to me in the garden. How long did it take then before she came down to you and started talking to you and chiming around? Well, you see, they started to be, well, October, November, December, so I don't see her very much in the wintertime, the first year, you know. Where did you stay then, beside the main house? No, no. I had a room for myself in the defense apartment. Starter building? Yeah, yeah. Starter building. Mm-hmm. So... Where did you eat? Down there. The basement there, all them servants go there and eat. Right down there. Yeah. So I fool around with the girls, that too, you know. We had a good time. So, but how close did you get? I mean, she never visited you down in that building where you laid there, did she? No, no, no, no. And you could never go into her house or her room? No, no, no. There was a distance there. Yeah, sure. Well, I know, you know, when they come up, because her and her girlfriend, they always come up where I am, see. So then they stand there and talk, because they know damn well that I come out later on, see. Because I always sit and read and have something to do. So when I tell you that, then I go out and... So then they always open the... and they're there, you know. So then I go and talk to them. Then we go out walking, see. Out to the park, go around there. So... Well, she was a wonderful girl, no question about that. But... But she stayed unmarried? Yeah. She never married? No. But why didn't you see her, though, I mean, when you were home? Well, if I had gone the day before, day after, then I'd see her. But, you know, I couldn't go up there again. But if I had known that, then I couldn't... I just like to get away, but they do a trick like that to me. I don't like that people doing a trick like that. So that's why I went up there. So then I thought that she hadn't lived in Helsingburg. So Britt... The blacksmith's daughter, now. Yeah. You talked to her. Yeah, I talked to her, yeah. So what she told you, that was probably the right thing, then, that you... Yeah, yeah, sure. Yeah, she told me that I think she must love you because... And she mentioned your name all the time when we were together. Oh, I see. But it's strange, though, she didn't contact you after you left the United States. No, no. She didn't want you to come back. Because she never got my address. And I don't know, but I know I'm going to go to Rockford, Illinois, but I don't know the address. Otherwise, I couldn't tell her that. But didn't you have any feeling for her to write back or get close again? Oh, no. No? Were you afraid to come into the family? No, I was not afraid of that. No, because I had Eddie in Bristol. Already then? Mm-hmm. I was in love with him when I was 12 years old. You had a lot of girlfriends. Yeah, sure. So the reason to go into the United States now was probably not only your sisters. No, no, no. It was Eddie. Yeah, sure. Because I figured, no, I can't write to her from here. So she was surprised. So I told her, well, then I send a ring, and I told her that. So then... She wanted you to come up there. Yeah, but I wouldn't come. I had a wonderful job there. You were still at Lansdome, still? Yeah, sure. I stayed with Lansdome 44 years. 44 years? Mm-hmm. Some people said he was a hard guy to work for. He was, yeah. Were you one of the few that stuck up your nose against him? No, I was not afraid. But other people were, though. Yeah, sure. Not me. Because he was double your age. Yeah, yeah, sure. Yeah, sure. Maybe even more. Yeah. So when I went to Sweden, when I come home here, I stayed in Sweden two months, got paid for two months, and then they paid my fare. He did? Yeah. So I got them two months paying everything. So you became the superintendent there for Lansdome? No, I was just the foreman of Bayer. Of Bayer? Mm-hmm. Bayer, all the fence, it was for him. I saved lots of money for him. Well, I suppose it's an important beginning there to buy the right stuff. Yeah, sure. So you were smart enough to figure out too many nuts would be too much scrap. Yeah, sure. And cutaways. He bought a collar of oak, oak veneer. So that come in, so he said to me, you have to look through it. I said, you look through it? Yeah, but I just look, and a few pieces, it look okay to me. So I said, how much did you pay for it? Well, $10 a thousand. I said, you did? Yeah. I said, I'm going to look through it. But you should see veneer, big nuts in them. You have to, yeah, one turn you have to throw in the fire room. Did you go to the seller and see the product before you bought it? Oh, yeah. I go to them places. And you didn't buy it just over the phone or? No, no, no. I was calling the phone to Kentucky, to make them veneer come out there. I need a collar of $10 a thousand for my hangnail, for back, for the backside, and then in the case, you know. That's all. Otherwise, other stuff I have to look through. So then he told me, you have to look through that oak, because I couldn't see very much. So I said, what did you buy it for? Well, I bought it for when we have oak veneer and make cases on oak, then I like to have that on the back. So I asked him, how much did you pay for it? Oh, he said $10 a thousand. So I looked through it, and you should see what I threw out, threw away. It was lost. Oh, yeah. So I said, that stuff, you should have used the $8 a thousand for. So I separate them. There's some real bad, I put in one pile, but I had some you can use, I put in another pile. So I said, well, you can call the agent, and I'm going to talk to him. So he said to me, well, you're going to talk to him? Well, you see that pile laying there? Well, then you just welcome through in the fire room. So if you're going to buy it, $8 a thousand. Oh, you think I can do that? Yes, and you call the agent, and then I'll talk to him. Otherwise, we unload it to the car, and they send it back. So then they have to pay for the work from the lumberjack, and they put it back in the car. So he come, he got mad at me. He said, you, you always cut down the prices. Yeah, I said, why not? He said, I don't think that Lance is going to pay for scrap that you can't use. You have to put it in the fire room. That's no sense. I don't think you'd like to do that either, do you? No. Well, he says, you're going to have it for $8,000, okay. Yeah, I'm going to call the company. So he called up. He, so I said, well, what do you tell them then? Well, I told them that guy, he says, he always cut down on the price. Because they can never fool him. Well, we got $3,000 house. With all those furniture factories in Rockford? Yeah. There must have been 40, 50 of them at one time in the 20s? Yeah, probably a little more. They never went together in one coalition? No, no. They were always one for themselves? Yeah, sure. No company ship? Well, you know, under the, when it was hard to get jobs, you know, the press. Then Lansdorne, he incorporated with Free Sewing Machine, head of piano, new home. They bought that out from East. He bought those? Yeah. No, they incorporated them together, see. So, Master Jansen, he was head for Free Sewing Machine, and his brother was head for head of piano shop. Well, Lansdorne had bookcase, and Lansdorne furniture corporation. So they went together. Then the press came. No, before the press. So, we were in Chicago, me and Lansdorne and his son. So they talk about, they say, well, now you, they had you make the beautiful furniture, and I make lower price furniture in Central Veneer Company. So I said, well, boys, you talk so much, don't you? That you're going to do so, and you're going to do so. Yeah. They said to me, yeah. Well, but probably you get fooled. I said, what do you mean? Well, now the depression. But you didn't know that at that time, though. Oh, yes, I know it. Depression was coming. No, just, that's why they incorporated, because, but they had about half a million dollars for the banks in St. Louis. So, they talk so much, but they're going to do so, I figure, well, I can put in for five cents, too. So you were with them, or? I was with them, yeah, in Chicago, in Locke & Veneer. So I said, well, they say you talk so much, but you can get fooled. What are you talking about? Said the kid. Well, I said, I feel that they're going to get the pot, all of it. You should never incorporate it all, because Master Johnson, he was, he take care of the penny. He was so tight, so it was just impossible. Oh, no, Lansdowne said, well, it's okay. But I think so, that something's going to happen. So, the depression was over, and we start to get stuff for radio boxes and stuff like that, you know, so we got kind of busy. It was a big business with the radio cabinet. Yeah, sure it was, yeah, that time, yeah, yeah. So we were busy like the dickens. But, you know, to pay interest for half a million dollars, them days, then. So, well, a fellow come, because he couldn't pay interest back, you know. So he took over on Lansdowne, he was nothing. So then, we liquidated. There were two Jewish guys, from both Lansdowne's. They couldn't meet the payments then? No, they didn't meet the payments. And there was a thirty-eight? Yeah, I think so, they were around there anyway. So then, Lansdowne, he just walked around, just like somebody had put ice-cold water on him. He had nothing to say then. Not a darn thing. So, well, I got a little too fast there, because I had Mr. Johnson. He moved into Lansdowne's office. So we were going to have a picnic. So I barbossed over the picnic, to buy all kinds of stuff, you know. So, they called me from the main office. So I went in, so. So I said, well, what do you want? They said, well, Mr. Johnson would like to talk to you. So he said, I can't understand that they're going to have a price for the kids. In the price, they have pie and stuff like that, so what are they going to have a price for? Well, I said, Mr. Johnson, you don't like to eat the pie, you have to tie your hands, and you have to eat with your mouth, and you get pie over your face. That's why, that's first. Eat the pie, he gets the price. Oh, he said, he didn't do that. I said, yeah. Well, that's the more you have to buy for. Well, I said, absolutely, when they do anything, and they be the first one, then they get the price. So I got mad. I told him, well, I said, Mr. Johnson, you don't need to worry. Because this here can be the last Lennestron's Furniture Corporation's picnic. So don't worry about it. Oh, he said. So then I went. And they didn't have any picnic, then. It was the last one? No, that was the last one. Oh, he, the pennies. Well, he had to get you broke anyway. What happened, though, then? How about his son, Lennestron's son? Well... Did he stay with the new owners, or... No, no. So then I moved on to Bridgeport, Connecticut, in the wartime. You did? Mm-hmm. I worked for Eflin, Dyer Toolmaker. So I said to Eddie, well, we move down to Bridgeport. For you have lived here long enough for me now. I don't care to try to get another job anyway here. So you had two children, then? No, yeah, I had my boy, but the girl, she had passed away. I see. So I... So I went down there. But, you know, there were no furniture factories there. So I figured, well, how did it... I told my son, yeah, his wife, he was out in the... He was flying for the Air Force. So he... So he was out. But his wife and him, they had my furniture, see? They had bought furniture. So I said, well, then I'll get a rent, stuff like that, and you can send my furniture down to Bridgeport, Connecticut. He stayed with Eddie's sister. So I went in. I seen a little shop there, so I just went in there. Said, well, since you need any help there. So the young fellow said, yeah. What can you do? Not a darn thing, I said, told him. But I said, yeah, recommendation, you can see. What for, I know what they're last, what for over at the Weimann Company. Oh, he said, gee. So he said, well, can I have them? I'm going to show them to my dad. Because I can't hire you. So I have to talk to my dad first. So I said to Eddie, well, this is, I tell you one thing. We go out, head in, and then we go home. I think I go back to Rockford. So then she said to me, Hilda said, well, Steve. Cassette 2, sit down 4. But you only tried once, then you felt, you didn't feel too good out in Bridgeport. No, I feel good there. But there were a lot of Rockford people in Bridgeport already. Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure, I know that. Did you know anybody? Oh, yeah, I went up and saw them too. What did they say? Did they encourage you to? Yeah, they said to me, well, I think you can get a job here. I said, how much do they pay? Well, you get 50 cents an hour. I said, I wouldn't have more than that. So, well, this is what you expect. Well, I tell you, I expect a little more than 50 cents an hour. Not very much. Well, there was probably not much that time, I don't know. So, when I came home, then she said, well, Steve, you start to work Monday. So I went over to Haverhill. So, well, they told me to do so and so, and I did. And then they made lots of different kinds of gates up to Hartford, Connecticut, from the government. It was all government work. So, I made some gates, you know, and they had to be in the thousands. Not over. Some they called for go, some for no go. So, I had a heck of a time. You know, I never used any of the tools that they used in the diatomic. I figured, well, there's no sense in being too dumb. Try to do the best you can. So, I sat there, you know, getting pieces, and then you have to run the sanding machine and sand them down. That's so much, you know, then after you have to have some kind of paper, some stuff, and then you do it by hand. You know, they have to be just the right thousand, the right no go, so you can go. I had twelve big steel pieces I had to work up. So, I started to grind them, you know. Took my gates and mashed them, and then I started to have this paper and that stuff, you know, and just put them with hand. So, I had to fix them up. There were twelve of them. So, I went in to the inspector. The first time I started with that. So, I said, well, I guess you have to probably throw them in the wastebasket. Well, sit there until I check them and see. Well, you do it good. You don't need to worry about it. And then I went over to all the machines. So, then the fellows who sit in the jigboard machine. Yeah, he was sitting there. They had that. They had a little house, they had a room, some glass in glass. There had to be so much temperature in that place. So, I went to New York City, the house races. So, he had a plate there. I think there were twenty holes in that plate. And they were supposed to be up. The house was connected. There was thirty, and we just worked five hours. So, the soup come to me. He said, Steve, you have to be in the jigboard machine. Make them holes in here and make it, because they have to be up at twelve o'clock. Then the fellow come down from half-time and pick it up. So, I said, me? Yeah, you. I said, what the heck was the matter with you? A job like that, you think I go in there and spoil it? He said, you have to try. Because, after he said that to me, put Steve in there. Because he pick up fast. I have never seen a guy pick up so fast as he do. For every time I do any good job, then he give me twenty-five cents more now. So, I said, okay, I'll go in there. Man, I got scared. Because that plate cost money. If I should spoil it, then you have to do it over again. And you were supposed to have it up that Saturday noon. So, I went in there and I told, no, Steve, to heck. Don't get nervous. Go ahead and do it. I did it. Bring it in, I said, hell, you got it. I went, oh, Steve, wait. You sit there, I check the whole thing. I said, yes, well, I can throw it in the wastebasket. He said, you're darn, Steve, it doesn't make a difference what they give you. You do it, it's perfect. That plate was perfect. So, then the guy, he come on me. So, I said, good thing that you were here now. No, I don't want that job. I said, don't you? No. Well, I said, I don't like to take a job from anybody else. That's your job, so you go in and sit there. No, I take your bend so you go in there. Well, then you have to talk to somebody else, not me. Because I don't go in there. But if they tell me to go in there, then I go in there. So, then the suit came to me. He said, well, Steve, do you like to have it? No, I said, I don't like to have it. Yeah, he won't have it, and I can't put anybody else. Because you pick up so fast. So, I can't understand it. I didn't think I can understand it either. So, I went in there. Sit in there for over two years. Have that job. You stayed in the bridge for over two years? No, I stayed there for four years. Four years? Uh-huh. Did you start another job then? No, no. So, then... This was during the war then? Yeah, during the war time. So, I figured, well, my boy, he was out flying, so probably he got killed and stuff like that, you know. Because they shoot down the planes so damn fast. But he had lots of trouble, though. They shoot down wings for him and everything. But he went... Overseas? In Germany? Yeah, he went to Japan. Japan. Uh-huh. So, I stayed there. So, in the war, I stopped the quits. So, I sat there, I think, late around Christmas, till the afternoon. So, Lansom had been in there, in a restaurant. He had a restaurant close to National Park. In the corner, there was a restaurant there. And he wanted him and his wife. So, he said to my brother, Don't Steve come over to Christmas for you now? Yeah, he come over this year. So, we see him for Christmas. So, I drove over here. Well, he said to him, Don't you come over there. Tell him to come up to the first hotel. I'd like to talk to him. So, he had bought Superior. It was old Mr. Lansom? Old Mr. Lansom. I bought that. So, he liked to have a new veneer department. So, he had money saved then? Yeah. After the bankruptcy? Yeah, sure. Yeah, he had, yeah. So, he was able to... To start over. So, Salmi said, Well, you have to go see Lansom. He'd like to talk to you. Yeah, I said, I'll go up and see him. So, I said to him, Well, come on. We'll go up and see the old man Lansom. So, I went up there. I said, Well, I'm here. What do you want? He was just sitting with his pants on. He hadn't even get dressed. Because they had sold his house. So, that's why him and his wife lived in a fast hotel. So, I said, Well, what do you want? Well, you'd like to come back? Well, I said, ask the boss. He was your wife? Yeah. So, then, I said, Well, I think you'd like to work in the furnace industry better than in the machine shop. Well, he says, I do. Because I worked for the furnace factory so many years, I go in there and knew. It became easier to him. Yeah, sure. So, he said, Well, that's up to you. If you'd like to go back to Rackford, I'll go with you. You know I love you. Yeah, I know. You love me. I know that. So, then, Lance said, Well, I bought Superior. They have a veneer department. Well, entirely no good. I said, What do you mean, no good? Well, that machine, the old-fashioned. Well, I said, I'll tell you, I'll go back. So, I'll be over here the first of January. So, I told my daughter-in-law, Don't send my furnace in because I'm coming back. So, I come back. How about your wife? Did she like to move back again? Yeah, he said, Because I can see that you know, because when the war was over, I don't think there would be very much for halfling veneer company. Go around and ask around the yard. So, I put my price. He said, Okay, Steve. So, I said, Well, I'm going to call you. See what I do. Saturday night, they talked at the door. So, he said, Well, if you want to go back, okay with me. Was her parents living then in Connecticut? Oh, yeah. Sure. So, I moved back here. And then Lansom said, Well, now you can see. It was down there. We just used to make small plywood, not anything big, you know, for real big furnaces. So, then Lansom said to me, Well, now you go out on the road and buy all the machinery you want. So, I did. So, we started up a new veneer. But it was a hard time to buy new machinery during the war? No, it was not hard. Because they were selling... They were selling used machinery. Yeah, sure. But I bought new ones. Yeah, I don't like to have any used ones. So, the guy from the internist guy there, he helped them all like the dickens to put up the machinery. Well, I bought one at a time, you know. I bought the clipper the first of all. Because then you don't need to use the saw so much, the clipper. You have the knives so sharp, so you just clip it, and then you can just tape it together. Oh, they just like a paper cutter, but heavier, of course. Yeah, sure. So, they went okay. We had a good business. We put them all over the United States. So, you stayed with him after retirement? Yeah, sure. I stayed with him. Was his son in the superior? Oh, yeah. He had to have his son. He was a co-partner. Yeah, sure. So, then... Yeah, he got sick, the old man. I remember that three years after, he had a problem with his heart. So, I went up to the hospital, and I had the knife, so I talked to him. He said, well, if anything happened to me, Steve, then Lansdon's Furniture Corporation just stayed three years. I said, what are you talking about? Well, I mean, if anything happened to me, I'd go. Well, I said, your son went through the whole industry. When they unloaded the plank, and the cars, he went through there. He went through the apartment I was in, and through the cabin maker, and he went through the finishing room, so he knew everything about the furniture. Him? You don't tell me that. I said, sure, I'll tell you that. If you don't do that, then he must be a darned fool. So, he passed away, the old man. And the guy, he was nuts. So, he went in. Sometimes I was with him in Chicago, when they had the furnaces show. So, at that time, they had made 25 sets of dining rooms in Cherrywood. 25 bedrooms. So, he sold seven of them, each, in the group. He called Peterson, he was our office manager. Well, tell Steve we have to cut 25 more of that, because I sold seven of each kind. So, they're going to go. So, he come down to me, he said, Mr. Peterson. So, I said, what do you mean? To cut 25 more of each? Yeah. When you have all the rest? Is he nuts? He told me, so I guess you have to do it. Well, I don't like to do it. Well, you can do what you please. You can tell him that when you come home. Yeah, I said, I'm going to tell him. So, he called, he said, you told Steve to go ahead and do it? So, he said, yeah. But he don't like to do it, he'd like to talk to you. Calling, I can talk to him over the phone. He said, what's the matter with you? I told you, you're going to cut 25 more of bedrooms and dining rooms. Yeah, I said, you can hold on for a while, not start to cut them right away. You can use them and sell a little more. And when you go close down, then cut. But not now. I'm the boss, he said, so you do it. I said, okay, I'm going to do it. But I think you're going to be sorry. Oh, no, don't you think I know what I'm doing? I said, no, you told me once, that you were one of the youngest firms in the factory business. And I'm good looking. Yeah, you're good looking, man, you're damn dumb in your brains. He said, you have always something to say. Yeah, I said, you don't need to worry, because I can soon leave you and go to another firms factory. So you don't worry about me, but I'm worried about you. Well, it happened so that he run it three years. Look at that. He had over half a million dollars stand up there on the top floor. Unsold? Unsold, yeah. I had to sell them for nothing. So, I told him, yeah, you have done a foolish trick. You didn't listen to anybody. You think you are just, I'm the king. And I guess you're a dumber. And then all the guys go out on the street, because you think you can do whatever you please. Why did he went haywire like that? Because he figured I'm a big one. In Iowa, they have plywood there. And you know the river road, in Rockford, you can go that way. So there is a restaurant there. So, he went in there, so he said, Steve, I bet a dollar I'm going to kiss that girl. I said, okay, I bet with you. So I went out there, I had a few cigarettes left, but I think I'm going to buy another pack. So I said, you see that young chap, he thinks he is wonderful. He's a good looking guy, don't you think so? He said, look at me. Yeah, he told me, I bet a dollar with him, he said, he's going to kiss you when he pays the bill. He said, what kind of guy is that? Well, he's one of the big thermos industry. He's a chaser, my boss. I probably better do it. You bet with him and I'm going to kiss you, not him. So I bet with him. So, he paid, so then she said to him, well, miss, I guess you're not married. He said, no, I'm not married. What was his name though? Nah, yeah, I probably get it. Well, I have never thought about that name since I quit. They had to have a last name. So, she said, oh, yeah. She said, it's perfectly okay, but I'm not going to kiss you. I'm going to kiss that fellow. I think he has more better brains than what you have. Because I never heard a guy sit and eat and ask to get, turn out a fellow that she's going to kiss the cashier and take the money for the food. So she gave him two. He said, there you are. You're so darn dumb, I told you. So, I kissed her. So I said, come on, meet Adalo. So when he had had the liquor date, he worked for a little furnishings company. And I don't think he'd even had worked very long there because he quit. Then he came to me. He said, Steve, I think I'm going to start up a furnishings factory. Hire a few places there instead of a furnishings company. Well, yeah, I'd like to have you and Lyle. They were the furnishings men. So, we went down south and explained they're going to make the plywood and everything, you know. And then they just chip it over here and they just put the furniture together. So you'd been out without a job then since they liquidated it? No, I had a job. But I helped him anyway. I worked for Weimann Furnishings Company then. So, we had spare time and stuff like that, you know. Then we went up and helped him set up the spreader for the varnishes and all that stuff for the furniture. Because we didn't need many machines when we were going to put the cases together because they were all laid up and just had glue and stuff like that. So, him and I, we went down there. So, I told them. And just to look at the picture. We had sold, I think, over $4,000 of furniture already. Just to look at the picture, see? So, he was happy, you know. But I don't know what happened. Then we had the spreader ready. Then he came up, so he said to Lyle, Well, Steve and Lyle, you can take the business. I said, what's the matter with you? You know his dad, he took his boys' money that he got from his grandpa and was going to build a furniture factory with it. So, he said, well, I have to cut it down. Well, I said, you have to pay for your spreaders and all the stuff you have bought for your office. You have to pay for that. He said, I don't have any money. I said, what's the matter with you, darn fool? So, I went down to Peterson National Bank. So, I said, well, can you trust me? He said, what do you mean, trust? Well, we figured we'd start up the furniture factory. Just get the stuff and put it together and sell them. Yeah, you can get as much money as you want, Steve. Because I trust you. So, I told that to Lyle. Was it a Swedish bank? Yeah, a Swedish bank down in his state. So, he said, oh. Yeah, I said, how about it? You think I can go 50-50 with me? Well, I don't know. But I think we had a minute. If he had done it. Would you have put in any money yourself? Well, I... Or only borrow the whole thing? No, I figured him and I would go together and pay half and half, see? But he didn't like to. I figured, no, I wouldn't do that now. So, then I started working for a Weimann furniture company. Stayed there until I was 65 years old, then I retired. What happened with Lundström then? He was gone then? He was gone. He came every morning, that kid. How old was he really when he was doing all this? In his thirties? Oh, yeah, he was a little older than that. Forties? Yeah. He was never married? Yeah, he was married, so he was married to a divorce. He had two girls. And the boy, he took his money, that his grandpa gave him. And grandpa gave him money, and then the factory. And he couldn't take care of it. So, then he always came home, every morning, for breakfast. So, I told Eddie Valens, I feel sorry for him in one way, but in one way, I don't feel sorry for him. But I don't think he got his brain in the right place. Because it's not practical in the other way. No, no. So, then he said to me, well, I think I'm going to kill myself. So, I said, what do you mean by that? Oh, he says, I had a gun in my cloth compartment. Yeah, you go out and get it, then I'll help you. So, he looked at me. So, then, you know, he could always come to me and like to have money, see? For borrowing money? Yeah. So, then my wife got heart trouble, you know. So, for three years, she got heart trouble every year. So, she passed away from me. So, then, then I lived up in Rolling Green. So, then I sold the house, and then I moved down here. Then he came here and asked me if I could borrow him $25. So, I said, yeah. So, then he came the next day and said, well, I'm here now. I said, oh, how can you get money so fast? No, I just came here to ask you if I can stay overnight. I said, no, you can stay here overnight. So, he had another bum with him, see? So, then he said to me, well, can you, can I have $25 more? I said, pay back the rest $25, then you can have $25 more. But I don't give you $25 more now. I never got it. So, then he come back and asked me if I can borrow him $10. I said, that bum's sitting there in that car, and you, I guess you just drink. So, to heck with you, you never get any money from me anymore, before you pay them $25. Yeah, I said, I'm going to kill myself. Yeah, I said, you have said that so damn many times, I don't think, but he did. He killed himself anyway. Yeah. So, he left the wife, then? No, his wife had already taken the wars. So, I saw that.