 So how did you apply this paint? Well, you had to, the primer and that, I just painted it on there with a regular brush, but the badger head brush I had to use for the blue varnish that I put on the body. You mixed the varnish with the mask? No, no, I just put a coat of blue on there. Now that was the color, but that color didn't stand the weather and sun, so I put a spar varnish on top of that. This blue shade now, was it with the time or was it your idea? Well, the Packard people, that was the color most used for the Packard automobile, which of course, people don't even know about that anymore. Ford, it was all black? Yeah, you could have any kind of color you wanted on a Ford just so it was black. Well, Packard, that was a bit more ahead of its time then, too. Well, yeah. Well, a Ford, I guess you felt like you couldn't, a Coupe particular, you couldn't put any other color on them. I don't think that would look good. But this blue, that was beautiful on this car, and I fixed it up so it was real nice and got it real good. And then this painter had told me, he says, now when you put spar varnish on there, you have to flow it on, just flow it on. You can't brush it on, and if you get too much on, you'll get runs. And he says, I don't know. You could try it, but I don't think you're going to make it. Well, I says, I'll try it, and I'll try again. That's what I'll do. And we had a foreman that lived up there in Rockview by the name of Young, Mr. Young. And he come over and he heard I was painting my car, so he come over and look at it, you know. He says, you're doing all right. That looks all right. He says, but are you going to put that spar varnish on now and flow that on? You think you can do that? I said, sure, I'm going to try it. But my big problem was it was a dirt floor in a garage, so I had to sprinkle it to keep the dust down, see. And then I had to go over after that and brush all the car down, the whole car down to get the dust off of it. And I had to do that between each coat. Then I put the spar varnish on, and I was surprised. I flowed it on real good. And this Young come down and looked at it, and he says, boy, I got to tell Jack about this. He was a finisher up there at the factory where Young worked, West End Furniture. And so he told him, you know that kid you tell him about that Packard Blue and that? You should see that car. He's really got it nice. But that guy was jealous, you know. He wasn't going to tell him anything more. So I, yeah, yeah, yeah, okay. But I drove it out, and it shined like a new dollar bill or a new shiny dollar, you know. And so he says, I never believed that you could do that. Well, I says, you can do anything if you really want to bad enough, I says. So you had the temperature and the weather with you. It was in the summer. It was in the summertime, yeah. Yeah, I couldn't. I had to pick when the weather was right, and I tried to pick a day when it was cloudy so there wasn't much dust floating around in the air. And I got a reasonably good job of it. So then you were ready for dating girls? Yep. With the shiny blue car. Yeah. What did you look for? Well. Did your mother tell you who you were going to date and so on? Well, my mother was concerned with, there was an Italian family that had moved in next door to ours. This Swedish family sold it to, his name was Johnson. And he had, you know, thrown out for feelers to see how much he could get for the place. But this Italian gave him $600 more for that place because he wanted to get in a good neighborhood, you know. And it was the first outsider coming in then to the Swedish family? Yeah. And all the rest of them were Swedes around. Hey, Prince, get out of here. So they bought the horse then from? From him, he got $600 more. But the agent that sold them the house, he says, you don't have to worry about them. That's a nice family there. They're not like most Italians. Well they had three girls. Or was it four? Three I guess it was. Well the oldest one, Mary, I dated her a few times. She looked awful good, huh? Yeah, I didn't like girls particularly. But you know, sometimes they had a couple going and I says, I don't know, we've got to have girls along. But I'll get her. So I asked her, sure, she would go. So I dated her for a few times. And she had a girlfriend come up from Southern Illinois, Streeter, Illinois. And her name was Mary. And that gal, I might say, fell in love with me, you know. She was Italian also? Yeah. And she was insistent that I come down and pay them a visit down at Streeter. She says, you could stay with my brothers. And I says, they'd kill me if I come down there as sweet among those Italians. She says, don't worry about that. She says, I can handle that. And I remember when she come out there, Dad and I were working. We were digging a trench to bring connection from the water department that put the water lines in there. So to save money, we dug the trenches ourselves by hand. And she come out there. Well, she said, I just come down to say goodbye. And she started to cry. I felt bad about her. And I liked her. She was a real nice girl. But Mother was afraid that I was going to fall in love with one of those girls. And I says, no, I don't think so. I says, sure, I like them. I like to date them, but I don't care for them. And the one girl, I won't mention her name now, in the family there, had said to her younger sister, if Gene doesn't want my sister Mary, I'll take them, she said. So you never visited the Streeter Inn? No, I wouldn't go down there, no. I was really, well, I didn't see any reason why I should go down there, because I didn't see any. Do you think you listened to what your mother said at that time? Oh, yeah. Most of the kids like to rebel, you know. Oh, yeah. Oh, I listened to Mother and Dad, yes, very much. Do you think there was a religious factor? The Italians were a little bit... No, but she didn't think Swedes had any reason to mix with Italians. So... And it was very unusual if somebody crossed the line. Yeah, and the Swedes didn't marry blacks, you know, that's for sure. They'd get along with them all right, but they wouldn't... But you didn't have any blacks at that time? No, not up there, no. There was only the one that polished shoes, the Matteller, he was a Swede. He even spoke Swedish, somebody told me. Yeah, yeah. So you didn't become steady then with this Italian? No, no. And I... Mother said a couple of times, I wish that you'd find some other nice Swedish girl. I don't want you to get mixed up with them. Did you take her into your home? No. As you were being next door? No, no. She didn't. The best we did with that, we'd sit on the back porch or front porch in a lawn in a group, you know, and talk and all that. But I didn't have any special interest in them, neither one of them. But it was a nice family. It turned out to work out all right in the long run? Well, they were all right. But they hadn't lived there more than about two weeks, I guess, or three weeks. And they were nice people. I thought they'd get along nice and everything. But the friends that they associate with come up there. And I was working out in the garage on my car, because I was always working on the car, either that one or somebody else's car or something. I had all my tools spread out there. And I went in for lunch, and I come back out. And all my tools were gone. I looked out, and here are these kids that they had brought in, had decided to relieve me of all my tools. And there were three of them. And they had picked up all my tools and started with them. And I come out there like a cyclone, you know, and I took after them. And they start throwing their tools around in the grass there and everything. One kid there, he had a big wrench, and he stuck it down inside of his overalls, slid down so he couldn't bend his leg, you know. And I knocked him down, see, and I got him up by the collar. And the other two kids, they beat it. But they dropped everything. And I told this kid, you're going to stay with these tools. And I says, I'll kick every tooth in your mouth back into your throat. And I was mad. And this wrench, you know, was caught in his overalls. And I had to back it up and get it out, you know. If it hadn't have been for that, they probably would have made it and got by. Well, they threw all the tools. I had to go down in the grass there and sand and gravel and that and pick them up. But that's the experience I had. And one time, I can remember, mother had hung out a close line of clothes in the back. And some of those kids come up to visit. When they left, half of the clothes on the line were gone. That's princess, go on out in the hall. Go on out in the hall. So this wrench, you know, if they were friends of this family living next door, did they would behave, you know, or putting them in a bad shape? In other words, they had to... They had left, of course, but the people they visited, they had to face it. Yeah, well, I told Dominic, that was the boy, he was the oldest boy. I says, I thought your family was a nice family and you could mix with the Swedes over here. I says, they're all honest people here. Well, he says, we're honest too and we don't believe in this stuff. But then kids come over, they like to visit us up in this neighborhood up here, he says. So they thought that was pretty nice. Well, I says, if they'd behave, it'd be all right. Well, he says, you know, he says, you think you're the only one that had trouble? I had a gold watch up there in my room and he says, when they were here, I missed my watch. And so I tried to find out who took the watch. Nobody did. But I showed a kid, one of the younger kids, 50 cents and I said, that could be yours if you could tell me, give me some leads. He says, okay, don't tell anybody. I said, okay, give me the 50 cents. So then he told them, this guy here hasn't got it, but he give it to another guy and another guy and you can get it from them. So he went down and got a hold of that guy by the collar and I am glad I got rid of it. Well, you stole it though. Yeah, I did. So after about three stops, he got to the kid that had it and he got his watch back. And he said, now those kids had better not come out in that neighborhood again, he says. They even steal my watch, he says. So he got his watch back. So it's not easy to see the different nationalities, different… No, no. You see, up until those people moved in up there, if I had a bicycle or tricycle or wagon and we were playing with it, wherever we left off in the front yard or back yard, you'd leave it out there until the morning. But after they moved in, you couldn't do that because their followers or their friends come up there and stole what was loose, that's all. So we had to lock everything up every night. So they were not responsible, but the people at the hobnob, whether they got friends of theirs, they brought some… But you would think your neighbor would be very careful not to invite, but there were kids I suppose, they just came in any time and roamed around. But we didn't have anything to do with the family. What kind of work were they doing then? What was he employed in? Well, the old man was retired and he hadn't worked for several years. And he associated with a guy down on 18th Avenue and Dominick told me that my dad has invested some money with him. Well, I found out later that that was a blind pig, you know what that is? He was getting his hooch from a fellow three blocks back, his name was, we called him Dynamite, and he supplied the booze for this guy and this guy sold it under the pretense of having soft drinks, bottled soft drinks and groceries. But we knew that he had other things to sell in there too, see? I know what our neighbor up there, I won't mention his name in case he gets back, but he got, he was a pretty heavy drinker of alcohol. And one time his wife come down and asked my dad, he says, I understand that my husband has been drinking and he's laying in a snowdrift down there on 18th Avenue and he's going to freeze to death tonight. I wonder if you could go down and see if you could help him get home. So dad asked me if I'd go along and he was, he didn't have a stiff joint in his body, he was so wiggly. We picked him up and pushed him in that coop and I managed to sit down there too and we took him home. So dad went down the next day and he went into this fellow and run this place and told him don't sell him any more liquor because his family is suffering and he's going to get too much and one of these days something's going to happen. And he says, that's my business. If he wants to come in here and drink until he gets drunk, that's his business, he says. Well, dad says, I just thought I'd ask you as a friend that you as a neighbor up here because he's only about four or five blocks from where we lived. No, he says, I'm not interested in talking about that, he says. So he just wouldn't give us any satisfaction. So the Swedes, they were heavy drinkers, some of them, the workers. Yeah. That's a fact. And how about the Italians? Did they drink as widely as the Swedes and Irish? I don't know. I never saw. The drunk Italian in the way that you were? It's people next door didn't drink heavy enough to get drunk. I know you got pretty slobbery sometimes, but they never got. But they was from wine though. They got the, because there was a custom. Yeah, Italian, he made wine from dandelions and they said that was very potent. And there was, you couldn't make wine during the prohibition. Oh yeah. For lost wine. Yeah. It wasn't against the law. I don't know if it was against the law or not, but this man that we picked out of the snowdrift down there, he come down one day on his way up, uptown he walked. Of course, he didn't have a car. And he said to dad, he said he had made home brew. And he says, boy, it was good. I had 21 bottles of home brew so far today, he says. And dad says, well, I don't know, could you hold that? Oh, he says, I just sat down in the basement over the drain, he says, and I'm buckling just to run right through me, he says, down in this drain. But now I have to get started on some more. He didn't have the money to buy any, but he made his own beer, see, home brew and wine. So the prohibition, you were young enough, so you didn't have any use for it. I mean, it was for the getting old. No, I wouldn't touch that. What's the prohibition, you think, incentive for people to break the law, to go and buy a few bottles there and put in their pocket and get drunk? Oh, sure. Oh, yeah. They, yes. They, well. It seems to be like that, you know, when something is forbidden, you got to have it. You got to have it anyway, yeah. I know when I was working at Alco, we had a, I don't remember his name now, he was a fat guy, five by five, and he used to drink pretty heavy. When he got paid, he went into the tavern and it was a blind pig, you know, and he drove his car and he parked it in the back there, and he had gone and bought a lot of, no, he went in and he drank, so he got tipsy and didn't know what he was doing, so he spent most of his paycheck in groceries he was going to bring home to his wife, and he went out and put these in the car, but he wasn't coherent enough so he knew what he was doing, he put it in somebody else's car. And when he got ready to go, you know, he could drive, of course there wasn't much traffic those days, you know, and he got home and he told his wife, he said, I got the groceries in the back end of the car. He went out there and he says, I can't find any groceries in there. Wait a minute, he says, I bet I put it in the wrong car. Of course, nobody would own up to that, so he lost his whole paycheck, lost the whole thing because somebody else got a big load of groceries, and he bought almost his whole paycheck in groceries. Did Barr or this Blythe Pino, did they act as bank too to cash checks for people? Yeah, they'd cash them and then they'd induce them to stay around until they spent all of it, you know. And there's one Hugo's Tavern down there, it's still there I guess, on 7th Street. I understood he would, you see, one thing, they couldn't loan them any money. After their money was gone, they'd blow their whole paycheck, then he'd come over and stick another five or ten in his pocket and said, you owe me ten now, next payday. But this was done on a QT, see? And then they'd blow that and then he'd get so drunk, then they'd throw him out, you know, on the street or in the alley. But there was no conscience in the bar owners' families, the kids going under anything. So they were kind of a ruthless bunch of people, those bar owners. How about the churches now, what role did they play against those... I know when I was working out in Iowa and Nebraska, the measurement years ago was that you couldn't have more bars than churches in the town. If there were 11 bars, you gotta have 11 churches. No. What was it in Rockford, for instance? Oh, I know. Were there more bars than the churches? Well, who knows which was bars? They didn't call them bars, they were speakeasies, and who knows what the speakeasies were. So the number was much, much more? No. So there were probably, I don't know, two dozen speakeasies in Rockford, more than that. There's Dynamite, who furnished the booths for this guy on 18th Avenue. He had a store like, I don't remember if it was a restaurant involved in that thing, on 15th Avenue, right across from the Black Hawk Park. And he furnished all the booths for the fellas in that neighborhood and sold to them on a wholesale deal, you know, to go out and peddle it. How were they able to do that? I mean, you would think the law enforcement would know. Well, the police were up there one time. Police chief Bargree, no? He was elected in 1903. Yeah. He stayed on till 1940. Yeah, he was a cover-up man for the speakeasies. And they sent, I remember they had a, they sent a couple of detectives up there to get this Dynamite, see? But he was out of town till they pulled off. He would take off them? Yeah, sure. And Bargree was the chief of police and he was, he would help them. Gee. And there was a federal crime, there was a FBI was called in, it was a heavy case to handle. So Bargree didn't help? No, there was no FBI. There was no FBI. They didn't have anything like that. Not that I know of. They were not called in then in case of any? No. Uh-uh. No. And if any other agency got to delving in, Bargree would have quietened it down, see? But they had a speakeasy, two doors south of the number one fire station down there. And the police station were right together there, as I remember. They later moved into the city hall. But here the speakeasy was right next door to them. Just like today, you know, they couldn't. And people knew about that, of course? Oh, sure. But you couldn't do anything. How could you do anything? The chief of police was protecting them. So today, for instance, if there is a drunk guy on the street, you very seldom see that because they drink in a different manner now. But he's not thrown in jail. But years ago, they ganged up like Bus Albin. You remember him? Who? Bus Albin. No. And next was another one, Vildsvinet, they called him. They lived on the railroad cars there up in the industrial section. They unloaded railroad cars. You can't recall those names? No, I can't remember those. I don't know anything to do with them. They weren't taken in anyway to the city hall. They were sitting off and they had to pay a few dollars. And sometimes an employer had to go in and bail them out. How did they do that every week? I mean, they wouldn't be filled up with the drunks. Well, what they would, they had Black Maria, was first pulled by a team of horses. And they'd go out and collect on a late Saturday night. And they shoved them in like cordwood in the back of this Maria, see? And hauled them down to the tank. And then they had to pay two and a half to get out. It was the city jail? Yeah. Yeah. Did they have to feed them there in the morning before they let them out? No, I don't know. There was no... No, it was just get out and go and pay two and a half and that was it. And I don't know what they did with the money. But then they graduated from a team to automobiles. You remember Black Maria Horstron? Oh yeah, sure. Yeah. Yeah. And so then they had automobiles so they could collect them fast, you know. And they'd make the runs, see? And through 7th Street and Broadway. And the ones who saw it coming, who were able to get around, they'd amble away and hide, you know. The other guys, they were sleeping. They'd pick them up and there's another two and a half, see? Down the station with them, that's all. But the poor wife not sitting home with four or five kids, how was he able to raise the money though? I mean, $250 was a lot. Well, this one guy, I don't want to mention his name because he's got family around Rockford yet, but anyway. He was a drunk one night. He was going to cross the railroad track down there off south of Broadway and he was too drunk to walk so he crawled. And he started crawling and got over across the track and the train started up and cut his leg off. But he didn't die. They picked him up and hauled him in and fixed him up and he hobbled around with that wooden leg for so many years as I knew him. He was a painter by trade. And I don't know. But he was drunk every weekend. And they didn't help and they were throwing him in every weekend. They just came back the same. Oh yeah, sure. It was the same routine. Oh yeah, same guys. The other guys, they drank enough, they'd get sleepy, they'd go crawl around in the back of the buildings and hide, you know. This black marina, we didn't go looking for them, you know. You just drive down and pick them up, that's all. They were already far gone. Or this merchant cop on 7th, they had a walking policeman on Broadway and they had a jail there, it was about the size of this room. And if they were drunk and that and abusive and that, he'd throw them in there and lock the door. And then the black marina, I'd come along and pick them up and hauled them in. He said, I got three or four drunks here for you, two and a half a piece, boy. Haul them down to jail. Was there a profession that a young guy looked for to be a policeman or a fireman in your days? Well, I don't know much about that. Because it was a safe job though, I mean, in other words, you could come into the city all day. Yeah, oh yeah. Were any of your buddies trying to get into the police department or the fire? I don't know. I don't know anything about that. I didn't have any interest for that, so I didn't know. Any people? This is cassette four and the side two. Yeah, a little lint streamer would walk along 7th Street there and he'd stop a guy and he went, he had stop signs, you know. A guy went through it. And he'd run down there and flagged him down and he says, well, the guy says, I didn't see anybody coming. I know, but it says stop and you stop, he says. But he didn't arrest him, but he said stop. So he enforced the law? Oh yeah, and old Danielson, Daniels was a motorcycle policeman. He had a sidecar and a motorcycle, you know. You remember those? In India, with big handlebars and a Harley Davidson or Indian? Well, it was a Harley Davidson. It was a regular motorcycle, but a sidecar on it. So if you pick somebody up, he'd throw them in there and haul them down, see. Boy, that guy, he would drive along about 12, 15 miles an hour. And I tell you, if you had a noisy cutout, today they can't arrest them because they gotta measure the decibels, see. But he measured them by the sound. And he says, you go down and get that fixed next time I put you in Yale. Yeah, or any speeding, you know. He couldn't catch a speeder because I don't think he could dare drive that motorcycle of his over 20 miles an hour. But the guys that outrun him would run away from him. Well the streets were probably not that sufficient for a high-fast driving either, don't you think? No, no. 7th Street was brick. It was paved with brick. Up as far as, let's see, from State Street to 6th Avenue, it was brick. From that on, it was paved with sand and mud. And Broadway was all just loose sand. No ruts in there because it wasn't mud, it was sand. 11th Street was the same way. All the way out past Sandy Hollow Road was all sand. So there was a country road on Broadway going out to Cherry Valley? Yeah, well it didn't go, hmm, Log Cabin as far as that. I don't remember there was no Newburgh or anything like that. It was probably another country road, that's all. I don't know. Well there was one mayor, Dan Green, I believe, he said that it won't take long now before Belvedere and Rockford will be one city. He said in the 1950s or 60s. But talking about the highest official now in Rockford, the mayor, do you remember the mayor, O'Green? No. He ran against Bennett. You were too young then, I suppose, you didn't pay attention to it. But do you remember Hallström? Hallström, Brown was the first one before Hallström. Was Brown Swedish? I don't know. But Hallström, no. Hallström was Swedish. He came in as a young immigrant and very radical. He had marches down there during the First World War, reject drafting and everything, just like the Vietnamese War. But Hallström was put in by the Labor Party. The Socialists. Pardon? The Socialist Party. Yeah. He was a socialist. But when he got in and found out that the things that they had promised to do, you couldn't do. And he found out that they put a lot of pressure on him to change everything, you know, and he wouldn't do it. So I think he made two turns, I believe, and then they kicked him out. But didn't he turn to be a more liberalistic of a view later on? Well he found out that what they were talking about was not workable, that's all. So just— He is dubbed to have paved the sidewalks of Rockford. Is that true then? In other words, replacing the old potholes and with good roads, good streets. Was that during his term he did that in Rockford? Did what? Paving the roads, I mean the streets. I don't recall that he had too much to do with paving the roads. No. They said he had a kickback from the cement manufacturers. Yeah. Ten cents a bag. Yeah. I wouldn't be surprised. I wouldn't be surprised. But that was, I think it was with the highway. I don't know that—I don't remember when they paved the streets up there on 7th Street and Broadway. I know it was during my time, but I didn't pay any attention to it. You don't remember the parade they had on 7th Street during the First World War when they resisted the draft, the lot of Swedes, and they were taking the bride well in Chicago? No. No? Yes. I wasn't interested in parades. I didn't care about that. I don't know. It was a very small parade, but they were jailed and some of them were shipped over to Sweden and some went to Chicago. Yeah. I don't know about that. How about Blom, though? He was later. Blom, yeah. He was a pharmacist. Yeah. He was pretty good. He was strict. In fact, he tried to make it turn around too much, and it didn't work too well. They said he went on every morning to count the shovels and the spades and the picks and everything. I believe it. I believe it. Yeah. So he was a working man then? Yeah. Yeah. Were they full-time mayors, in other words, with a salary at that time, so they were paid for it? The mayor? Like Blumenau, for instance. Was he running his pharmacy at the same time as he was running City Hall? No. He had a son-in-law or somebody that he turned his pharmacy over to. You see, his pharmacy was on the corner of 5th Avenue and 7th Street, I think, or 6th Avenue. And he turned it over to him when he went in as mayor. So I think he had his hands in it too. But they were elected, and of course, most of the Swedes probably were behind them, but they needed more votes, though, from the Italians and Irish, where they didn't have anybody to run against a Sweden as mayor, like Hallström and Brunberg. Well, it was mostly Swedes, and the Swedes were the only ones that would vote. The Italians, they didn't care to vote for anybody. I see. So they were... They were interested in making booths and hooch. That's all they wanted. So the Swedes, they were active in the politician? Yeah, about as much as they could be, I guess. But I think they were probably, the Swedes were in the majority as far as that was at that time. In the 20s, when you were working, did they talk politics during the lunch hour and the lunch break? No. You were sitting there. No, not too much then. No. No. I know the neighbors up there in Rockview, where I lived there, they'd talk politics. And I remember some of my neighbors over there favored Russia very much and thought it was a nice country to live in. And I says, well, I'll tell you, I says, if I had my way, I'd put all you guys in a boat and start you off. And before you left, I'd drill a hole in it. And boy, you'd have to bail fast or you'd sink. I says, but I'd get rid of all of you. You talk about it so good over in Russia. Why don't you go over there? I said. So they were actually communists then? Yeah. Yeah. Do you know anyone like Harry Anderson? David Colleen? Harry Anderson? Yes. Yeah, he was a real communist. Yeah. He was, the FBI was after him. Yeah. Well. His sister was married to a Sweden house owner. What's his name? Ekström. Wait a minute. Axel. Axel, yeah, that's the one. Axel. Eklund. Huh? Eklund. Eklund, yeah. Yeah. He had to leave Rockford. They were after him. Yeah. Well, Harry Anderson, he was my neighbor up there in Rockview. He was about your age. A little bit older, maybe. Yeah, a little older than I. I'd say probably about five or six years older. He was a communist through and through, and I knew it. And when I worked at Alcoa at that time, they had a deal there where they chose a certain number of people from the plant, guys from the top, should I say. And I happened to be one of them. They asked me, oh, they were going to teach us rules and regulations and chemistry. And so, of course, both Broberg and my John, they said I'd be a good candidate. So they insisted that I go down there and four or five other guys from the shop there. And we were to meet once or twice a week for an hour and a half or two hours to take lessons from these people. And this Harry Anderson showed up as a speaker. So I went to my foreman and I says, I don't want no more of that. I said, I am not going to listen to instructions of a Bolshevik, I call him. You knew him personally, didn't you? Oh, yeah. And I knew he was a communist. So, oh, you can't put a label on him. I says, yes. If I put a label on him, I'd paint him red. And I said, don't tell me. I've been living with that guy. I brought up with him, so I know what he is. And how in the world do you have to pick trash like that for? Well, then of course, I got to the superintendent and he called me in there and asked me about it. And then he referred it to the head guys at Uncle Swanson's, Harry Swanson and Paul Swanson headed the plant up over there. And so Paul come up and he says, you know this Harry? And I said, yes. And I says, he's a Bolshevik, a red, and he's no good for this country. And so, I put a label on him and they got to looking. I said, now, if you want me in that class, get rid of him or I won't go. Well, you'll go if we ask you. No, I says, I want no part of that guy. I don't have to listen to his teaching, I says. So, he got rid of him. They wouldn't use him. But he got to preaching more openly, you know, after a while. And the FBI got after him. So, I don't remember what happened anyway. They threw him in jail and whatnot. He had to leave. I think he stayed in Chicago for a year. Yeah, well, anyway, I know that they found out what I said was true. So, he didn't get any followers. In other words, he was too abusive, too arrogant. Yeah, yeah. So, and the socialists later on in the 20s, they didn't get any foothold either. The socialists? Yeah, they had a Swedish socialist club down in Leven. But they had no interest. Do you think people were afraid to join that group, or were they too… They didn't believe in them too much. They didn't have no part of it. My folks, they wouldn't listen to them. I was a young man. I wouldn't go near them. I didn't have anything to do with them, that's all. So, most of them, or maybe all of them, they did not belong to any church? Oh, no. So, they were completely outside. And the church people were on the outside for their use, of course. Yeah. So, your family did not belong to the free church? Yeah. Well, my dad never went, but my mother did. So, she was more religious than the… Yeah. Dad didn't discuss the religion? No, he didn't care. He said, if you want to go and the kids want to go, it's all right. But he says, I don't care to go. But you attended seminary school? Yeah. And also the youth groups later on when you got to the teenage years? Yeah, I stayed with them. I remember dad would give me three cents. I could get on the streetcar for three cents because I was, I think I was under 12. I had to be under 12. And once in a while after I got to more than 12, you know, I tried to get on for three cents and the conductor warned me. He says, you're over 12 and next time, he says, you'll have to get off. And it's bad weather, you know, and I didn't want to walk all the way from Rockview down to Fourth Avenue and Sixth Street. But I had to go to seminary school. Mother said I should go. And I did. And mother would go in the evening and I'd go with her. Is that how you met your first wife, then Irene was her name? Yeah. No. No, I met her in Chair Valley, the home place. Still there. And what happened was this kid I hung around with, Axel Johnson, he was my age and we're thought alike and everything, but he didn't have a car so he used my car all the time. And I had the chance to buy the gasoline and if to treat the girls to anything, I'd get the chance to do that too because he didn't have any money. If he had any money, he'd spend it before he got it. And so he said he wanted to, oh yeah, he wanted to date Irene's sister, Esther. So he says, I wonder why don't you date Irene, Esther's sister. She's a little younger and I like Esther, he says. So I don't care, blind date, but that's all right. So we did. I went out with him a couple times and then I broke away from Axel and Esther because Esther didn't like Axel. So I went down to see Irene and it developed into a real nice friendship and her brothers, I like them real well and we get along. I like farming too, you know, so that was okay. And she was of Swedish background? Yeah. Born in Sweden or born here? No, she was born in Belvedere. And her last name as a girl, her maiden name? Anderson. Anderson? Yeah. And she was born what year? You know? One, 1901. 1901. Okay, in Belvedere. So you got married then in 1924? Yeah. Married in 1924. Then you were ready to build a house or did you rent an apartment then when you? When we got married? You got married then in the Free Church, Free Church Pastor? No, we got married in her home. In the Cherry Valley? Cherry Valley. And Reverend Johnson, Elmer Johnson married us. And him and his wife sang a couple of solos. And we had a house full of company there and they had a big home down there, something like this one, you know. But I don't remember. We got married, oh yeah, and then we moved in with the folks over there in Rockview. They gave us a room upstairs and I bought some new furniture and we couldn't get it up in that crooked stairway so we had to take the windows out and move it up through over the front porch into the windows there. Couldn't get it around the bends in that narrow stairway, it was about this wide, you know. Come in and then around. So Al, he decided, Dad and I, we'd fix that, we'd take the windows out, we took the windows out and moved it up. So we lived with my folks for four years. And Irina, my mother and dad, they got along just beautifully. And when we bought this place in 29, Mother cried when we left. She says, it's going to be so lonesome without you two. And she says, I just love Irina, such a nice girl. And so we moved out here. Now that was a real experience. The house was nothing more than just a shack. How did you pick this place then? It was for sale then? Well, I bought this place in 29. In the meantime, a fellow come over, if I digress a little bit, a fellow come over to my mother one day and he owned the lots next door and he says, I'm going to put up a sign on it, I'd like to sell that lot. So if somebody asks you, he says, I'll take $600 for that lot. So my mother said, well, I'll mention it to my son. Maybe he'd be interested in buying it. So yeah, I says, boy, I got his name and I called him and yeah, $600. So I had saved up $600 and I went down and bought the lot. And in the meantime, they were getting ready to put in a water line up there. They weren't paving the streets or anything, but they were putting on city water. And I remember in leveling or grading, they got some loose dirt there. I told them, dump it on that lot there. I own that. I'd like to have it dumped there if we couldn't. So they did and I remember they had a real big accident up there. The fellow that was running the machine, you know, was a track, fell down in a ditch and cut both legs off in that chain because he was the engineer and the ground caved in and he slid down in there and cut his legs off. So boy, that stood still for a couple of weeks there then before they got that straightened out. I don't remember. We moved in and we lived there with the folks for four years. And in the meantime, I had used a wheelbarrow and shovel to level off the whole front end of that lot. By hand? Yeah. And I went up and got the black dirt up on the hill on the road there. There was a knoll and I dug into that and got black dirt, which was about a half a block to wheel it. But I wheeled it every Saturday afternoon till dark, wheeling it down there and making the front lot level. So then I decided that I wanted to build a garage. I had never put up a building of any kind, you know. So I told Dad I'm going to build a garage. So I built a garage, decided to make a 20 by 20, a double garage. And I remember when I laid it out, I didn't know how to lay it out. I first got the – went down to the city and got the grade for the alley so I'd know how high I would have to raise the lot up. And I had to raise – I had to make a foundation four foot high around that garage on the front side to meet the level of the grade. Four foot high. And I made the forms and mixed it all by hand and put it in there. Then I started building the garage. But I remember I had to – I didn't know how in the world am I going to lay this building out so it's square. But I figured out a way to do it. So I made it and I made it square, aligned with the road, you know. So it worked out all right. And I made a garage 20 by 20. And – Did you figure to build a house there and – Yeah. That's what I had intended to do, yeah. But you didn't do that at all? No. No. And that garage is still there. It's still there. And it's not falling down either. So the fellow next door, the Italian, he saw me building a garage so he decided to build a garage. And about six months after he built it, the roof started going down the middle. He says, I can't understand what – yours doesn't do that. Why does mine do that? I says, because you didn't brace it properly. Well, so he told me, yeah, I put those things up there like that. Yeah, but you got to brace them so that they don't pull apart. The garage swelled in the middle and the roof went down. I remember he had an awful time. I don't know what he finally did in order to straighten that out. I don't know. I didn't pay – So the Italians, they are better winemakers. Oh, yeah. He's better on booths, yeah. And when you bought this place, did you also get the acreage? The land? Yeah, it was 30 acres. It was a farm then, in other words, here? Yeah, it was 30 acres. The acreage you got here was 20 on here and 10 over there, the 10 that I got now. Did you have barns and outbuildings? No, that was all – the only thing was the chicken house over here. But the garage, when the wind hit the garage, it went right straight through without stopping and it said that was Gene's place we just went through. Why did you pick this place? Because they must have been out in the wilderness compared to – Yeah, but I had to get something that was within my means. So I remember I had that lot looking pretty good and that garage, so I put a price on it. I wanted $1,800. So this fellow that – this salesman, I knew him from my childhood days down here from Chair Valley. I can't remember his name now. It'll come up with me, I guess. But anyway, he knew I was looking for a place and he was working for a realtor by the name of Jackson in Rockford. So he said, Gene, why don't you – I think I can get you a good deal on that lot, he says. I said, I want $1,800. So he says, well, maybe this guy will make a deal with him. So this Hague, he was a booster too, you know, and everything was falling apart down here and falling – there wasn't much but the land that was any good. And so we got together and he decided – I don't remember how that was now. Well anyway, I made a deal with him. Your intention at that time was to pay cash for it or take it on a loan? Yeah, well, I – there wasn't much to get a loan on there. I don't remember how – now, wait a minute, now I'll tell you. He wanted $1,800 for the lot, but he wanted $800 more than that for this place. So I had to take a mortgage and I went down to the farm loan office down on – downtown somewhere and see if I could get a Mr. Porter, his name was. And I says, I'd like to get a loan so I can buy that piece of property over there. I says, I got $800 – or $1,800 for my lot to trade in, but I don't recall just how much of a loan I had to get there. But well, he says, I don't know, that's not a farm really, 30 acres. Well, I says, I'm going to farm it, I'll make a farm out of it. Well, I don't know, according to the rules, he says, you're just under that border. He says, I don't think you can get a loan. So I says, well, will you try? Well, he says, I can try. Well, if you don't, I says, tell me who you deal with and I'll get right to them and ask them. Well, he says, you're pretty aggressive, aren't you? And I says, I want what I want and that's what I'm going to go after. So I don't remember how it was. Finally, they took some test borings out here and whatnot and they said, the land is alright, but he's not got a big, it's not a farm, he should have 40 acres. Well, I'll get more 40 acres, but I got to have what I got there now. Finally, Porter says, I had a meeting with them again and I explained to them that you really wanted it and they finally come across and they gave me a loan. He says, so you'll get, I don't remember how much the loan was. Yeah, I guess I got a loan of $200,000.