 We have October 8, 1987. I'm sitting here with William Nelson Jr. in Oman, Nebraska. And if I ask you now about your grandparents that came from Sweden. Oh yes. My grandfather's name was John Nelson. And he was born March 10, 1850 in Kristianstad, Sweden. The name of the town slips my mind. I was over there three years ago. I forgot. And he was a cabinetmaker and carpenter by trade. No record is known of his forebears nor his childhood or youth. But he came to the United States in 1974. 1874. I beg your pardon. 1874. Thank you. And found employment with the Rumford Baking Powder Company in Rumford, a suburb of Providence, Rhode Island. And in 1875 he saved enough money to enable him to send for Hannah Olsen, who was his betrothed's girlfriend in Sweden. And she immigrated to America in 1875. So she came from the same area that your grandfather did. Yes. They were childhood friends. There was no mention at any time of the reason why they left Sweden or why he left Sweden? I'd have to do a little research on that. I just don't recall. Let's see. So his parents then were farmers? Yes, I believe they were. Sharecropper farmers of a large estateholder. That tells you pretty much there why they left. I suppose they weren't making anything. They didn't see any future. Didn't see any future. And so they decided to immigrate to this country. They were married in 1875 there in Rumford. And how long did they stay there? I believe in about 1884 they decided to move to the Midwest, which was very popular after the opening of the West and the gold rush of 1849. And they settled in Strasbourg, Nebraska. Did he have any friends, relations perhaps in Nebraska? I don't think he had any relatives that I ever recall that they mentioned. But he did find employment as a rail maintenance foreman on the Pacific Railroad. In Strasbourg? Huh? In Strasbourg? Yes, in Strasbourg. So they had a depot there at that time? Yes. And then he built a spur line to Strasbourg, which is about 120 miles from Omaha, to take in the crops that were raised at that time, and he worked on that. And then later he got into the house building business. And then it was unusual. There were ten children born in the family, and it started out with girl, boy, girl, boy, all the way through, all ten of them, which is unusual. And he died before my youngest uncle was born. My father was probably in about the sixth grade at that time, and so he was one of the older ones, so he had to quit school and help support the family. Then since they tell me that they'd only get about 50 cents a month besides their board and working on a farm, the boys and the girls couldn't find employment, so they started to come into Omaha. One of them was a shipping clerk for the Carpenter Paper Company. My father was a millwright, a mechanic for Union Pacific for 14 years, and one of his brothers was a cashier at the Omaha First National Bank. And the girls were housemaids for some of the well-known wealthy families here in Omaha. So their mother decided to keep the family together. She moved into Omaha with them from Strasburg, and so most of the family spent the biggest part of their life here in the Omaha area. So Grandma, you remember her then? Oh, yes, yes, I remember. Did she still speak Swedish at that time? Yes, most of the time she would speak Swedish. And like I told you, my older sister was taking Swedish lessons. And then when World War I broke out, any foreign language was taboo. I mean, they didn't want anything that was all American, see? So she quit that school, and I never had a chance to go. I wish I would have had the opportunity. But I can remember as a boy, there was always Swedish sermons on Sunday. Here in Omaha? Yes, the old Swedish Baptist church is where they attended. Oh, they belonged to the Baptist church? Yes, at that time. I spent most of my time at the old Swedish Baptist church, the general conference headquarters, their schools, and Bethel College in St. Paul, Minnesota, which you probably know. And do you recall that they talked about the Baptist seminary in Strasburg? They were there for a long time. The cemetery? No, seminary. Oh, the seminary. I think that they did. In fact, my uncle Ben, after they moved it to St. Paul, he attended there, one of the boys. Did he? Yes. Where was that located? Is that building still there? It's in St. Paul. I mean in Strasburg. I really don't know. I do remember taking one of my aunts out there before she passed away, and we were out to a celebration. I think they had an anniversary. It was uncanny. We went out to the cemetery, and she could direct me right to her father's grave. He was born out in Strasburg. He was buried out there, I should say, not born, buried out there. Their mother was buried here in Omaha. But I recall how vividly she remembered when her father died. Of course, they were all young children, but it was a pretty big event in their life, naturally. But then my father left the Union Pacific Railroad because they'd have labor strikes, and he said that when they were out on strike they didn't get paid, but if they did gain anything, he says, you never gained it back. So Henry Ford was going to build a plant here in Omaha, build cars. So he was one of the first employees and went to work for them. Was that before you were born then? No. I was just a couple years old when he went with Ford. I think he went with Ford in about 19...oh, about 15. He was there for about three years. In 1919, he decided maybe he'd get out in the dealership. He knew the dealer in Oakland, Nebraska, who happened to be down there. They used to drive out to cars from Omaha. So he went up to Oakland and he bought that dealership in 1919. So I was just a young fellow. I remember moving up there, so I spent my childhood and school years up in Oakland. Then I traveled on the road for a wholesale firm here in Omaha for seven years during the 30s. Then I was in a bomb-loading plant during the war effort building bombs. Then after the war, my father got bad, and he had one brother that was in business with him. They had both the John Deere implements and Ford cars up there in Oakland. My uncle passed away, and my dad's health was bad, so he wanted me to come back there after the war. So I was in business for about 19 years up there. As a Ford dealer? Ford dealer, yeah. And the John Deere. But then I could see the farmers getting larger. No tenant farmers, population was decreasing. Looking down the road a few years, I couldn't see much future in a small town. It was not even a county seat town, so I sold out and came back to Omaha. I came back here in 1964, and I've been with this company now for about 23 years. If you go back to the Ford days, do you know if they were attracting the workers with the $5 a day? Well, yes. I'm sure the pay was good, and they paid so well that there was no strikes. I'm sure that's what attracted my father. Did he have any union of the workers during that time? Not to my knowledge. Ford didn't. That's why he paid that high wage to eliminate the labor conflicts that the railroads were encountering at that time. So your family was in Oakland then during the Depression. Yes. What happened then? Well, I can remember my father told me that back in 1919 or 1920, right after World War I, that business was real good. He said he just didn't think that you could make money that fast, and he said it was just like a dream. Then they had a crash, and he had a lot of cars and tractors in stock, and they went from $750 down to $365 a piece. Ford didn't protect them. They had to take that loss. So he was quite discouraged, but he says the Depression didn't last long, and things came back. So 1924, 1925, and 1926 were pretty good years. Well, then when they had the crash there, we had three banks in town, and they closed all the banks, and only one of them opened. The bank that he was in never opened up afterwards, so that worked quite a hardship on him. There was no return on the investment? I think he got about a 50 cents on the dollar for what they had in the bank, but that kind of set them back. Then, of course, we had the dust storms and the drought. I imagine many of them told you about the dry years that we've had here. Dust storms drifted up as high as the fence, like drifting like snow. We didn't raise any crops here for, well, mostly during the 30s were pretty dry years all the way through. How were they able to survive? Well, they just barely existed. I know my wife's folks, he came over from Sweden as a boy, and he was over in Illinois for a while. Then he settled out here and started a farm. The farm was seven miles northwest of Oakland, but he had some ground along the bottom land, along the creek, close to town. He had a few acres there. That flooded over in the spring, wherever they got enough moisture to raise some corn. He raised enough corn to sell for seed, and that's what kind of pulled him through. It was a real experience. I'll never forget those dry years. Each farm at that time had their own dairy farm? Yeah. One thing about subsisting in those times as opposed to today, everybody raised chickens. They had a big garden. They raised fruit trees, so they had fruit. They always had hogs. They always had milk cows. They always had butter and cream. In fact, the way they survived is they'd come to town and sell their eggs and their butter and trade it for groceries. That's just about the way they existed. So today is different. They don't have anything of that more than the crop? No, just the crop now. Most of them are big cattle feeders or big hog feeders. They feed thousands of head of them. So when they hit so hard, they are really going fast? Yeah. In those days, almost everybody was pretty much on the same level. They all had a little something to go by. So there was no complaining then from anyone because they were all in the same boat, so to speak? Yeah. Everybody was the same. For entertainment, you went over to the neighbors for a visit. They didn't have money to spend for entertainment like they did today. Today, we made our own entertainment. We made our own games in our youth. And the church was the center point? The church was the social center point. Did your family transfer from the Baptist church here to the Baptist in Omaha then? Well, we came to Omaha and we were doing the Baptist church. But then it was a young church. There were young people in the church and young families. I had known some relatives in the covenant church here. A lot of people from Oakland came to Omaha that I knew as young folks. I liked the Swedish heritage. We lost that in the Baptist church where we had gone. It was strictly American. So they became fast American then? Yeah. So we felt such a warm bond and close fellowship that we joined the first covenant church. Did you join the covenant church up there in Oakland too? No, here. Oh, here. Joined it here in Omaha. Do you remember when you lived in Oakland that they had any cooperation with other churches like the West Elementary Church? Oh, yeah. Leonard Stromberg, you probably remember him. Leonard Stromberg, yeah. You see, he had a little church out in the West Side. Well, my wife's dad... Is it West Side? West Side, Memphis. And my wife's father owned a farm just two miles north and a mile west of there. So she grew up in that church. And Mrs. Stromberg was her Sunday school teacher. And of course, I knew Dr. Stromberg too real well. In fact, he had boys I went to high school with. And his daughter was in my class. Bernice was her name. Schongren. Schongren, yes. Well, we went to school together. I see. She was a happy one, though, wasn't she? Yes, yes. She was a very brilliant girl too. And Dr. Stromberg, he did a lot of writing. Did you know about that at that time that he was a... Yes. He made quite a few trips to Sweden. And he was pretty well known by his literary works. He was quite a writer. Did they read those books in the community? Well, a lot of them read the books, yes. Because they were Swedish stories, of course. Yes. Very clean written. Yeah. You were not able to read them, though, because you didn't... I couldn't read the Swedish. Did he and other pastors in the community cooperate, exchanging pulpits at that time? Well, it started to come more so after World War II. Once a month, they would have what we would call union services, and all the churches would get together. However, that was between the Salem Covenant and the First Covenant and the Free Church. And we didn't have too many. The Lutheran Church participated, but the others participated. And we'd have song services. In fact, I led a lot of those song services back in those days. And then we'd have one of the ministers would speak, you know, and they'd fill the church. It was on a Sunday night. Sunday night they had that. Also up in Oakland. This is in Oakland. This is in Oakland. Did you join the choir then as a young boy up there? Yes. Yes, I joined as a young fellow, and I directed the choir, and was Sunday school superintendent, and my wife was primary Sunday school superintendent. We were quite active in the church and in the community. Chamber of Commerce worked, and I sang, and we had a Chamber of Commerce male quartet that we used to go around and sing just for publicity. When was the last time you was up to Oakland? Five years ago. Five years ago. Are you going up there anymore? Yes, I expect to go there. Well, you lived in Oakland in all your school years. Yes, in Oakland. I went down to the University of Nebraska. So everybody knew each other then in this community? Very much so. Everybody, you knew everybody in the community. Yes. Yes, and we were just one big family. So there was a mutual trust then among people? Very much so. They bought and sold things, and the farmers depended on service and everything. When did they come in with the tractors? John, do you know? Well, we were the John Deere inmate dealers about the time that they transitioned from horses to tractors. Was it during the Depression? Yes, yes it was, during the 30s. So they were able then, despite the hardships, to invest in the tractor because it was a big... Well, they'd had the horses, and we'd trade in the horses, that'd be enough for down payment, and John Deere would carry them on credit. Oh, I see. John Deere had a very liberal credit system and low interest rates. That's the only way they could move their merchandise. And so if they couldn't make the payment this year, they'd charge them more interest, and they'd pay it the next year, see, if they couldn't raise it. They were very liberal with them at that time because they had probably no other choice. It's either that or not manufacture the goods. So it... and I might tell you this story. One day we traded... we had a salesman that was... he knew livestock. We'd trade for cattle and hogs and horses. You took the trade? Yes, during that time, during those tough years, the 30s. How were you able to get that? We'd trade that, yeah, that's all we had to do, so we'd trade that, see. He knew the value, he could guess the weight of the critters and everything. And you had to have somebody like that that really knew livestock to trade, you know. Was he an old farmer then? He grew up on a farm. And he liked livestock, and he showed interest in it. He was... he knew the value of things. One day he traded for a span of mules. We delivered the tractor, and they said, well, we'll come up, we'll have a truck come out tomorrow and pick up the mules. And so the next morning, this farmer called my father and says, Bill? He says, yeah. Bill, he says, I tell you, he says, you better bring out the dead animal truck. He says, one of your mules died during the night. Anton Sandval was his name, I'll never forget that. Of course, they... you know, what do you do? You just take those things, those losses. And of course, they made quite a joke out of it. My dad would kid him every time. He says, trading off a dead mule to him and everything. But that was the kind of... you know, you took those things, and they made a joke out of it, and that's the way it was. I remember one time he'd come in with two dozen ducks and traded. He had them in a crate, and he went up and down the street there and sell them, some duck to this fellow and a duck to that fellow. It was just before Thanksgiving, and that's the way you did things. So this Anton Sandval? He was the farmer that traded the mules in, yes. Oh, he was the one. Yeah, he traded in... he was the farmer that had the mules, and one of them died during the night. The guy, or there was the tracer, so to speak? Leslie Stevens was the fellow that was salesman for us. He worked for us for 25 years. He's... he was born in 1900, so he's 87 years old. He's retired out at O'Neill, Nebraska right now. I was up to see him about three months ago. His health isn't very good, but we were pretty close. So was it his responsibility to get rid of those mules and ducks? Yes. He had to sell them. First he had to trade them in. Turn it into cash, you know. But then he must have had a little farmland to feed them, or... Well, we did have a... he lived on the edge of town. He kind of had a little acreage, so... and some yards there, so we could take them in there and keep them until we could move them, see. And he was able to trade them and sell them off to make a profit? Yes. For your debt? Mm-hmm. Yeah, that was the hard way. Oh, it was. It really was. It was a little bit harder than to receive cash. Yeah. You did a lot of things in those days that they wouldn't think of doing today. It was a necessity, you know, and people just don't believe those things. When you were old enough, did you start with this kind of a business? Did you want to help your father? Well, I grew up in the business. In fact, when I was 12 years old, we'd get on the train out of Oakland and drive down to Omaha, and the Ford factory was on 16th and Cumming Street down here. And my father would... this was back in the Model T days. I was probably in 24, 25, along in there. And he'd drive out a car, and I'd go with him, and we'd drive out to Florence, which was the edge of Omaha, in the streetcar line, and then I'd stay in the car, and he'd get on the streetcar and come back to Ford and get another car, and then when he came up there to the end of the streetcar track, then I'd follow him home. In those days, there was no such thing as driver's license. They'd pick me up in Omaha because I had to look to the steering wheel. I couldn't look over it, you know. Maybe a policeman would pick you up in Omaha, but if you got out to the edge of town, nobody bothered you. So you learned early to drive down? I was only 12 years old. And nothing happened? You were an adult? No. Yeah. Still an adult? Yeah. I enjoyed that. I thought I was a pretty big boy, you know, then. So then later on, as I became of age, a lot of times we'd take orders for cars, and they'd want a certain color and different things, and if they were ready down here, it's time, and we'd take some down and drive out cars. So I kind of grew up in the car business, and then after the war, in 1945, I came back up there, and I was there for about 20, almost 20 years in the business myself. So your father had retired then at the time? Yes. He'd retired, so I bought his business up. And he was still living on? Yes, he was still living. He was there, and I sold out just shortly after he passed away, but he wasn't active in the business because his health wasn't too good. So he saw his business, you were able to increase it then, because after the war, they started to... Yes. Business was real good, actually. And you kept the Jandir line, too? Yes. Both Ford and Jandir? Yep. Did he get off then with the service mechanics? Yes, I had about 12 people on the payroll. And there were only, in those days, Ford was very strict about their dealerships, you know. Very seldom you'd find another line of equipment in there like Jandir. Well, they didn't like that? They didn't like that. But we'd had it. And the only other one was, there was a fellow named Milt Morrison up at Wausau, Nebraska. I got acquainted with him through going to Jandir meetings back in Waterloo and Moline. And he had the Ford dealership up there. He passed away, I see, a year ago, but he was up at Wausau at that time. I suppose you've been up to Wausau, too. So he had the same Ford and... Ford and Jandir up there in Wausau. Did they differ anything in the policies of Ford and Jandir? Oh, they were quite different. In what way? How did they... Well, Ford were more strict about moving merchandise. I mean, they were always pushing merchandise on you. And it was always a problem, you know. Whenever you could sell merchandise, it was always scarce. So hard to get. And when you couldn't sell, they were out there pushing it down your throat, so to speak. And the franchise is written in favor of the manufacturer, never in favor of the dealer. The fine print. Yeah, the fine print. That's right. But how could you do that if you couldn't take... if they wanted to push ten more cars on you? Well, that was one reason why I got out of business. So they were really... They were pushing me, and I said, listen. I said, it was in the wintertime and there was snow around, and I said, I've got all the cars around here I can take. They wanted me to take 12 cars. Continuous, next slide. Stop the old... Okay. Yes? I told the Ford Motor representative, I said, this is rather ridiculous. I said, here, you dictate policy with my money. I said, if I don't have a choice of what I can do and what I can't do, then I says you better find somebody else in this business. Well, at that time, they could see the handwriting on the wall, too. We were too many dealers in the county for the number of population, customers. So I just sold out. I sold out everything at auction. They took back most of my repair parts, and I sold at auction, sold the building and all. I'm glad that I did at the time because the people, the public didn't like it because, you know, naturally they were used to having their cars serviced and everything, and it was a hard decision to make. But it was getting where I wasn't getting any return on investment. So another dealership came in then? So before or...? No. We were four car dealers in the town when I was there, and we had about five implement dealers. They're all gone. In Burt County today, there's only one car dealer and one implement dealer in the whole county. So that shows you the change that's been made in the last 25 years. Is John Deere still out there? There's one John Deere dealer in Tacoma, the county seat, and one Ford dealer. There's no General Motors dealer in the whole county. During your dad's time, was Ford already pushing him to get cars? Yeah, they were pushing. The volume was not that big at that time, I suppose. No, it wasn't. Well, certain times, certain years, you had good years and you had poor years, but the 1930s were bad years all the way through. It was just nip and tuck all the way. You just had a hard time making it. But then the factories were closed down, I suppose, most of the time during the 30s. Yes, they had to cut down on production. They just couldn't produce more than they were asking for. That's right. Then right after the war, of course, everything was scarce and you couldn't get enough merchandise then. But you came in then? Yes, that's when I came in. And after the war, in 1946 or 1947, how did the model look like then? The first year was the same model as we had when they quit in 1941, you might say. Oh, I see. So there were no changes made then? No. In 1946 and 1947. Then in 1948, they came out with a big change. But then it was kind of hard to get merchandise because they were slow in getting change over. But then about in 1951, things were starting to roll along pretty good. Then we got in a war in Korea and that kind of slowed things down again. It made things scarce. But there were some good years and some bad years. But before I got out of business, I could see what money I made. If I stayed there, I was going to lose it all. So I thought, well, I better get out while I can. So you were one of the first Amtlesee to do handwriting on the wall? That's right. I was one of the first. For a site? Well, I don't know. It was just a lot of guidance. I thank the Lord for guidance on that. I really do. I had a building on railroad property behind the Ford business that I used as a warehouse for implements. I had a 99-year lease on the ground. So we put up the building there after the war. Well, when I decided to sell, I thought, well, how are you going to sell a building when you don't own the property? My wife was quite concerned about it. We did a lot of thinking, a lot of talking, a lot of praying. I said, well, now let's kind of put out the fleece. If I can sell that building on railroad property, that would be an indication that we should get out of business. It probably went on a week or so. One of the local livestock feed dealers was looking for something, and I sold them the building, so then I decided to sell out. How were the Swedes to do business with? Were they careful or taking their time before they decided? They were pretty conservative. Most of them were pretty good men to deal with. But like on any nationality, you have good ones and you have bad ones. But the Swedes, I think, are kind of a frugal and conservative group of people, generally speaking, not all of them. It wasn't easy, of course, but you could usually do business with them. They'd kid me in this business here, you know, they'd kid me about being a Swede. They said, Bill, you heard about the Scotsman, the tight Scotsman? He says, you know what's tighter than a Scotsman? I says, no. He says, a generous Swede. I said, you really know how to hurt me, don't you? But I think most Swedes are pretty frugal, but they take care of what they have. The Depression, I suppose, made an impact on the frugal outlook. The what? The outlook, the Depression. Depression? Yeah. Did they put a brake on everything? I mean, they had to be careful. Oh, they had to. Yeah, what really hurt us the most was these two banks where they had money in them and they didn't open. So, you know, I know we'd get the—they'd sell their produce on Saturday night, their cream checks and their egg checks. Went into the bank. And they'd give them to us and then we'd take them to the bank, you know, and cash them the next day. Well, then when the bank closed, we didn't have any place to go. Well, fortunately, one out of the three opened. And my dad went down there and said, well, we don't have much money, but we've got these cream checks we have to cash. Would you handle it for us? Oh, sure, I'd be glad to, you know, and that's—that'd start all over again. It was— What happened with that money that were in those three banks? Where did the money go if the farmers and the dealers in the town didn't get it back? Well, many of them were unsolved. They loaned out, just like we've gone through here now, a lot of these—they made poor loans. A lot of the farmers at that time, during the 30s, things were good and price of land was going up, so they mortgaged the home place to buy more land. And they lost it all and the banks held the mortgages. So that's where a lot of that money went, see? I mean, it just wasn't there. Did the bank borrow money from someone else? Yeah, and they—yeah. And so they were insolvent. The banks couldn't pay, so the government wouldn't let them open up. So they just—everybody had to take their loss. And today there's only one—is there more than one bank? One bank, the Farmers and Merchants Bank in Oakland. And that was in one family for over 100 years. They just finally sold out to a group of fellows here in Omaha a couple years ago. Were there any Swedes involved on the board there? Well, yes, there were. And then they had a mutual insurance company that they formed up there, carried— Over fire and— Fast, uh-huh. Fire and— Was that Swedish-organized? That was Swedish, yes. A fellow named Augustus was the manager of it, and they had a board of directors. I can remember a lot of those old Swedes, the Wallersteds and the Johnsons, and quite a few were on those boards. And most of the policyholders, they were in good company then? Yes. People that they knew personally? Yeah. How about in the co-ops? Yes, there was one cooperative up there. And then there was Hompkiss Grain and Lumber Company. They were quite predominant. And they had grain elevators in all the towns up and down the railroad there for years. There's another one down there, Sedek—Berger Sedekvist, or is it down at the railroad, going down the hill there? Let's see. Was there Holm—was there Holmberger? Holmquist. Holmquist. Holmquist. H-O-M-Q-I-S-T. H-O-M-Q-I-S-T. And he was still there? Yeah. And a few years ago from Main Street, that building on the corner was the building that I was in. How did you take the adjustment on coming after life in a small town? You went to the drugstore for coffee in the morning, and you would talk to people, and you greeted everybody, and you came to a big town. Well, fortunately, you know, up there at Oakland, I called a cup of coffee, they called up their Swedish highballs. Way back in the 20s and 30s, they'd gather for coffee. Well, that got very popular in this country during the war and after the war. There wasn't so many coffee breaks, generally speaking, in most communities. But Oakland always had the coffee break. Well, like I say, I left right after I went to university and started traveling on the road as a salesman for this firm in Omaha. I traveled to northeast Nebraska and northwest corner of Iowa. So I wasn't around there too much for a few years, see. But where I really—what really bothered me after I sold out, here I sold out this business there in Oakland. I knew I should get out. I knew that was the thing, but I didn't know what I was going to do. And I went along for six months after I sold out and looking for something to do. And then I went back on the road for a year and a half and selling merchandise. And then this company, we're looking for somebody to go out. And what I do with this company, I market our architectural and engineering services. We do a lot of work for municipalities, water and wastewater and highway work and bridges. So I'm out trying to gain new clients, see. And it's been real interesting. It's the only job I ever had in my life that I really enjoyed. And there's no press like the Ford? No, no press at all. I was in Detroit. I tell you, I don't think I'd be here today if I still stayed in that business. It was pressure all the way through. It's competition. Competition. Sometimes ruthless, I suppose, from the top. Yes, it was. And what made it so difficult, I was kind of in the center. I had dealers all the way around me. And when you're selling the same product, all you do is who's going to give the most for the old trading or whatever it is, see. So you're buying a business and you're just getting where you just couldn't come out. Which was worse, a couple of mutes or an old car, to say the least. Well, I tell you. The car didn't die well, I used to when you died, too. But I sold out the John Deere business in 58 because it was just getting to be too much trying to run both of them. And the John Deere business, usually if you traded for equipment, you had to go out there and haul it back in, you know, and find a customer for it. And it took more help. So I decided to get rid of the John Deere business and just the Ford. It wouldn't be so hard on my health. Well, after I got rid of the John Deere business, I found out that really to make it worth your while, you needed both businesses to make it real profitable, see. So, but I like the car business better because, you know, you could trade for something and it would roll in on its own wheels and it was easier to get rid of the used merchandise. Like, for instance, on the farm equipment, if you sold like a cultivator for a fit-on tractor, well, you had to find some client that that cultivator would fit on and it was very limited. And then I used to sell a lot of used farm equipment to the farmers that were renting ground. They couldn't afford a new one. Well, then when that change came, when the tenant farmer was frozen away because the fellow had the money, bought his farm, he farmed himself. So instead of two-row equipment, he got four-row equipment and six-row equipment, see, to farm it. Well, then that made the two-row and four-row equipment kind of obsolete as he changed. It was a fast-moving situation, so to speak. And the farmers, they were in the, to get the new equipment at that time. So the old equipment didn't suffer too high? No, that's right. That's right. Because the young people were growing up until they're dead. Yeah. Get a new tractor, get a new disc. That's right. Combine. Yeah, they, and those were good years, you know, at the war here. They got good prices and they had the money and they could do it. So the 60s and 70s were good years then for the farmers. They could expand and buy equipment. Yes, I'd probably been all right if I'd stayed in. The late 60s were pretty good years. Most of the dealers made money at it and did pretty well. But I just, I just was tired of the carbine, so I just wanted to get out. And I'm glad I did. I have no regrets. If you compare yourself now with your father, was he under the same strain, you think, the same situation? Yes, he was. In the beginning, in the 20s? Yeah. He was, I can see it now. I couldn't see it when I was growing up. But I can see where it was a strain for him. And it affects your health, no doubt about that. The volume was smaller, of course, but it was still a headache. Still a headache, yeah. And you have your responsibility of your health. When I got out of high school in the early 30s, he says, well, you better find yourself something else, says, I've got these men married working for me that have families. He says, I can't let them go and hire you. So I went out and started to sell fuller brushes and sold cooking utensils and those things when I was trying to go to school, trying to earn my way through. He says, if you go to school, he says, don't depend on any help from home. So I went down to Lincoln and found a job and tried to work my way through. But that was quite a struggle, too. But it was a learning experience for me. I guess I've probably been in sales work all my life. You've always been good at that. To persuade people to buy you. Well, you know, in this business, I heard a good definition of a diplomat. A diplomat is a fellow that can satisfy the irritated without irritating the satisfied. Talk me through. Something to that, isn't there? You've got to be a middleweight or two. Yes. Where did you go to graduate from college now, or university? In Lincoln. Lincoln. But I didn't graduate. After two years, I had a chance to get a job, and I took it because during those depression years, the fellows there that had engineering degrees and attorneys, they were walking the streets. They couldn't even buy a job. So when I had a chance to get a job, I thought, well, I better take it. These fellows in school, why should I take an education when I couldn't? These fellows can't get a job. I felt kind of fortunate I was able to get a job, see? But, of course, that's where it's changed, of course. Nowadays, you wouldn't have a Chinaman's Chance without an education. But there are some without a job with education today, too, though. So there's something of a repetition, I mean. Yes. From recession time. Yes, that's right. What about your daughters now? Did they, I mean, you have a boy. I mean, you have three sisters. Did they go through college? My oldest sister did. My father had money then, and she graduated. She went to university in 27, 8, 9, and 30. So when she got out, well, then the Depression hits, and she was the only one. I have two sisters younger, and they went to a business college. That's about all the education they got. But I have my son graduated from the University of Nebraska. He's with the Pontiac Divinity General Motors. He was a manager here in Omaha, and now they closed that office, and now they transferred him to Kansas City. So he's down there. And then I have a daughter living here that was a medical technician. And since then, she isn't using it now. She's married. It's interesting to notice, though, that there were so many boys and girls that couldn't go to college because the parents didn't have the money to do their best. That's right. But many of them became very successful, though. That's right. That's right. I mean, you had limited education. You probably would have continued if you had the money. Oh, if I had the money, I would have, absolutely. But you have been successful without it. Yes. Well, I guess it's that school of hard knocks, they say, you know. Do you look back, though, or you don't regret the way you did? No. No, I have no regrets. I think that during those Depression years, people as a whole were— they didn't know at the time, but they were happier then than they are now with too much. A lot of people got too much. They don't know how to take care of it. They abuse their bodies, and they're not happy. Money, you know, they strive for money, but that isn't always the answer. They can sometimes turn them over too fast. That's right. What did you learn from your father in salesmanship, for instance? I mean, to sell a car or a tractor. How did you—did you do it differently than he did? Well, I learned more from this salesman that worked for this than I did anybody else. The mule skinner? Yeah, the mule—yeah. I learned more from him. He taught me a lot of things. I tell you what, and I've carried it over in business today. When I go out, I have to represent this company and myself, and you try to work them both in together. In other words, you have to try to convince people that you have integrity, that your word is your bond, that they can have faith in you. That's the big thing today, I think. Always has been. That's one thing my father always instilled in me. He says, Bill, always keep your word good. If you're going to do something, he says, keep your word good. He said, your word is your bond, and he always practiced that. I think it was a good heritage to pass on to me. So your family had been, on the religious side, so to speak, active in the church? Yes. Have you been more active than your parents, you think, because of participating in the church? I was probably more active than my father because when he bought that business back in 1919, cars were just coming in, and the doctors up there had horses, teams. They brought them in the delivery stable, you know, and they took care of them. When they'd come out during the night, they'd have somebody there. So when cars came in, they said, well, if I want a car, you're going to have to have a vehicle for me that I can get in here night or day. In those days, you had to keep them in the heated garage because the oils and the lubricants would get stiff in the wintertime. Did they have antifreeze at that time? No. Well, denatured alcohol is about all they had. But so my uncle, I remember, he wasn't married. He kind of stayed down there in the wintertime. So the doctor had to get his car out during the night, get called out on a case while they were there. So my father was open Saturday, Sundays, and all day. So he kind of, you know, the business kind of had priority. So he didn't attend church as much as he should have, and like anything else, you kind of get away from it. But after his health broke, we started this quartet, and he sang in it. My father and I, and that got him interested, and he liked music. So we started out. There were five boys in the family, and when this oldest boy, I was telling you about the women, the Bethel College, left home, the youngest one was a high tenor, and his voice changed. He went to low bass, which they needed, and his voice changed. So they kept on. So they sang together for probably 25 years as a quartet around Omaha here. So he liked to sing, and we got quite active again, but after he got away from the business, so to speak. Did you also have a string band up in Oakland? No, no, didn't have a string band up there. It's all here in Omaha, isn't it? Yes. Gotten into that, too. We set up to get ready for the 100th anniversary, and so that's when that was. Is there still active in the string band here at the First Covenant? Is it what? Is it still active? Yeah. It is. We plan on playing for the, we're going to have a banquet the 13th of April next year, 350th anniversary of the Swedes landing. So we're going to play a little bit during the banquet. Plan to, anyway, get some Swedish numbers. Most of these are hymns, but we'll probably get, well, we'll have to learn how to play De Gamla, De Fria, you know, and probably some other numbers, play a few numbers. So you are still keeping in contact now with the Swedish background? Yes, yes, I've been active now up in Oakland. They had a Swedish festival this summer. And you have a background for it. Yes. How about the organizations now, Swedish background? Did your parents or you belong to any of the Vikings? No, I didn't belong to any of those in Oakland. They were very active. The Viking was very active in Oakland. But all we had was church affiliation activities, and we didn't. Did they have a Swedish newspaper, Swedish-American newspaper in your home? No. You don't remember? I don't think they did ever have a Swedish. How about politics? Were they Republicans or Democrats? Mostly Republican. Up in Oakland? See, Val Peterson, you know, he was born in Oakland. And he'd come up there a lot when he was governor. So he was the governor? Governor here, yeah. And then he was over in Denmark as our ambassador. And when he was over there, my cousin, who was with an attaché with the government, he had been in several foreign countries, including Russia and Ethiopia, and he was stationed there. So they were both, when they got there, they had a picture they sent back to the Oakland paper that two former Oaklanders get together over in Denmark, which was quite unusual. So you knew him in person then? Yes. He was born on a farm outside there in Oakland? No, his father was the northern minister. And the governor of today is Kay Orr. Kay Orr. Also a Swedish background. Yeah. And she became the first female in the Noonday Club of Omaha. You belong to the Noonday Club now? Yeah. Have you been on that since you came here, or did you join when you were up in the ____? Well, no, since I came here. I had an uncle here that was quite active in it, and of course I'd heard about it. In fact, my father told me about it. They used to sing for the Noonday Club when they were living in Omaha. And these businessmen are professional people, yeah? Yeah. Here was the year I got a few of those. There's our Scandinavian Noonday Club. You had visited Sweden? Yes. Did you see the birthplace of your grandparents? I didn't have an opportunity to visit them. Now, my mother's folks came from Goodland, Visby. And then we were going to go over there, but fortunately this trip was for the three countries, Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. And we spent time in Norway, because I enjoyed all the tour. So although we did spend about three days in Stockholm, we took the train from Oslo to Stockholm, and then we spent three days sightseeing in Stockholm. We went on our own for about a week. We rented cars, and the other couple we were with, they had relatives over around Jönköping. And so we spent some time over there. Well, we were up to Karl Larsson's up at— Södermalm. Yeah. And we looked around a lot, but we did a lot of sightseeing. And I didn't have enough information. I was looking at this book here. My uncle didn't have much information on it, and I thought I'd spend some time looking into that one these days. I should be retired. Well, I'm semi-retired now.