 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Reverend Elish Uriel Youngdahl, Rock Island, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. There was about the weddings and funerals and so forth. So as a consequence, they want to minister, so they called on me. I never turn a funeral down unless they belong to a church. I tell the undertakers, the funeral directors, find out definitely before. Once or twice I've gotten in trouble because they lied to the undertaker or funeral director. And one was an Episcopalian, but they hadn't gone to this church for 20 years. But the Episcopal church, once a member, like in the Catholic church, always a member. And so I went down and talked to the priest down there and he said, well, you've got to understand. I said, they haven't been inside your church for 20 years. They said that they had told the other through. Now I said, I don't know what more finally you want. And I said, that's it. And the other was a Baptist who was way out of bounds because some of his relatives belonged to his church. He felt he should have had the service. I said, okay. I said, I'll give you the—whatever they pay me for the service, I'll send you the check if that's what's bothering you. He said, this is it. But I'm probably as well known around here as any pastor anywhere. I can't go anywhere without having—it's kind of difficult at times being in the hospital scene meeting all these people, thousands of them, thousands, so forth. I go out to eat, for instance. And I go down to Harold's here often because they've been very nice to me, and the girls down there know me. It's good. But there isn't an evening that I go down there—and I go down there about twice a week—that at least four or five people come up, whom I don't know, remember. Oh, how are you, Reverend Engelson? And then, of course, I'm active with the—retired as a colonel, and I'm active at the arsenal. And— So you can go over there too and get some— Yes. I go to the commissary, the PX, and the club, and so forth. But the reason I've had so many funerals is once—when I first came here, they were bringing back the bodies from overseas. They called on me, and I'd have as high as 10, 12, 15 funerals over there, one right after the other, see? So you had—how many funerals, you said? Thirty? Thirty-seven. I could—I don't know if I—here, just take it off for a minute here. Stop it. I've had 3,742 as of Saturday. I had three funerals last week and two the week before. Here I am retired. I've had—I've had—I think it's 12, 12 funerals so far this year. None of them is church connection except two out of my little church. So you get funerals outside anywhere? I'm a minister in a way to the unchurched, and I've tried to make use of that in trying to show them the way. So I think I have a real responsibility, and I feel it. It's real. So you don't block the door for anybody that comes in? No, not for funerals. But weddings, is there— Weddings, there, they got to conform. In other words, if they come—if there comes a couple now, the lady is Catholic, and the other one might be not anything. What do you do then? Well, I find out exactly how they talk to them, and I usually have two or three counseling sessions with them. I have a lot of people who come up, have the license with them, want to get married. I said, I never do that, never. I said, you sit down here and chat with me, and we'll set a date for another visit, and then we'll set a date for the—and no, they want to get married right now. I said, okay. So they don't have to belong to a congregation, or once they understand what you are talking about, you feel— Well, they say most of them don't belong to a congregation. If they belong to a congregation, I won't marry them. Well, then you— I tell them, I tell them, you go back to your minister. I just had one now. I got a call. It was for a short period of time. When my father died, I took over Salem Church as student pastor. Here in Moline? No, no, no. 1926. That was in the seminary. Then in 1940—see now? No, no. 19—was it 1940? Well, I—sorry, 1949, I guess it would be. Magnuson left, and I took over as vice pastor. Then in 1952—I don't see no—how was it? 1952, Homer came. That's right, 1952, then Magnuson left. Then I think it was 1953, they offered me a call to Salem. And of course, of the hospital, I had only been there for four years, and that was out. So I didn't do that. I wanted to stay there, but that was way back then. Well, that's it. So there we are. That's good. Thank you very kindly. Thank you very much.