 Oh, you want all the middle names? Everything? Ida Marie was the oldest. Jenny... I have them, but will you tell me... Yeah. Ida Marie and Jenny... Chris... Amelia. No, wait a minute. Yeah, Jenny, Amelia. Frank Harris. That's the boy. Emily Christina Alice Augusta Rebecca Hedwig Elida Williamina Esther Albertina Josephine Victoria And their middle name was from a queen. Yeah. Was that your mother's idea or... Who came up with the idea? Was that your mother? I'll tell you, I'm at the tail end of the family. By the history we're told, those things I don't have. I do have a count of things, but that sort of thing I wouldn't know. I'll tell you, the older people, they grew up, but I was born when my older sister was about 18. So, in consequence, you don't have the history, you know. But I have heard it from various places, I know. That's Josephine Gustafson in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She was born 1889, 14th of November in Leicester, Rice County, Minnesota. And we have 7th of November, 1986. So, your parents then had nine girls and one boy. Nine girls. Isn't it remarkable? We had two sisters first, and then a brother, and he lived to be 103. 103. What was his name? Harris Frank. And then the seven girls came along after that, and then my baby brother. So, what did your father do now for a living there in Leicester? What did I do for a living? Your father. Oh, father. He was a farmer. They moved there, it was true, but July, oh yeah, July 1st, 1876. Well, anyway, father and mother, they came over not together, they weren't married. But mother was about 19 when she came over. And she came from Augustboda in Småland. Yeah, and father came, of course, from Blekinge, I suppose. But he had a brother over here, that's why he wanted to come. And he was in Millersburg or Leicester. He what? Your uncle. Was he here in the... Yeah, he lived on a farm. Ahead of your father. Uh-huh. But they were married in Marquette, Michigan, father and mother, and had the one child there, and then he wanted to move to his brother's place on the farm, you know, near him, and they moved just a short ways from him on a farm. Now that was in about 1872, I would say. Let's see, I wonder if we have... So he stayed in Marquette then for a while, your father, before? Oh, father and mother were married in Marquette, Michigan. What was he doing there, your father? He had sort of a restaurant. A restaurant? A restaurant. And he did have a bar with it, and mother disapproved of that. She did. And so they moved to Leicester. And then they had their, they were married, now this might interest you, they were married for or I mean, knew one another for three weeks and were married. And lived to celebrate their 50th anniversary, and had all these children and everything was fine, happy home. How big of a farm was it? Well, he, what he called Homestead, I think about 80 acres. So he cleared all 80 acres then? No, no, every winter, immigrants would come down from Sweden, from the cities, because they didn't work in the wintertime, and they boarded and roomed at our place and did the logging. Do you remember that? No. You don't remember? Yes, I remember the very end of it, I do. Oh, I see. And they were Swedes? They were Swedish. And sometimes I think we had about three of them at one time. And, but we had a pretty good size house. Were those immigrants from Sweden from the same area your father or mother came from? I wouldn't know that. You don't remember that? No. They came from St. Paul, Minneapolis, you know, and knew one another, of course. And then they'd come down and work. So then you had to talk Swedish? Oh, sure. Mother said, we talk Swedish till we went into school, a country school, of course, and then we dropped it like a hot potato. You did? Why? Oh, well, I still remember my Swedish prayers. What did you say when the table prayed, for instance? You know, what is it? Yes, not the words we go, but seeing that there's a brood we foe, but seeing that there's a compass bird that bleeds his hair and he look dead. Did you say thank you for the food? Yeah, thank you for the food. I'll go afterwards. Did you read all in your sonnet on the table or just one person, or how did you do it? I think that father and mother usually did it. It seems to me that they did it. Oh, I guess we children did it, too. You helped out. But that part I can't remember too well. But mother was a very they both were, but mother was a very good Christian mother. And then you attended Middlesburg Kristallnässjö. Yes, but do you know what? When the Germans came, they were all Swedes in Leicester. I'll tell you what, the Norwegians lived on the hill, the Swedish lived here, and the Germans there. But these people were all Swedes and they didn't have a church, of course. And so they had a hard time that particular year, and they had meetings, you know, they would meet at their homes for their meetings. And the farmers shook their heads and they said, oh no, we can't, we can't make it this summer, you know, the church. Mother got up and said, they are list, well, you've lost the worldly goods, are you also going to lose the spiritual? And with that, they made a motion, they would go ahead and build the church. So your parents, they were charter members of the church? Oh yes. Why did they call it Kristallnässjö? Do you know the background to that saying? No, I suppose Christ in the valley or something like that. There was a valley? I think so. So the Swedes, they lived in the valley. You saw, you were there, weren't you? Well, the Circle Lake, you can look over it, it's about a mile from it, but the church is on the hill, and over there, Circle Lake. Now, I don't know where they got the name really. But the Swedes, they lived in the valley then? Well, not in the valley, but the hilly country for the Norwegians, and this plain more country more. But there were hills there too, but not like, you know, up in the Norwegians. So you were growing up with Norwegians then? Well, I'll tell you what, the Swedes were sort of just there, and Norwegians had their church and school, and the two of the Germans. So the Swedish had their school, and the Germans theirs, and Norwegians. You never went together with them? Well, yes we did, but they each had their own, like, you know. And the Sermons were in Swedish then, when you were a little girl? Yeah, they were in Swedish all the time. How about the Confirmation, was it in Swedish too? That was in Swedish too. And so when we moved to town, in 1911, that was Swedish for a while, St. Paul's Lutheran Church, but they turned to English because all the churches had to, you know. And in Sweden, if our church, Kristallnäck, would have carried on in English instead earlier, they might have gotten a lot of those, you know, like a few people lived around the church who weren't Swedes, and they might have joined. But they couldn't join the church because they spoke Swedish? Well, they couldn't understand Swedish. How about the Norwegians and the Germans? Are their churches still there? Well, I suppose they had the same thing. But did they disband too, or what happened to them? Well, they didn't disband, but they were, well, I'll tell you, with our church, what happened was the people, the old farmers, when they retired or got older, they moved to town because their children would get jobs. But not too many. Lots of them stayed right there in the farm and married the farmers. But our family, and several of them I could mention later, my husband's family, moved to town. And then we found jobs in town. Now this is kind of interesting, but there are three of the girls who were maids because they didn't, you know, at that time, they didn't have that education to go on in the business world. But when they came to, my sister Alice, now she's gone away, she was the one who went into music, and then all the rest of them, we went into the business world. You did? Oh yeah. How could your dad afford this now? I mean, nine girls and one boy, that's a big family to feed. It's a big family, but mother did it. Oh, she was a wonderful mother. She sewed for the family and cooked for them and did everything. And you never heard people oh dear, complain those days. And if they did, of course we children didn't hear it. But we girls, the last ones, helped with the farm work just like men. You did? Oh yeah, we did. Milk, cows, and everything. But how about you now? You came at the tail end, so to speak. Did you have to work as hard as the first one? Well, no, the first ones, you mean about the farm or what? In other words, your oldest sister, she was the one that had to help your mother, of course, in the kitchen and the washing and ironing and cleaning. Yes, but she went to the city. Well, she was about 18, I think, when they went to the city. Oh, she left then? And then the next girl had to go. Yeah, but mother did the men. She sewed for us and did all the work and cooking and everything. So, you said you went into the business world. Did you go to stay with St. Alphaston? No, no, I went to Minnesota College my last year. It doesn't exist anymore, but Minnesota up here. My mother, I'll tell you, her father was on the King's Army. In Sweden? In Sweden. So, he always got a pension, you know, and he always sent mothers some. And mother would save it to send the children away for education. Where it was a religious school, you know. Minnesota College? Minnesota College. Minnesota Academy is really what it was. But they called it Minnesota College. Who was in charge of that one? Was it denominational? Oh, no, yeah. Lutheran. Lutheran. Dr. Frank Nelson was the president. And my sister, who was two years older than I and she, she and I both went there. And then the other one who started education, she went to Gustavus Dulles College to get music education. The oldest one of my sisters, mind you, went down to Gustavus II and that was a long, long time ago. But I don't know what she studied. I can't tell you that. So, were you able now to belong to the college, for instance, you went to, St. Augustine? Was the school good enough in Leicester to educate you for college? You didn't have any trouble? You mean Minnesota College? Yeah. I mean, that was a big step to come from Leicester and Minnesota to Minnesota College. Yeah. Well, I'll tell you the thing was, we girls, beginning with Elida, Elida, Esther, Mamie and I were in the class and we went to Northfield High School and worked for a room and board. And then when I took the last year, folks were still on the farm, I got a place up in town and worked for a room and board and got my Minnesota College there, you know, and then went one year to the university. And she wanted to adopt me and, but with my family and she said send me through university, you know. But on the other hand, my family moved to town in 1911 and that's when I was I had gone to the university for a year and I just couldn't see it. I wanted to live with my family. You said they went to town, to St. Paul? Minneapolis. Oh, Minneapolis. They sold the farm then? They sold the farm. So no one took over the old home? No. My brother bought a farm at Delano, Minnesota. And there he lived and got married and then he moved to Watertown, Minnesota. I see. But he was the only boy, you see, so he was... Was your dad's farm too small for him, you think? Or why did he move out of the area? Oh no, it got to the time that children went to town and they were old enough to, you know, retire and so forth. I see. So, with so many girls now, was there enough boys to go around on there in Leicester and Millersburg? In Leicester? Yeah. Well, I... How do they... Well, you see, we left early to go to school so we weren't marriageable age, the last of us. So you went to... took other boys then around in other places? Well, no. Well, several of them did, but on the other hand, I knew my husband from the farm. Because he lived... He was a neighbor? He went to the same church and everything. He was a neighbor. I mean a neighbor. Well, he lived not too far from us. But how about now if you had married a Norwegian or a German? Oh, well, that's acceptable. It was acceptable? Oh, I had several sisters who married English from... and one married Norwegian and... Were they Lutheran? Were they Lutheran? Well, afterward, they went to the Lutheran church. Yeah. The one... He came from... He came from around Maine, one of them. But he was a salesman here and my sister met him and they were married. And then one was a druggist and he was Norwegian. I see. But everything was fine. I was going to say this I ran into. This is a church or a school I went to, country school as a kid. Close to the church? What? How far from the church? No, no, not... No, no, this is a school. The church wasn't close to that. No? No, but we went to... this was about... 1899. Yeah, well, this picture would be about that one school where both girls and boys went. Were they all Swedish here? There was Norwegians and Germans? A few Norwegians or just about one family of Irish or let's say German. Oh, German. Well, because they didn't live there, this was kind of Swedish, you know. So when you were in this school now you didn't talk Swedish at all then? Well, when we entered we didn't talk English. Not at all? But we dropped it. You dropped it. And you had no trouble? You didn't mix the Swedish with the English in school? No, I can't remember that part about it. I think that we talked English somewhat. We talked English at home, but we dropped the Swedish like you know, otherwise the conversation would be all Swedish. How about the Germans now? Did they talk German in the neighborhood? Well, I expect they did. We didn't decide. We had a very good neighbor who was a German and they had seven girls and one boy. Boy, a lot of girls down there. They were all the same ages. A lot of girls down there. Yes, a lot of... and then two for farmers, you know, it wasn't easy. And the father, he probably wanted boys to help out on the farming. But you said you had to help out then like a boy. Oh yeah, but when it came to fall time that's the time we went away to high school, you know, and father and mother would always have a little squabble. Father thought we ought to stay home and help with the farm work, you know, everything like hay and corn and that sort of thing. And mother says no. She says they should get off to school. So she was all for education? She was for education. And she was a leader in Christianity. They all looked up to her. So becoming a member now or starting this Kristallna Kyrs, was she also on the board, your mother or your father was on the board? I have a picture of it. They were, yeah, they served as that. And I had four sisters who were organists there. One after the other. Oh, I see. And we have seven people buried down there. Seven or eight. So they came back then to the old... It's my brother's church. So when you played around with the Germans and Norwegians, what kind of games were you playing? Did you play any German games? What kind of games for what? Outside of school work, I mean. Oh no, I'll tell you what, we didn't have games, but we were all together. What were you doing? Chasing each other? Well, I'll tell you what, we didn't have too much recess. Those were recess. But it wasn't too much. I don't remember too much about recess. This is after school, we had a picnic. And we had a hayrack party. Those are two pictures of old, old ones that I wrote about today. Is this your dad's horses then? No, no. It was somebody else who had horses. And a hayrack with all the children. So where did you go then? You drove around? Yeah, to a lake I suppose. Maybe had lunch and we'd... Were you swimming in the lake? No, we didn't swim at all down there. No swimming? No. But there was water? Well, I think somebody who lived near the lake, maybe they swam, but I learned to swim. Didn't learn to swim until I came up here. Then I swam underwater. They called me, what do you call these boats that are... Submarines? Yeah, submarines. You were able to learn that? You were able to learn the swimming? Uh-huh. Why did you have to learn that? Was it in the college? Oh no, no, we just did it because we wanted to do it. We moved to town, you know, and that's the things you want to do. How about the holidays, like Christmas for instance? Oh yeah, that was lovely. Christmas we had, you know, you have our usual presents, but one of the presents was a bag of candy for 25 cents at home. And they weren't expensive, they didn't expect it or anything. And then we'd have a lovely Christmas Eve supper, and we would get up and we always had a Christmas tree, a little Christmas tree. Did your dad cut it around in the neighborhood or did he have to buy it? The what? The Christmas tree, did he have to buy it or could he cut it in the neighborhood? No, there were no spruces around there. Well, that part I can't remember, maybe, I can't remember where we got it. But anyway, they had candles because they had great light. Well then we'd all go to bed and get up and go to 5.30, Christmas morning services. And we'd go in sleds, you know, and the kids would be having hot things to keep our feet warm, and blankets. And the church had a lovely sermon, you know, in the morning. And then we'd go home and have breakfast and Christmas day, I wonder, I don't know that we had services, but Christmas morning was our service for the day. And you couldn't play around on Christmas day? Couldn't play around? Well, it was snow. Oh, it was snow. It could be hot then. Do you remember Santa Claus coming on Christmas Eve? We didn't have Santa Claus. No Santa Claus? No. But we had lutefisk. And Mother fixed that herself. Came frozen and dried, and then she'd put it in the lye water, and well anyway, thawed it up. So we always had lutefisk. The typical, you know, Swedish supper. Did she prepare something else? Sylta? Oh yeah, yeah. All those things, just like Sweden. Doppa i grytan? No, we never had that. You never had that? No. But relatives of ours did. Did you have anything special to drink on Christmas Eve or Christmas day? Mother made Swedish beer one time. And I think that's what they do. And then wine, we always had wine because Mother made it out of grapes. We had plum trees and apple trees and all that sort of thing, and Mother always preserved all those things. Had a basement down in the house, and when we opened the dining room floor, you know, opened the door, well that's our basement, that's where we kept everything. There was the fruit cellar. Fruit cellar and all the vegetables. We had a garden, of course. And they kept the cool in the summer too? Uh-huh, that's the only thing we had. Where did you sleep all you girls? Well, we slept, we had an attic on the second floor, you know, and I think we had two beds there, and another bedroom of two bedrooms upstairs, and then Father and Mother slept upstairs. But what kind of heat? Stoves, and pipe going through. Through the floors? Through the floors. And that was hot enough? Yeah. We had warm quilts, made feathers, chicken feathers for pillows, you know, and had straw under the mats. But it could be cold down there in the wintertime though. And we were always warm. So what did you do in the wintertime, when you were about 10, 11, 12? What did you do in the long winter days? Well, sometimes we didn't have a sled. Long winter nights? We had a little bit of a hill that went down outside of the, not too far from our house, and we got in shovels and ride down on a shovel. And then one Christmas my brother gave us a sled, which we were so happy about. But you had to help Mother too, to stitch and sew and mend clothes? Mother did all of that. You didn't help out? No, I had one sister who went to the dressmaking shop, and she helped too. She could do it very well. But Mother did everything. And she'd put us to bed, and she'd sleep till 2 o'clock in the morning to sew. How, when you moved into the cities then, to Minneapolis, it was 1911, you said, your father and mother, you all left the farm then? Yeah. You sold the farm then? Well, I'll tell you what, Bohemians came in too, and bought. So when people moved to town, the Bohemians came and bought. So the Swedes left then? Yeah. Well, they left or they died or moved away somewhere else, you know. So why did the Bohemians come down there? Well, the Bohemians lived up in Wheatland and Montgomery and New Prigg. And that was to the west of us. So that's why they moved closer and closer to Middlesburg. And they had no use for your church then? They had their own church? That's it. And they were captured? No, the old families that were left, they carried on the church for a long time, themselves. And ministers would come that would study for the ministry, they would be the ministers. And then finally, I can remember this, when we got a regular minister, he was a missionary in India, and he came and was a minister. So, but the Bohemians, no, they were Catholics? Most of them, uh-huh. And in Wheatland, there were Irish people up in Wheatland, and they were Catholics too. So they couldn't use your Lutheran church then? They what? They couldn't use your Lutheran church? Well, the Catholics didn't move in, you know, they lived up where they were. But the Bohemians came in. So your dad and mother, how long did they live? To high age? Well, mother was 84 and a half, when she made a long prayer meeting, and she had a stroke. And lived three weeks. So she was active then until the... She was very active in church. And father died at, let's see, 78. How old was he? He was three years older than mother. Oh, 87 then? No, he died at 78. 78 years old? 78 years old. In 1923. And they were buried in Middlesbrough then? At the church. And two, three of my sisters who hadn't married, they were all buried down there. And one of my other sisters was buried down there, and her husband said he'd like to be buried down there too. And the baby brother, of course, my father. So you married in 1928? 28, yeah. And you were working then here in St. Paul or in Minneapolis? I'll tell you what I did. I was a business person. I worked in offices, you know. Then I got a job at the Food Administration. And when the war was over, I got $100 for a bonus. And my other younger sister, who was two years younger than I, she was a salesman for a Kodak company. And so they had changed places that time, and so she was kind of out of a job. So we went to California for a visit in 1920. And that's when poor people didn't travel. But however, we did. And you know, we went over, you may not know this place, but it's Catalina Islands. We spent a weekend over there. And for a weekend was $11. That was like your honeymoon then? For my sister and myself. Then we spent two months in. And then we got married. No, this was young. I was still working. I didn't get married until I was 37. So I worked a great deal. But you knew your husband all the time, though. Why didn't you get married earlier? Well, he had married another woman that, this was sort of a made-up marriage, because a very good friend of his, she kept on begging for this girl to get married. Well, they got married, and she died at childbirth. But I knew her. She was the one that belonged to the same church. But I had a fortune teller one time, and he says, this man has been in your wheel a long time. So you married at the $30 church? No, no. Up here in Minneapolis. He was up here before. What was he doing? We were in the antique furniture business. Oh, both of you? My father, of course, retired when he came to church. Came to Minneapolis. So he was in the antique furniture business all his life? 51 years. 51 years. So what did he do then? He bought furniture from families all over the place? Well, his brother, the oldest brother, was in that kind of business. And then as the other boys came from the farm, they went into it, too. And he died 21 years ago. So I've been a widow that long. So all the beautiful furniture you have here, it is your husband's? Yeah, they gave him the store. Well, that over there was a former piano, and in Paris it got the first prize, and they made a writing discount of it. Oh, I see. And he bought it? Well, they bought it for the store because we sold antique things, you know. And you had it in St. Paul or Minneapolis? You had that store? Yeah, it was on Franklin Avenue first, and then they moved downtown. And then one time they had a fire, and they moved another place, and then they found a water place on 11th and between Grand, across the auditorium there. Now that's a parking place. Was it good times then when you married in 1928? Was it easy to get a job? Well, I didn't work after I was married. You didn't work? No, but before that I sold... Cassette. I should have told you this. Yes. So how did you travel then between the different cities? Well, at that particular time we traveled by train. I made it to town from Minnesota with another girl, and then we'd take a freight train, you know, riding in the back, and they have one... Caboose? Yeah, caboose. You know, we were all through the town. And then in the winter we did do very well. They sent us to Louisiana, Shreveport, and New Orleans. So we worked the winter down there. So you were on the road all the time then? For eight years. And you stayed in hotels at that time? No, we stayed at family houses. We'd get a place at families. And retired teachers and various up people, they did that kind of work too, educational selling. But how did you get a room then for the night? Did you write ahead of time? You mean when we traveled? Yeah, because when you... Oh, when we traveled in these little towns, we would just ask people where they might stay. Always stayed at homes, very seldom hotels. I see. And houses were always open for you then when you came and knocked on the door? Yes. How long did you stay away then? A month at a time? A month at a time? No, until we finished the town. We'd always go to the school or some head person in town to get a recommendation. And so we got sort of introduced and people would just take you in. But I mean, when you left Minneapolis, how long did it take then before you returned? Oh, we stayed down there... In Minneapolis here? Yeah, in Minneapolis. Or in Minnesota. I think we went just from town to town and got back about... Once a month? Well, I suppose so. Let's see, got back about... When it started to get cold. And then, what kind of material were you selling then? Education? It was a shiitake desk, which had a blackboard and things. Oh, there was furniture you sold? Well, yeah. We first traveled with a shiitake desk. You could put it on the floor and children could use it on the floor or it could hang on the wall. Did you knock on doors then? I mean, or you went to the schools? No, we went to homes. But then they made a smaller sample, so it was only that big. So you took orders then? Yeah, and they'd usually... They'd order them lots of times for Christmas. We'd get the first payment and then we'd send the rest of the desk, it was delivered. And you had the commission then on those? Yeah, we worked in commission. We were promised $125 a month if we wanted to take the salary. But we worked in commission and I made $75 the first week. I didn't get it all, but I mean, by commission I earned it. But I didn't keep up all the time. You didn't knock on doors? Oh, we didn't mind at all. It was interesting. I love people. So you get acquainted, you learn a lot. In fact, President Roosevelt said it was as good as a university education. And you didn't handle any money though? Did you handle any money? Well, yes, our commission about it. Yes, but I mean, when you made a sale, did you collect any cash? Yes, $3 or $5, whichever they wanted to pay down. And then we'd send it to the company. Oh, you didn't keep it? Oh, we kept the commission. Whatever it happened to be, $3 I think. But the rest of it you sent on every week then? And then when the desk was delivered, they would send us the balance of what we had coming. I see. And then you went on to Louisiana in one winter. How were the people down there? Were they easy to work with? No Swedes down there? There were? No Swedes down there? Very, very few. In fact, have you ever been down there? Yes. Oh, have you? Well, the canal is like Hannover, you know? Well, the people on that side hadn't even crossed it in all the years. Is that right? They just stayed there. They told you that? Yes, what do you call that? I used to know the name, but when you don't use the name for a long time, you forget. Why didn't they want to cross that? Oh, well, they were kind of poor people, you know, and lived there all their lives. But you didn't sell any desks? Yes, we sold that part too. In the poor district? Uh-huh. Were they able to pay for it? Well, yes. The ones that did all buy, but we would listen to them. And the one I can remember still, I had one woman telling me, have you ever been to New York much? I said, never. But they hadn't been, you know, around. But it was interesting. But you didn't stay in homes down there, though? Yes, we did. You did? Uh-huh. So there was an experience? It was an experience. And they had colored help, you know. So the place that we stayed, we worked for the company that stayed there. And a maid came in one morning, she was black, and she wore a hat. And they said, why are you wearing a hat? Oh, my hair doesn't look very good. So when you married... Emanuel. Emanuel Gustafsson, then you quit working. Yes. Was there a custom of that time, not that the women shouldn't work after she got married? I didn't pay attention to that. Were you tired of traveling? No, no. They wanted me to keep on. But no, no, no, no. I didn't want to. I mean, you know, I was used to a home and not to work after getting married. So you got an apartment then in Minneapolis, or did you buy a house? No, this place. This place? We moved in there after we were married. I lived here about 60 years. And this is Colfax Avenue. Did he build the house or did he buy it? No, no. The Wallis-Burys cousin, you don't know that name, but they were movie people, their cousin built this house. And of course, another thing, when this was built, it was built, but it wasn't supposed to have any duplexes. This side of Colfax. And Patty Berg, do you ever hear that name? No, no. It's across the street from me. So this was a well-to-do neighborhood then? A well-to-do neighborhood? Well, I suppose it was. I don't think we thought very much about it. Were there other Swedes living here? No. Well, it was that time of... 60 years ago, things weren't built up. And we didn't have buses going by the house. So what happened then when the Depression hit? Were you able to keep the payments going? Oh, the Depression, yes. You had no trouble to meet the banks' demands? No, no. It was about the time my daughter was born. And you remember if they sold any gold coins here in Minneapolis back in the 20s? Gold coins? No, I can't remember. You don't remember that? No. So you didn't have any bank failures here, and did you lose any money? I mean, you had some deposits in the banks. Oh, yes. My husband took care of all that. He was a force, so I knew how to take care of things. I had a business head. So you took care of the bills then, or did he? No, no. After he died. I still make out income tax. Every year? I'll tell you what, I've been blessed with mind and memory so far. And I give it all the credit to the Lord. I memorize the chapter of the Bible every month. And that keeps you sharp. It means a lot. So you joined the Lutheran Church up here in Minneapolis? Mount Olives. Oh, the big one? Yeah. Were you active there then? Very active. Conference work and mission work and so forth and so on. In America, I think, 12,000 members. So you've seen all the young dolls then? I knew the father and mother. I had a date with Luther one time. You did? Yes, I knew them. I knew our minister now, our poor young doll when he was a baby. And his folks and so forth and so on. But it was a little church then. And tomorrow we're going to have an anniversary brunch of everybody who has joined at certain years. And then the ones who joined at the time I did, I'm going to that. My daughter and I. So you are one of the oldest members? Well, there are some that are older, I suppose, but very few. Can't be too many. But we joined St. Paul's Church when we came here. That's 28th and 15th. And then when my daughter was born, she was ready to go into Sunday school. And that was so far for us to go from there way over there. So we decided we'd go to Manoa. How come this church grew so fast with 12,000 members? What was the reason for that? The young dolls are very aggressive. And we have a youth center up the lakes. We have a retreat center in Lakeville. We have a residence and hospital or care view hospital over here. And a retarded one out of Dixieland. So how many pastors is helping you out then? I think we have about seven now or so. Well, I have it on the church program. And they are all full time? Yes. Full time. So you have many services there during Sunday then? We have 9 o'clock, 10, 11, and 12. And then broadcast at 12 o'clock. I see. And those are people of all kinds of nationalities? Yes. And it's so surprising. They had 400 who joined last Sunday. 400? I think it was 400. In one joining? Well, children and family members. And so many of them, they weren't Swedish names at all. You don't find a bunch of Swedes anymore. But they're community people. So they live around here and also in other areas? Well, they live farther than that too and they come. And they come in. Do they still have Jylluta? Yes, they do. Are they Swedish? Let's see. We used to go for that. I think, no, not Swedish. English. Because they're very few Swedish. They don't have anything Swedish. I see. So there's not many around to be one setting of people that appreciate Jylluta. Your parents, they never came back to Sweden? No, they never. Did they talk much about Sweden? Well, they could when they were, when the children were the others. But father and mother weren't the kind that every time they'd have somebody come, they'd sit down and talk Swedish. They adopted themselves to America very well. Did you ask any questions about Sweden? Oh, I suppose we did. But then I went to Sweden, you know, 100 years after mother left. 100 years? And I went to her church and found her record in the office still. So then you saw the landscape. We went to Sunday service there. Did you have any second cousins or third cousins, I mean, distant relation in there? Not there. No, we did have a relative over in Sweden. He must have been a nephew of my mother's. And he was with us on a weekend and a trip and showed us all these things. Took us to mother's home where she used to live. But there was nothing but scraps around, you know. I see. Because 100 years after. So what year did she leave then? Well, 100 years before. I have it here. I think, no, these are the marriages. Well, mother lived well, 100 years before that. When did you go to Sweden? I think it would be about in 1969. 1969? So she came 1869 then? Yeah. And your father, did he come earlier or after? Well, father came a little bit earlier. A little bit earlier? Uh-huh. It was, times were rather hard in Sweden at the time. And that's how they went. Did they talk about that hard time in Sweden when they had the bark and the bread and the... No, mother just said that times were rather hard there. We heard that part about it. But I asked them, well naturally... Yes? You have one daughter and one granddaughter. And two grandsons. And two grandsons. So what are you telling your grandchildren now about the heritage? Well, I have it all written down. Oh, you wrote it down for them so they can read it themselves? See, and that's what I've been doing. I've been going through it. And that's what I want to get it all pieced together. And next Saturday we're having her 97th birthday. So I want to give a piece of paper to all the relatives on the, you know, extended ones. And have them write what they know about their parents. I see. That, you know, are on that list. You haven't visited Sweden? You have no connection, I mean, correspondence or anything with anybody? No, I don't know a soul over there. I've always felt that they should have married me. In fact, there are very few people left over there in Sweden that are, you know, dead. All of your relatives. Well, I don't know. There are a few, but the ones that we met over there, I think they're gone. I don't write them anymore. I used to write them at Christmas time and keep in touch. But I do have relatives in Atlanta, Georgia and Muncie, Indiana. And of course they have, they keep in touch. So you remember then writing to the relation in Sweden? Oh, sure. And it was on your mother's side then? Yes, my mother's side. You had no connection with your father? No, because his father died when he was seven years old. And so in consequence, there was very little memory on father's side. So you didn't go to his birthplace then in Blekinge? You didn't go to his place of birth? No, we went through Blekinge, but not any places. Like your granddaughter now, have you taught her to prepare any Swedish dishes or customs like lutefisk? Truth of the matter is, I was one of the youngest kids. We do have lutefisk, used to have it, but none of the children care for it. So at Christmas time, our menu has been changed. To what? Christmas Eve. Well, meatballs and so forth. How about her mother, now, she married a Swede or a non-Swede? Yeah, my mother married a Swede. We had lutefisk every year up until two years ago. And we've changed it to beef tenderloin because nobody likes it. How about your two brothers? They don't like it. They love the meatballs and that stuff, so what we do is we have the hors d'oeuvres before Christmas Eve and have all the Swedish things and don't have lutefisk at all, though. How about herring? Oh, yeah, yeah, they've got that and the korv. And you eat that? I don't eat herring. I eat the Swedish sausage and the meatballs. But I'm not a fish eater. Well, you see, my daughter, I didn't carry it on. Besides, at Christmas Eve we did, and so she hasn't, you know, and I don't do it anymore. Well, she had it all up until two years ago. You know, we had red cabbage and all that. How about your father? He was born in this country, of course. And his parents, were they born also here? Both sides Swedish? Yeah, my grandfather, I think, is like an eighth or a fourth Norwegian on my father's side, so he's not real pure, but close enough to it. But he should be a fish eater, though. Oh, yeah, they all are. I'm the only one in the family that doesn't like fish. You don't care for fish? Uh-uh, not at all. What? Shrimp, lobster. You have an old-fashioned Christmas, like grandma, a Christmas tree and Yeah, we have a, we actually, we all decorate our trees with Swedish ornaments. One year I did it for a department store here that was totally Swedish with all the straw ornaments and little flags and all that kind of stuff, so. How long before Christmas? We really, I think I put mine up Oh, it was like around the first week in December. I mean, I usually put it up a long, long time. And then the Christmas gifts, are they given out on Christmas Eve? Christmas Eve, yeah. They always been like that? Uh-huh. And you have Santa Claus? Yeah, on Christmas morning, I think. Oh, he comes on Christmas morning, Santa Claus? Yeah, Santa Claus. Well, Santa thinks he comes. They have stockings hanging over the fireplace. Well, anyway. But, yeah, I mean, I think that our family has kept with a lot of the Swedish traditions because a lot of people, I mean, that I know that are Swedish, they've never even had lutefisk and I spent, you know, 30 years having that for Christmas and always hating it. But like I told mother, I said it was always kind of nice because she never really pigged out that night. You always felt comfortable going to church. We always went over to my mother's place for Christmas Eve, you know, the families, until my mother died in the 35. I see. How about your church? Do you go regularly to church? Fairly regular. I mean, we all belong to the same church. You were confirmed in Lutheran Church, then? Yeah. To the Mount Olivet? Not at Mount Olivet, at another church over in another suburb. Oh, your parents live that way? Yeah, yeah. But now everybody goes back to Mount Olivet, so I guess that's where our roots started. You didn't have to learn any Swedish or thought of any Swedish by heart? The only thing Swedish I remember, I was singing Happy Birthday in Swedish. Can you? Yeah, Elsa taught me that. Who did? Elsa. I didn't know that. Down in Chicago, yeah. What is it? Isn't it Yama Han Levin or something like that? Yeah. Don't ask me to do it now. And I knew a Swedish prayer. Which one? Gudsom haver. Oh, barn and chairs. She knew me some. And Mother taught that to me when I was just a baby. How about your grandmother? Did she live close to you when you were growing up? Four, five, six, seven? Yeah, I mean, she's always lived here, and we've always lived, I mean, it's only five or six miles from here. I lived out of state for about eight years, but I've been back now for two years. I lived in a land where they didn't know what Swedes were. The South. You kept a low profile in the South. Oh, they have nothing to do with anyone's roots in all of the South. They could care less. You couldn't find Ludifice to save your soul down there. It was funny. Is this a real Swedish area? Do you feel like that? Oh, Minneapolis? Yes. More Swedish than Norwegian? Oh, definitely. I mean, that's my, maybe I'm prejudiced, because I don't even admit that I'm part Norwegian. Why? I just never have. I've always been raised a Swede. I didn't know there was another breed. So, yeah. Oh, didn't you? No, I don't tell many people that I'm part Norwegian. That you're what? That I'm part Norwegian. Oh, no. No, I don't think it's necessary. It isn't that we're prejudiced, you know. It isn't that, but you just aren't. But, I mean, we've always gone down to the Swedish Institute, and my parents have always been active in that. I'm sure you've been there. And, yeah, I mean, everything has always been Swedish. Even down to Skål and Varsagud. Mother's always called people to the table with that. So, even though she's not... So, your name now is... Swanson. You married a Swede? No, I'm not married. Oh, you're not married. No. I thought. I'm not dating a Swede. That's the first one I've ever gone out with. Why don't you date a Norwegian? To get the Norwegian back in your life? No, I don't think I would. This is the first Swede I've ever dated. That's close enough. I usually get stuck with these Irish Catholics or something crazy. What would you say then, your grandma, if you came up with an Irish Catholic? If I came up with an Irish Catholic? I don't know. I suppose they'd go along with it as long as I didn't convert. I don't think I could convert and be Catholic. Is there still a discussion about that? I mean, 50 years ago, you just couldn't do it. I mean, there was no property. Well... Do they think about it, the young people? I think a lot of them do. I do. I think it would be harder if you were dating someone that was Jewish to, you know, all of a sudden convert into that. So, in other words, you would think about the future? Yeah. Not just for a moment, but you would think about the future. After all, if the Catholics have the same faith as you do, I don't know there's a reason you can't accept them. No, no, no. He's talking about converting. I don't think I would convert and become a Catholic. I would hope you didn't think I would do that. That would mean marriage. Well, yeah, I mean, people will get married, but I don't think you have to, you know... Like your mother, now, when you started dating this guy. I'm sure she asked, you know, who he is. Well, we knew him. I mean, we knew his family, and he even goes to Mount Olivet. So, there's a safe bet, then. It will pass. It's the first one. It will pass the exam. I've been through Catholic and Jewish, and this is the first one that's even been Lutheran and Swedish. So, um... But I don't know. I don't think I would convert. But a lot of young people don't think that far, in other words. No, they don't. How old are you now, then? 32. 32. Yeah. So, 17, 18, 20, they probably don't think in those terms. I don't know. I just have always, you know, felt... Well, when you started dating, I mean, when you were 17, 18, I'm sure you had a lot of dates. Yeah. Always Catholics. Anyway, I can't sit here too long. In the bank robbery in Northfield, my grandfather's great-uncle or uncle had just come home from Sweden. My husband's uncle. There was a Gustafson. That's right. This was Niklas Gustafson, and they spelled it with a V, and it's in a lot of history books, and it's always in the movies that they show. He was killed in the robbery, and they always have him acting like as the town drunk or the town loony, but the fact was that he didn't speak any English, and when the guns started going off and the sheriff said, everyone get off the street, and he was, you know, sitting there like a dummy holding the horses, and he got shot. Sitting in the wagon, then? Just, you know, standing out in the street, holding onto the horses, and he got shot in the robbery. And he was killed immediately, yeah. Uh-huh. Is he buried then at Middlesburg? No, Northfield. He's in Northfield. It happened in Northfield. Yeah, but why didn't they bury him at... A lot of the Gustafsons were buried in the Northfield Cemetery. There's only Grandpa's twin brother. He's buried in Kristalla, isn't he? Yes, and his... another sister, too. Okay, and all the rest of them are all in the Northfield Cemetery, so I don't know what the reason on that is. So, how will he be related to you, then, your brother-in-law, or... Well, he would be, well, not even a brother-in-law, because it was... It was not that close, because how far back... It was her husband's uncle. Uncle. Yeah. So, I don't know, so it would be my great-uncle or great-great-uncle. And what year was this? This was in, when was it, like 79 or 70? Ten years before you were born, then. Yeah, I mean, it was way, way back then. But they always have a big to-do every year down at Northfield, and they reenact the robbery, and... Has that gone on for many years, or... Oh, yeah, yeah. As long as you remember. Oh, yeah, because I ran into a woman, and her brother was the one that played my great-uncle, or whatever, in the robbery stage. Really, who was that? Oh, this woman that I met down at Faribault. Oh, I see. So that was kind of funny. But, and a friend of mine lives in the minister from Cristala, the old parish house. A friend of mine lives in that house now, down there. I see. So... Do you go back, then, once in a while to see the old area there, or... Well, I go back, I mean, I'll go down with mother and grandma for, like, Memorial Day. Decoration Day, too. To do the graves. And puts the flowers. I went down for the anniversary, 109th anniversary. Oh, that was in August? Mm-hmm. So, my brother goes down there every morning to hunt now, at Circle Lake. Deer hunting? Duck hunting. Oh, duck hunting. Yeah. But the deer season starts today, doesn't it? That starts, I think, Saturday. Oh, Saturday. Yeah. So we're... You have a great history until... Well, I mean, we've really kept up now, see, like, her brother, you know, I remembered him very well, and I'd see him every time I'd come home, and he lived till he was 104. 103. The church bell... And he was clear and healthy? Oh, he was great. He used to tell me how he'd sneak out of the house and tie sheets together because his mother didn't approve of dancing, and he would sneak off and go to the dances and kind of chase women, I guess. He always had a lot of Catholic girls. Yeah. Always named Mary. But he was a grand... He was a grand person. He was such a good brother. So good to all of us. So much fun. So, Mother didn't approve of that? Oh, no. Oh, well, I think she knew. Not... Yeah, not sneaking out then. So, they were sneaky years ago, too, then. There's not only today's youngsters. That's cold, Susan. That's my phone ringing. Looking at all those old pictures, you know, of your parents, did they work much, much harder, do you think, than people in later years? They what? Did they work much harder, you think? Oh, of course they did. And they took everything. They didn't, you know, accept... Well, I mean to say, they just didn't. You never heard any complaint about them. But they never complained? No. Not that I can remember. They didn't, you know... And they didn't get depressed and that sort of thing. Well, we had a lovely family. That was Father's brother. Oh. And they didn't ask for a doctor too often, either? No. What happened then, if any of your girls got sick? That's Mother's picture. When we happened with... Oh, I'll tell you what. I told you, I'll tell you that Father was a postman. He carried the mail from Dundas to Leicester. And one time, he couldn't go. And at the time, the mother was pregnant with me, and the horse ran away. The horse ran away, so she fell out of the buggy. Well, anyway, when I was about to be born...