 Det är en ny intervju med Annie Erickson, Jameson, New York. Det är den 4. november 1985. Vi tog av på två olika intervjuer i Kalifornien. Du sa att du hade en intervju med Jack Pennies, hans vän. Ja, Mary Livingston. Du var på hans hem, och intervjuade henne. De ville se min referens, vilket jag hade en bra referens. De var väldigt satisifierade. Det enda som var avgörande i det här stället var att jag skulle behöva sova och kika natt. De hade deras partier natt. När man är ute och gör en bild, så har de två, tre månader. De lägger deras stora partier. Jag kunde inte se förändringar i mitt livsstil och sova. Jag kunde inte göra det. Var det så att de sov också i dag? De var pågående. När du kom till en sån här plats, hade du en sån här intervju med Jack Pennies? Ja. När du kom till en sån här plats, hade du en referens från varje plats? Ja. De hade tagit på vad du gjorde och hur du har behandlats på olika platser. Du hade en bra rekord. Det var lätt för dig att gå in i... Lätt. Alla jag intervjuade ville ha mig. Jag intervjuade många människor jag hände ner. De hittade dig på plats om du ville... ...kompensera med de här övriga. Jag tror att många andra människor du har hittat har en bra rekord. De var gäster och så såg vad du kunde göra. Var de här som kom och frågade dig om du ville börja jobba för dem? Var det så? Nej. De skulle inte göra det. De var färdiga till sina vänner. Men du hade en reputation. Du gjorde det bästa. Du blev Jack Penny-offret. Jag ville inte sova och kika natt. Jag skulle lägga på de stora partierna på natt. Jag kunde inte ändra mitt liv. Vad gjorde du efter det? Det var efter det jag jobbade för de jubila. Leo Bing. Han kallades en av de tio rikaste jubileåren i världen. Han och hans bror hade operkompenseringar i New York City. Men han hade förvaltade letter. Varför skulle jag inte lägga det in? Det är inte så mycket jag vet. Jag tror han är borta. Han är död. De flyttade till Kalifornien, vilket inte var bättre. De hade en liten liten barn. Han var ungefär 70 år och hon var ungefär 35. Han hade lagt honom till operkompenseringar. En fin person. Så det var en förvaltning mellan hans vän och hans hund? Ja, det var allt. Han kändes som en grannfald för barnet. När barnet skulle lägga in en vän, så sa han att han ville träffa hans mor. Och det här var min far. Den lilla femåriga. En dag kunde han få sitta i dineringen med hans barn och ha dörr. Annars hade han sin egen dinering och sin egen tutor. De byggde en egen skola när jag var där. Så den här nattet på tavlet sa han att han skulle tränas när han var en. Oh no Peter, she says. You won't marry me, you'll marry someone your own age. Yes, but mother, you married father. How could he understand things like that? He was so smart. That child was beyond his years. He'd correct your English. I was the fiftieth person that she interviewed. For that job, as a waitress. And I didn't want to take the cooking job there in a Jewish home. And I thought well, I'd make a little change. So you apparently made a good impression on her then? Well, I think it was because I came from a small town. And she looked over my reference and she said, well there's one thing, she says, I don't want you to talk too much to my son. But don't talk too little. I thought well, how are we going to do this? She says, we're bringing him up to train him to be a famous brain surgeon. And he was, for his age, he was the most intelligent child. So I got the job. The cook came in and she says, gave me a dollar. She said, this is for your bus fare. She says, this is the last of the fifties. She said, this is the last of the fifty ones. And so the cook told me, she said, you're the fiftieth. Well, I started there. And it was different. Every home I came into, it was a little different. And you had to learn their ways. But they were very, very nice to work for. And that's finally where they went out in the desert and got a snake for a playmate for the boy because he didn't play with other children. He was too intelligent to play with other children. He'd sit in the car, the chauffer would take him to these parties, and he'd sit in the car and watch the others play. But he had no desire to get out and play. But he'd watch them. Well, he never asked to join them. No. No, he had a snake for a playmate. And that snake was allowed to be wherever he was. And of course, for breakfast it was crawling on the dining room, his dining room table. And I'd come in to serve and I'd see that snake, and Mr. Bing says, don't show fear in front of that child. He says, I was brought up in fear, locked in closets. My son is not going to fear anything. Well, I thought I could have told him something, but who was I to tell him? He was so highly educated, he was fanatical. Really. There was the father. And he could go out in the woods that little boy sometime and a snake might be poisonous. Is that right? Is good psychology? So, well, that went on with that little snake. But it finally died. He'd even take it to the private school with him. What kind of school was that? Was that a Jewish school then? I assume so. So one day, you had to be positive working there in that household. You couldn't say perhaps, or I think, or maybe. You couldn't use those words. You had to be positive about everything. Well, one day they invited his private teacher to come for lunch. So I went in and announced lunch and the teacher, she says, I wonder. Oh, I thought you said the wrong thing, lady. I wonder if I should wash my hands. And Mrs. Bing looked at her. Well, do you or don't you? I knew she said the wrong. But she was good to work for and so was Mr. Bing. They were very, very good to work for. And at that time, the wages were better there than anyplace else I'd ever worked. At ninety dollars a month. My room and board. I never received that much anywheres. I worked for peanuts most of my life. Twelve and a half a week here for Rich Snell Hall. In Jamestown? In Jamestown. You mentioned that this snake, no, he died the first snake. The first one died. What happened then? And when they first brought that little snake home from the desert, they had it in a little shoebox. The lid was punched full of holes. And I was in the kitchen when they came in and Mr. Bing said, now don't show any fear. And I thought, what is there to fear? I thought there was butterflies in that box like we used to catch years ago when we were young. And they took off the lid and there was this pink and gray snake crawling. And the little boy says, pet it! Mr. Bing says, you better? I pet it, but I thought, I'm going to be on the train for home tomorrow. You know, I'm not going to stick around any longer. Well, that went on and that snake died. And they went out and got another snake, a huge one. They got a white king, stretched out as long as this, the width of this, not the length, but the width of this floor. 12-15 feet. Oh, yeah. This big around. Black and white. And when the cook saw it, that snake, she ran to her room and locked the door. And she didn't come out for a couple of hours. But of course the snake never came into the kitchen, you know. She only saw it that one time. But I would run into it because I was in the other rooms. She had a, I didn't have to clean. She had a cleaning lady. I waited on table and what else did I do? Well, I took care of the linen closet with all the linens. No laundry. They had a colored girl to do the laundry and do cleaning and so forth. But I had to serve at their lunches and their big parties. And this big king then was? Had the full use of the house. The whole house? Yes, the whole downstairs. Not upstairs, but the downstairs. I never knew in the morning where I would see it. Although I knew they kept it in a great big box out on a brick solarium. And at night the boy would take the head and I'd take the body. All I could do to carry the body and the tail. Which if it wasn't depression times, I wouldn't have been there. So you were a snake handler then? And we'd carry it and put it in that box. Well every morning when I'd come out there, see its head coming, crawling out, you know, coming out. It could go anywhere in that place. But I got used to it. You get used to anything. The cook never got used to it. Who fed it? I did. You did? It had chicken livers once a day. And milk. That's what it lived on. Chicken livers and milk. And I didn't actually feed it. I put it on the floor for it, you know. The milk and liver. So it would eat it all. Once a day. And the appetite was good? Yeah. Where did it go to the bathroom? You wonder. I can't remember now. You never cleaned up? No, I never did. Never did? Never did. I can't understand that. Now I didn't think about that. Was there a smell in the house you would think there was? No. There was no smell. And you got used to it after a while? Oh, I got used to it. It didn't bother me. I didn't mind carrying that snake. It was all I could do to lift it. And I was strong. But the boy always carried the head and he'd say, Oh Annie, isn't that beautiful? Isn't he beautiful? I had to go along with him. I thought, well, you get to... Yeah, I guess it was beautiful in a way, you know. You couldn't say maybe. I could never use that word. So I had to learn to speak different. And of course that's the right way. One should be positive. So he corrected you then if you said something wrong? Oh yeah. Immediately? I happened to mention at Christmas time about a poinsettia. He said poinsettia. And one day we were in his mother's bedroom. And I saw Peter's shoe on the floor and I picked it up and just nonchalantly I said, Whose shoe is this, Peter? He looked at me and he says, Whose shoe? Would you think it would be? Oh. He was too bright. He didn't have a childhood, that boy. I felt sorry for him. One day he said, Oh Annie, would you come and play with me? And I felt so bad. I thought, Oh, I wish I could, but I was not allowed to. Oh, you couldn't do that? Oh my, no. No games? No. You couldn't read for him? No. Stories? No. He had a private tutor. So it was all business? Everything business. How about the mother now? I don't know her background or anything about it, but she was a very beautiful person and very honest and conscientious about everything. Just once a week. He was allowed in with his parents once a week. At the dinner table? At the dinner table. Otherwise he was not allowed in. So there was a schooling day and night time for him. He had to learn. So what really happened to him after he went to school and all that life? Well, I only stayed there two years. Two or three years. I never heard. No. He was not allowed to go to school. He was not allowed to go to school. He was not allowed to go to school. So you had to stay there two years? I never heard. No. I often wonder if he is a brain surgeon. Just think, when he was going to pick his bride. I wonder if he ever lived to become a brain surgeon under the conditions that he lived under. So you stayed there two years? Two years. You got used to it? I left one year. My mother took sick and they sent for me. I told her I would be leaving. I said my mother is taking sick. She said, we don't owe our parents our lives. I said, I feel like this. I said, you can't do enough for your mother or father. That's the way I feel. So I went, but she wanted me to come back. So I went back there after I had been home a while. I went back out there. You came back to Jameson then? Yes. And then I went back to the Bings again. So they didn't care about the parents? Only the... What's coming up? Was there only child they had? Only child. You certainly had a lot of meeting with different people. I did. I really did. When you think back, do you think it's possible to change to almost any kind of environment if you have to? Yes, I think you could. In other words, you can train yourself to... You can train yourself, yes. To do anything. That's right. And you get used to it? You do. So after you left this snake or whatever it's called, was there something missing then in your next employment? No. Did you feel at rest? I adjusted quickly. How old were you then at that time? I can't even remember. It's a long ago. Late 20s? Yeah, it must have been. Then I worked for Joan Crawford. Yes. I went to the Swedish Agency to ask for employment and they sent me out. They called her Miss Crawford. Well, I had no idea that was Joan Crawford, the movie star, when I went out there. She came out and interviewed me. She looked at my reference and she says, yes, she says, when do you want to start? I said, just as soon as possible, which I did. But I only worked there about a year. Movie stars are hard to work for. They're wonderful. She was wonderful to me. But I can't explain it exactly. You're under a tension because when a bell rings, you have to be there. Wherever it rings, you have to be there. When the cook and the butler had off, I did the cooking and the waiting on the table. And then I had to arrange flowers and I had never arranged flowers in my life. Twenty-five bouquets a week, various flowers, they'd bring into the butler's pantry, which is bigger than this here. How long did they remain in the waste system? Well, almost a week. Once a week you do? And then I had to take care of the... They had a white rug. She loved white. They had a thick white rug on one of her living rooms. And if anybody stepped on it, I had to have a certain brush that would take off the foot marks. You couldn't have foot marks. It was all blue velvet and white. It looked like a mortuary to me. I wouldn't have any desire to go sit down there. I wouldn't be comfortable. It was so out of this world. And the hall was all mirrored. Huge hall, just mirrored. The whole hall. I nearly run into myself more than once going to answer the door. Who came up with all those design? I mean, the movie stars sometimes are common people, they pick up because of their looks and so. And their ability to act. Who gave them all those crazy ideas? Well, they had their designers that come in and design all this. And they are wild ideas. And they go along with them. But that hall was something else, I tell you. You could see yourself dizzy-headed. You see yourself everywhere. More than once I almost smashed my face, hurrying to get to the door and run in the mirror. Well, but she was very wonderful to work for. She really was. And this book that comes out about that her adopted daughter wrote. I don't go along with that at all. Unless she changed so drastically in the last few years. Because she was so conscientious. She was so kind. And if anyone got hurt, send them to my doctor. I'll take care of it. Anybody. She was very, very, very nice. So I never could do. I started to read the book and I threw it. Because it wasn't anything like her. But the daughter wanted to get even with her mother. It was not her real daughter? No, adopted daughter. I didn't see her ever. I never saw her. I quit before she adopted those children. But she had a little niece. Her brother's child. Who would come every weekend with her nurse. She was around five years old. Another child I felt sorry for. Because all I heard the nurse say, don't touch that, don't touch this. She couldn't touch anything in the home. And the poor little thing. Really, I felt sorry for her. And I took care of lovebirds in a big beautiful cage. I'd feed them. And they were the most beautiful birds I've ever seen. They had long tail feathers. And they had strings, just like a string of pearls around their neck. It was in two shades of blue. Perfect shaped. One day I left the cage down on a small table. Instead of hanging it up. I left it down. And she put her hand in to grab the bird. And hung onto the bird's tail so hard that she pulled them out. And the nurse finally found her and took her up to Joan Crawford. And she says, put her in a straight jacket and leave her in bed all day Sunday. Well, it wasn't a regular straight jacket. They just tied her into bed. And Joan Crawford did pull her hair. And she says, how does that feel? It doesn't hurt. So she put the child to bed. The next day on Monday when I come to take care of the bird, if that wasn't an odd looking bird with no tails, you know. And she came over and I says, why did you pull the tail feathers out of the poor little bird? I didn't mean to. I just wanted to hold it. I just wanted to love it. But I said, you wouldn't do that again, would you? No, she says, I wouldn't. I just wanted to love it. Poor thing. Well, that was just one of a hundred episodes. That I can't recall. But some of them just are in my memory. So like Joan Crawford, she went to the Swedish employment agency. Did they look for Swedish? They liked the Swedish help. They said they were more conscientious. So it was easy to get a job for a Swedish girl. And your name at that time was Annie? Erickson. No, Annie Swanson. Swanson. I'm jumping ahead of my time. From Fortin, Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania, out in the lumber region. Where we had a hard bringing up. So then you mentioned that you had to go back to Jamestown several times. Several times. Yes. Finally the last time I stayed home. And then you've been out there about seven, eight years? Seven years, I think it was. So you never met a boyfriend after that you went to do it? I went with an aviator. He had been an aviator and he was a car salesman out there. And he always wanted to take me up in the airplane. I wouldn't go. I was afraid of planes. I never would go. And his name was Ed. He was not Swedish though? No, he was Irish. Ed Garner. And you went steady with him for a while? For a while. He was a very strong man. He had a terrible temper. He used to tell things he did. He was in the sales room and he ordered the colored man to wash the windows. And just because he didn't do it, he knocked him down. And kicked him. And he was telling me this. And the negro pulled a knife and the head boss saw it. He just caught him in time. And he had a leg. So it fired him. But then later, you know, the Irish they fly up but then they get over it quick too. He went back to the place and told him he could have his job back again. And when he came back he went and got the water and pail. So he started to wash the windows and Ed says I started to help him. And he says, Mr. Garner, you are an odd man. You knocked me down and kicked me in. Now you are helping me work. Well, Ed says, if you do the right thing, you will be treated right. But he did have a terrible temper so I didn't want to go steady. So you didn't bring him with you to Jamestown then? Oh, mercy, no. No. So then you came here in... Came to Jamestown and then I married, met Ed. But you had to tell me how that happened. You just didn't meet him. Oh, I met him down at my sister's. Before that time you had some experience out in California. A palm reader or was it? Oh, yes, yes. Tell me what happened there. I went with a girlfriend, wanted me to go with her down to Long Beach. Because there was a lady there that read your horoscope. And so I went down there and she read her horoscope and told her things. And she asked me if I didn't have a question. And I said, am I going to marry this fellow I'm going with now? It was Ed Garner. And she said, is he dark? Does he have dark hair? And I said, no, he's blond and blue-eyed. She said, no, you aren't. Just like that. She said, you're going far away from here. She said, so far I can hardly see. You're going to meet a dark-haired, brown-eyed man and you're going to marry him. Well, it went in one ear and out the other. I didn't pay much attention. But when I did come home, my sister had met Ed previously. He worked with her husband down at Proto Tool. And he told him that I was coming home. My wife's sister is coming home and we're going to have a little card party. Would you come? He said yes. In fact, Ellen had danced with him at one of the... And she told him then at that time, she said, I'd like to have you meet my sister when she comes home. She'll be coming home from California pretty soon. So when Axel asked him, he said yes, he'd come. So when I came in, I was the last one to come in that night in the room. They introduced me to Ed. He stood up and acknowledged the introduction. And do I have to put this in there? So you saw him right there? I looked at him and I thought, that's the one I'm going to marry. Isn't that strange? But then I forgot about it. We got to play in cribbage. I'd never played cards in my life. And they taught me how to play cribbage and I won the game. They said, beginner's luck. And from then on we went steady. And you married? We married, went together a few years and married. And then I didn't work until Joni was in kindergarten, five, six years, our daughter. And that was in the thirties? That was about the forty. It must have been the forty, yeah, 1940. But then I started to work. I got a job down at the Viking food shop in the kitchen. Bill Warner had it at that time. And I used to fix food there for hundreds. Well, I wasn't the only one. There was a few cooks there. The head cook and then the... But I used to bake a hundred to two hundred pies every morning. Individual pies, chicken pies. And every time Bill Warner would go by, he'd say, go easy on the chicken there. Chicken was cheap. As soon as he went by I piled the chicken on thick. I wasn't going to cheat the people. And there they got a big chicken pie, one of these, you know, about this size. And a carton of gravy for thirty five cents. And the people stood lined up from the door, clear down to the kitchen door, front door of the kitchen, waiting for those pies at noon. That was their lunch. And what a good lunch for that money. And I used to love to make those pies. We had big cast iron ovens, you know, just like layers, like drawers. On my trips out I'd stop over and sightsee. And that was in Salt Lake City. And I'd been sightseeing. I'd been in the tabernacle and heard that lovely organ and all over. And I was downtown and there was a big sign on the store, I think it was a ten cents store, that said turkey dinner, come in. It says turkey dinner, thirty five cents. I thought, well I'll try it. And I got a full course, wonderful turkey dinner for thirty five cents. And then you took a walk. And then I took a walk. Then I shopped around, shopped around. I don't know where all I went sightseeing and everything. And later on in the day I was walking past the store, it says turkey dinner, thirty five cents. Another one. I went in and had another turkey dinner. So I had plenty of turkey that day. So there was an affordable time anyway, thirty five cents. Thirty five cents. Even dessert with it. So there were the good old times. But if you look back, they were pretty rough times for a lot of people. They were pretty rough times for a lot of people. Oh, very rough times. Very. It was impossible to scratch up thirty five cents, I suppose, for many. Like Ed here, my husband, he said he walked the streets for two years without work. So anything he'd saved up, why it went. That was a hard time, but you could always get a job as a cook. It was always open? Always. So you mentioned here about you were a waitress at one family in California or in Beverly Hills. And then you had to pitch in cooking when the cook was off. That was at Joan Crawford's. Wasn't that the way it was? Oh, I was in there every day. I know, but I mean to do your own cooking for that particular day. Wasn't that harder than you continue every day of the week? No, it wasn't hard. You had the hang of it. I was considered second cook there. Oh, I see. So you were always... But I was ready whenever the bell rang, whatever. I had to know everything. And do a little bit of everything like arranging flowers, which I did. And put them in the various rooms. So you could even have started your own funeral home if you wanted to write then. That would be the last job I'd want though. But those homes now you went through, so you had to do it. You worked there for seven years in California in Beverly Hills. Weren't they kind of artificial? Did you have the homely feeling in them? Or how was it to you? You got used to it of course after a while. I didn't think about it. I was so busy working I didn't think about things. And I worked for Evelyn Venable. I worked for the New York Times. I worked for the New York Times. I worked for the New York Times. And I worked for Evelyn Venable. I also worked for her during those seven years. She was married to Hal Moore. He was an ace cameraman. And he was rated good. And all up his stairway there was huge pictures of movie stars. And underneath it was autographed to Hal Moore, who made my career. A photographer can do a lot for you. And I worked there for a couple of years I guess. And she was another beautiful woman, Evelyn Venable. She used to star with Will Rogers. And she was a movie star that was never kissed. That was in her contract. Her husband had raised her as a vegetarian. And it was signed in the contract that she was not to be kissed. So she was an unkissable movie star. And she'd come out and have breakfast with us in the kitchen. She was a beautiful person, wonderful to work for. Her hair was so long she could sit on her. Her husband wouldn't let her cut her hair. And she'd put it in braids and put it up. I have an autographed picture. I had so many pictures of stars autographed to me. And I had it in a huge black book. And that book disappeared when we moved away from our home, sold our home and moved. That book disappeared. I had many, many pictures which I valued. But... What was I going to say now? This lady, you know, that was the film star. Evelyn Venable. She only ate vegetables and vegetarian. Did you have to eat the same thing then? We could have all the meat. She said all the meat you want. The nurse, the waitress, she said you have all the meat you want. And the nurse was a good friend of mine. In fact she's the one that got me the job there at Evelyn Venables. She wanted to eat meat. She was a Jewish girl. And she was the baby nurse. They had a beautiful child. And I've got an autographed picture with Evelyn holding that baby. But like I say it's in that black book that disappeared. So I'd fix meat for the girls. But you know I got so... I didn't care if I had meat. Because I had protein in other dishes like nut dishes. I used to make a nut loaf, big nut loaf, and grind the nuts. And then there was celery and mushrooms. And I don't recall now whether I put eggs in it or not. But it must be held together. It was very good. Oh I like that nut loaf. I've made it since I came back to Jamestown. I think I have the recipe some place. And one day she invited some movie stars for dinner. And I thought oh she'll have steak or some sort of meat. No, she said they're going to eat just the way I eat. So I made that nut loaf. And I had all kinds of vegetables. And I had croquettes out of vegetables. So this was the main dish then? The main dish was that nut loaf. Of course you got all your protein you need. We don't need meat. If we get enough protein in cheese dishes. Cheese soufflades and cheese fondues. If you get enough protein you don't need that meat. And meat stays in the system too long in your intestines. So that it throws off uric acid into your joints. We can get along without meat. The meat department wouldn't agree with me on that. But that's an established fact. One of the head doctors from Mayo Clinic wrote a book. And I wish I had that book. It was loan to me. And I read all about that. About meat. The desire for meat. It does pick you up and steak is good. But it isn't good for you. So she was a healthy, very healthy person. And she had a complexion of a baby. She was beautiful. So vegetables and fruit and nuts. Fruit and nuts. Good for your complexion. Oh yes. Lots of water. She drank at least 20 glasses a day. 20 glasses? Yeah. She drank a lot of coffee. But she also drank lots of water. With it? Mm. How about spiritus? Whiskey and cognac. I don't think she drank anything like that. They had a bar in the basement. And it was a, I don't just recall now. But I was down there a couple of times. It was kind of spooky like down there. They had a big bar, you know. And I think that he liked to take a little. I never saw them drinking. Was there common in most of the home? They had their own bar? At Joan Crawford's they had a bar. Because Mr. Tone, she was married to Franchot Tone at the time I worked there. He drank steady. But he walked a straight line. I never saw him stagger. And they had a bar there. And most places they had a bar. I worked for, then I worked. I worked there two years for, I think it was for Evelyn Venable and Hal Moore. Mr. and Mrs. Hal Moore. On Quigley Drive, two miles from Hollywood and Vine just up the curvy mountains. She gave us money for taxi fare home. But we'd walk down to save on that. We'd walk down because it was so beautiful. Something I was going to tell you and I can't think now. In this Snell Hall that I worked for, a rich banker here in town. They drove out. They were driving out with a woman doctor from Jamestown for a trip. And they looked me up. He said it took them two hours, but he was determined. He wasn't going back home until he found me. So they drove up there. And I took them around the home and introduced them to Mrs. Moore. You could look down and see the lights down. It was just picturesque from their big picture windows. It was beautiful. And afterwards he said, Mr. Morris, er, Mr. There was the guy from Jamestown. Were they looking you up for an employee? No, just to visit. Snell Hall. Although he did write to me several times and want me to come back. And he was the one suggested I go there because I had this sinus, it's bad. And I had an operation, you know, had a radical operation on the maxillary. And so he suggested that after he heard the doctor suggested. But then he wrote to me several times and wanted me to come back. So he took a trip out there and you... He took a trip out there and looked me up. You were the guy. How about the living quarters now working for those people? Very nice. You had good room. Yeah, very nice and bad. Oh yes, very nice. And they respected your day often. Oh yes, mm-hmm. You didn't... How about your friends now? Who did you congregate with? Well, I had friends from Jamestown that had moved out there years before. And I used to go to their home and visit them. And I got acquainted with different ones. Her personal maid was a good friend of Joan Crawford's personal maid. And oh, I met quite a few nice people. Some former Jamestowners. And we... They formed a little sewing club and I belonged to that. There was quite a few women belonging to that. Some from Jamestown. And we'd meet and have luncheon and sew and have dinner. So... You got some... Oh yes. It was from Jamestown then? Oh yes, mm-hmm. Of course, I rode home every week. Right home. So when you moved back down from California, your mother was still living then? Yes, she was still living, mm-hmm. So you came here to live with her then? Yeah, I lived at home. And what kind of work? You started with Viking food, you said? Viking food job. And I did millinery for a while before, previous to that. I did millinery. I enjoyed that work. I worked there a few years because... They still had mills in Jamestown then? Woollen mills in Jamestown? Oh yeah, but I worked at millinery. Oh, millinery, I see. I used to sew hats. I'd pick out my own... Pick out a frame and pick out the materials and make hats. I loved that work. But then factory-made felts came in, you know. And there wasn't anything doing in the homemade hats. The hats sort of went out there. But I used to make my own hats. People would stop me on the street and say, I asked you where you bought your hat. I says, oh, I didn't buy it. I says, I make my own hats. I loved that. Couldn't you have started your own business then, you think? If I had the money. But the same with when I worked for Snell Hall. He said, of all the pancakes I've ever had in waffles, he says, I've never tasted one like yours. He said, you should start up your own pancake shop. I should have had the nerve to say, well, will you loan me the money? I couldn't save money on $15 a week. And then after that he lowered it to $12 a week. He could have loaned me the money and I could have had a little pancake shop. He says, I've traveled all over Europe and I've never found pancakes like yours. So it was impossible for a person like you to go into a bank and say you want to... Oh, I never thought of it. I never thought of it. And my money went to Dr. Hickman and Dr. Rieger for my sinus, all the money I earned. I paid my board first and then the rest of it went for that. I couldn't save money when I was working. It was hard to scrape money together then. It's just saving enough to travel back and forth. The highest wages I made out in California was $90 a month working for the Jewish people. And that was considered good wages in those days in your room and board. But then if sickness strikes, the money flows out fast. It's the same as if you get sick or you had to go to the doctor. That's what I was going to do. Were they expensive at that time, the doctors? Well, not like they are today. No, but I mean if you compare with the time what you made in the earnings and so on. Well, it was enough. I don't recall. I never saved any bills or receipts, but it was plenty. But Evelyn Venable, she was so nice. Here I'm jumping from one thing to another. But you can put it together in a different way. The nurse, she was a good friend of mine. When I first took the job, she took me to the kitchen window and she said, you see that Hollywood sign? You've seen it. You've seen it. I think it's out there. You can see it so plain from my kitchen window, that big Hollywood sign. You see it on TV a lot. She says, one of his wives climbed up on that and jumped over into the gully and committed suicide. I wish she hadn't told me that. Every time I went to that window, I could see that woman up on that Hollywood sign. He was a German Jew. He was a great big fellow. Kind though, very kind. On holidays, like Easter, I decorate their dining room. Not the dining room, their breakfast room. They ate their breakfast there and lunches. I decorate the table with Easter eggs. I love to decorate. He was shocked. He says, never in my life have I had any decorations on my table before. Holidays, I like to do that. They gave you free hand to do a few things? Oh yes. They didn't object to that? Oh no. No. I think they like that. Did they thank you then, especially for things like that? Yes. He was very appreciative. I know one time Evelyn Venable called me and she said, girls, I've lost a valuable bracelet. Very valuable. She said, I don't know where it is. I wish you'd help me find it. Well, we hunted and hunted and we couldn't find it. She thought maybe it got into the laundry and went to the laundry. But they said no. One day I went down something, a premonition, call it. I went down into the basement to that bar room that they had and I started looking. I looked underneath that bar table. I saw something shining and there was her bracelet. I took it up and I put it back on my back. I said, choose an arm. She said that. I took it out and showed it. I never saw anybody so happy. So they did appreciate it. One night Hal Moore came home and I had my shoes off because my feet were bothering me so I have bad feet. He says, are your feet hurting you? He came home late. He came home sometimes at night when he was working my over. I said, oh yes they do. So he told his wife to take me down to a shoe store and have special shoes made for my feet. It cost them a fortune. But I could not wear them. I tried and tried and tried. Once the bones are set, you can't change them. If I was five or six years old, yes, not after you're grown up and the bones are set. I tried so hard to wear those shoes that I couldn't wear them. They were white. So they were very, very nice and kind to work for. Then one day they said, we're having a luncheon. It's our dog's birthday. So they set the dog at the table and they had all these guests. Invited guests. Yes, at the table. I baked a cake for the dog and put candles on. How old was the dog? I don't recall. Ten or twelve? I don't recall. He was supposed to be in the kitchen. I couldn't have him under my feet. I'd just point and he'd go lay down at a certain place. Pretty soon he'd be up again, but he'd always mind for a while stay off from under my feet. This particular day, his birthday, they all came and they had their dinner, their luncheon rather. After the luncheon they got up and left. The dog was still there. They went in another room and when the waitress went in she says, come quick. I went in. The dog had eaten the whole cake, the candles and the candle holders. The whole thing. So we called Evelyn Venable and they had to take it to the vet and have it stomach pumped. That was one of a hundred little episodes. Were they kind of funny in regard to animals and dogs and cats? They loved animals. They all did that? Yeah, they loved animals. Was there some kind of relief for them to be occupied with something else? I wonder sometimes. They loved animals more than human beings perhaps? Well, some perhaps. But I don't think they went overboard except that dog and his birthday cake. Did they talk about the animals when they came together? No, not much. What they did mostly was to try and remember. That meant so much to them. You have to have a good memory to remember your parts in a play or something. Over to Joan Crawford's especially, they'd start with, I'm going to England, take a trunk, and the next one I'm going to take a trunk and a pair of boots, and the next one I'm taking a trunk, a pair of boots and a hat. They'd go around 50 times. It's surprising how you can wake up your memory that way. They did that a lot. So they were all in the same business? Mm-hmm. So there was mostly people from the same profession and meeting at dinners and gatherings? Well, they had different groups. Hal Morris never had Joan Crawford's crowd. No? No. And vice versa, Joan Crawford never had that crowd. So they mingled in different circles. So they had to be on their toes and go to the... Oh, yes. Were they always on time when they had a... Oh, yes. Very precise. Yes, they were. Always on time. Did they leave all at once or did they mingle after some of them? You mean for work? No, I mean when they had a dinner, for instance. If there were 20 people invited for dinner, did they all leave at the same time? Well... Did they stay later and sit and talk until... I don't know. I can't remember some of those things. But I think... I don't recall that. Whether they all left at once or if they went a few at a time, I don't recall. Nowadays they have what they call open house. Open house. When somebody is celebrating something. Did they have that at that time, too? Did they come in and they would stay half an hour and then left and then other? I don't remember catering to any open house affairs. It was sit down dinner. Sit down dinners, mostly. And lunches. They'd have their cocktails in one room, usually in the music room at Joan Crawford's. And I'd bring her tomato juice. She didn't drink anything stronger than tomato juice. And they had their own leather. It was soundproof. Their music room. And the bar just off of that, open. And he drank every day he'd drink. But he never was drunk. To my knowledge. I never saw him drunk. Did you see her at that time? I never saw her, but her home was just above Joan Crawford's in Brentwood Heights. We passed her house, walking, the cook and I. But I never saw her. They had great big fences, you know. Joan Crawford and all up the line. And she was never over at Crawford's house? Oh never, no. It seemed like he was, Mr. Tone seemed to be jealous. He'd be a little jealous of Greta Garbo. Because she got a part that he wanted his wife to get. He was hoping that she would get. But Greta Garbo got it. It seemed like he had a little, well he was just a little bit jealous. Yeah, competition. Well I suppose it cost a lot of money to stay in that kind of circle. Oh yes, yes. They were on their tours all the time. They had, the one cook they had when I was there, the first cook, and I was considered the second cook, because whenever they'd step out of the garage I had to take over. I had to know what I was doing. And one day, I was upstairs in one of the upstairs living rooms where Joan Crawford was. That was another big beautiful white rug. The cook came up there to get the day's menu. And she said, well I'm entertaining tonight and I want squabs stuffed with wild rice. And she told, she said, how many? The cook said, how many will there be? She said, twelve. Alright, she said, you just want twelve squabs? Just twelve. Alright, I'll order steaks for the help. The cook told her right out, she says, I'll order steaks for the help. She wasn't afraid. Squabs, is that? That's pigeons. Pigeons? Pigeons, yeah. The whole pigeon? Yeah, the whole ones, you know. Stuffed with wild rice. Wild rice, uh huh. Well there was a delicacy too. Oh yeah, that was very good. Special bread ones, you know. So you had a tidbit of all the kind of fancy food I suppose. Oh yes. And I used to, oh of all the hors d'oeuvres I used to fix and canapes for their parties. Liver with bacon rolled around it and all kinds of things, you know. And broiled and... I could tell something funny but I don't think I should tell that. Well, make it a part of history. You've gone through a long life. She was having, there were just the two of them for dinner that night and she ordered English lamb chops. They were about ninety cents a pound at that time. Big thick lamb chops. I would have to serve it also. So the personal maid sat in the corner watching me. And I was getting the dishes hot in the butler's pantry in the electric oven and coming back and forth and getting everything ready. And I opened the oven door to look at my chops and they were on fire. Just burning. And I grabbed the pan and ran to the sink to pour off the oil and they all went in the dish water. All the chops went into the dish water. But it was clean dish water, clean soap. I just fixed that ready for dishes. I took out the chops and rinsed them off and the personal maid was doubled over laughing. And I was so nervous. I said, oh dear God help me. I put them back under the broiler and got them ready and announced dinner. We had to light about fifty candles before dinner in the dining room. And it overlooked a beautiful pool. The reflection, it was really beautiful. So I announced dinner and I said to the waitress, the personal maid, oh you serve tonight. I'm so nervous. I said, you serve. Nothing doing, she said. So I took the chops in and all the other food I had, I'd go in and serve. When I came in the second time she said, oh Annie, she said, no Ann, she called me Ann most of the time. She said, Ann, these chops are delicious. And I thought if you only knew. But I couldn't tell her and I wouldn't tell her. And I knew they couldn't have been, they couldn't have been that good. But she wanted to compliment. It was something new, a new flavor. So you made a hip.