 I have a cousin that lives out in California, and I never corresponded with her very much. In fact, I hardly know her. She wrote me, and there was somebody that was here from Sweden, and they wanted the Bowling family tree. So she wanted me to give her all the information I know of Carl. There was five brothers, and traced the family tree as far as I could. I sent it to her, and she was going to send me a copy of it when she got it all completed. I haven't heard anything. So you are the Bowling family in Chicago? Yes. Are you acquainted with them? Yeah, one of them. A pair? Hussey? Hussey, yes. He's a cousin. I see. He's active in the singing society. So they're the same family? And Pear is his brother. I've got other cousins. There's Carlotto, Pear, Hussey, Bink, and Martha. But that was from my uncle, Otto Bowling. But I've lost track of them. And you're acquainted with Fred Bowling? Yes. Yeah. Well, I have a cousin in Chicago, but I never hear from him anymore. I've written him several times. I never get any reply, so I don't know what's happened to him. Yeah, I'm sitting together with Carl Milton Bowling in Rockford, Illinois. Yeah. And he was born 1907, 6th of September, in Rockford. Right. And we have the 28th of October, 1986. So you mean there were five brothers Bowling that came from Sweden then? Yeah. And your father was one of them? Right. It was Carl Malcolm Bowling. Yeah. And he came from Forsheim outside Mariestad in Västergötland. So what do you know now about your father coming from Sweden? Do you know the reason why they all left? Was it a big family over there? Well... Five brothers left. My dad says there was five brothers and five sisters, but all the girls died in infancy. I mean, that's the only thing I remember about it. So there were no sisters coming over here? No. Only five brothers? Right. They all left for the United States? Right. Oh. And one of them went back for a while. And I understand he had some kind of automobile agency over in Sweden. And... Mariestad. What was his name? Otto. I have to think. Let's see. It was Emil, my dad, Carl, Fred, and Otto. Otto was the one that went back. And this Hasse... He's gone. Yeah. He's the son of Otto's. And did he stay in Sweden then, Otto? No. He came back to the United States. And he was active in Swedish circles, various clubs over in Chicago. So their father, what was he doing for a livelihood? Becoming a farmer? I don't know too much about that. But if you know Hasse, you can get a lot of information. He was born over there. In Sweden? Yeah. All the kids were born over in Sweden, and they came over here. But your father never talked about his beginning in Sweden, so to speak? Well, not that... He might have talked about it, but I wasn't paying too much attention to it at the time. He went into the printing trade in Mariustad when he was a young guy. Well... Printer's apprentice. Yeah. I think he did. I don't know if he did very much along that line there, because he was a fairly young man when he came over here. He came here in the early 1890s? Yeah. I mean, I don't know what I said. But he was born in 1968. 1968? Yeah. And then he... So... I don't know. 1968, maybe in the 20s. Was he one of the younger ones? Well, there was two younger than he was. I see. So did all five brothers come over at the same time? Yeah, I think so. All five? Yeah. And they landed in Pennsylvania? Yeah. Do you know the place where they ended up there? No, I don't. I don't remember that at all. But he worked in the coal mines? Well, yeah, for a short time. And then they came out here. And someone went to Chicago. And for some reason, he came to Rockford. I don't know. There was some influential Swedish people who were trying to get these immigrants to settle in Rockford. So I guess that's how he got here. He was the only one who came to Rockford? Well... For a while there, this auto-bowling was here. And he worked in one of the machine factories here. But then he went back to Sweden. So you received a letter from John A. Aldeen. Who was that guy? No, Aldeen was president of the Swedish American Bank. Here in Rockford? Yeah. So he wrote to your father then? Apparently to induce him to come here to Rockford. Yeah, or he had a letter of introduction to him from somebody. I don't know. And for him to start at Rockford? Well, yeah, I guess, yeah. Maybe that's how he started. So he became a printer then? Yeah, well, they worked for this Rockford Post. And then that's where he met my mother's brother, my uncle, Fred Tiff Carlson. And then, I mean, they knew a lot of people around here. And they decided the bank loaned them some money. And so then they started a Swedish print shop. They were the only ones that could print Swedish in Rockford. They were the only ones? Yeah. But they continued to work with Rockford Post? No, no, no, no. They quit Rockford Post and started this printing shop. And they was called Bowling and... Carlson & Bowling. Carlson & Bowling. Bowling Printers. And they was down on 3rd Avenue? 4th Avenue. 4th Avenue. Yeah, where the bank is now. So there was the line of business then of your father? Yeah, yeah, a printer, yeah. When you ask me if he was a printer or in Sweden, I mean, that's kind of vague. I don't know if he was or not. He could have very well been because he got in the... worked for the newspaper. But he came into Rockford Post first. And Rockford Post, you don't remember that paper? No. They folded up, I believe, in 1911 or something like that. But you never saw it, seen it? No. Do you remember seeing any Swedish newspapers in your home? Oh, sure. My... this uncle Fred, my uncle Fred Bowling, he was business manager for Svenska Amerikanen. In Chicago? Yeah. And so he used to send the Swedish paper out here all the time. So they were interested in printing. Yeah. Two of them, at least, we know. But they stayed in Chicago, though, the restaurant there. Yeah, yeah. And... Well, this Fred Bowling, he was... I mean, he was interested in these singing societies. And he was president of the American Union of Swedish Singers. Yes. A couple of terms, or I don't know how long. But they went over to Sweden for a concert. And he was knighted by King Gustav. Maybe you heard that. Oh, I see. No, I understand that. Yeah. Uh-huh. So they were all interested in organizations and organizing. Oh, yeah. Yeah, Fred especially. One of the other brothers, he worked for the postal department. In Chicago? Yeah. The other was a machinist. And Emil, the oldest one, when I first knew him, I mean, I think he was retired. I don't know, really. So they were all done. I think he worked for some construction, or elevator company, I think, or something like that. I don't know. But your father-in-law, Carl Malcom, he also... He was the first president of... Yeah. What they call it in Swedish? Svenska Musik... Sjukföreningen. Sjukföreningen. Yeah. It stands for Swedish Music and Sick Fraternity. And it was in 1898. So he was already in Rockford at that time. Oh, yeah. He became the first president. So do you have any vivid memory of meetings and doings? Because they also had a band. Yeah. Was he a musical, your father? Did he play in the industry? No, he belonged to the society. He belonged to Svea Sonor. So he was a singer? He wasn't a singer, but he belonged to the organization. But as far as I know, he never did any singing with the singing societies. But this society here, they were for sick and aid, to help people. Yeah. And there were quite a few members in the beginning to help out. Well, this is 50 years after it started. It started, yeah. But it says Svenska Musik. Yeah. And Sjukförening. Yeah. So he belonged to that one all his life then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, he belonged to Svea Sonor, too. He was a member there, a life member. He got to be a life member. How were they able to belong to so many different organizations? You would think you would get tired after serving one. Yeah, well, I don't know. He might have belonged to Lyron, too. How about you? I mean, you didn't belong to either one of them. I'm not really a joiner. I belonged to Svea Sonor for a while. Were you a singer? No, I wasn't a singer. But we had a membership up there. We used to go up there to their dances and go up there. Well, when I was a lot younger. Socialized people. Yeah, we liked to go out coasting or tobogganing or something. We'd do it every Saturday afternoon. And then when we got tired of that and we quit, we'd come and go to Svea Sonor because they always had oyster stew Saturday afternoons. And after being out in the snow and everything, that tasted good. So they had food, usually, at the doings? Yeah, well, sure. They had a big kitchen there. A lot of the members were Pinky Wall and I know especially he liked to cook. He did a lot of cooking there. And it seems to me that most of the people at that time, they had nicknames. Well, I don't know what it was. It was Corky and Pinky and Spanky and all kinds of, and Hank and Frex and Corky. So you knew all those people. But they were old already then, I suppose. Well, they were older than I was. They were one generation. But your father not belonging to Svea Sonor and Svenska Musik and Fruktföreningen and perhaps Svithjod. I think he belonged to that a lot of times for business reasons, too. For the printing business? Yeah. Because then he was one of them. Yeah. So this probably goes with the business. Yeah. Did you start it also in your dad's business after school? No, no. I thought I was going to. I was a printer's devil there when I was younger. I used to clean up the place. We lived upstairs. Were you headed in the same house then? Yeah. When they started the print shop, they started across the street from 4th Avenue. But then the bank wanted to build a building there. So they had to move out. So they loaned them money. And then they built two family, well, it was two stores in the bottom and two family dwellings upstairs. And they had the business. So it just had to go up. You were close to the business then. Yeah. Well, my brother started in the business. Motherfucker? Yeah. He was a pressman. He was four years, he's four years older than you are. Eight. Eight? He was born in 1899. I was born in 1907. And I thought perhaps I'd be going into the business, but it was kind of a depression when I graduated in 1925 from high school. Was it hard to get a job then? Well, things were slow. And so my dad never said anything about coming down there to work or anything. So I just happened to put my name in the high school for I was available for a job. I'd take anything. So that's how I got my job. I worked for Barbara Coleman Company as a draftsman. I see. You started from the beginning then to learn the trade. Yeah. So you didn't work with tool making, you were a draftsman? No, no, no. You were drawing? Yeah, I was a draftsman. I see. Well, that's what I wound up at. But I had an offer of a job to be a pattern maker that I was interested in. But I don't remember. Well, I guess somebody else got the job. So you continued with Barbara Coleman and... That was the only job I ever had. I worked there 47 years. I see. What happened then during the Depression? Were you laid off? Well, yeah, during the Depression, I mean, well, I was kind of fortunate. I only lost about six months' work. But I was working off and on. I mean, they'd lay you off and then they'd call you back when they wanted you. But I got to, I was working in what we call the patent department. And I made drawings for patents and, of course, during the Depression, they were doing a lot of development work as much as they could. And then they filed patents on it. Mr. Coleman, Barbara Coleman, he was an inventor. So he took out a lot of patents. And their line of business, what was that? Well, they were in the textile machinery. Textile? Well... Building the machines? Yeah. They built the tool and they made door operators and garage doors. They had several divisions. And how about, were there many Swedes working there? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, there's toolmakers and like that. There were a lot of Swedish people and Swedish men that were real good craftsmen. So you could hear Swedish spoken all the time then? Oh, yeah. Occasionally I'd talk to some of these Swedes. I never could speak it too well myself. Oh, there was not used in your home as much? Well, my brother and my sister, they were one year apart. And when they started school, my brother came home and said, Mamma, pojkarna säger tala svenska. So he couldn't talk English when he started school. I see. But then, of course, I never talked any English. Well, my mother did go to school here for several grades, but I don't remember my dad ever going to school. But he did a lot of reading and everything and printing. So I don't know where he learned his English, really. So English was used most of the time then when you were coming into the world? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I see. And did your mother know? Did she come over here alone or with her parents? No. Her mother died, and she came over here with, let's see, there was, Carlson was her brother, and she had three other sisters. Was he a printing man then, Carlson? He might have been a printer, yeah. But my grandfather, the only one I ever known, was my grandparents. Did he come over here? He came over with the girls. I mean, he brought his family over here. And the only job that I know that he ever had, he was a sexton or the custodian for Zion Lutheran Church. Oh, I see. And he spoke only Swedish, though? No, he only spoke Swedish. And, of course, they lived next door to us on this building that they had. We had one apartment, and my uncle had the other one, and my grandfather. And an aunt was living there until she died. Well, then my mother kind of took care of her father, but he lived in the next apartment. But he talked Swedish to me, and I'd talk English to him, and we got along pretty good. Oh, I see. So you never answered back in Swedish? No. But you could understand Swedish? I could understand what he was trying to say some way or another. I don't know how. But he was from Skåne now. Did you understand his dialect? Yeah, well, as far as I can remember. And his first name was? His first name was... I can't remember it. It was Carlson. Grandpa Carlson. Grandpa Carlson. Yeah. So you didn't call him Orfar or... No. You called him Grandpa. Grandpa. So he was a sexton at the Zion Lutheran Church? Yeah. That's the only job I know he had. I don't know if he did anything else before that. So your family, did you belong to the Zion Lutheran Church? No. No parents? No, they didn't belong to any church. No church? But we were next door to the Salvation Army, and my mother liked to listen to them and go over there once in a while. But when I got confirmed, I got confirmed... Well, I don't know if my mother went to Zion or not. I guess she went over to Zion. But when I was confirmed, the friends that I chummed around with, I had several of them, they went over to the Emmanuel Lutheran. That's only two blocks from Zion, but it's only a block from home. So I was confirmed there, and I'm still a member there. Oh, I see. So during the Depression, how did your dad and uncle fare with their business? Well, they kept it going. So they was going. Yeah. The organizations still needed them, tickets and flyers. They had a little business, but they didn't have as much business as they would like to have. How long did your dad live? My dad died in 1957. And then your brother, did he take over then? Yeah, my brother took over the business, and they ran it together after. My uncle, Carlson, died in 1934. He was 59 or something. So your brother became a companion. Yeah, then he ran the business. But my dad lived upstairs, and after my mother died, my brother's wife and my wife, they kind of took care of seeing that he had enough food and things like that. Then he got kind of senile. Then he came and lived with, alternated between my brother and I until he died. So you lived close by too then? Well, I didn't live too close. I was married then. I lived on what we call Paris Avenue. But that's up around here. Well, yeah. Close to Hoover. Yeah. And the reason we built the place here was that we only had one bathroom over in the other place. And it got a little bit hard to take care of, and the bathroom was upstairs. We couldn't get him up there half the time. And so we built this one-story place. So your dad lived with you here then for a while? Yeah, yeah. Like I say, he died in 1957 or something like that. We moved here in 1955. So he lived here off and on for about three years. Did he go back to Sweden at any time? Oh, he was back once that I know of, but I think he was back twice. I'm not certain. But he went back. I think that was about 1921 or something like that. So with so many brothers here now, you had a big family reunion very often, I suppose. Well, my Uncle Fred, he was the... The kingpin. Yeah, yeah. Was he the oldest? No, there was an older brother, and then my dad, and then Fred. But he liked parties and things like that, and he was an organizer. So we used to have a bowling reunion, and there was quite a few of us. So they'd rent one of the halls in Chicago. It was an Orphee, or Harmony Club, I think it was. They'd have a catered dinner and things like that. How often did they do that? We did it practically once a year or something like that. But then after he died, the one that kind of held the group together was his daughter, Mildred. She married a fellow named Lundquist. He was assistant director of the Swedish Glee Club in Chicago, as far as I know. And then... But now everybody moved around and this and that, and I've kind of lost track of most of it. So they're not so close to each other anymore? No, we don't correspond too much anymore. My cousin Mildred, she finally had to move out to California with her sister, but she's in a nursing home now. And she's blind and senile. So, I mean, I tried to keep track. And then one other cousin was in Tulsa, Oklahoma. I used to write to her, Christmas, and so forth and so on. Finally that stopped and I finally found out that she died. But I didn't know anything about it. Oh, I see. So the family isn't too close anymore. So no answers to the letters. No. Do you remember during the 20s, there was some Swedish soccer group here in Rockford? They tried to form unions and there was bad times and they had to organize. Do you remember anything of that? Not too much. It was a very small group. Yeah. Well, in the 20s, I mean, I was in my teens. I didn't bother about civic things like that. So, but there were no unions when you started at Warwick-Colman? Not when I started there. No unions? But they got a union in there, finally. But then they had a re-election and they kicked the union out. They did? Mm-hmm. What year did the union come in then, in the 30s? No, no, no, no. I don't remember. No, just when I was. After the war? Yeah, it was around there. So they kicked the union out then? Yeah, but I mean, Barber-Colman had a reputation of being a good place to work and that they took care of the people pretty good, so. How did you get advancement of the pain, for instance? Did you ask for it yourself or you just gave it to you? All the years I worked there, I don't think I asked for a raise more than about three times, but otherwise it came. How did you do then if you didn't have a union? How did you ask for a raise? Just asked the boss for a raise. I thought it would be worth more money, so I had a kind of a special job. Patent drafting is a little bit different than just making mechanical drawings. And I thought maybe I was worth more than just a regular mechanical drawing. But like I say, maybe I was easily satisfied, but I only asked for a raise about three times as I remember. How about the other workers? How did they get the pay raise? The same way, I guess. They had some kind of a scale, I mean, a formula. How many years you had worked there and so on? Things like that, yeah. Did you have pensions? They had a trust fund. The company? The company did. They paid in some and you paid in some? Well, we didn't have to pay in anything. They just, a certain percentage of the profits or something they put in this fund. What did you do? And they were going to keep it until you were 65 and retired to give it to you. Of course, I'd worked there 17 years before they started that. So when I retired, I'd only been in it about maybe 17 years or something like that. So it was a pretty good deal. And they paid out then to every? Yeah, when you retired. When you retired. Yeah. You get a lump sum then or you? You could either take it out a lump sum or you could, that was your own decision, invest it in an annuity or something. So the union, was it the UAW that came in there and was kicked out or was it a different union? I was never mixed up in the union. Oh, you didn't have to belong to it? I didn't have to belong. Because the workers were separate? Yeah, yeah. I don't know, I think it was the machinist union that got in there. And they still don't have a union, national union, is it? No. And they have probably quite a few people left. Yeah. Of course, the Coleman family, I mean, it was a family-owned deal. I mean, outsiders didn't have any investment in it. It was all Rockford-based company. Yeah. And the Coleman family now, they're dying off and they want to get a sell their shares in the company. So now, I really don't know exactly what the financial setup is, but the Coleman family is out of there. Oh, I see. And they are still producing? Well, they've been selling off a few divisions. So they're mostly electronics now and high-tech stuff. Well, you started there in the 1920s, then? 25. 25. How many were working there then? Was it the biggest company in Rockford? It was that, and I think National Lock and Barbara Coleman and Sunstrands. I think they were the biggest ones. But at one time, they had 5,000, 6,000 people working. That was after the war, though. Yeah. Well, during the war, maybe. And they were working several shifts and everything. They were expanding, but now they've been selling off several divisions that they feel are unprofitable now. You know, they... Site 2 with Carl Milton Bolling in Rockford, Illinois. Site 2. So you continued there then for 47 years at Barbara Coleman. That means that you liked the job pretty good, then. You didn't... It's the only job I ever had. So did you compare the pay scale with other factories, like Sunstrands and National Lock, at that particular time? I didn't. You didn't? You were satisfied with what you had? I wanted a job, and I took the job. Like I say... You progressed as fast as you were going to go. Yeah, I just progressed. And did you belong to any organizations now, or Swedish? Well, like I say, I belonged to Svea Sønder for several years. But I'm not really a joiner. I belonged to the Emanuel Lutheran Church. How did you meet your wife now? Through the church. Through the church. Her parents came from Oregon, Illinois. Yeah, well, we had a basketball team. It was a pretty good basketball team. So one of the fellas... And they had a good church league here. So he wanted a team in the church league. And one of the rules was we had to attend church in order to be eligible to play. Well, they made a good Christian out of you. Sure. Well, I was confirmed that I belonged there anyway, but we had several fellas that belonged to other denominations and other churches. But they also could join. Well, they didn't join, but they attended church. And I was kind of captain, and I had to be responsible for the eligibility. So you didn't have to join as a member then? Nor to play basketball. Only attend the church? Yeah, yeah. Or Sunday school. I mean, we were young people at the time. You didn't attend? Yeah, yeah. So, and then I met my wife. They had a young people's group, and they had a party, and I took her home a couple of times, and that started it. And then you got a car with rumble seats and everything. You could double date. So when did you buy your first car? My first car? Yeah. Let's see. The second one. Well, we bought the, my dad, he never drove, or my sister, but they wanted a car. So, and I chipped in too, in 1927. Oh, that was for the family then? Yeah, it was for, well. How did you get to work then, back and forth from home? I only lived a mile away. I walked. Every day? Yeah. And when did you? In a winter too, I walked across. They didn't have the factory out there in Loves Park then? No, no, no. The factory was down on Main Street. South Main. South Main, yeah. And I walked across that bridge one winter when the warmers they got was about 20 below. It felt good then to come inside the factory walls. Oh, boy. Yeah. How did you discuss any politics at your work? During the lunch hour, for instance? I wasn't interested in politics. You just kept away from it? Yeah. Were there any discussions, though, about Republicans or Democrats who were best and doing a good job? I suppose there were. I mean, I got of age and I started at 18 when I was 21 and I voted. I imagine there was discussions, but I mean. How did you get an idea, you know, to vote for, to be right, I mean, during the Depression, for instance? I don't know. Were you who over-iced, or? Well, I forget who the first one I voted for, but Rockford was a kind of Republican town. Republican. So, I mean. So you were the Republican? The Swedes were Republicans, the Italians were Democrats. Do you think they made a bearing on choosing the party? I mean, you didn't want to join the Catholics and... No, well, I suppose it had some. In some way, probably, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. They had quite a strong political, John Erickson League, I don't know if you heard of that. Yeah? Well, you belonged to that one? No, I didn't belong to anything. How about your dad? Did he belong to that John Erickson League, you think? I really don't know. He was a Republican. Yeah, I think he was. I don't know. He was talking about Socialists or something like that. Maybe he was a Socialist. I don't know. Oh, you never discussed that with your brother either? No. No. No. Yeah, but weren't you concerned of who was leading the city? I mean, the city hall and the management and the aldermen? Yeah, I mean, usually Sweden was a mayor for years and years and years. Hallströms. Hallströms. Hallströms, period. Yeah, and I forget. That was one of them, but... Blom? Blom, yeah. Well, yeah, I think when I first started, oh, maybe Blom was in there. But they say that Hallström was in for four terms. Yeah, he was in for a long time. He should be remembered as a good mayor or... Well... Just like a politician. Yeah, well, I mean, he had control of the politics. I mean, I've never been too concerned with... You remember Hallström, though. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. He was probably belonging to the same organization as your dad. I suppose maybe he was. He had to favor all the groups to get votes. Yeah. Like I say, I never paid too much attention to politics. I was politically minded at all. It's probably best to stay outside. Yeah. But some people are very active in it, though. Oh, yeah. I imagine I took part in discussions and things like that, but I mean, not that it made a lasting impression on my mind. It wasn't... But there's John Erickson leading now, the Republican. Yeah. Could there have been any Swedish workers in there, though? They didn't fit in there, really. Oh, sure. They did? Sure. They did attend. Yeah. Oh, the Swedes, they had a pretty good organization, as far as I know. And by the time for elections came around, I think they made themselves known. But you would think a regular worker, he would favor the Democrats as being the... Yeah, well... Messiah for them. Yeah, well... Yes or no? I don't know. I don't know enough about really good or bad opinion. Who was the strong man of the Swedes during that time, during the 30s? P. A. Peterson, he was too old then at that time. Yeah, I think so. I mean, he maybe had a lot of influence. How about Swan Hillman? Well, like I say, I never paid too much attention to things like that. He was... He had Rockford... Yeah, well, then Hoagland. Hoagland was another one. Yeah. I think he belonged to our church. What kind of business was he in? Well, the National Lock Company. Hoagland? Yeah, he was one of the ones that started that. And then the Rockford screw products, Hillman and... They were all Swedes. And I think they started at the Lock Company and then split from them and started their own businesses. They all got old and they were all Swedish, started by Swedes, I think. And they started in the garage to start with and then they mushroomed. Yeah. It's remarkable, though, as I saw a little schooling they had. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, you as a pattern maker, you know, or a draftsman, you will probably know... Is it more complicated today, you think, for inventions and patterns than there was years ago? Well, I mean, I think to get something really new, you can make improvements. But they did the computers, now, though. Yeah, well... Mechanically, it helped. Well, I mean, computers, that was a good invention. But you had to think about it yourself and use your pen. Yeah, yeah. Well, yeah, they got computers now. Yeah, you didn't have to use a pen. You could push buttons. Well, yeah. As far as patents are concerned, I mean, people think they got a good idea. But if you check back far enough, somebody had the idea years ago, but never had the means or the ability to really push them. And so I think it's harder to get patents or get something new. But if we think now about the John Nelson knitting machine, that was in the 1850s. Yeah. Isn't it remarkable with the guy coming there with two bare hands, he had nothing, no tools, nothing, and how he could have all this in his head? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because it's a very ingenious apparatus you have to work. Yeah. Well, things are getting more complicated all along here. Like you say, these computers, I mean, that was a good invention. But Mr. Coleman, he was working on computers, but he was trying to do it mechanically. And, of course... And that was in the 40s and 50s? Yeah, yeah. And, in fact, he had some good patents. For years he had one of the biggest patents in the United States. I mean, the longest. You know, you have to claim certain things when you get an invention. And they write these things down and describing them. They call them claims. And this one patent that he had had something like 450 claims. And AT&T, wherever they turned when they were trying to develop communication systems and things like that, they run across his patent. So they finally decided it was cheaper to buy him out. So they bought out his patent for, I don't know, now it don't sound like, but it was several million dollars. So he was far ahead then? He was ahead of his time. But then they went to these vacuum tubes, which if you were going to have a computer today with vacuum tubes instead of these transistors, I mean, you'd have a whole room full. And if something went wrong with one tube, you'd have a heck of a time finding out which one it was. What do you think now about computers? Some people say it will make less jobs available, and some say it will create jobs. What do you think? Well, it makes less jobs when it gets right down to the actual figuring out things. But it creates more jobs to make the computers. How many computers do you really need? Well, it all depends on what they're used for. I mean, you can have a complicated computer that will keep track of inventory or stuff like that, you know. And it will only take a couple operators and maybe a couple men to keep that thing running. But on the other hand, you have maybe a bunch of little ones that feeds information into the computer. So, I mean, it's big business. So, it's about 50-50. Yeah. I mean, they've got to make the computers, but the computers maybe take the place of several operators. Do they even make the cars now? They put them together and they spray paint them and everything in Roblox? Well, it's unlimited of what you can do with it. And it's taken a lot of people to develop these things. I mean, that's the way I look at it. Like in your profession now, being a draftsman, do they use less draftsmen now today than 25 years ago? Oh, I don't know. The engineering departments in these various places seem like they're getting bigger and bigger. Sunstrance, they have more engineers than workers. Sure. Sure. What do people say now about the UAW at Sunstrance, for instance? Are they happy with it, the way they are run by the unions? Is it good for the city? Well... Because there's a saying, if you give the worker more money, he will spend it. Sure. Well, that's good. Sure. Sure. But on the other hand, I mean, I have a couple of friends that were foremen or department heads. And they say that, I mean, the workers, I mean, and it's bad workers. Yeah. In other words, it protects everybody. Yeah. Well, they're trying to protect themselves. But that keeps a go-getter or somebody that's smarter from advancing. I mean, and the ones that are, I mean, the big union people fighting for union, I mean, you and I, say you can turn out 10 pieces, you're kind of lazy. And say, I could work a long and a little bit more efficient, I could turn out 20 pieces. But they won't let me do that. So the competition is lost then against others. Sure. Sure. And now the unions have been getting so strong that, I mean, a manufacturer, he can't run his plant unless the union tells him what to do. They are too strong then. Well, they try to be. They go overboard. Yeah. But, I mean, of course, I mean, everybody can't be smart. We got to help the handicapped. Yeah. Sometimes they create handicaps for them to make it to convenience. Yeah. Yeah. I believe in union. Well, just about like my father being in the printing business. I mean, my dad took care, my uncle took care of the office part. And he could typeset and do certain things around there. My dad, he took care of the shop and seemed that the jobs got out and everything. And they had to have a pressman, I mean, to print. My dad took care of the typesetting and then they farmed out to these linotype machines, you know. And they ran off. They'd get the linotype made by an outsider. And then the union came in and wanted them to belong to the typographical union. But, sure, they belonged to the union. Well, the minute they got them in there, then they said that for each pressman, you had to have a typesetter. Well, they couldn't afford a typesetter. They did that themselves. And they kicked them out of the typographical union. So what happened then? But they could still run the shop, though. Oh, they could run the shop, sure. I don't think it hurt them any, but they were just a job shop. So the union broke them if they had belonged to it. That's right. So there are certain instances you had to take it or eat it or leave it. That's right. I'm not really against the union. They've done a lot for the working man. Do you think the scale now, for instance, in Rockford, Sunstein is the biggest union now. Do you think their company or their union have set the scale for other companies to shape up, to pay their workers a good pay scale? Sunstein had a reputation. I mean, they were either feast or famine. They got a big government contract, and, boy, they had to get it out in a certain time. So they could short it. Well, say you were making $5 an hour. They'd say, well, we'd like to have you over here. We've got to get the job out, so we'll pay you $10. So what the heck is the guy going to do? He's going to work for $10. The minute the doggone job is finished, bingo. You're out. They're out. But then the union came in. Well. They said, you can't fire us because we have a contract. Yeah. But I was speaking more from an engineer's standpoint. There's not too many unions of design engineers and things like that. They have no union. No. They're more freelance. That's right. You figure you're better than the next guy, and you can hold your – if somebody wants your service, they'll pay for it. Do you think that's a good feeling, Toby, on that side? Like you know, being a draftsman, you don't care about the union. You have a good reputation as being a good draftsman. Well, I mean, I had no qualms. I had my job, and I was satisfied with it. But nobody could come and tell me that, well, you should get more money or something like that, and if you join the union, we'll get you more money. Well, the minute you do that, then you're under their influence. If you wanted more money, and the scale was – maybe you'd get less money. Do the workers have much to say, though? Do they go off into union meetings? It seems to me they stay away rather than attending. Well, a lot of them do. A lot of them, they only join the union because they have to. That always reminds me of the story about this French nobleman. He had a valet, and this valet, he was a strong socialist, and he'd go to the meetings, and he'd come talk to his boss, and they thought they were taking advantage of the people, you know, and he was strong, really strong. So he wanted the rich man to divide his money with the poor man, you know, everybody equal. So all of a sudden, he stopped going to these meetings. The nobleman asked him, what happened? How come you haven't much about these socialist meetings, or you go into these things? He said, I don't go anymore. He says, I quit. He says, quit? How come you quit? Well, he says, it was strong for you dividing your salary with me, and I'd get more, see, because you were making a lot more than I was. But when they finally found out that he'd have to pay out his salary, instead of getting more in, because he was making more than these other people. So then he was against it. So that's a double-edged sword. Yeah. Well, I suppose there's a lot of things like that, but many workers, they probably don't think, they listen to the leadership, and if that's a... It has a bad reputation, the union. Well, if I was working for somebody, you were working for somebody, and you got a raise, and I didn't, why didn't I get a raise? But like the office workers now, they don't belong to unions. Well, you are one included. Yeah. When they have a union, don't they automatically get the pay raise on the unions? Well, maybe you had some. That's why the unions always figured that... They could make management with them. Yeah, yeah. Well, I don't know. And when there are strikes, for instance, then usually management has to work overtime, so they actually benefit from the strike. Yeah. Well, they struck at Barber Coleman. They did? Oh, yeah. They had a couple of strikes there. When the union was in? Well, they were trying to get in, and when they got in, then of course right away they had to go on strike for more money. But you were outside then? No, we could go in and work, but we had to run the... Machines? The gauntlet. No, we didn't have to run machines. I mean, I didn't. It was idle then during the strike? Well, there were certain jobs I had to get out, and some of the help did run machines, but that was kept kind of quiet because they didn't want to get them in trouble or anything. But I was... I volunteered for being what they call an observer, and I'd stand outside the door when the people were going out or coming in, just to see what was going on, and if anything terrible happened, I suppose I'd be called as a witness or something. But I got to talking to one of these... He was an outsider that came in here, and he was running the thing, and he was a great big guy, but he was foul-mouthed. And the girls coming out of the... And he'd call them all kinds of names and everything like that, and of course they'd kind of scoot by him and all. And he was just an ugly fellow. And then people had gone out, and so it was quite... It was awful quiet there. So he'd come over to me, and he said, Boy, I don't mind this job here, what I'm doing here. He says, You'd be surprised how much of that nice cool air conditioning they bring out with them. And this was a hot summer day, see. And people would come out, and he'd stand right in front of the door, you know. And Richard's doing it. He would think he wanted that nice cool air coming out there. It was the best benefit of all. Well, I suppose they tried to intimidate people across the lines. But they quit the Union, and in other words, they voted it out finally. Do you think there were outsiders coming in from other places like Chicago? Oh, sure. These people, they weren't local people. Well, the leaders, but they'd have the local people out there show that they were against them. But they weren't as rough as... But it's amazing there were so many workers, 5,000 workers or more, could stay outside the Union. In other words, they had the... Well, those 5,000 workers, they weren't all machinists that would be considered... Yeah, yeah. But it's certainly a big company. I think Lithuania's going, and Laurentian's going, but a lot of these Swedish clubs have been disbanded. But like you now being a first generation born in this country, you have less interest of those organizations. In other words, in your youth, they gave you presents of oyster soup after the skating parties and dancing perhaps with girls and so on. But later on, it didn't give you the benefit that you have it in... No, I mean, I was never... So you never joined them? No. No? Your father, for instance, did he tell you to... No, no. He never pressed you into it? No. But your brother-in-law? My brother, he's more enjoying it than I was. The clubs like that, I'm more for the church work and things like that. So he was born 8 years earlier? Yeah. So they made a little bit difference. Yeah. How about sports activities now? Did you play soccer or... Well, I played a lot of basketball. Basketball. Basketball and baseball, softball. But no Swedish soccer? No. That's just come into importance lately. I mean, soccer never used to be a sport here. I don't know if they ever... You don't remember? I don't remember ever going and seeing a game when I was younger or anything. Soccer. So you never participated in that? No. This Swedish music and sick fraternity now, SMOS, they had a summer camp, Riverdale. They had a property alongside the river, the Kishwaukee River. And they had a nice cabin there. Lyron has a park too. Lyron Society has a park. Close by? Yeah, on the Kishwaukee River. So there's the summer place then for the meetings. Yeah. But this SM and SF, they are serving dinners every Friday? SM, yeah. Do you attend those? Oh yeah, I go up there. It's the best deal in town for the money. So who is running it now then? Well, they hire some lady that comes in and... Takes care of it. Takes care of it, yeah. And how about the sick fraternity? Is they still paying out to members? I don't know anything about that. I don't know if... I think maybe they've given up on that insurance type deal. So the treasurer peed it out then over the years? Yeah. But they still have the meat and serving the food? Oh yeah. And a bar? Oh yeah, the bar. Well, I think they let somebody come in and maybe pay something for serving the food. But then they make all the money off the bar. Is the bar open every day? Oh yeah. I see. As far as I know, but they only serve meals once a week. And is the most reasonable price in town? I think so. I mean, for what you get, they give you a lot of food and it's home-cooked.