 This is cassette two, side one. Cassette two, David Nelson, Grand Rapids, Michigan. Cassette two, side one. Okay. Well, I explained to them, when I left they were there, I told them. And if anybody had taken them, this other fellow could be suspected. That was laid off same time as I was. And he was too. He was called in and arrested. And I don't know what happened. We probably have to give it back to him. I don't know if he even sold it or not. I have no information on that. Well, then they needed a chief chemist to replace the one, Mr. Bursak. He was a graduate of University of Wisconsin. And he had been there for six, seven years. Then I was asked to take his place. They also hired a pharmacist also at the same time. So we had to work together. And I stayed there for five years total with that company. When I quit, they had increased my salary to $110 per month. And I had made some new products for them, improved the old products. A lot of them were old-fashioned method for manufacturing. Did you have free hands to do that, or did they tell you to do it? I was in charge of it. I had to be in charge of the manufacturing. And that was a little hard for me because there were some products that I had to study up on that we were making. We were making milk and magnesium, citric and magnesium, ointments, zinc ointments, and all kinds of ointments. Well, the methods for making it was all in the United States pharmacopeia. So they were like recipes. They had their own recipes and their own manufacturing processes that we could follow. And what way did you improve it? Well, take for example milk and magnesium as one item that we made. They had—we were making an old-fashioned method with a five-gallon bottle. They put the powder in the bottle and filled it with distilled water, sterilized distilled water, and tied on the cork. Then they had a machine that put the bottle on the—lying down, and that machine that went like this, shaking it, see? And that had been shaking. But, you know, that didn't produce the reaction because they used cold water. They couldn't use hot water because it would burst the bottle. There's a chemical reaction that changes the zinc oxide to zinc—no, magnesium oxide. It changes it to magnesium hydrate. So there would be like an explosion? Yeah. And that's what actually happened. There's always some—even with the cold, putting cold water in there, it generated enough heat so that a lot of bottles exploded and spread all the stuff all over. And another thing, the stuff you put in the gallon bottles, you know, there always a sediment was about this high in there. And they didn't sell very much of that milk and magnesium. Every time you had to use it, you had to shake it up, you know. But you're not supposed to make—use that process. And I told them that, and I told them I wanted to do—make an experiment. We had a hundred-gallon tank with—which was tin-plated inside with stirrers. One stirrer went one way, and the other stirrer went the other way. And that was steam jacketed, you see. What I did was fill it up three-fourths with water and turn on the steam so that it was hot. Then we put the powder in there, and then we filled it up to a hundred-gallon, almost a hundred, not quite. And then we turned the stirrer. The stirrer—one stirrer went this way, and the other stirrer went the other way. They went something like this, you know, like this. And, you know, we had—and then we had one cold water in it to cool it off. And when it was done, we could tell when the—when the reaction was completed. It was smooth, you know, smooth like milk and magnesium is. You've seen what it looks like. And then we put it in bottles, and from then on they had no trouble whatsoever. And this was told to—through the buyer, to the purchasing agent was told—told it to the president of the company. That was one. And from then on you'd have bottles full in the—with milk and magnesium that had about this much water on top, you see. And all the salesmen were told about the wonderful improvement, and they sold like mad. The sales went way up, you know. So it was more appealing then? So that—oh, yeah, yeah. That's the way milk and magnesium is supposed to look. Was that the product that was a good seller over the years? Yeah, it was—it was— Yeah, you see it on TV all the time, milk and magnesium, milk and magnesium. Yeah, milk and magnesium was selling, but there were so many other products they were selling, you know. It was wholesale, too. So they were selling other people's. Phillips was selling, yeah. So we had a lot of—that was down below in the wholesale division. See, there was a wholesale division, and the manufacturing was on fifth floor, fourth and fifth floor. Then I did the same thing with citric or magnesium. That's a laxative, see. They never used to sterilize the water. And then they had trouble with it a lot. It had a sediment of so much in each bottle, and you had to shake it up each. And that wasn't satisfactory either, of course. You know, I told them that we should—we didn't sell much of that at the—when I came there. But it wasn't long. The first few months I did both of those improvements. The citric and magnesium, we put them up and put the sodium bicarbonate in the last thing, and then in the bottle machine, put the—you see, it's supposed to fizz, you know, when you open it. And the cork is right—put stopper right on. And we—I tried a few bottles first. We had a huge kettle, steam jacket kettle, put it in there, and I heated it up to almost 100 degrees, you know. No, yeah, a little bit over 100 degrees for a certain length of time. And then that dissolved all the solids in there that we put in, and it remained clear, you know, no sediment in the bottom whatsoever. And that was brought to the sales manager, you know. I brought it to the sales manager and told him about it, what we should do. I want to use my own method in making it. And from then on, boy, they were selling like mad. They had a talking point. The salesman had something to tell about, see. We have made a major improvement. And boy, they were so busy there. Then there was another thing I did. Oh, I improved many of the little things, small things. But there's one big thing. There was a company in Wisconsin, a dairy company, with a lot of cows. They needed the fly spray. They had one fly spray sent in to us, and the previous chief chemist had worked on it, but he hadn't been able to get one product, produce a product that was satisfactory to them. So we still had the sample there, and I analyzed the sample, found out what was in it, and I duplicated it, see. And then I made up a sample number one, a gallon, and a sample number two. We sent that to the Siren Dairy Association. In Wisconsin? In Wisconsin. And they tested it out, and in about a couple weeks we heard from them again, and they said, this is better than we sent, better than we had before, they told me. And then they sent us order. We made 30,000 gallons of that stuff, putting in big drums, you know. They put it in their own cans, you know, and labeled it with their own, and they sold it to the farmer. And we had to make, that summer, the first summer, we made 30,000 gallons of that fly spray. What kind of vehicle was that? Was it a kind of... A spray. Yes, but the liquid, what was it consisting of? Well, the base... Was it oil based? No, it was a petroleum base. Petroleum base. Yeah, petroleum base, yeah. And other things, you know, that repelled flies. So they killed the flies then? Yeah, they killed them, but it also had somewhat of a phenolic odor to it. To come in? So it was repellent, too. It works as a repellent as well as killing. Oh, the second year, we made almost as much, too. But then somehow, the third year, they didn't seem to come back within their orders. I don't know what happened. I think a competitor came in there and imitated the product, probably underbid it, you know, because... Competition. Yeah, competition killed it. How were you able, in such a short time, despite the odds from Peters-Larsen, there was no good news, you come here, and what did you tell him, now, for instance, when you met him? Well, I sometimes referred a little bit to him. You were good luck? He said, I told him, you told me that you shouldn't come, you know. Well, he said that if you have a specialized, you know, some of them had student examin, you know, and that was all, and no specializations. They didn't help? No, it didn't help them, because they hadn't specialized in it. I had specialized in chemistry and drugs, see. That's what helped me. Otherwise, I would never have gotten a good little notice. Did you meet anybody else with your qualifications, not in the same line, precisely, but with your schooling, that come over here, or were they mostly farmers' kids that come? You mean in Sweden? Yeah, some come from... In Sweden? Yeah, some come here. No. You were very different, most of them came from farmers. None of my brothers came here, and none of my friends went. Well, I know one fellow, a fellow who was much older than I. He went to the East, in the United States, but he died from a heart attack, and he was the first one that I ever... wrote to me from the United States. And he was in the building business, you know. He was a carpenter, doing carpentry work out East. And he had a family, too. And he used to be a Sunday school teacher there in the old country. He was much older than I was. I went to his Sunday school class. But I thought... I was always interested in English, you know. And he used to write... Do you remember the last time you came here, you knew English? Huh? There was a plus for you that you knew English. Oh, sure. Otherwise it would be impossible for you to be a head chemist there. Oh, yeah. You had to be able to read. Sure. Yeah. No, that went on. And I told my mother and dad, before I left, that I'll be back in about five years, I said. I want to see you in five years. I'll be back at that time. So what happened then, 28? Did you go back? So in 1929, I went back. And... You had a steady job then? Yeah. And I had 110... No, no. I had 150 dollars a month at that time. Had you bargained for that kind of price, or did they just give it to... No, well, they advanced my price after I'd done those improvements. There were many other improvements on other products. We made a whole bunch of... And I figured that was my job to do. And then I moved, after I got back to the company, then I moved to St. Paul and stayed with a family where I had my meals, too. So I had my meal, room and board there by Peterson. He was a carpenter, and he had only one daughter, so she had a big house, you know. So there was plenty of room there, and I got acquainted with the Petersons, and I went to their church and everything. What church? Was that a covenant church? Covenant church in St. Paul. First covenant church. So I was there, and I got acquainted there, and I had a wonderful time there. I was single. Did you join any other organizations of Swedish background? No, I didn't. Well, we had a Värmlandsklubb. After I was married, you know, my wife... But there's a lot in between there that happened, you know. Well, this is probably getting too much detail. Your first wife, her parents came from Värmland? Her parents, yes. They were Värmlandingar. Yeah. That is what her dad was. Yeah, her dad. Her mother was a Blekingskar. I see. And they went to the same church, and they got married and lived outside of Mene-Tanka. He was in the carpenter business, too. So many Swedes that came over had no trade, and they started in learning a little bit carpentry, you know. Bought a few tools, you know. Got fired, got the job, got fired because they didn't know anything. Then they went to another contractor, and they learned a few things there, you know, and got fired. They kept on adding tools before you know them. They were full-fledged carpenters. And when they had been carpenters for about 10, 15, 10 years or so, then they started to build houses, one at a time, you know. And sometimes they increased, so they got, after 10 years in the business, then they had a big firm, you know. But they were going to the Second World War, though. Yeah, yeah. So you went home to Sweden in 1929. Yeah. So what did you tell your parents then? Did they, they were anxious for you to stay or? Oh, yes. They were, my mother especially. But my dad realized that, that, well, he wanted me to stay, too, but... Did you explain what you were doing in St. Paul at the time? Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. They knew. My dad, my mother wrote to me every two weeks. Every two weeks? Every two weeks. And you answered back then? Yeah, yeah. So we kept up. We, but the, the postage wasn't very much at that time, you know. Now, here's what happened. At Neusborg and Cutler, the last day I worked there, see, we, the company sold out to McKesson and Robbins, the 1st of May, 1929. Now, one of the pharmacists that worked there in the lab, too, I, one of us had to be there. And he, he was going to take his vacation, 1929, in the middle of the summer. And he had planned on that. And I had planned on, but I planned on three months' vacation in 29, three months. And then we couldn't both go. So he decided he'll take mine, his vacation when I come back. We had it all made up, you know, and decided before March 1st. March 1st came on just a couple days before I got the letter saying, your employment is terminated as of 1st of March. Then, what'll I do now? Have you bought the ticket and there was some... No, I hadn't. This was before I had bought the ticket. I was, I had planned on going a little later after about April I had planned on going. So then I decided I'll go in March. But then I wouldn't have any job when I come back. So that was a problem. So the last day I was over at Noyes Brothers and Cutler in the laboratory, there was a salesman in from Chicago. We used to buy a lot of essential oils and different chemicals from them. I told him, so I know, I knew that salesman, he had been calling on us, on me for several years. He represented Fletcher Brothers. Well, I said, you're running around the country to all of these manufacturers. Couldn't, see if you couldn't get me a job when I come back. Would you do that? I didn't think that he listened to me, you know, because times weren't very good at that time. Well, they had already started in 1949. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So then I, he took up his book, you know, a little book and he added things. What will your address be? Maybe I can, he said. I got surprised. Now, my address, I gave my parents address, you know, in Yamblebrook, Newshur. And then he wrote it down. I probably will. And he asked me when I'll be back. Well, I don't know, I said. We'll fall probably. Because then I figured I'd extend my vacation for three months, maybe we make five or six months. Well, he knew that I was looking for a job then. And I went back to Sweden and I came on Dottningholm. That was a bad boat. It was small compared with Stavanger, if you will, and Dott, and some of the others. The Swedish lines, you know. Was it narrow or crowded? Huh? Was it crowded, the space in there, or? No, no, there wasn't hardly anybody going, you know, back, you know. But the ship itself, was it narrow? Yeah, it kept going like this all of them. It had three propellers, see. And it kept going like this all the time, you know. It was too small for the propellers. Yeah, and the boat was practically empty, you know. It had very few passengers. You mean going to Sweden? Sweden, yeah. So I went home and I got my old friends still remember me, my old girlfriends, too, her girlfriend, too. And you kept contact with her, too, or? Yeah, yeah. Then I was home and I bought my brother's old Ford, see. And I drove that all over the country up to Stockholm. They were going on the left side then, you know, see. I had to be very careful when I, at the turns, you know. That was, that was my only problem about it. But I didn't have any accident. I didn't have a license or anything. I got by cheap. No, I, we had a wonderful, I had a wonderful summer that, and my mother was not well. She had diabetes. But she lived for another year after I came back. I came back in September, the 13th of December. I had, I came the 13th of July. So that was 1929. I had a wonderful time there. And... So were you all set to get married in Sweden then at that time when you went back, or? No, no. Bring her with you back? Later on, she would have to go to America, but she didn't care too much about America, you see. So after I got back, we woke up, you know, with her. But she was a wonderful girl. She was daughter to one of the manufacturers in Groningen, you know, metal manufacturers, brass factories. Well, anyway, I was going to say that. When I wasn't home one day in July, in the middle of the summer, here comes a letter from A. J. Crank Company in St. Paul. I had been recommended through that company by the salesman who took down my address the last day, you know, I was there with the Noisbrothers firm, you know. Noisbrothers, they quit manufacturing, you see. And we were making money in the manufacturing, but they were losing kind of money on the... Well, you know, the chain store came in and they were underselling us, you know. We were selling to the private drug store owners, you know. So there was less and less customers because they sold out to the chain stores, you know. And the chain stores had their own manufacturers, East, McKesson and Robbins. They decided that they would buy up all the wholesale manufacturers that they could. So then when I was home, I got this letter from Walter Crank, and he was the owner of the cosmetic company. And I thought that he wanted to see me. I know he was looking for a chemist, but his father had built up that business to a huge cosmetic business, you know. And cosmetic and drugs are pretty much related to... They made some antiseptics and so forth too, but otherwise it was mostly cosmetics. At that time, was there a bigger industry than the remedy pills, the cosmetics? They started to come in more and more. Lipstick and everything, everybody was using it. Oh, yeah, yeah. Was it a big industry already? There was a big industry at that time. Was it bigger than the health industry? Like headache pills and the magnesia? Yeah, there were many big industries in the cosmetics. There was one called Almond in Des Moines, Iowa. That was our biggest competitor. But he had worked up a business this way. He used to start in his younger days. He was an old man when he died in an accident, Alfred Kronk. He was a German. And he had built up his business downtown in St. Bernard. Only a half a block from where I had worked, you know. I was supposed to cutler. There he had his factory. But he had started going around to the barbers and sharpening their blades. You know, they had those long blades. And that was the business he had. He had several people working for him in that. You mean the shaving knife? Yeah, shaving. The razor? Razor, yeah. Razors, yeah. Well, that's how he started. But he started to make tonics, you know. At that time, they used a lot of hair tonics and stuff. So he did that. Then he started a face cream they called lather cream that you smear on. You don't use in a wash. You just take it in a jar and shave, you know. That was like Burma shave. You probably heard of Burma shave. See the signs all over? Yeah. And this fellow had cranks. He had started a lather cream, too. That's a two, side two. So you were offered a position there? Well, he wrote in the letter. He didn't actually say. No, this crank, the old man crank, he built a big building in Midway on University Avenue in St. Paul. And he had a big workforce and he had added. So he had added to his line. The small, the barber line became less and less. And the other drugstore line got bigger and bigger. He had a full line of face creams, you know, and powders and everything, face powder and everything. And they were selling food to demonstrators. They had demonstrators in different store down off from Dayton, up on the west coast and in Chicago and in the big cities around there. So there was several million dollars, many million dollars of business there. But he got killed in 1928. He ran his car right into a streetcar and got killed instantly. And his son was taken over then. And his son is the one that wrote me the letter. And they didn't have any professional chemists there. Crank was the only. He took a formula and made it up, you know, and just made it by just mixing it up and making big batches out of it. Oh, the letter says, I would like to see you when you come back from Sweden to the United States. Please call on me. So that's all he said. But I knew they needed a chemist there. And therefore, I concluded that he wanted me to work for him. So when I came back from Sweden. How long did you stay in Sweden? Three months? Yeah, from first of. I didn't get to leave until the latter part of March. I had to sell my car and cleaning up, you know, different things, you know. And I got the boat in Drottningholm. So I got back to Sweden the 4th of April. See, I extended my vacation. Our arrangement with the pharmacist was off then, you see. He stayed on for another few months to get rid of some of the, settle the machinery and things like that. Well, anyway, when I came back in September, then I went right away to A.G. Crank factory and saw this fellow who owned a new owner, the son to Walter Crank. And he said that we, I'm sorry, he said, that I have nothing to offer you. I had a job for you, but we have decided to sell the company. See, his, he had a sister and she was a school teacher. She was smart and so was Mrs. Crank, the older lady, his mother. They decided between themselves that he didn't have the business head that old man Crank had and the company will be going down. It's better to sell it now while it is at top speed, going top speed. That was 1929 in the fall, September. So my heart fell in my shoes, you know. I thought now I have nothing. I had to start all over again looking for jobs. But Walter told me when I saw him in the office, he said to me, but I suggest that you go to the new owner that we are selling the company. It's just in process of being sold now, but it hasn't been signed yet. So you go to see Mr. Washburn in his downtown office. He had made millions of dollars in stock on a big railroad company that makes those big things they lift up railroads with, railroad wrecks, you know. Oh, I see. Wrecker. Wrecker, yeah. And he had made a lot of, sold that out. And he had three grown sons who he wanted to get the business for. So he bought this from Crank's. And he was in the process of buying it at the time. So when I came to him downtown, he said this, I'm sorry, we need a chemist, all right? And we can't hire you now because it's in the process of being written up. It'll have to be signed first. So come back in a week. All right? I came back in a week. And then he had my application and everything and my schooling and all record and everything and what I'd done. So you have excellent references, he said. So I'd like to, we'd like to hire you when this deal is completed. So he said, come back next week. That was two weeks then from the first. So I came back then. And then he said that, well, it's almost completed, he said, but we still haven't got it signed. Come next week. So then I came the third week. Then we signed. Then he hired me. And then, then I, he told me to come a certain date when I should come in the office at the new factory. It was a new big building, you know. It was built so that they, now they have it, that building is a kind of a historical building. They don't, that building has no more business, manufacturing business. Is that in St. Paul? In St. Paul, on University and Prior. It's still there, the building. It's a beautiful building. It's three stories. So they knew all or not? Then, then They didn't know anything about the chemistry or what was involved? He had to rely on the chemist then? They had to rely on old man Crank, you know. Yeah, but he was gone then. Yeah, he was gone for two years, see. So they had, they had to run by, well, they had a buyer there that was, he wasn't a chemist, but he doesn't, he knew how to do the buying of materials and so on. But then the new one, that is, you were going to be They had a foreman down there that was substituting, you know, pharmacists. This is a very crucial job though, I mean, with foreman. Oh yeah, yeah. Do you have to sign a contract and you didn't want to steal the recipes and the formulas? No, my job was to supervise the manufacturing, see. And that was, I didn't do the buying, I didn't have to do the buying, although the salesman usually called on me too, when they, those who sell sold materials, see. But there was a lady by the name of Ada Hunt, and she was, when, when, when Washburn took it over, she was made purchasing agent. And so was the purchasing agent, see. And she had been kind of running in those two years when they didn't have a chemist. She was, she was pretty knowledgeable about a lot of things, you know. And you have the formulas, all, she couldn't make any new products or anything like that, or analyzing anything, see. They had very little analytical work in the laboratory. In fact, the laboratory was almost nothing. She did a few tests there, certain things. But, but we, they were making mostly cosmetics, see. And the formulas were already established, established with A.J. Crunk himself, you know. And he was no chemist either, but he just took a recipe from a book and went ahead and make it, change it a little bit, change the color a little bit, you know, make it. QF. They sold a lot of hotcakes. A.A.R. Yeah. Oh, they had a big business there. We made cleansing cream, 300 pound, 300 gallon batches, in great big tanks. They were sunk in the floor, so they stood this far above the floor. And they were all glass lined with two propellers. They got several of those tanks. And then for the shaving cream, they had 150 gallon tanks, glass lined too, with one high propeller and one low propeller. QF. So shaving cream, that was a big business. A.A.R. That was a big business, yeah. QF. In the 20s and 30s. A.A.R. Yeah. But the trouble was, it was not the scientific formula, see. It was something he got cooked up himself, you know. QF. So you couldn't duplicate it. A.A.R. Well. QF. Did you get all his old recipes now? A.A.R. Yeah. Oh, yes. QF. They were sold with a deal? A.A.R. They were in works, in the works, you know. They were making them when I came there. But they were not, there was something wrong with almost anyone because shaving cream, they, you know, they have some customer down in Brazil, and he put up the shaving cream from their barrels that we shipped them, company shipped them. But, you know, the weather there is pretty hot, and when the shaving cream gets hot, it melted, you know, and became like soup, you know. It had an acid in it, boric acid in there, and the acid acted on the emulsifying agent to decrease the emulsifying power of the emulsifying agent. It was made of stearic acid as a base and alkali, and when they form a soap, see, and they act as emulsifying agent to stay, so it will emulsify. The oily part is little droplets into an aqueous face. They call it oil and water emulsion. That's what it's called. Well, that's what this, but then he had put in boric acid. That has acid reaction, and that reacts with this emulsifying agent to decompose it into acid and alkali, and then it turns to liquid. So we got barrels and barrels back from the south, from Brazil. He sent it back? They sent it back, yeah. We had to dump it. Couldn't use it. Did the people complain years ago about shaving cream and… Oh, yeah. Well, shaving cream, they improved it during the time, see. I improved that shaving cream by taking out the boric acid, you see. What did you add instead? I added petrolatum, USP petrolatum instead. That gives a small amount of lanolin, see. Lanolin is good for the skin. And after that, it never separated, never turned to soup. So you could ship on South America again? Well, they quit. I suppose they were bought from somebody else. This Burma shave now, what… Well, that's the same kind that we were making, same consistency and everything, you know. What time did they come in with all those billboards you see all around the United States? Oh, they quit. They had to quit. It runs its course, you know, and after a while it loses its effectiveness and then they have to start… You start something new. They have to… yeah. But was it in the 1920s they came in? Yeah, it was in 1929 I started with cranks. But was Burma shave already in then? Yeah, they had started, but they were very small. They were a little factory on Lake Street. But they grew up through this average, so they were doing pretty good. They were our worst competitor. How about Procter & Gamble now in Cincinnati? Were they big at that time or… Well, not like they are now. No, they were not nearly what they were now. But Procter & Gamble, we didn't have… They were more like detergent. Yeah, they used a lot of detergents and things like that. Did you make toothpaste too? Yeah, I had noise-boilers and cutlers. Not at the cranks. At cranks we didn't make that. But I made… they had… they asked me to make up toothpaste as well as shaving cream. That's the foamy kind that you use to have in tubes, you know, and that you work up a foam, you know. I made one of those. That sold pretty good. So the brush and the soap was out then? Yeah. They disappeared in the 20s? Yeah, they disappeared. But I think somebody is making something like that yet, but I haven't seen any in the stores for many, many years. And the barbers, they had the customers' shaving cup and… Yeah, yeah. …lined up. But that was a long, long time ago. A long time ago. So you were hired in 1929 in the fall? Yeah. And what happened then? You had the Depression coming on. Yeah, then the Depression came on, you know. A lot of people, manufacturers of cosmetics, had to quit. Armand went broke in Des Moines, and a lot of people couldn't stand it. The company, we lost… cranks lost a lot of business too during that time. Even though we improved, the whole line of cosmetics, about seven, eight products, was revamped as far as the ingredients were concerned, so that they would hold up in hot weather. And another thing too, the labels were revised with the modernistic-looking blue and white face, blue and silver. Silver label with blue prints on, a profile of a woman. They had that on all the labels. Before that, before I came there, they didn't have any product resembling any other. One product had one kind of label, and another had another. It was not like generic then? There was nothing unifying the light. What was the reason for it? They were capsizing the companies. Did the people buy less because of the Depression? Well, it was general depression, you know. So people bought less? People didn't have work, and they bought much less. We had to fire the demonstrators, you know, because the government figured they had a law that said this, that if you have a demonstrator in a store, demonstrating and selling the products in a big store, you have to have it in a small store too, otherwise it's an unfair competition. There was a law? A government law? Mm-hmm. There was a fair, supposed to be a fair something they called it. So the small stores, they couldn't afford to have a demonstrator, see? And then they only sold from hand to mouth, you know, or from person to person, you know. They didn't sell enough for the people to stay around. No. Business was going down. So what happened to you? Were you laid off too then, or what happened? No, the company sold out. But before they sold out, in the middle of the Depression, I worked on a new product, and I wanted to make a lotion, a skin lotion, that was as good as you could make it, regardless of cost. I put in heavy, a lot of lanolin in it. That was the secret of the whole thing. And I made a cream, a lotion, that was thick, barely thick, barely thin. You had to put it in a wide-mouth bottle. And I had worked on that for some time, and made a lot of experiments, and tested it out on some friends, you know. And I got the formula that... I made up a formula that I thought was very good, worked out. It wasn't sticky, and still it had plenty of lanolin in it, but it was dispersed and absorbed. People liked it. I had given the old man Washburn. He always came up in the laboratory once a day, mostly to learn something, because he didn't know a thing about cosmetics, you know. And I told him, here's a lotion I made. I had made about a quart or so. And I would... I think that we should try that out anyway. Nothing will sell in a Depression, you know, but maybe this is something different, you know. This is a different lotion, for skin lotion. Oh, he said, forget about it. We have a beautiful line of cosmetics now, all new labels and new, improved formulas and everything. So, we can't sell it. Why do we add another new product? We should sell what we have, he said. Well, time went on, and every day I mentioned a little bit about this lotion, white lotion. It was white, and it wasn't like Juergens, because Juergens is a kind of a pearly lotion. That's mostly glycerin and soap. That's all it is, perfume. No lanolin in it. No, and no lanolin in it. So, this is what happened. One day, he surprised me. I kind of forgot, after talking to him for a week or so, you know, about this lotion. I thought that there's no use. He won't change. So, a couple weeks went on, and then I had given some samples out to his son's wife, or to his son. They took them home to their wives, you know. And they thought that it was marvelous. They had evidently had a family get-together or something, and they had told the old man what a wonderful lotion that was. So, one day he came up, and he surprised me. I thought I would fall through the floor. He said, You've been talking to me about this for a month now. I had had pretty good reports from my daughter-in-law. Now, maybe we should decide. Oh, I said, that would be wonderful. So, make up two gallons, he said. And we still had the demonstrators in the store, he said. And I made up two gallons, and we put it up in two-ounce bottles. And we put the little makeshift label on it, and we sent it out to the demonstrators in San Francisco and in Chicago and different places, to the department stores, where we had demonstrators. Immediately, they started to write in for more. How soon can we have it? This is something we want. It'll sell, because it's excellent. It's the best thing they ever tried. And then next week, he came up and said, We have had very good reports, real good reports from this new lotion. Make up five gallons, and we'll get a bottle, a bigger bottle, three-ounce bottle, and we'll send out more samples. And in the meantime, we'll send out some of these two-ounce. So I was happy as a lark. And I thought, My goodness, he finally woke up. Then things began to happen. They got the label made, and the bottle selected, a three-and-a-half-ounce bottle with a large opening, and we started to make 40-gallon batches. And boy, you have to make one batch after the other, so we started to make 150-gallon batches. And it was really going good. And we had to make, well, every other day we had to make shaving cream, and every other day we made, we had two tanks of the small size, 150-gallon glass line. So we made one one day, and the next. And it was going, and then all of a sudden they decided that they'll sell the company in 1938. In 1937, they were four Jewish fellows. They were buying their own department stores downtown in St. Paul. And one had a factory where he made beauty supplies. These permanent waves, you know, that powdered stuff, that they put powder on. Well, anyway, they decided to get together and buy the business, so they bought it. And one of them was this young fellow. He was the one that was supposed to be president of it, Raymond Lee. And I worked for a year for him. But then I, an old man, Washburn, he took his sons out of the business and himself, when he sold the business, of course, and he told them that he wanted to keep this lotion that I had for himself, for his sons. So he asked the new owners if he could hire me temporarily just for helping him get the factory started. So I did. I made a drawing for the different kettles and so on. And they started up on Robert Street in St. Paul. And they have been there ever since. I don't know if they're still there. Their sons took it over for them. So you were not laid off then during the Depression? So I wasn't laid off. You had a steady job. Until about 1938. I worked one year for the Jews, but I didn't like... No matter how much you do, you've got to do more. Anyway... You never tried to start something on your own? Or you had these ideas you could develop? There was a little period in between there, between 1939 when I moved to Texas. It was a little year or so I tried to make up some... and sell to beauty shops. I made pretty much the same formula. But I called it Snow Bomb. Snow Bomb? Snow Bomb. But I didn't have money to advertise it with. So I decided I won't... If I had money to throw into it, I could have had a good business there. But I didn't have enough. So advertising is... Advertising is terribly important. Very much important. Well, this Bomb Argentum, that's what they call my lotion that I made. What was the name of it? Bomb Argentum. Argentum is the Latin name for silver. So it was Silver Bomb. Bomb Silver. The label had a silvery frame all around it. And a beautiful label. So they bought the trade name and the formula from these Jews. And the Jews, of course, would have to quit making it. So they sold... they bought the business, but not the Bomb Argentum. Bomb Argentum, they started to make after... with a diagram I made for them down in town, St. Paul. And they were selling through drugstores and through... all over. But somehow they were not merchandisers either. They were not chemists either. So finally it started to go down. And then they started to put... they bought a machine that put them in little pillows, they called them. They looked like little pillows, about so big and so wide. Two by two. And there was enough for one application for hands and arms and face and so on. So there was a good perfume to it all.