 This is tape number two, page number one. And we continue the interview with Frances Peterson, Molline Lenoy. When Mr. Peterson and Mrs. Peterson were married, then they built this house on 9th Street and 19th Avenue. 19th Avenue was a boulevard with a strip down the center of trees at that time. And of course it was just a block away from where his parents lived, where Mr. Peterson's parents, mother and father lived. And these two twin sisters, they never married. They lived at home then and took care of the mother and the father. And when the father died, they lived with the mother. So they stayed there in that family home. And then there was also another brother, Emil, who lived there. His wife died when his little boy was born, so then he and his little boy moved in with the two sisters. So there was kind of a neighborhood there. It was all Swedes around there. And the Brismans lived near there too. And is this the same relation as to Leroy Brisman and Dagstena? Same family? Yes, it's the same family. In fact, Mr. Brisman and Howie's dad and Howie's mother's brother were in construction together at one time, many years ago, before 1913. But then your father-in-law, he started his own, Charles E. Peterson. And then when he died, then the boys took over, the three brothers took over and just called it C.E. Peterson Sons Company. And that's still going? That's still going. So you married after working at Mother Woodman for about four years, you said? And after you married, you didn't go back to work? No, never did. Was there a custom among the people, when you married, this is it, you stay home then? Yes, it was more or less, because jobs were so scarce that it was almost a sin if two people in the family worked. I see. But was it also an indication that the man couldn't take care of his wife if she had to go out to work? Yes, it was. Was there an underlying thought about that? It was that way too, yes. And they just didn't want their wives to work. That wife was supposed to... So you married then in First Lutheran? Uh-huh. And who was the pastor? That was Pastor Engdahl. George Engdahl? George Engdahl. And Howard's next, well, youngest sister, really, it is, married Reverend Oscar Lennardson. And he was a pastor. And so he came also, so that he helped marry us, he helped tie us together. And Reverend Engdahl was just brand new there. I think he'd only been there less than a month. But it was quite often, you know, that there were two pastors to marry you. And so... Was there a church wedding then? Yes. Uh-huh. And your father was still living then? Yes. At that time? Uh-huh. Yeah. And you moved into a new home or a rented apartment? No, we moved into a new home that Howie had built for us. So he was with his father then in the construction? Uh-huh. And construction happened to be a little slow at that time still. What year was it? 1939. 1939. So Howie's dad suggested that he buy himself a lot and get started building. So that's what he did in the summer of 1939 and then the house was finished in November. So we were married on the Sunday before Thanksgiving in November and moved into it. And his brother Elmer was the one that found the lot for us. And so for about ten years, Kenneth lived on at 2365 30th Street, Elmer lived at 2360 29th Street, and we lived 2365 28th Street. We were just one block apart. And that was kind of fun when the kids were growing up, you know, the cousins together because there were empty lots in there so we'd just kind of go right straight through. And you had how many children? We had three. Three boys? No, one boy that you just met and two girls. And he continued in your father-in-law's business after he died? Yes. And they were going to grow into a big organization or corporation? Yes, they had a big... And they went in for bigger units, not family dwellings? No. There was a time when building was slow that they built a group of homes. Well, in fact, twice they built a group of homes. But that really wasn't their main construction. That was just to keep busy. They did most of their mostly commercial building. And they did a lot of work for Deering Company and a lot of the big concerns. Mostly within Rock Island County then? Yes, just locally. And over at the Arsenal? They did some work at the Arsenal. Not actually on the Arsenal, though. It was a contract off of the Arsenal. It was during the war. They built some kind of... I think they were supposed to be some kind of ammunition boxes. But that was done in their shop. And the company now is located downtown? Yes. They have to be located off at the Venture? Well, first they were downtown on 4th Avenue and 12th Street, between 12th and 13th Street. They bought a piece of property down there and they had an office. That's down where... Well, it's 1214 4th Avenue is where it is. And then from there they went out, they bought Midvale Farm. And then they moved their office out to Midvale Farm. This is the one where Venture is located? Yes. What used to be Venture. Well, it is Venture, isn't it? That's right. And then they gradually just sold off the property back there. So most of Midvale Farm is all gone now. That's when Howie retired then. Then the boys that took over, see it was two of Kenneth's boys and one of Elmer's boys that decided to continue on in the business. And that's when they moved down on 5th Avenue to this present building where they are now. But Howie never was down there. He was retired? He was retired. So this is where you could have time to spend together in Sweden, then, your husband? Yeah. He was also interested to find out about his roots, I suppose. Oh, yes. And it's very interesting. I feel really as close to them as I feel to my father's people. And, of course, I've never really been as close to my father's family, although I am, but I'm not. When we go, we have spent most of our time with my mother's people because they're closer to our own ages and, well, they're just more like us. But you have several cousins on your father's side because there were so many children there. Yes. But there weren't very many grandchildren. The two girls, they never married? No, they never married. And of the boys, let's see, there were three, four, five, six, seven. I only had about seven cousins, so that's not very many. So your father, now, he disliked to think about going back to Sweden again. No, he didn't want to go back. But his sister, though, she went back and forth. Yes, she went back and forth. Different ideas. Yeah. And, of course, it was when her mother was living, and I think that, you know, coming here to work for a little while and make big money, and she used to, she was a pretty thing, and she brought beautiful clothes, and then she'd get lonesome, you know, and then she'd go back home. So you remember her coming over here? Yes, I do. I remember her. I think I saw her maybe three or four times. But then when my grandmother died, then she stayed home with Anna, and they stayed in the family home that they had. But I saw those two sisters three times, and they lived to be 96 and 97. And my cousin, my dad's younger brother, he was here, and he lived in Rockford. He finally went from Moline up to Rockford because there was work up there. And so they had left a daughter behind because of illness, and, well, when they were both going to come to America, when all three were going to come to America, they wouldn't let them go because my uncle had a felon. I think it was on his finger. So then they had to go back home. So then in the winter, they didn't want his wife and the little baby to go because of the rough crossing, so he went himself to New York and was going to fix up a place and get a job, you know, for her to come in the spring. Well, as it happened, he got sick through the winter. Well, then his wife went, but they left the little girl behind with my grandmother. So then, of course, these hard times, then they couldn't get back. So then his work was such that he got this job in Rockford for some lock company, I believe it was up there. National Lock? No, it wasn't National Lock. They made doors for garages or something. It was Barbara Coleman. Barbara Coleman is who they worked for. It was a big company. So through the years then, they had another little girl here, and so before she got to be 12 years old, they went back to Sweden. They had saved enough so they could all go back. So he died back there, and so did she then. But the two sisters then, you see, had never met. Tara must have been 16 at that time, the one who lived with her aunts in Sweden, because my grandmother was dead, of course, so she really only knew those two. But that happened quite often in Sweden, as I understand. If we go back now to your husband's side here, Howard Peterson, he was in the middle of the fence, so to speak, between the Belgians and the Swedes, throwing diapers. He was. So he got to know the Belgian people pretty good then, when he was growing up. Yes, he did. And you mentioned that he was also interested in politics. Yes, he was. Was he an alderman for that? Yeah, he was. A Republican alderman or a Republican alderman? Yes, with Sig Andersen, if you know Sig. With Sig Andersen, yeah. He was mayor pro tem at one time. That's right. But how did they work now with the Belgian people? They were staunch Democrats, though. Well, they put him in, because they knew him. They always say that a Catholic and a Democrat is going to get in. So he had people that voted for him on the Belgian side. Oh, yes, very definitely. They really liked Howard. So they crossed the party line, perhaps, in that case. Yes. How long did he serve as alderman for that? I think, let's see, the term, was it two or three years? He served two terms. I know that. It must have been, he was either six or eight years. And he got in easy or with a pretty good majority. Yes. So it was not only the Swedes that voted him in then. No, no. They got him from the other side. Yeah, absolutely. They really liked Howard. I really don't know of anybody that didn't. I mean, he was a nice... Easygoing man. Yeah, very friendly, very good. He was interested in politics, then, apparently. Oh, he certainly was. Yeah, he was. Did he work with the school board, for instance? No, but his brother Kenny did. His brother Kenneth was on the school board almost at the same time. And he was president of the school board. But Elmer was never interested in politics. He didn't want to. He didn't want to spend time with that. No, he just never did. So you remember some of the Swedish mayors there, like Oakleve, Johnson? Oh, yes. They were also Republicans. Yes, they were. Were the Swedes Republicans when you were growing up? Most of them, you would say, or not most, but the majority of them. I'd say so, yeah. Oh, once in a while there would be a Democrat, but I think most of them were Republicans. How about from the Belgian side? Were they Republican all the months after the war? Well, no. The only one I can remember, well, there's Jess McCandless from down in First Ward. I think he was a Democrat. And then, of course, Laverne Olson, he's a Swede, but he was a Democrat from down in that end of town. When did he serve? Well, I think Jess McCandless was on the council when Howie was. I remember that. So from the Belgian neighborhood. And then there was another fellow. What was his name? From up around William Carr School. But see, Howie and those kids had played together. They had gone to William Carr School together. So they were personal friends? Yes, all of them. So the only – oh, Jess and Laverne used to fight for their end of the ward down there, because there were a lot of Mexicans, of course, down there in their end. But it was a friendly sort of thing. They never fought or anything like that. Just a little squabble. Yeah, that's right. And this was in the 50s and 60s then? I would say so. So there was a pretty good time in Moline then at that time, 50s and 60s. Everything was going up. Yeah, you bet. Inflation was coming with it, too. Yeah, that's right. And they made a booming Quad Cities. Yes, we certainly did. And the old commercial bank, did that fold up completely or? Well, yes. Dissolved. Yes, it dissolved. And never opened again. Not under that name. In fact, I don't know if anybody ever got any money back out of it. I really don't know. What happened then, like in your case now with your dad? Did he hesitate to put money in the bank again? Because I imagine when you lose it once, you would think it would be a scare to even think about going back. He never had very much money to put back in. So he didn't have to worry about it. No. My mother always, you know, believed in banks, and we always used to bank at First National because, you know, well, Ted Tolleen was a member of our church and very well thought of. And then Wally Erikson, of course, a young man, started working there under Ted Tolleen. And, of course, he lives right down the street, you know, here from Wally Erikson. And he just retired from the bank now, so he's been with the bank since he was in high school. And so, in Erikson's, Wally's parents lived just about four or five houses from my parents when they were staying with this older man and taking care of him. He was a member of our church. That's how we got in touch with him so that, you know, there wasn't much work at all. I mean, the people that had already worked in the shops for years, you know, that was one thing. They pretty well kept their jobs and everything, but my dad couldn't go back to concrete work. And finally, you know, you can't stand to finish concrete on your knees. He got old. Yeah, it was really hard. So he died when he was 62. Was it fast? Yes, it was pretty much, yeah. He had a terrible cold, one thing, and so that's what really knocked him off, pneumonia, really, toward the end. But I think he probably, you know, some of those years, it was when I was first married, too, and I really didn't know a lot about what he was doing, you know, at that time. Because Mother and Dad were living in their little house by themselves, and you get so wrapped up in your own little family and everything that... But he probably did his own little share of drinking, too. I don't know. Did they actually... Was it brought on by the Depression, you think? A lot of people had to resort to that thing. Absolutely. Because it was a... It just... No way out. It just spoiled a lot of... so much. Did you see many, what you called drunks in those days? Because there were many taverns and nobody had a car, so they were walking. Could you see many? Well, of course, where I lived, you know, I lived away from it, so I really didn't... So there was nothing up in that neighborhood? No. And, of course, all the stores were downtown at that time, downtown Moline, and, of course, they kept it well policed, you know. There weren't many people there. So they kept them all down if they were... Or put them in jail, you know, whatever. So most of the taverns were down on 3rd Avenue, you know, and, of course, the stores were on 5th, and you didn't even have to be afraid to be down on 4th Avenue in between that space in there, you know, by the railroad tracks there. Did you go down often to downtown when you were young? Oh, yes. Well, yes. Or looking in the stores? Yeah. And we didn't have to be afraid. Never had to be afraid. And Saturday afternoon, there was a day off for the family, they said. Yeah. Well, Saturday, the stores were open, you know, Saturday night. Till how long then? Till 9 o'clock. Till 9 o'clock. 9 o'clock. And that used to be, oh, the thing, you did your cleaning on Saturday morning, you know, and you took a bath in the afternoon, fixed your hair, and then along about supper time, you know, well, there weren't many people to go out and eat either because you couldn't afford to do that much. But Saturday evening, you know, early, you just went down. The Salvation Army used to stand on the bank corner, you know, and play and sing, and then all these stores were open, and men came down around 8 o'clock, you know, those that had wives that were working or girlfriends that were working, and they'd wait for the girls to get through at 9 o'clock, and they'd go off to a dance. Maybe they'd go down to Switjed Hall and Vasa and those places, and they'd have dances. So there were many that had dances the same night then? Yes, sure. And the IOGT, the Templars. Yeah. How about the Swedish-American Athletic Club of Morin, the soccer players? Well, you know. Did they have a meeting hall as such, or was it just a playing field where they played the soccer games? I don't know. I really don't know where theyóI think as far as I'm concerned, I just remember them meeting over at Thornblom's house, you know, after their games, and Ture Eggstrom, of course, he was on that, and he was a barber, so he worked, you know, untiló Shorty Eggstrom. Yeah. I just knew him as Ture. I asked for Ture, though, where he lives, and nobody knew him. Oh, really? I said, you mean Shorty. Oh, for goodness sakes. Well, you see, I never knew him, but they didn'tó I guess it's Shortó Yeah, but they didn't call him that then. But they didn't? No. I see. Notó Officially? No. No. But, you knowó So you met those fellows then because you played piano, you said? Yeah. I was only 12 years old, see? Soó So you learned to play piano early, oró Yes, because this schoolteacher, you see, lived next door, and she was also an accomplished pianist, and so she thought that I should take some piano lessons, so she talked my parents into buying a piano, and so we had a big upright piano in those three rooms. You can imagine. I had a big piano and a big sofa that folded out where I slept, and an easy chair, one of those kind that fold back, you know, that was a fancy kind, and then one wall was taken up with a heating stove. So, you know, there wasn't much room in there. But you practiced often then on this one, so youó Yes. I had to practice because my teacher lived right next door. She could tell when I didn't practice. So she kept track of you. Oh, yes, you bet. And she's the lady that put me through high school, and you know, she had no other relatives, and so I took care of her, you know, for 17 years after sheó When she became 80, she had a stroke, and I had to settle her estate and take care of her. But she was teaching you playing, though. Yes. How could you learn how to play what the Swedish-American Athletic Club members wanted to hearó Oh, welló Charles and Hamboóó Oh, sure. Weó The East King, naturally, oró No, no. They had all kinds of music. They had. Oh, yes. ThoseóI've still got some of those. You played dance music for them then, oró Well, yes, and some of those old hymn line songó Yes, yes. And like there was Kvarnvaljons Offvejd, and that's an old, old song. And then there were some of the American songs, like during the war that they sang a lot of, you know. One was the Prisoner's Song. You probably remember that. If I had the wings of an angel over these walls, I would fly, you know. And then there wasóthere's a long, long trail of binding, some of those, but mostly Swedish. And this Mr. Tomlum, though, how did he come into this? Was his son a member of the team, oró Yes. Oh, yes, all of us. See, there wasóHans was on the team, and Elmer was a baseball player. He was a member of that family. And then they had three girls, Hilma and Esther, who married Strandberg. And Hilma, of course, never married. She's still single. And then there was a MarilynóI mean, Christine, who married Rossiter. She was killed very early in life. And let's see, who else was in that family of the boys? Clifford Thornblom's father. Now, what was his name? But anyway, it was just a meeting place over there, you know. It was a big house. It's where Salvation Army stands right now. And you see, Mrs. Thornblom was a sister of Mrs. Magnusonóthat would be Brian's grandmotheróand Mrs. Bernberg. And they all had boys. Well, there wasóI'm trying to thinkó there was Ole Magnuson, and that was in the second generation. There's just a big raft of cousins, you know. So they met there, and you had to play for them. Yeah. And there were some that weren't related, too. There wasóand I'm sure you remember some of the names of some of the fellows, like Mildred Carlson's husbandó Who, Nels? Well, there was Nelson Philip. Nels Philip, yeah. And, well, they used toóthey had a house and then a great big yard in between the next house. So there were fellows there all the time. If they weren't kicking socceróplaying soccer out there, they were playing baseball, you know, pitching baseball back and forth. So did you see them play soccer, the team matches? No, I never did. You were too young then toó Yeah, I really was. The only thing I did about that time was when they used to have dances down at Gutempler Hall. And, well, Mildred WedinóI don't know if you know her or not. No, I heard her name, but I don'tó She married Ernieóthey belonged to our church. Oh, dear. Well, anyway, she used to be down there a lot. She was a beautiful dancer, and they played all Swedish music down there. And, oh, I thought that was so much fun to go down there and dance Swedish. And, of course, some of the fellows would take me for a partner once in a while, you know. Yeah, that was fun. But that was only for a couple of years, and then, of course, like I say, then I went to live with Miss Astrum, so I didn't get a chance to do that anymore. But they used to have so much fun. Well, I'm sure that a lot of activities going on. Yeah. And a lot of Swedes down at that time, too. Could you see there was a Swedish community at that time? Oh, very definitely. There were so many Swedes around. Because the churches were full of them, of course. Yes. All the Swedish churches. Yeah. But, you know, a lot of these fellows that were on these soccer teams and playing baseball and so forth. They didn't go to church, though. They didn't go to church, no. So there was also a segment that didn't go to church. Oh, yes. Yeah. This is tape number two, and this is page number two. So... Preparing for the holidays, what happened in your home? Did your dad bring home a Christmas tree long before Christmas, or was it your time before? No, I never had a real tree. My folks bought a little artificial tree, you know, that folded up straight, because we didn't have, you know, much storage in that little place. And so every year that little tree came out, and at the tips of each of those branches, it had a place to hold a candle. A live candle. A live candle. What was it made of, wood? Paper. Paper. Yeah, the bottom part in the trunk was made of a stick of wood, you know. But it was wire out of... the branches were wire, of course, and somehow it was twisted so that there were little strips of green paper, you know. It wasn't bad, really. It stood on a table, then? It stood on a table. It was about four feet high. And, of course, it had candles in it, but we never lit the candles, excepting at Christmas, you know, at Christmas Eve and maybe Christmas Day, because that was dangerous, you know. If that caught fire, just going up in a big hurry. But I remember that at Christmas time there were a lot of old Swedes, like I say, from around Karlskoga, and they used to always stop in. My mother always had food, you know, ready. Brown beans and potato sausage and meatballs, so that she'd have some on hand for that particular time. And a lot of the fellows would come and sit around the table and have a coffee. You know, I don't even know what the yuk was. I think it's whiskey that they put in their coffee. Of course, I never got any of it, so I never knew what it tasted like. And then they'd tell little stories, you know, about home. Once in a while my father's brother, Troy, used to come down from Rockford, and then there was an Axel and Gerta Swanson that always came down and spent the holidays. They were farmers up in Minnesota. She was from Karlskoga too, but she always used to tell me she was from the other side of the tracks. She said that my grandparents were so strict with my dad's sisters because there was nobody that was good enough to marry them, see? And she said, and I was from the other side of the tracks. But, you know, it was true when Holly and I looked up where she used to live, there was a railroad track that ran through there, but she always used to tell me, all my life she told me, and she just died now last October. I took care of her for 15 years. And she always said, Well, Frances, I knew your grandmother real well. She was such a pretty woman, but she was so fat, she said. She always told me she was so pretty, but she was so fat. So, but I think they were very strict there. At Christmas Eve, now, did you receive any Christmas gifts then, or juleklappar? Christmas Santa Claus? No. No Santa Claus? No. I always had a present from my, from Kalmar, from my grandmother. They sent from Sweden? They sent from Sweden. And I always had a present from my mother's brother in Colorado. But, and then, well, it was Aunt Ellen, my, this sister of my dad's that went back and forth. She was always the one to send to. And then, so I say I got from Kalmar and from Karlskoga and from Colorado. But those were the only Christmas presents I got. So what did they send then from Sweden, for instance, from Kalmar and from Sweden? Oh, like Aunt Ellen would send, she sent me maybe a silver spoon. One year she sent me a little pouch-like bag to keep a handkerchief in, you know, and it had a mirror on the bottom and a little thimble inside, a silver thimble inside. And I've got all those thimbles in there in the living room in there that she sent me. And, oh, maybe a little kind of a leather purse of some kind. But it was always something kind of pretty and ladylike. And my, from, that was from Karlskoga. And from Kalmar it usually was something homespun, you know, in linens or something like that. And they came in time for Christmas? Came in time for Christmas. And they sent it early, I'm sure. Well, they'd send it early and then my mother would hide it until Christmas Eve. Oh, I see. Yeah, or Christmas morning. I guess it was Christmas morning that we celebrated more than Christmas Eve because Christmas Eve we always went to church. But you didn't go to Julotta in the morning? Yes, we went to Julotta in the morning. But, oh, that's right. It was Christmas Eve that we celebrated because we got up and went to 5 o'clock service at Julotta. And you lived so close, you had no trouble to get down there? No, no. But Howard's family, they'd get up early enough and they always used to walk down to church from 19th Avenue and walk back home. That was a long walk. Yeah, it was. Walking though it was cold. But that really meant a lot. Our church still has, for many years they had that 5 o'clock service. And while our kids were growing up, they used to complain because we always went, when they started having the midnight service, we would go to the midnight service and then we'd wake them up to go to the 5 o'clock service too. And they thought that was terrible that we did that. But we wanted them to hear a little bit of Swedish and participate in that. And you know they're glad for it now. They kind of wish there were still that old service. Because so often coming out of the service about 7 or 7.30 in the morning, sometimes it would snow and it was so pretty. And the young people would all gather together and they would go and carol at different homes for a while and then they'd all go home for the rest of the day. Has it been a Swedish Yule as long as you remember in the first Lutheran? Oh, yes. Now, of course, it's gotten later and later. We have our midnight service. It seems like people like to come to that. In fact, they have one at 5 o'clock too for the families. But the 12 o'clock or the midnight one is the most popular. And then they do have that Swedish service in the morning. And it's usually pretty nice. I think most people go to the Salvation Army one and then they come over to ours and then we have coffee. And I don't know if they have any coffee over at Salvation Army in between. But a lot of the old Swedes still carry on and do that. And what have you carried over now with you from your mother's traditions of cooking and preparing for holidays? Well, all through the— Sylt, lutvisk, köttbullar. Yes. And we've always, when the children were growing up, and even with the grandchildren now that have our home for Christmas and everything, Howard made a sausage stuffer. And so we used to make maybe 30 pounds of potato sausage for Christmas. And so we'd set aside the day, you know, maybe a week before Christmas, and we'd all get together around the kitchen table, you know, and some would turn the skins and others would wash them, you know. And then others of us were mixing the stuffing. And then when we got all ready to stuff, why, then everybody was around the table and we had all kinds of pans, you know, and we'd stuff and cut and flatten them out and get them all ready and put them in the pans and then we'd be cooking some of them. And by the time we got all through making the sausage, then we would eat some. So you were—there was a whole family affair then? Yes. And the grandchildren, they still want that stuffer. And the Arp family has borrowed that stuffer for years because they've carried on that same tradition because they could borrow our stuffer, see. And it's a big one, so you just go—you plunge on it. And so—and they still carry—they carry on that tradition now because the two daughters live in Houston—I mean, one daughter lives in Houston and one lives in Dallas. And the one that lives in Dallas, when she comes home at Christmas, why, we always have to make potato sausage. And then the boys—she has one boy, and when they come up then, we make our potato sausage, and then all the boys get together, Bruce's two, and the girls that are here, and they roll in meatballs, you know, for me and everything, so we make all our meatballs. And the girls like lutefisk, so we always have lutefisk. Those that don't like it just don't eat it, that's all. But everybody loves the herring, and I always pickle that, and now the girls do too, by the gallon, you know, about two weeks before Christmas, so it really tastes good. So we still do that. And how about the Christmas gifts now? Are they given out on Christmas Eve or—? Yeah, Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. That's when we have our get-together, and then they have their own family get-togethers on Christmas Day. Do you have Santa Claus coming down for the graduation? Not anymore, no. No. See, the youngest—the two younger ones are 12 now. So there's two left. So they're Santa Claus. They pass out the gifts, and they put on the hats and pretend like they're Santa Claus. They still like to carry that on, and there have been a few years when they haven't been able to get home, you know, for Christmas. But last Christmas—and, of course, see, four years ago—well, it'd be four years this next Christmas—Howie died. And so we didn't have a Christmas much, you know, that year. But last year—last Christmas now, I asked for the whole family to come home because I was anticipating that I would—it'd be my last Christmas here. And so everybody was here, and it was just a wonderful Christmas. And, you see, the boys are 17 and 18, and the girls are 12 and 14. And they had the most fun together, you know, doing all these things. We just did all that sort of thing for Christmas. And they like to carry on, you know. It's surprising how much it means to them. And so does Midsommar. How about—did you celebrate the years back? Do you remember when you were young? Midsommar? Yeah. No. There was not such a thing here. How about the church now? They have celebrated Lucia a few times. Yes, but it's just our ladies' organization that celebrates that. And the church now today, are they interested in the Swedish tradition or anything, or is it too many outside elements joining the church? There aren't as many Petersons and Johnsons and Brismans in the church anymore. They are thinning out, yes. But we do observe some of the Swedish traditions, but we don't have smörgåsbords anymore. But our LCW carries on with Lucia. And then we have our—just our—our yulotta. That's really all anymore. It's just those of us that belong to, you know, the Augustana American Scandinavian group. So— Made my father wish not to go back. He had a little brother that used to pester him a lot. And I think what happened when those two were together was a horse kicked this little brother in the head and killed him. My dad would never talk about it. And it affected my dad so much that he wanted to leave home. And I think it probably, you know, made my grandparents, or at least my grandfather, who was very strict, it made him angry. And perhaps it was hard for him to understand, you know. And I'm sure that that's one of the very reasons that my father wanted to leave home, but he never would talk about it. Did he correspond often with his home or mother or father? No, he didn't. Did he get the most news then? Well, he found out through the brothers. Now, Tura that lived in Rockford used to correspond very well because he had his little girl there, you know. And so he always—they sent money every month for her upkeep to my grandmother. And so they would get letters back. And Tura and my dad kept in contact with one another. But otherwise, you know, there wasn't a lot of contact. There were a lot of people that just never wrote back and forth. One day after another went and they— Yeah. I know a lot of these older people. There was one old fellow who had no relatives here at all. He was just a bachelor, but he was a good friend of my dad's and my mother. And he was a watchman down for Deering Company. Swan Anderson his name was. And he took such a liking to me. He thought I was the nicest little girl. And every year when there was the fair, Mississippi Valley Fair over in Davenport, he would take a day off from work. I just can't believe this now, you know, that I'm grown. He took a day off from work. We would get on the streetcar, and there were several transfers to get way out to the Davenport, Mississippi Valley grounds. And we would spend all day there on any ride I wanted to go to. You know, if I wanted a piece of jewelry, if I wanted something to eat, you know, just anything I wanted to do. Was he related to you? Not at all. Just a friend? Just a friend of the family. And he took a day off? He took a day off from work to take me there. They wouldn't do that today? Nope. And we'd come back home on the streetcar. Oh, that's wonderful memories. Yeah, he was such a nice old friend. And I think, you know, he appreciated that whenever he came to the house, my mother always had something for him, you know, to eat. And he was always treated like somebody in the family. And you know it was awful crowded. There was always room for one more. That's right. Oh, yes, and in that living room there was also a dining room table, an oak table. And it must have been about 44 inches round and four chairs. I don't know where all the furniture was when I think of it now. Because I'm sure the room wasn't this big. No, I'm sure not. No. Because this is exceptional. No, it was probably, yeah, about half of it across here. Oh, that's... Yeah, but it really was quite a sweet town, you know. And then down at the corner on 6th Avenue and 13th Street, there was a Baptist church for many years. And so there were a lot of people, you see, that came to the Baptist church, too. But there was a division between the Methodists and the Baptists and the Roots. Oh, yes, you betcha. But Salvation Army seems to be an organization that everybody could go to without being offended or offend anybody. That's right. So they were more liberal then, or was it a singing, you think, through the Salvation Army? Oh, absolutely. I think it's the music. The music. The music, absolutely. And they still sang some of the old Swedish songs, you know, and held in with that tradition. And so the old Swedes felt that they could go there. And the Army captain always spoke Swedish. During the Depression, no. The Salvation Army, they had a soup line. Yes. How about the rest of the churches? Not like the First Luther, they didn't have anything like that. No, no. It was only Salvation Army. Well, yes, but our church all through these depressed years, they have served these dinners that the government served, you know. And they still have them. They do? Yeah. How often? They're brought in. Well, I think they're called meal sites. Would they bring them out to the families then in their homes? No. Well, no, no. You come to the church and you have to call and say that you're coming in. But, I mean, this is a government thing. And I think the meals are only, what are they, a dollar and a half or something like that. It's very inexpensive anyway. And I've never gone down to them, you know. But a lot of the people that live downtown in those apartments around, they come over to the church. And so I think it's three times a week, if I'm not mistaken. So, you know, they've always used our church for something like that. And our church has always collected, and I think most of them do, foods for distribution. So in that way we have, but we've never had a soup line. But there are a number of us that are always given to the Salvation Army. I always have. For their program, you know, this one fellow that started out in that little store there on 12th Street Hill that started serving Thanksgiving dinners and that sort of thing. And they do a good work. Yeah.