 15 October 1986, I am sitting here with Stephen Ingram Northsea in Rockford, Illinois. He was born in 1893, December 26th in Engelholm, in Skåne, and came to America in September 1911. 1911. Yes, shall we speak Swedish or do you prefer... Well, then which one do you prefer? Yes, yes. Yes. So, can you tell us a little bit about your father, Anders Nordsjö, he is called. Yeah, well, there is not much to talk about because I was three years old when he passed away. So you don't remember him? Oh yes, I remember him awful well. Because I know, you know in Sweden, they have the corp in the living room. So then he lay there in that chair so I could cover it up when I kissed him. Oh, you remember that? I remember that, yeah. Oh, he was a wonderful man. You know, he got pneumonia and then, yes, you know, they didn't know much about pneumonia at all. So then he passed away. So, Nordsjö, where does the name come from? Was that an old family name or... Well, I don't know, that's something I can't tell you. But he was born in Västergötland. Well, I think he was born in France. In France? I think so, if I'm not mistaken, I believe so. Because then he went from there to Stockholm and there he met my mother. And she was born in Stockholm? Yeah. So then I guess they got married and then they moved over to Västergötland. You know, he was a foreman for the leather factory. He had two, there were two leather factories in Ängholm. So he went to one place and to the other place, see? So he was a tanner then? Yeah. So he was a regular. But he can't call for supertans, so he went from one place to the other, and then two factories. So what happened then, how many children was it in the family? Seven. Seven of them? Mm-hmm. How many boys? Four boys and three girls. And you were one of the, you were the youngest then, or? No, I had one younger one. One younger one? Yeah. It was that easy then for your mother to... No, but she was working every day and they helped her. They had to clean the house and cook. You start from the old one and go to the little one. So that's the way they do it. You all had to pitch in to... Oh yeah. It was yours. Yeah. Then I was 14 years old. Then I left my hometown and went up to Bjergskog, Kormanstadt. And they were not close to Klippan. I went in to be a trager for a live. So I worked there from 14 years old until I left the United States. I see. So... So you left in 1911. What was the reason for that now? You had other brothers and sisters over here? Yeah, I had my sister. Just one? Yeah. And she wrote to you then? Yeah. Or you wrote to her, or what happened? Well, I wrote to her, but I never thought I was going to go to the United States. No? So then... Well, my sister and her girlfriend, they went to the United States. I don't know really the year, you know. Because I was just, I think, about 11, 12 years old when she left, you know. So then she come home. So she said to her, Well, tell... I'd like to have Stephen coming over to the United States. So that's why, you know, I left. So I told her, I walked up down on the Nest on Julenschwerda. She was a wonderful lady to me. So you had a pretty good job there? Oh, yeah, I had a wonderful job. So you were an apprentice gardener then, or what you were? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So she told me, you hired out for another year. Well, I tell you... So she said, I can keep you here. Oh, no, I ain't too young. If I had been 18 years old, then you can tell me I have to take that year off. So I hired out for another year. So I had been there three years. Then they sent me to school up in Gothenburg. So they paid for the schooling for me. So then after, when the old man passed away, then I took his job, see. I took his job anyway when I was there. There was a job you liked? Yeah, I used to love it. I was boss of all them, you know, the state. They started, if they got them work so many days a year, then they get free housing. So that's why I took care of all them, from coming to work. And they really were interested in that. But, so I figured, well, I can't do nothing but try to get in like that too. So your sister, you know, that was over here, was she much older than you? Oh, yeah. She was the oldest one? No, I have an older brother. What was her name? Svea. Svea? Nuford? Yeah. And she was not married then when she asked you to come over? Yeah, she was married then. So then my brother come over too, because he was a sailor. He went out on the sea when he was 14 years old. We all left home when we were young. So then he said to my mother, well, I think I go to United States too. So she said, okay. So they bought tickets. We come over, have dinner. Did you buy your own ticket this week, or did your sister's? No, no, no. My mother pays. Was your mother? Mm-hmm. So then they come over here and work, you know. Well, I start to work for a dollar a day. So then I have a little money, then I send it back to my mother for the tickets. So we pay her back, you know. But when you left, now then, then you had to go to the pastor to get the dismissal letter. What did the pastor tell you when you asked for the... Well, he said, I can't understand that you like to go to United States. Were there a lot of young people that left at that time? Oh, yeah. There was no one then all over that... No, but you see, there were lots of young fellows that could go to the army. So that's why they went over to United States. That's the way. Yeah, sure. So when you were 17, 18, that was the time to... Yes, that's good. So you, what did you pack in your suitcase when you left? Did your sister tell you to bring something special or... No, no. We just took regular clothes with us. You didn't have any food along for the travel or... No, you get food in there on the ship, you know. Everything was taken care of on the ticket? Oh, yeah, sure. You went through Helsingborg first. Then over to Copenhagen, from Copenhagen over to Liverpool. So then from there... You took the train then from Ulm, I suppose, to Liverpool? Huh? No, we took a boat. Directly to Liverpool? Yeah, you see, we have to go over to North Sea. Oh, I see. And that, I tell you, that sea, that started getting wild. So the ship, they went this way and this way and they were... They'd take the pants and everything and go around like that. You got sick too? No. Not my brother either. So they had some kind of salt, bologna. So my brother said to me, well, are you sick? No. Well, he said, take a piece of this anyway. You had that with you? Yeah. So then, you know, when we come to Liverpool, then we threw that away. He just took that with. So I'm not going to be sick. He thought I was going to get sick. So they actually helped them with this bologna? Oh, yeah, sure. Salt. It was good for the stomach? Oh, absolutely. But otherwise it just came right out? Oh, the smell. You had your brother with you then? Yeah, my brother was with me. What was his name? Alvin. Alvin? Yeah. An older brother? Yeah. My oldest brother, his name was Rudolf. And then my sister Svea. Then Alvin. And then me. And then Elin and Clara. They're all seven. Oh. So... And they all left? No, I got... My oldest brother was home. And then my three... Then my three sisters. They stayed in Sweden? They stayed in Sweden, yeah. I sleep over here. We were three here before. So how about the trip from Liverpool to New York? Do you remember the boat? Was it the Cunard Line? The Cunard Line, yeah. That's all I remember. I don't know the name of it. But it was an English boat anyway. And that trip was... Yeah. Eleven days. Eleven days. So what happened then when you came into New York? Did you... Well, then you have to stop in English Island and go through there. How did that work? Did it... They locked us up. No problems? No. Didn't have any problem at all. But you see, then they lock in your eyes and they... Well, they shoot them for... Smallpox? Smallpox, yeah. Well, you didn't have it in Sweden? Oh, yes, I had it in Sweden. So then... Then they come and shot in me. I had a little mark from Sweden. So then they shot it in my body, you know. And he tried to suck it out. And you see his arms filling up in place. I said, what do you have to do that for? Well, I don't like that arm thing in my body. I said, I don't bother with it. I don't fool around with it. I'll let it be. So it got over. Then you got that right mark there, see. But he was vaccinated in Sweden too, though? Yeah, sure. We all had to be vaccinated when we were just young kids. So he got sick then? Oh, you see his arms filling up. But they happened after you left Ellis Island, though? Yeah, sure. They didn't see it? No. They didn't see it. Or send them back? Yeah, they had. Yeah, sure. So did he go to the doctor for it? Or it just went down by itself? No. Then, yeah. They come over here. They had some salve, you know, they put down. So they went down. So then they took the train to Chicago? Yeah. No, they took the train from New York City to Chicago. Then they had to change there or take another car. Then they stopped over here on 7th Street, you know. There was a station there. So then we went from there over to Jamaica Center. So they gave them all the stations and the meters. So then we went over to him. So then we stayed there one week. So then my brother said, well, I think I joined the Good Temple in Sweden. I think I'm going to join the Good Temple there. So he joined a week after we was there, Sunday. So then he said to me, well, how about you? Ah, I say, I see if I can find some boys, you know. So then, so then probably I joined later on. So then I joined a week after, Sunday. Did you get any girls? No, Linnea. Linnea? Yeah, I had Linnea Scandinavia here. So then, it be there probably a couple, four months. Then I won his name, or... Really I can't remember his name now. But he organized, we had to organize and build another Good Temple there, you know. So many to take care of the, well, the priest and the stuff like that, you know. So then I said, well, I go with. So then we organized Vega. I think it was 1912. So we had a, well, we had a real good time. Why did you join another large, I mean, organize another large when you had one, Linnea? Well, you see, the Vega had one up here on Broadway or 7th Street. Or Linnea was located... Linnea was on 7th Street, the Scandinavia was on 7th Street. So then the Vega, they could have one up here and the East Side, so it's down there. And so I was... So you were actually one of the charter organizing members then? Yes, yes. So you had to take one of the officers? No, not first. There were other people who had been. But I was president there. My secretary, vice president, well, I had all... They were in the stewardess, what you call it. And you had already joined the IOGT in Sweden when you... No, no, I don't know. You were not a member there? No, no. You see, my brother, he drank so damn much. But I don't like to have that down there. But so he... You joined for the first time then when you came over here to Rockport? Yeah. Did you know about the temperance in Sweden? Oh, yeah, sure. They had lodges there. Oh, they had lots of lodges, the difference. IOGT and National and... They had lots of good temperance. Well, you know, IOGT, they were over the whole... Over the world? Yeah. But I mean at that time, you know, in 1900s, they... Yeah, yeah, but they had good temperance there. So you joined them as soon as you came into Rockport? Yeah, sure. And how many members were there then, about 100? Oh, there were lots of... No, there were about, I think, one regular lot, over 100. But the other lots, there were 75 or somewhere close to 90. But at that time, you didn't have your own meeting hall. No, we rented, yeah. So then, that big... If you have seen that big house there on 15th Avenue and 9th Street. The big house? The big house, yeah. We built that. What year was that? In the 20s? No, they were earlier than that, I think. So we chipped in, you know. Well, there were carpenters in the lots, you know. And they laid the bricks and electric. So we made it ourselves. It was a big building over its time. Oh, yeah, sure. You were not afraid to build it too big so you couldn't pay for it? No, no, we were not afraid of that. Because everything was down-shipped then, so... And you had all the tools and all the power to construct it. And there were two floors. Yeah, they were interesting. So you had a meeting hall on the second floor then? Yeah, then we rented out, you know. Then we had a meeting in the basement. So then they... I think by the year, then they changed over again. So then they make a restaurant there. So we had a restaurant, that too. They were ideal? Yeah. And they served the dinner is breakfast? Dinner is breakfast, Sunday, so... Well, you know, otherwise, the other fellas, they have to go to the restaurant here on Broadway. But then we figured, then we just can go there and eat. So you employed the manager to take care of that? Yeah. And there was a cooperative? Yeah, the vice-cooperative, yeah. Did that work out all right, or did you make any profit on it? Oh, yeah, sure. And they started in 1920, still? Yeah. And continued during the Depression, too? Yeah, sure. No, they don't do that. In the Depression? No. Because then people come down and like to have food for nothing. You know, they could... They had not enough money to feed them. That was impossible. I see, so they were close to the early 30s. Yeah. So, because... And it was open for everybody? Yeah. You didn't have to belong to the Temporary Store? No, no, no, no, no. I tell you, there were people there who came in every day and every Sunday. But, you know, the Tech had that organization so we could make some money. So we could pay that. The building? So then the downfill, you know, then they sold that and built another temple out on... Yeah, then you go to Chicago. And then they opened the woods. So then we had to sell that. We couldn't keep it up. Oh, you mean camp and wood? No, no, no. No, that, we keep up. There was also Vega though, wasn't it? Yeah, there were all the... Rockford and... Yeah, and Linnea and all three... But they did another one out there, you said? Yeah, sure. Why did they do that when they had this one? Well, they think they got too much, see? So they sold it. So then they had to sell that. I think they sell it to the signers. So now they rent the hall out there. On Charles Street. On Warren Avenue, where is it? Well, I don't know. So they're stuck. I never belonged to them then, so I never came in sight. But we go out there and sing, you know, this fair group, from there in. So then we have some doings, and the rest will come over there. Why did they sell this though? Was it a bad location, or why did they want to get it? No, I don't know. If they were not... if they don't have enough members. You mean the membership drop? Yeah, sure. They're right for the large. They meet in the homes. So they didn't have many members in them, large in the moment. So the large was strongest then, or both larges were strongest then in the 20s? Oh yeah, all three larges. All active in the... And then it started to drop down. But you would think the prohibition would have made it strong though. Well... Did they affect anything about the large life? Oh yes. In what way? Well, you see, some of the guys, these land pigs, you know, some of the guys, some had been drinking before. So they could... well, I guess, they go out there and try to get some stuff, you know, and so the good temples, they don't know it. So I was chief temple, I'm there again. So one fellow come to me, he said, Oh, is that fellow good temples? Yeah. Well, he was with me to the land pig, and had a pot whiskey. I said, What? Yeah. So he come to the meeting. So I said, Hey, actually come here. Let me see what you want. Well, I just like to talk to you. I said, Were you with so and so, I think his name was Carl Johnson, were you with Carl in the land pig and bought whiskey? No, he said, Not me. Well, that's perfectly okay, but I'm going to find out anyway. So I talked to him. So I said, Next Thursday, you come up to Dweger. Okay. And he come. So then he come. He said, Well, has that guy you were with. Is he lying or you lying? Which one of you do that? Well, I said, I bought it. So then he scribed him up. So the blind pig, they was the bootleggers? Yeah, bootleggers, yeah. Oh, there was one fellow, then Dr. Lapson went over, said he had to serve beer and wine. If you remember, I don't know if you remember, I guess probably you don't. Yeah, I know about it. Oh, you know about it, huh? So there was one fellow, he went in there every evening to have a glass of beer. So there was one, his name was Victor Swister, he saw he went in there. So, Swister told me about it. So then I talked to him. Yeah, but they didn't have much alcohol in that. I said, Sure, there is. If you drink navy beer, that's a different story, but you take the regular beer. So I said, if you like, start over again, OK, otherwise just about get out. So he said, I don't know that. And that's alcohol and beer. I said, enough. Navy beer, they just like, more like a soft drink, you know. But if you get thirsty, that's nice to drink, just the same, see. So, yeah, I said, then I'm going to buy navy beer, not other beer. I don't thought that had anything to do with the good temps I certainly had. Because there's so much percent alcohol in it. How about the homemade brew they made the beer, was that also strong? Oh yeah, sure. Were there allowed to do that in the homes? No, but they do it anyway. So, but you know, you can't watch everybody. There were lots of people I think that drink, but they weren't said so, see. So, that's out of control. So if the depression hadn't been, do you think the temperance been stronger, the prohibition and the... No, they didn't get any stronger. No, but I mean, the depression was a bad time, people got depressed. Yeah, but... Do you think that turned them into drinking more? Yeah, that might be true, I don't know. But them people that was in the good temper, we stick together. We stuck together. Yeah, we didn't, never nobody went out. They were out of work too, I suppose, many of them. Oh yeah, sure. I was not out of work though. No? Uh-uh. What kind of a job did you get now when you came in here to, your sister helped you or? No, I helped myself. You stay with your sister and... Yeah, I stay with my sister till I got married first, I got married. And you married in 1915? Yeah. So then you know, she was born in Brooklyn, New York. Yeah, how come you ended up in Brooklyn though? Well, that's a big story. You want to have that too? You mean you left Rockford then? No, no. She, her sister, her mother's sister, so then he said, well, I'm going to Sweden. And he was young. So then, so then she said to her sister, take Eddie with you. Because then he can, then she can see Grena. Which she can stay there over summertime. So then you know her sister, she fell in love with one fellow that worked for the, for the city. And he hired her out for a year, for electric. Him and another friend of him, you know. So then they got married. So she had to stay, he had to stay there. He didn't go to United States. Because he hired her out for a year and he had to stay there, just the same. So they lived there. So then she was, I was half a year older than her. I was born in 1893, she was born in 1894. So there was one fellow, kind of good looking guy, you know, he, he hold her hand. Because they, they were on the second floor. So I said, I know you, I'm going to do something. I set my arm around her and went down. So she stayed there. And the fellow he come and take her hand and said, leave me alone. So then I come, so then I took her arm around her and went down. I took her out, you know, to show her. If they have any doings in Tivoli in the park, I took her. So we went, we went together every week, Saturday and Sundays. So, so then she then, when they were ready to go back to United States, she said, well, even, then he said, Stefan, now I'm going to go to United States. And I said, I miss you, because I love you. You're just a kid, you know. Oh, I kissed her, said goodbye to her. So I told her, well, you write to me. They were in Engleholm, yeah. And his grandma lived in Engleholm. I know her, I heard her release in Engleholm, see. So she said, yeah, I'm going to write to you. So she wrote to me. I wrote back. So then when I went to United States, I forgot her address in Connecticut. So I wrote to my mother. I forgot Eddie's address, though. So you send the address to me when you write the letter. So she did. So I wrote to her. She was surprised. So I wrote to her, yeah, letter every week. From Everett? So then, yeah, I think about 19 years old, I sent her a dime or something. Oh, you sent her a... You didn't ask her to marry you or anything like that? No, no, no, I just... You sent her a... Yeah, yeah, nearly done. So they engaged, see. So I told her, well, if you find a better fellow than I am, it's okay with me. But don't send her in to me, for you'd have to make it as lengthy as it goes. From the side too. So then I said, no, I had a good job, so I don't think I can move down to Bristol, Connecticut. He moved from New York down to Bristol. Her parents were there too, then? Oh, yeah. So, well, then I say, well, I don't think, because I had a good job at Lansing Summer Car Prices. I was foreman there. Already then? For the whole, yeah, for the whole Vanilla Pound. How were you able to advance so fast in your job? Well, you see, it happened that the old boss, he got sick. So he went up to the hospital. So he got an operation. So then he had to take care of the glue spreader up on the second floor. I took care of all the fellows down the basement, they cut out the veneer and matched them together, so forth, so on. So then one fellow, he had been there, he was the oldest one, and then I was the youngest one. So then they gave me to be boss. For the guys, you know, when they're going to pick the veneer, we were afraid to pick the veneer. So they always asked me. And I had never been there very long, you know. You never had experience or anything in there? No, no, I just stopped. You just stuck your nose in there? Yeah. So then a soup came to me, so she said, Well, Steve, you help the guys to pick veneer. So I said, How about the oldest one? No, sis, because they always ask you. And they tell me that you know more about it than what they do. But, sis, you'd be responsible now. So I said, Sure, if I do anything wrong, it's okay with me. And then I said, I must do wrong. But how about the language now? Did they speak Swedish there? Swedish and, well... Were you able to converse with them in English? Oh, yeah. And the workers? Yeah, I understand English anyway. Were most of them Swedish workers? Yeah, sure, they were all Swedes. Except when the salesman come and show veneer. The veneer, you know, when I take out. But you would think there would be a lot of older Swedes that have been there many years? Yeah, sure, there was that. But they were not able to... No. They didn't have the right snuff? No. So... So... So then... They went on strike. Oh. So then Lansdom come to me. So he said, Well... Steve says, What are you going to do now? Well, I said, I got a job. Because you were not with the strike then, because you were a foreman then? Yeah, I was a foreman, yeah. You didn't have anything to do with the strike? No, no, no, no. So I said, Well, that's perfectly all right, you call them back. And I leave here and go to the Republic Furniture Company because he had called me so many, many times to come over there and take care of the veneer department. So you don't need to worry about me. So then he said, Oh, no. So then I said to the old man, Lansdom, I'm going to hire new guys. You have two spreaders going. But I'm going to work so hard that we're going to put three spreaders going. Because they make plywood all over the United States, the feds. Oh, he said, I don't think so. Well, I said, that's okay. But if I say anything, I mean it. So yes, we start with three spreaders. He come down. You know, everybody was afraid of him. Oh, he was the tough. Oh, Lansdom. Oh, he was tough. Was he an older guy? Oh, yeah, a small lady. He was a young lady. He come when he was just small. So he found a little piece of veneer, but that long and that wide. Oh, see, he said, I have a penny. Yeah, I said, I tell you what you can do. Get nine more, then you get ten cents. Oh, he looked at me. I said, if I had more, you can get the heck out of here. You belong in there. You belong in the other end. You have your office. There you can control, and I control down here. What did you dare to say there? I mean, you were just a greenhorn coming in there and telling the boss. Don't make any difference to me. Because, I tell you, I don't pay anything for it. But you were not afraid to be fired, though? No, no, no. I was not afraid of that. So Lansdom's factory, now, what was the name of that one? Lansdom's Furniture. Lansdom's Furniture. So, he went up to the soup. He said, there is a young chap who can tell straight out to anybody. He's not afraid of anybody. It was you then? It was me. He said, Steve said that to me. So, the soup came down and asked me, are you dare to say that? I said, why not? He said, nobody can say anything there when I'm right. If I'm wrong, then I beg, excuse me, I was wrong there. So he said, how you dare to? I said, I dare to do anything. So then he said, I like him. He's not afraid of me. So, one salesman comes from Chicago. Yeah, the owner of the baking and veneer company. So, I pick so many. I like, you know, I like, we have to take away. We have to take away the home. So, he put arm around my shoulder, oh, Steve, take a few more. So, I told him, if you are not satisfied with what I pick, pack them in a trunk and get the hell out of here. He went off to Lansford and told him. So, he said to him, well, this is, if Stephen says so, then better you do it. Because then what he had said, that's what he means, so then better you pack. So, he come. He said, yeah, I have to pack my, because I talked to Lansford. He said, but you said that better you do so. He must be afraid of you too. I said, no, I don't think so. So, he packed. And then Lansford said to me, well, Steve, we are going to Chicago. I said, what the heck are we going to do in there? What are we going to go with you for? Well, we go up to the veneer company. And we are going to pick some veneer. I said, what kind of veneer are you going to pick now? Because we have all kinds of veneer. No, not back veneer. You know, we buy varnished, and we buy some knots and everything, when you glue together a pipeline. So then we use that for the back veneer. We pay $10 a thousand. So we buy car loads. So, we went in there. So then Lansford said to me, well, look, he said, we can get that for $10 a thousand, the car load on the honey. $10 a thousand? What does $10 a thousand stand for? Some at the feet, yeah. So, I looked through it, and there were knots and knots and knots in them. So I said to him, we come out. So I said, you want $10 a thousand for that? Yeah. Because you go to Mingle Veneer Company in Kentucky and buy it for $10 a thousand, so I said, you know, I can do that. Yes, it's good. Well, I said, it isn't worth more than $1 a thousand to take it and leave it. No, he says, I can do that. So, that'll stop you about that one there, and cats behind me, behind me, American behind me, and doers behind me. So he said, well, can't you take that? I said, I'll give you the price now, $8 a thousand. No, he says, I can't do that. Well, that's okay. So then I went into Mingle Veneer Company in Kentucky and told them to send the carloads for $10 a thousand because they gave us bad on my gift. So a month, a month and a half, then he said, we're going to Chicago. I said, you're not going to buy anything, because we got plenty now. So you're not going to buy anything for a long while yet. No, but I like to go in there, then I go into the back of the veneer company, then we go up there and see if we have something. So we have that there, behind me still laying there. So he said, you're going to give it for $8 a thousand now. No, no, I'll pay you $6 a thousand. You said that? Yeah, if you like to sell it. Why did you lower the price of the offer? Was it bad? No, he was stubborn. He said, I can't do that. No, I tell you, I gave you that price because I have a carload coming from the Mingle Veneer Company. But then at the end of that, you can ship this over to the Alton Sons Corporation. I can't do it. Well, okay. I said, you should never be so darn stubborn, because when I say that's the price, they have to be the price. So he said, I've sold to many agents, and I give you the toughest one I ever had. Was Lansdur with you then? Yeah, yeah, to his regret. He must have been an old pro, though, I mean, many years of experience. What did he say? He didn't say anything to me about that. He said, then you said so. I believe you. How come you get into that business so fast, though? I mean, you came direct from Sweden. Yeah. No experience. No. And just after a few months, you know how to do it. I start with Thai or accent. But I was an Englishman. There I learned a little bit to talk English. So one guy, he come and goose me. I don't know, you get it down there, too? Yes. So he goose me. I hit that darn thing. And I run a stick of it. And he come that far from me, from me knife. So he said, tell the boss, tell the boss, go ahead, tell the boss. So he was an Englishman, so I don't understand him anyway. But then they had a Norwegian nurse there. She come down, you know. I just had a dollar a day. So I told him. So then this show, he come. Oh, he said, he did that to you? I said, yeah. So that's how I hit him. I understand a little bit. Did you hit him with a fist? Yeah, sure. Like this. So then this Duke said to me, well, you get 25 cents more a day. So you get a dollar 25. And I said to the Norwegian, I'm not going to hit another one. And then I probably get another 25 cents. He said, oh no, don't do that. Well, he cut a fool with me. What did he say then? He goes to you, he said, did he say something? Yeah, then the soup, the soup started to talk to him. Said, what you do next? Play around like that. A goose person. Then he started to do his job. He'd get you all excited. He just jumped. So I hit him and he was close to the knife there. Oh, I was a tough kid. So how did you come into Landström's now? Who introduced you to their company? Well, nobody. You just went there? Yeah, I just went there and asked. I asked that old man, you know, had you any work here? Oh, yes, you can start there. So I started in Korsgesa, Repsa, Runde Jonto, the whole darn thing I run there. And they produced the living room furniture and the dining room? Yeah, they do. Yeah. The whole line? Yeah. I bought that desk there. Oh, this was Landström's? Yeah, I bought all the dining rooms there. That's Landström's. So you take now a table like that. That's pipeline. Or that is a la mahangni, the frame, see? So that stuff... But this is vinyl? Yeah, that's katsumahangni. So that plywood, we make that. That's from Weimann Furniture Company. So, and then, from all these things, then, we make them to Weimann Furniture Company. We lay all the plywood for them. So you glue the plywood sheets then? Yeah. And ship them to other companies? Yeah. So there was a big line then at Landström? Oh, absolutely. We make carloads to Karajula. So what happened now with this vinyl? Did you get it for $6,000? What? No. You went too low? Yeah. No. No, he has to tell you. What did Landström think about you? He probably thought you were a Jew or something. No. He told me, Well, Steve, you have been over in Sweden, as you know. I think I'm going to send you over in Sweden. So then you can go in there and you'll turn this factory. So I said to him, Yeah, that would be okay with me. So then my mother, This is that, where she had restaurant rooms. So she saw all that. So then we started digging in the basement. The sledding went from the basement to the chimney. The chimney plopped down. All the floor, she lived up on the third floor, went down to the basement. So you know, they thought for sure that she was going to die. So they sent a telegram over here, that we had to, all of us, my sister, my brother, and me, that we had to come to Sweden because Magda passed away. But there was no plan going. So we had to take the boat. So if she had passed away, we couldn't come home to the funeral, because they'd take 11 days. But, so my oldest brother said, Well, I'd like to put her in the hospital. She said, No. If I'm going to die, I'll die in my home. So when we came home, you know, she still had blue. Now, I get blue and red, you know. And she had a head cut, I think, until 20 stitches. So she was supposed to go to the doctor. So I said, Well, Ma, I'll go with you. Well, if you'd like to go with me, that's perfectly okay. So I went with her, so then she come out. So I said, Well, how is it? Are you okay? Yeah. So I said, Well, wait a while. I'm going to talk to the doctor. So then the doctor said to me, Well, don't you think that I can take care of your mother? Oh, yes, but I'd just like to find out how she is now. She's 100%. I've never seen a person with a heart like what she's got. So she lived, she got 96 years. So when I came home, she was a good singer. She was singing Küngli Aap in Stockholm. So then I said to my mother, Well, Ma, how about we go up to Torslund? The Tivoli, you know. What year was that? It was 1946 or something like that. That was the first time you went back? First time I went back. But the accident with your mother, it happened long before that, though. Yeah, sure. Before the war. No, it happened the same thing. Yeah, because we went to Sweden, all of us. But my wife, she didn't like to go with. She said, I'll go up to Connecticut to my mother and stay there until you come back. But I was in Sweden for close to two months. So then she said, Well, then I won't go. Because as long as my mother lives, that's perfectly okay. So then she said, Oh yeah, go take passport from me to Oslo. Then we go. So we were, and we were left behind. So they had been home before me, so I didn't like them home. So, my mother was glad to know. Because I was her pet. So, but I don't know what happened because then my brother, he was her pet. Not me. So, so my brother and I, you know, in Sweden, they wash clothes, but then they cook. You know that? No. Has somebody told you that, like they do in Sweden? No. Where do they go? They cook, they have a big, big iron pot, round. So then they wash the clothes, and then they rinse them, then they put them in that and cook. So when they cook so long, then they take them up, then they go down to a river, and then they dip them in the river, then they bank them. So then they hang them up and dry. So they get, them clothes get clean. So, so I used to help them with that thing. When I was home. So then my brother, In 1946, or that was before you left? No, that was before I left to go to the United States. I was just a young kid then, you know. So then, we went down to the basement, she had lumber, because she had bought a new bungalow. And there was lots of lumber, so you could make anything. So we went down there and make it. And she had a stove in the basement. So she burned coal and wood, you know, and that's what she got to heat up the rooms. So we went down there, so we make a cover for it, see? Big, round cover. Handle in it so she can lift it up. So then my brother went up and said, Now, see what I have made. He didn't say, The made. He made it, see? Oh, ain't that beautiful, she said to my brother. How can you do that? Oh, he said, that's easy. I don't say anything. So then my sister, well I got Steve, and she was sitting there and slept. So I said, I'm going to fix you. So then she said, well, tomorrow I get the coal out of the birch wood, then you can cut them up, pile them up in the basement. Yeah. My youngest brother, he lived in Copenhagen, so he came home. So I thought, no, I don't have really any excuse. But I figured, no. I got to Bjergsen-Gommansdorp to see if there were any French left when I learned to be a gardener. So I said, well, I'm not going to stay home, I'm going up to Gommansdorp to see if there are any French there. So I went up there. So, well, I guess, I don't know what he thought of it. Because they come so fast in my brain that I couldn't go. So I went up there, so the blacksmiths, I went over to her, so I said, well, sister, there are not many French left. Well, she said, you have stayed away so long, so you can't expect that. So Britta, that was Vanessa's daughter, she was just as old as me. So I said, well, Britta is not here either. No, she said she lived in Helsingborg, but she came to Klippan tomorrow, because she had rented a apartment there. I said, she's not married. No, she's not married. I said, that's funny, she had a boyfriend when she was 14, he was 20 years old. No, he didn't marry her. I thought, I think she loved you, Steve. I think she was in love with you. I said, oh no. She said to me, yeah, I believe so. Because that's honest truth. She'd never get married. So I said, that was too bad, I couldn't see her, because I couldn't tell her, I can't marry you now. Yeah, but you're married. I said, what's the difference? I can have one wife in Sweden, and one in America. Yeah, she said, I know, you were always like that. So I guess that's why she loves you. Did you meet her? No, I didn't meet her. I said, that was too bad, because I couldn't wait. Well, I like to go away, because they made that trick to me, you know, that they said that, I would sit and slept. Oh, I see. What was her name? Britta? Britta Junengstjerne. She was a wonderful girl. She was the same age as you? Yeah, same age as I was. So you chummed around them when you were working? Yes. Because you liked the job so well? Yeah, sure. Her parents, were they dead, or what happened? No. They were still living? You mean her parents? No, I think they probably have passed away, I think so. Because I don't see anybody there. So who was living on the big estate, though? Probably some, they had two sons, one girl. I don't know if the youngest son had it. Probably some other relations, so they had other jobs. Because, he woke up in Stockholm. One of them, he was in the army. The other one, he was more, well, he liked to fool around with trees and stuff like that, you know. So I don't know them either. But, yeah, I told you, I talked to the blacksmith's girl. Because she told me all about her. But this Britta, why didn't she write you, or get in contact with you? No, no. But when we went to Stockholm, then she always wrote to me. She did? Uh-huh. And you wrote back? No, I don't wrote back. Why? No, because I get called in, you know, to her birthday, you know, I told you that. Oh. So, I... What do you mean, then, you... Britta, no, Britta. Oh, you didn't tell me that. Oh. So I'd be invited to her birthday party. So I told her, I have all kinds of games, you know, swing the bottle, when we come there, then he have to do something, you know. So then we play post office. So, so I said, well, Britta, you and I, we got a mail the letter. We didn't have any mail. Well, I said, you have that fantasy that we're going to do it. So then we have to buy stamps to put it down, a licket. Oh, she said, you have that same thing? I said, sure. So that's why I like to have you with. So I kissed her. Don't you think she called, she told her mother that? She did. Yeah. So I come in the morning down for breakfast, she called on me. She said, Steve, come here, I'd like to talk to you. I said, what do you want me? Well, I said, you can sit there or smoke a cigarette with me, because I'd like to talk to you. So she said, well. You were smoking at that time? Yeah, sure. So she said, I know, I know that Britta told me that you asked me a letter, but you didn't have any letter. And then you said, well, we have to make the stamp of the time, and then you kissed her. So I said, yeah, that's the game. Yeah, I said, Britta said it. So I said to her, well, for you and for me, you get mad at me? No, she said, I don't get mad. But I thought you didn't have nerve not to do that. I said, oh, I got all kinds of nerve. So then her, wintertime, her boyfriend, and his mother and dad come, you know. So you have a man there, and then people come to take hats and coats and stuff, and so he had to take care of that. And he had a lot of nerve.