 This is cassette six, continuation with Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. And we have 8th of April, 1987. In 1934, can you recall when you were working at that time? How did the depression affect you? Were you laid off for a longer time? You were married and you had your children by that time. Yeah, let's see, 1934. I was working at Elko. Yeah, I had left, let's see, well I was working at Elko anyway. I was working three half days every other week. There was more than most of them though, a lot of them were completely... And I don't know, I blame that to the superintendent that had charge of us in there. He didn't, he thought the way to keep expenses down was to not have people working. But the machinery fell apart and everything else, but then that didn't make any difference, see. Why was the leadership hesitant to fix the machines and see any future in the work? Well, I don't know, they didn't have any interest in that kind of thing. All they did was sit in the office and chew tobacco and spit. And you come in there and you ask them something, they wouldn't know anything about it. So, those fellows, they were in their 50s, 60s, maybe older, the superintendents and the leaders? Yeah, they were probably in their late 50s, yeah. And over at National Lock at that time, Frank Hoagland, he was also pacing the floor and had a rough time to meet creditors and everything, but he was able to pull through though. How did that work, you think? Did he have a different philosophy? I don't know. Of course, they had a variation of work, see. Now, Elko was mostly screws and bolts and things like that, wood screws. Faster business than the other ones. They had the locks at National. At National Lock, they had the lock division and they had other divisions over there too. So, they did pretty good. They kept going. When did you see a change then in the management's thinking? How many years did it take for them to pull through? You mean at Elko? Yeah. There was a slump every year, isn't there? Yeah. I think that management over there was not interested in... Well, the Swansons headed it up. They worked at it. But the guys in the shop, the Brobergs and them, they were not interested in... They got a paycheck every month and they didn't care whether school kept or not. So, there was no real push there to do anything. So, in your way of thinking, there should have been a change then. In other words, a younger generation should have come in with new ideas. But that was not the way it was working though. I know during the war, we wanted them to get into some of the things that helped the war effort and not stay on that other stuff. All they would say is, Well, we've been doing this for many years and I don't know why we should change now. So, that was their attitude. Yeah. But they had to go into the war production. A little bit. Not too much over there. No. You didn't? Pardon? Why didn't they catch on to their one? Well, they didn't want to. They got a paycheck every month anyway. The government pressed them in to fabricate for the war effort. No. They just said they weren't equipped to do it, that's all. And got away with it. But that's how we got out of there and got to starting our own business. You were still at Elko then in 1942? No. Let's see now. I got to think a little bit there. I left Elko in around 1940. So, your association was Ray Carlson. Did he also work for Elko? Yeah. Ray Carlson and Campbell also. All three of us worked for Elko. So, you knew each other? Oh, yeah. I didn't know Campbell very well, but I knew of him. Was he in the management then? No. He was salesman. And he was a good salesman. A crackerjack of a salesman. And he said, well, he and Ray got together, Carlson, and says, boy, we can't get Elko interested in anything in the war effort. They won't make anything. They won't do anything. So, all they would say is, I don't think we're equipped to do it. We won't do that. So, I was on my own pretty much over there. They let me operate the way I wanted to. In the tool room? Yeah. And as long as I kept the punch presses and the tappers and them going and so forth. So, Ray would come up with and he'd have a piece. He'd say, look at that piece. Do you think we can make one like that? Sure. Sure we can, I says. Can you make a sample or two for me? Yeah, I'll make a couple of samples. So, I made him some samples. And when they brought it in to the Brobergs and showed it to them, you know, because that's where it started, they would just throw it on the table and say, oh, forget it. Where did you get those? Oh, Aspley made them for us. Well, that's just one piece. We can't make lots of them. He said, we can't make them to pay out. Forget it. And they'd throw them out on the table. That's all there was to it. So, then Campbell said, well, to Ray, he says, why don't we start our own company and make these things if you think you can do it? Well, Ray said, I would go along with that if I could get one man to go with us. And that's Aspley, he says, because he can do anything with machines. Ray Carlson, what kind of position did he have at that group? He was on the headers. At that time, he was salesman for the, well, he was sales engineer is what he was. So, he was not as well advanced in tooling as you were then? Oh, no, not at all. He didn't know anything about the tooling. So, when we started over there on 9th Street, he says, I don't know anything about tooling, he says, but I said, if you listen to me and follow my advice, I'll make a toolmaker out of you. He says, well, that'll be something. But it worked out pretty good. So, how did it go about, did you tell Broberg then, or did you want to quit, all three of you? Well, we met and we decided that 10 o'clock on a certain Monday morning, I was to go in and talk to Broberg and tell him I was leaving. And Carlson and Campbell were going to meet down in the office, with the office, and tell him that we were at the same time. So, I went in to Broberg and I told him we were starting a company of our own, and I can leave today or a few days from now or a week or two weeks, whatever you want. Oh, you ain't going to quit. He says, you can't quit. Well, I said, I think I can, all right. So, I decided that we were going to go as far as I'm concerned. I didn't have any idea what we were going to do, but I know that the one part that they were real short of was this terminal, the connector between the cable and the controls for the airplanes. And Carlson and I, he said, I can head them already if you can make the tooling. I said, if I make the tooling and that works, then there's no problem in heading. So, we had a few tough hurdles to make in order to make them on a header. How were you able not to get the tools to start the factory? I mean, this was during the war now. Were you able to buy used equipment or...? Oh, we bought junk in there. We were in Chicago. I had took, I forgot what it was, $11,000 or $12,000 in credits with me so I could buy machinery. So, how much did you put in then, each one of you, to start? Well... You had to incorporate then? We put in, Carlson, or Campbell put in $15,000 to begin with. And Carlson and I, we didn't put much in it. I didn't have anything, you know. I had some machinery in that and I threw that in. But we had to put our know-how and efforts into it. And Campbell said, that's all right. He says, I'll put the money into it. And by the way, he took the money out, too. This Campbell now, he had made most of the money then during his lifetime compared to you and Greg Carlson. Yeah, he was an engineer, salesman. So he had a percentage then of whatever he could sell off to the... Yeah. Well, he represented American Cabinet and Elko and one or two other companies. And he was a good salesman. And he said to me one time at a meeting before we had decided to go, he says, well, if we now decide to form a company, he says, it's up to you. Can you make the tools for all the requirements that we have? I says, I can make anything. If I get some steel and some machinery, I can put it together. I'll make anything. And he said, well, I suppose you could make a micrometer, too. I says, yes, I can, but I don't think there's any money in that, but I can sure make you one like that, too. And he laughed. He says, okay. Well, but I says, can you sell anything that we make? He says, you can't make enough stuff that I can't sell it, he said. And for a while that worked out all right, you know. But when we started to pick up, one day I said to him, I said, we need more business upstairs, sir. I says, Campbell. Well, he says, I don't know if I can get any more of those. Oh, yes. You told me if we can make it, you can sell it. Now go out and sell it. And he did, too. He laughed. He had a big laugh when he opened his mouth, threw his head back, and you could hear him for a block, you know. Was he also knowledgeable in law and stuff like that? Or how did you incorporate? Did you have a lawyer to draw up the papers and incorporate? No, we just rented a building and started, and that's all. Oh, you were not incorporated? No. Uh-uh. You just went right on? No, but we did have the pallet and wheelers. We took them on as accountants, so we had accountants in there to know how much we were losing in business every day, you know. Because you were on the shop floor all the time. In other words, you were in the tool room. Yeah. You were not in the office. No, well, yeah, I was in there, too, because I hired all the help when we got to. And I met the salesmen because I had to be able to converse on their terms, see, so that they knew what we were talking about or what we wanted to do or what we needed, see. How did you decide about the company name? Was it called Chemcar from the beginning? No. They took, well, Campbell, first we had several different names, but they took the first part of Campbell and the next one of Carlson, and they didn't have any room for me, so they left me off, see. And you didn't have any quarrels about it? No, I didn't care, but I made one resolution, and I made that at the time when we got together. I says, well, it's going to be very difficult for three people to get along and not get into a fight somewhere, but if you fellas want to fight, you'll have to fight. I will not fight. I says, I'll state my position, and then I'll back away, and you can fight if you want to. Well, Carlson says, I'm not going to fight. Well, Campbell says, neither am I. Well, I says, all you got to do is prove it. And we never had any problems at all. We got along just fine. Of course, I think that was probably due because I was just too easygoing, that was all. But they needed you, though, more than you needed them, actually. Well, you needed a salesman, of course. Yeah, well, it's just like Erickson said. We rented a spot over there in that old building, and a fellow by the name of Erickson, Harold Erickson, I believe his name was, and he said, you know, you've got a perfect setup here. You've got three guys, and you're all specialists in each one. One can't be without the other, and all you've got to do is get along, and you'll make a big success out of it. I predict you are going to be very successful, he said. And that was true. We were successful. So Ken Carr, that was the company name then, from the beginning? Yeah. Who was the president? Carlson was the president, and Ray was the vice president, and I was a nobody. You were a silent body. I was secretary. And I didn't clamor for any publicity. I didn't want any high position. I didn't ask for anything. All I wanted to do was make this company a success, and that was going to be my job to do, as far as the shop was concerned. And people would come in there and saw what we were trying to do and what we had to work with. I said, I don't understand how you can make those things. Well, I says, it takes ingenuity and willingness and hard work, that's all. So you actually had to construct machines too then, if you couldn't buy them in junk piles? Well, we bought the first header we wanted a solid die. There wasn't one to be had anywhere in the country. But we found an open die in Chicago. So I went in there and looked at it, and I said, that is nothing but a miserable piece of junk. But I don't know what else we can do. I'll have to bring it home to Rockford and overhaul it. Well, Ray says, can you overhaul it? I said, sure. I said, I can make all the parts, but it's going to take a lot of hard work. And I started at 8 o'clock in the morning and went home 2 and 3 o'clock the next morning, every morning, day in and day out. And I hand scraped the ways in there. The gate, when it come forward, it dipped down 45,000 like that, you know. It was water in the front. And I had to equalize that or scrape it back by hand, stand and scrape with a hand scraper, which I did. It made it work. And I got those in there and straightened out. And then I put steel ways in there and got the machine working pretty good. But now we had an open die instead of a solid die. But we made that work, too. How did you know to get the raw material, the steel, during the wartime? Did you have to contract yourself then to the government to produce? Well, first we had to get the steel for making the tools and parts. And I went over to a junkyard over there, which was owned by Karl Leibovich, a very successful fellow over in the scrap metal and so forth. Here in Rockford? Yeah. So he had just bought this little junkyard over there on 16th Avenue. And I says, well, we're starting a little business over here. Karl, I says, I haven't got any priority. I haven't got even an MRO. A farmer had an MRO, but I didn't have one. What does that mean, an MRO? Well, that gives you the right to buy to certain limitations. You could buy a file or two or something. You couldn't buy any machinery or anything like that on it. So I said, well, Karl, what can I have? He says, look around. Anything you need in here. I says, Gene, I tell you, he says, if you need a priority to get it, I'll finagle around so you can have it. And I remember I bought a piece of junk there. It was a ram for a well drilling outfit or something. It was eight inches in diameter and about six foot long, four foot long. He says, what are you going to do with that? Well, I says, I'm going to put it on my hacksaw over there and hack off some slices and make some gears for the machines that I have over there. Well, he says, that I would like to see. Well, I says, stick around and you'll learn. So I did. And that hacksaw, that run all day and half night, cutting off those slices to make gear blanks. And then I got in to about the fourth or fifth blank. Then I found there was a hollow spot in there. That was no good. So I had to turn that junk around. And believe me, when you don't have a crane or anything, you have to finagle ways of moving it. So I turned it around and started on the other end. And I got the gear blanks cut off so I could make some gears. And then as far as bronze and that, he says, you'd be surprised, Carl said to me, when I bought this junkyard, I thought I bought everything on top of the ground. But I got to digging around in here, and there's all kinds of things in the ground here. He says, so I'm going to bring a machine and we're going to scrape it out. And he found pieces of brass and copper and things like that that I would need. So I says, can I have that? Sure. Take it. And he charged me just a scrap price for it, you know. And I'd make bearings and everything else out of it, you know. And then I shimmed some things with tin cans. I'd get tin, brand new gallon cans from the lunchroom right back of us there. I'd go over and they threw the cans out so they were nice and shiny, and I'd bring those in and cut them up and make shim stock out of it. Because I didn't have any shim stock, and I couldn't buy any. So I had to make them out of tin cans, you know. You wouldn't believe it. But I remember a fellow come over from – his name was Larry Foote. I forget the name of the company he was with downtown. And he says, I just dropped in to see what you're doing in here. I says, I'm trying to get started in the business. What do you got? What do you got? There he says, oh, that's a few bricks and a gas torch. I says, that's my heating furnace. And he said, well, what kind of things do you heat? Well, tools that I make for the headers and that. I says, and that thing? I says, yeah. But I says, I sure would like if I could get a nice little furnace, you know. Yeah, he says, I don't think I can get one for you. I'd like to do that, but I can't. I can't get it without some kind of a permit from the government. They wouldn't even let you sell your car, you know. You had to buy a permit to sell your car. And that it wasn't up above a certain price and all that kind of stuff. Finally, he got me one little furnace, but that was too small. So I says, Larry, you got to help me get a bigger one. I got to get a big one. I can't get a big chunk in there. So one day he come over. He says, I got together with the boss down there and we're going to put one together on the side. He says, and get it over here to you. And he says, I found a kettle too for your oil for drawing temperatures. But how are you going to handle the furnace and that thing and control the temperatures? Oh, I says, I make it some way. I says, I'll heat the oil up till I put a piece of shiny metal in there and comes out light blue, dark blue, brown or whatever. That was my temperature of it. You wouldn't believe the way I had to finagle around. And I used solder to draw, you know, if it melt the solder. That was my temperature I had to have, see. Well, things like that, I made it work. And he, one day Larry come over and he says, you know, he says, you got to have some kind of a little instrument there for indicate the heat. You can't be guessing at the heat all the time here, he says. Well, I says, I've done pretty well so far. So he says, well, I talked to the boys down there and I think I can get you a little wheel co instrument which you can hook up to both the draw pot and your furnace. If you can hook that up, that'll give you your indication of your heat. Fine, I says, that'll be fine. That'll give me a chance to do some other things I need to do around here. The people that we start buying steel from, I forgot what his name was, the salesman. He sold me a bar without any government approval. I got a bar of steel, I think it was two inches in diameter and about eight foot long. He says, that's an odd piece, you can have that wheel, just charge it off later, he says. So what are you going to do with it? And I showed him and he says, next time you come in I'll have some of the parts. And he come in there and he says, it's unbelievable, he says. You mean you made these and he treated it in that little furnace and that works? I says, sure, it works. All you got to do is be willing to do it and try hard. But it was difficult though to get the right temperature. Oh yeah, I couldn't give that job to anybody else because I couldn't. It had to be, I don't know what you call it, something inside of me that worked for me. Because the gears, if they were too soft, they wore down. If they were too hard, they would break. Sure. So they got to be tight in between there. Yeah. How did you hire other people now in your factory? You started off with three guys, how many did you hire in the first year? Well, then we only hired, I hired one fellow to help me put machinery together. Because the first load that come in there one day, the boys were sitting out there sunning themselves on the south side of the building during the lunch hour and a guy pulled up there with his truck and one of the guys says, what in the world is that guy doing with that junk over here? He says, I'm looking for a certain address, he gave it, and he says, cam car. He says, that's here. With that junk in here? Yeah. So then I happened along and I said, yeah, that's the stuff. Oh, boy, they said, you'll never make that work. Well, we did. We unloaded it and I started working with it. And I used Ray as a handyman because he was no toolmaker or anything like that, you know. So I'd have to make the parts. But he would be my moral support at least part of the night. The address now where you were located, was that the... The old gym in Broadway Court. Broadway Court, and it's on what avenue on the street? Well, it's, the building is still there. It's the old Swedish gym. I forgot the address we had over there. It was really in a court or the alley between 14th and 15th Avenue. At that time, it wasn't Broadway, you know. It was 14th Avenue. We got graduated because 14th Avenue had to be renamed because they were going to build it up. And 14th Avenue didn't sound right, so they were going to make it Broadway. So you took over after Swedish Gym then, or was it something in between? Yeah, no. They quit then at that time? Yeah, well, they had gone. They had gone and had rented, the upstairs was rented to Oskar Sundström. No, he owned the building. And he kept the upstairs because he was an inventor in his own right, you know. Didn't get much of anywhere, but he was... He had the machinery in there. David was the inventor? Yeah. Oskar's... Yeah, David Sundström. But Oskar, I don't think that he had too much to do with anything. But the other boys had the adding machine. They put that together, you know. And that thing was really successful. It was because it didn't have a board, it was full of keys, you know. It was only a small keyboard with the necessary numbers to make it work. It was in operation for many years? Yeah. So when you moved there, you rented the building then from Oskar? Well, all we could get was 1,500 square feet in the front of the first floor. Because the back end was Harold Erickson. He was the guy that come up with the welders. He built electric welders. And he never got anywhere because he'd get one working real good. Instead of putting it on the market, he'd try to better it, you know. And he'd fool around like that until he, well, they went broke. He never got anywhere. But I got one of the first welders, and I think I have it here yet, someplace in the buildings. But he made a good welder, and I said, Harold, just leave it alone now. Now put some production out and get these out. The farmers and all the people outside are crying for this piece of equipment. Don't try to make it the best one in the world. Get something out there so you get some money in. Now he was a good electrician. And his name was Harold? Harold Erickson, yeah. Did he work for you then? No, no. He was in the front end of the building, but they gave us 1,500 feet, and then Harold moved back into the back end so he could build his transformers or electric welders. And so after that, that was all right for a little while, you know. And finally I told Harold, I said, Harold, we got to have more room. 1,500 feet, I can't even move in here. Well, I said, I got to have some place to build my welders. Well, I said, I'm going to talk to Oscar. So I got a hold of Oscar Sunstrand, and I said, look, you have to let Harold come upstairs and build his welders. You'll have to find someplace else to work with your machinery. Now that was a job convincing him that that should be done, you know. So finally I got him, and we built a, helped him build a track up there for hanging a hoist so we could hoist the machinery up and down. And then we told Oscar, now we'll find another place for you. If you move out and let Harold have part of the upstairs, then we can have the downstairs, which was only for just a short time. And then I told Harold, you'll have to move too, because we need the whole building. So, well, he says, I can't do that. He had an old Cadillac. It was an old vintage, I don't remember what it was, but it was way back, 22 or something like that. He was going to drive to Alaska on that thing someday. So anyway, he couldn't part with that. So he had that out in the garage. I says, well, I says, Harold, I'll get you a place where you can build your welders and you can bring your Cadillac and other stuff over there. So we got him a place over on 7th Street off of Broadway, one block off the, I forget the name of the guy that's in there now. But anyway, we moved him over there. Oh, he was happy, could have a lot of room now. Then we had the whole building. So then we approached Oscar Sundstrand, he owned the building. And he says, we need the building, we want to buy it. No, he said, why don't you buy the building? He says, you're using the whole thing anyway. Yeah, well, maybe we can. How much you want for it? Well, we finally agreed on a price, and I don't remember what it was. But it wasn't too much for that building, and we bought it. And start fixing up in the back there, adding on to it, you know. And we rented all the garages back there for storage. The neighbors, they complained they didn't have any place to put their cars. They said, as soon as the garage is empty, you guys rent it, we don't get a chance. Well, progress, you know. We got to have a place to put our machinery. One important thing now, when all three of you quit from Elko, how long did you visualize you were going to be without a paycheck? Oh, I got a paycheck. I got $327 a month. That's what I got to live on. That's what my paycheck was. From the company? Yeah. How were you able to sell anything, though? Because you all had to buy the first... Well, I think Campbell put money in it for different times, you know. And then I said, now, if we could get some drill presses, I could get some girls in here and we could drill screws. Because these screws had wires to anchor them in the airplane, but they had to have holes drilled, some four holes and some six holes. So he says, well, they were stainless steel. So first of all, we got a little roll threader and a little header, a small 316th thing that was junk again. But the roll threader was pretty good. So I said, well, Elko made the screws for Minneapolis Honeywell for these aircrafts, you know. So I said, well, if we could get those screws from Elko and drill the holes in them, because they wouldn't drill them. And John said, that's stainless and we don't want anything to do with it. You can't drill that stuff and you can't work it. So they made the screws and shipped them into Minneapolis Honeywell in Chicago. And they put them on a truck and shipped them back to Kampkaar in the alley over there and we drilled the holes in them. What did Mr. Bruber say then? Well, one day, this was going along pretty good, you know, I had gotten a hold of six drill presses at Sirson Roebuck. Campbell and one of his friends were instrumental in getting me six drill presses. Four first and then two more, so I got six. So I put girls on all six of them. So there was a shortage of men then? So you had to hire girls? Well, girls were better for this kind of work anyway, see. Well, there was a shortage of men, yeah. Every man you hired, he wanted to be a toolmaker, even if he was just a janitor, see. He wanted to be a toolmaker. I had a fellow come in there one day, he was, I think he said he was 70 years old, but he was pretty spry. He says, I guess you're looking for some help. And I said, yeah, looking for a toolmaker. Well, I'd like to be a toolmaker, he said. Oh? Have you got any experience? No, but I'm willing to learn. Well, I says, I couldn't put you in here and train you as a toolmaker, I says, at your age. I couldn't do that, I says, but what kind of a job can you give me? So I offered him a job as a cleanup man, a janitor, and he was insulted, you know. So I said, well, I'm sorry, but come back when you learn a little bit more about this. Maybe I can hire you, if you live long enough. So you employed girls then, how many? I had six girls, first on a day shift, and then I had six girls on the second shift. So I had 12 girls drilling these screws. Now we were in the clover, we were making a little money, you know. All it just kept me busy night and days handling these women and sharpening these little drills, you know, that you can hardly see, much less drilling in stainless. It was pretty tough drilling. And to drill them so that they lined up and all that. But that worked all right. Then we got to making the terminals. Then is when we really got into trouble. We had to drill an inch and one-eighth in the shank of that terminal, and this had to be a concentricity of plus or minus 2,000, see? That's when the girls said they couldn't do it. And then I had to sit there by first one and show them how sharpen their drills, get them started. And by the time I got the next one going, and that one was broke down, this was a continual back and forth. But I made it. Was it the drill bits that broke off then? They got dull, see? And when they got duller, the girls applied too much pressure, then they snaked, we call it, you know, and it got out of concentricity. But at that time you were able to get all the raw material from the government? No, no, we just got some material. But anyway, probably I'm getting a little ahead of myself here. One day I knew, of course, all the boys and the truck drivers and everybody over to Elko, and the boxes come in, Elko made the screws. Lousy looking screws, I'll have to say that, but they made them because they were stainless, see? And they put these boxes out on the dock, and I was going to stamp them for Minneapolis Honeywell in Chicago. The guy says, what do you want to do that for? They're going over to Camp Carr anyway. Why don't we just throw them on the truck and take them over to Camp Carr? Which was all right for a while, you know, until one of the bosses down there came over and said, that doesn't go for local delivery, that goes for Chicago. It goes down to a trucking company. No, he says, these are the ones that they're drilling over at Camp Carr. What? You mean they're drilling them, we're making them, they're drilling them, yeah? So they got to Minneapolis and he says, yes, Minneapolis says you wouldn't drill them, so we had to farm them out. Well, they didn't know then for a while that you were doing it. No. So then he says, you wouldn't do them, you can continue making the screws and then send them over there direct if you want to, because they're doing a good job of drilling them and that's okay. If you want to drill them, that's fine. No, they wouldn't do it. We haven't got good enough mechanics to sharpen the drills and to drill them, so they wouldn't do that. So I told this salesman that come out from Minneapolis, I told him, I says, well, if I had that little header, I says, I've got one over there, but it needs work done on it. Well, get the work done then. What are you going to do with it? Well, I'll make those screws. So the Elko won't have to make the screws either. We'll make them and we'll drill them. So I got the header running and then we started heading the screws. And gee, you know, this worked fine. Here we drilled, made them and drilled them. Now we got the – Minneapolis got the wire for us, which was stainless, see? So because they go into aircraft, so they could give us a stainless that we needed for that. And we headed them and we drilled them. And Elko says, well, how come we don't get those screws anymore? Well, you wouldn't drill them. So Kamp Karr said they'd make them too. And so we made them and rolled them. And gee, the Minneapolis said, we're going to work. These are not stainless. This is cassette 6, side 2. Continuation with Gene Espling, Rockford, Illinois. Side 2, cassette 6. We made them and rolled them. Gee, the Minneapolis said, we're going to work. These are not stainless. I said, what do you mean they're not stainless? Well, they're beautiful. Look at those that we got from Elko. I says, forget it. They don't know how to make screws. I can't help we make them so nice. So they lost a tremendous big order then from Elko. Well, yeah, that hurt their pride, I tell you. Did you have any meetings with them like – No, they come over and accuse us afterwards of hiring all their good help. They had two or three guys over there who were fed up with them. They quit and they come over and work with me. And they didn't like that. And I said, well, I have not hired anybody from you, not once. And you can talk to them. I'll bring the people in here. They quit and they come over here looking for a job, and I gave them a job. And I'll do that again. So that's all there was to it. So there was competition. Were they unionized over at Elko? No, no. No, there wasn't any unions anyplace in Rockford then. They – Elko, let's see now, started – they had a fellow by the name of Johnson who was a real honest good guy. And they got – the fellows from Detroit come out and worked on him, and he started the unions in Rockford. And they told him that you're going to run this as your own business and you run it the way you did before, only until you got it started. Then they come in and took over. And that's how the unions got started in Rockford. But they couldn't get into Kamkar, and they didn't get into Rockford School for quite a while. But they did get into Elko while I was there. I got to be president of the union over there. I told my foreman, I says, I hate unions. You became the president of it? Of Elko, yeah. And I said I don't want anything to do with them. So they were getting started, and they were getting a pretty good foothold. And he'd come over every morning and he says, Gene, have you joined the union yet? No, I says, I haven't. And I'm not going to start – I'll join the union when you get 85% of the people here at Kamkar or at Elko. Then I will join, then I would help them run it. One day morning I come in and I said, Well, I guess I'm going to join. They got 85%. And we went down to the meeting, and they had a meeting, and they brought up – they said, We have to get a president for the union set up tonight where I'll be opening the meeting for some nominations. They nominated one, and that was me. And then they closed the nomination, the polls, and they said, that's it. So there wasn't any fanfare about that. I says, I don't want that job. Well, we need somebody who's honest and who will help us run this thing. So that's how I got to be working in there. And the union was all right. We did all right. But I had an awful time settling squabbles between the people. You know, some guys, I told them now, I said, Anybody who wants to belong to the union, you can. If you don't want to, you don't have to. You've got a job here anyway. And these guys from Detroit, they says, We can't allow that. We want you to force them to join, see? So they came in then to Rockford and had meetings with you? Not with us, they didn't. No, not yet. Did you belong to UAW or AFL? It was the CIO. CIO? Yeah. Commerce for Industrial. I forgot now how that was. Anyway. So they started out, you know, being congenial and trying to get along with people, they said, only to get them going. Then they took over, see? And I remember when we had our meeting down there on 9th Street in that lodge hall down there, the boys come up to me and they said, I was working on something up there in the front anyway, and they says, We've got some visitors in the back there. I says, Who are they? They're the people from the labor union down with the labor noose. They want to peddle the labor noose in here. They want to come in here and peddle that. I says, Don't let them in the door. I says, That's a scandal sheet and I don't want no part of it. And tell them to get out. He went out and told them and three or four of the Husky guys went out there and says, Are you going to go out or are we going to throw you out? This is a private meeting. Sheesh. He said, We didn't expect to meet this kind of opposition here. But I told them, I said, Now, I says, I don't want you to tell me that you want to subscribe to the labor noose because all they do is pick up the rot and everything and distort it and they're not for our good or your good or anybody else. Either they go or I go. Well, you're not going to go. Okay, out they go then. All right, so that was the end. They didn't try to sell the labor noose anymore in there. So they never returned them? No. No, they said there was no use going in there as long as that guy is president of it. He won't handle it. He won't let us in there. What do you think is the reason why the labor unions always have some outside representation like Detroit or Chicago? Is that because they don't trust the local people being too soft with the management? Well, you see, that come out of Detroit. The way they operated was they told a fellow that Rockford is wide open. You go out there and organize them and we'll give you a big job up there and a big salary and when you got it controlling, then we'll take it over, and that's what they did. Then they write off the property from it. Yeah, sure. Yeah, that's it. They did the same thing down in, we had a factory down, funny, I got to think sometimes, well, anyway, we had a shop down there, Indiana Metal Products, it was in Indiana anyway, and one day they were going to, the CIO come down there and said, we're going to organize the whole town, shops and everything. There wasn't a union in there, see? So I told the boy, I said, Indiana, I says, well, I says, when you organize and you get a union in here, I won't come down here and help you anymore, I'm all through. I says, my stock in this place will be for sale and I'm through. So that's the way I left that. But they didn't make a success out of it. The people down there just weren't sold on anybody from outside running their business for them. So they wouldn't go for that. But they put, one day, when we, well, we had a fellow by the name of Schroeder down there who was managing the plant, he called up, he says, we got problems. I says, what's that? He says, we got a block in the driveway, they won't let us drive through and they're passing out pamphlets and everything. I says, they're going to unionize us. Well, I says, let them try it, that's all right. So the pamphlet, they were real wide awake. They says, this is what we're going to offer you. One week's paid vacation after two years and all this and that. They had quite a few things on there. So I looked at that and I says, do you want this, do you want to go backwards? Look, I says, your rate here per hour is below ours, your vacation is below ours, you're going to trade what you got here, apples, cake, for nothing? Oh my gosh, the guy says, we shouldn't have posted that, that's wrong. So Schroeder, he took the pamphlet and underlined all the things with red ink, which they had promised, and then he had typed up the sheet of ours, what we had promised, now which one do you want? We want ours, all right, forget it. And then he went out and told those guys, he says, you goons get back to Detroit, we don't need you here. So that was the end then. So they never came in then? They didn't get in there then for several years, they didn't make it. When you were the president of the union here, what kind of, was there any kind of pension plan at the time or was that too early? Well, yeah, we had a meeting and I says, I'll tell you, I told the people, I says, I don't like unions, and I'll tell you one thing, if I take this job, I'm only going to take it until you get going, but there's going to be fair and square and no under the table stuff here at all. So, well, that was all right, that's what they wanted. So then we had a meeting with the management and all the different departments over there at Elko, they had a meeting in each one and put their demands, they called it, together, and they handed those to me and I was supposed to go down and give that to management, you know, at a meeting. So I says, well, I looked at that and I says, this is pretty asinine, I says, you're asking me to do something that you know you can't do yourself. So we had our meeting in there and I told them, I says, now, I says, we don't want a union here at Elko, but it looks like you do, because of some of the things, the way you're handling it, you've got to correct some of these things, which are, well, it was time and a quarter for overtime, everybody else was paying time and a half. I says, you're going to have to meet that competition, that's all. And so I said, at that meeting, I remember I started out, I says, I want you to know that you have some good, loyal employees here, and this group here are not in here, you've got these, they call them demands, I don't call them demands, I call them requests. We don't make any demands, and we're good, loyal American citizens, and we want our company to prosper and we're going to help it prosper. And boy, that meeting loosened up, you know, where those guys come in there with gloves on, you know, they're really going to handle us, but the thing melted down, and they says, well, I think we can get along all right. So I told them, oh, it was, it had been probably six months, I guess, eight months. I says, well, I know you don't like a union in here, but it's your own fault, you just can't keep on squeezing, you have to meet the competition around here. If you want to do that, your union will die. I says, you won't have a union in here a year from now if you agree to them. Instead of meeting them halfway, step out ahead of them a little bit. If you can't afford it, that's different. But I think you can, from what I hear of the meetings that you have, I think you can. And if you can't, you should sit down with the people and negotiate. You can start with me, I says, I'll negotiate with you. So, boy, I tell you, Paul Swanson, he was very interested, and he used to come up, and it embarrassed me, he'd come up and talk to me while I was at my work at the bench, you know. And it embarrassed me, because the employees said, what are you talking with him for? Well, I can't stop him, he's my employer. I says, if he wants to come up and talk to me, I can't stop him from that. But they didn't like it, so I told Paul, I said, well, if you want to talk to me, I'll just have to come down in the office and talk to you. We can't talk up here anymore. He says, I can see and understand that, but I'd like to know some things which you have told me, and I feel satisfied we're going to make it, it's going to be okay. Well, I says, if it isn't, it isn't going to be my fault, it'll be your fault. Some things you're going to have to give on, other things we're going to give on. Why didn't Elko give you a superintendent job, or a foreman, I mean, to get you out of the Union? You wouldn't have it all for that. They had a, I forget what, they had something started, which they were going to pay a minimum rate and have different steps for people in the plant. And then they were going to start business going, if this was done in all the plants and everybody had to compete on this basis, it would work. But they couldn't, I forget how it was, they couldn't have any supervisors, they didn't want any supervisors to head this thing up, they wanted just the factory people. So the foreman come out one day, Burl Bree, he says, I would like to offer you a better position in here, but I can't do that. You were too much unionized. No, not that. But he was, you see, I'll tell you, just frankly speaking and not boasting, I knew more about their business up there than any of those guys. But why didn't this, Jalmer, what was his first name, Burl Bree, why didn't they see that light, in other words, this new vision for the company? When I told them I was going to quit. You were 40 when you quit, a little bit over 40. Then they says, oh my, my foreman, they gave him, Jalmer, and John Johnson the job to melt me down, you know. So they said, you see what, offer him a better job, let's make him a good offer. Because I forgot what excuse they used for not doing that. But anyway, so John says, well, I'll tell you, Gene, I'm getting old and I'd like to have you take over my job, he says, foreman of the tool room. And I said, John, I have bigger ambitions than that and that's not enough for me. Because really, I controlled more of the tool room than he did. He used to say to me, he says, well, and gee, I don't know, we're awfully low on work here, can you suggest anything we can do to pick this up? Well, we can make some tools. Well, what kind of tools do we need? We need this and we need that and we need that. So let's do that. All right, well, we'll do that then. So we did. And then we started talking about they were going to bring in outside work, outside tool work. So the foreman had asked me when I started over there at Elko, John said, well, when I went in to look for a job over there, he said they didn't need anybody. So I said to the girl, her name was Rose, I said, I'd like to talk to the superintendent up there. I think he needs good help. So she called him. She says, this guy here, he says, he thinks you need him. Oh? He says, is that so? How much experience has he got? So she says, how much experience have you got? He says, enough. He says, what do you mean enough? I says, enough to handle anything you've got. All right, I come down. So he come down, brought me up in his office, and he says, now, he said, we really don't need anybody, but I'll go through this thing with you and we'll see. He said, can you build a die from start to beginning, finish? I said, sure. You want me to lay it out, too, or just build it according to the specification? Well, my brother, he draw it up and you make it. I says, okay, if he can draw it up, I'll build it. Who was the brother? What was his name? Elmer. Elmer. He was the chief draftsman. He says, my brother, he draw it up and you make it. We talked for a while, and he says, well, we go out and talk to Jan. Jan Janssen, he says, he is my supervisor in the tool room. I says, all right, we'll go out there and see him. So on the way out, I said, oh, you got a brand new Warner Swasey. Oh, you know how to run that? Sure. He says, I told you, I got experience enough to handle anything you got. You mean you can run that? Can you set it up and everything? Sure. Then I hire you for that. Oh, no, you won't. I says, I come in as a tool maker. I'll make your tools and dies, whatever you need, but not that. That's a production machine. Well, could you train somebody to run it? I says, well, sure, I can. Can't you get somebody? No, we tried, and you can't find anybody that knows anything about it. Well, you bring them in. I'll show them how to run it. I said, so I did. For quite a while, I'd show them how to. They didn't make any fancy stuff on it, but they didn't have a guy that knew how to start it even. Those fellows now, you probably knew them all, Eric Anderson, Swan Hillman, Henry Swanson, Swenson. They were tough, independent guys, too. They didn't like unions. They didn't like anything. No. Why was that? They were so... They were very tough in negotiations with the workers. Well, I don't know. I think... Like, for instance, now, if you had stayed with Elko, what kind of fruition would there have been if you didn't speak up and say, this is it, I mean, I've got to get out of here? They wanted you actually to stay in the same position year after year after year after year. Well, he offered me a better job over there, and then after we had started Kampkaer and we were... looks like we were going to go, then Harry and Paul and Carlson and Campbell and myself, they called a meeting and wanted us to talk things over. And we want to consider, what will you take for Kampkaer? We'll buy you out. Oh, that was Elko? Yeah. Because he could see that things were going to go, I guess. You were starting eating on their... Well, yeah, they didn't think it was just right anyway. So I said, well, I said to Ray, I said, well, where... Ray says, Campbell says, he laughed, he says, well, what do you guys want to do? Well, I says, I know what I want to do. If you want to buy or sell out, that's up to you. Go ahead, I'll back out. I said, I want no part of it. Yeah, but you get a good job over at Kampkaer, or Elko. And he says, Jane, he says, he got a good job lined up for you. Well, under pressure. Before, they didn't have any good job for me. But they knew who to go to when they had problems or trouble. And so I said, well, I don't... I'll still stand. I said, forget it. If you want to sell out, sell out. I don't care. Well, you offered a pretty good job then? Well, no, they said, we'll make you a good offer. But Ray said, Ray met him over there one day. Because he is still working over there, part-time over at Elko, you know. But I was full-time over at Kampkaer. And he said, well, I can't budge Jane. He says, he won't go. He's not going to sell. He said, we want to sell it, we'll sell it out to you. But if he don't want to go, Carlson says, I won't go. We'll stick with it. If he had sold out now, Ray Carlson, would you have bought him out? And in some way, borrow money and go on? Oh, no, I would back away from it. I wouldn't hope no part of it. I said, I... It was too much headache to handle alone? Yeah, yeah. I couldn't handle it alone anyway. I didn't have any money, you know, either. How about your family now? Your wife and you had two kids at that time. Yeah. And they were growing up in the teens or...? Yeah, they were just toddlers, you know. So they were not old enough to give you any help in other words? Oh, no, no, no, no. No. You had two boys? No, a boy and a girl. A boy and a girl. Yeah. Yeah. So you didn't... there was no hostile takeover? No, I told... What happened from that offer? I said, forget it, what you fellas want to do. I made a living before I come in here, and I'll make a good living when I leave here. I said so. How about National Lockdown or the Keystone Corporation, they bought out National Lockdown after Copeland died? Yeah. Or Stranquist. They didn't see you as any threat at that time in the 40s? No. Because there was also the same business, the Fastner business. Yeah, but that was a different... They were too big then to... Yeah, they didn't monkey. They didn't think we would amount to anything as far as that goes. So you had no talk with them in any... No. Uh-uh. At any time? No. When did you start to think about peacetime production? Because you understood probably after a while that the war was going to end. Yeah. And you had to retool again. Yeah, we started retooling it before the war was quite over. Oh, you did? Yeah. Did you have a meeting then in the city hall? Yeah, we decided what we were going to do. Here's what we got to do. And just as soon as they take the restrictions off, then we'll go to work. And I remember Minneapolis Honeywell... See, I can't remember that guy's name now. You know, after so many years, you kind of forget. But anyway, he come out and he said, I want some samples of screws. He says, a 632 by three-quarter slotted Phillips, slotted Philister head. So we made him some samples and he took them and he thanked us. And so then he got a call, Ray and I, we got to come in Chicago. So he wanted to talk to us. We come in there and, yeah, he says, so you think you know how to make screws, huh? Yeah, I think we do, yeah. We got your samples here and going over them and all this and that. So I said, well, what did you find? Are they all right? And he kept evading the answer, you know. And he kept shooting things at me, you know. So I says to Ray, I think I'll crawl under the table and go home. Finally, he took us into the engineering, which was almost prohibitive as far as that goes, but they let us in there. He says, I got Mr. Carlson and Mr. Asplen from Kamkar and Rockford, those samples. What did you find on those samples? He says, perfect. Perfect, yeah. Finish, quality, and everything is ideal. If they can make screws like that, they should be a good source for us. Well, that was different. I says, I thought maybe we had made something that you couldn't handle. So then they said, well, he says, I'll give you some orders. So they gave us some orders, and we went back and we made them, made the screws and drilled them and all that, and sent them in there. Fine, everything was okay, no problem. So I don't remember now, just anyway, he come out about a month later. They had shipped us some little orders, you know. He says, I've got some more business here. He says, yeah, the stack of prints, just look them over. He says, I'd like to have you quote on all those. I thumbed through them. I says, we haven't got the equipment for that. I can't make them. Equipment, you need equipment? Well, I'll get you equipment. I says, how are you going to do that? Well, we'll get them. But he says, I'll get you the equipment. You don't have to worry about that. I remember before the war was over, I was getting ahead of my story a little bit there. This fellow come out from Minneapolis, and he says, I've got to have a certain screw, hex head, trimmed hex head. And it was quarter, I think it was quarter 28, trimmed hex head. But they had to be perfect, you know. Well, I didn't know what they were for, but they went into the guns, the big guns that they had made. They had a six-inch gun that they were mounting on a scythe. So there was a big screw or a big... Little bits of things, yeah. So he said, I says, well, listen, I can't make that. I don't have any trimmer. I can make the rest of it, but I don't have a trimmer, quarter-inch trimmer. Give me the specs. Let me give him the specs. Called up a couple days later, he says, well... He says, you'll have to make a financial deal with Waterbury, but he says, I got a trimmer for you. I said, you got one? Yeah. Well, I didn't know it, but this trimmer that they had was scheduled and was sitting on a dock ready to go out by truck to one of our competitions. They went down and scraped that off and put a camcorder on it. Was it going ahead to Rockford? No, it was going, I think it was to the Townsend people. Anyway, they had orders that it was ready to ship it. So they wrote back and said, or called back a telegraph, you know, and says, give us the instructions, where is it being shipped? Designation changed. What do you mean? Well, the government, the Air Force, come in and said, this goes to camcorder. So we had it already lined up to come to you, and they come out and scrape that name off, put camcorder on it, and it's going to camcorder. So next thing I know, I had a telephone call that that machine was on the car by freight, and it's going to be, it'll come in on a signing over on 6th Street and so-and-so number, and it'll be in that car, and it'll be out there in two days. I'll call you when it arrives. Boy, this is moving pretty fast, you know, so I said, well, I don't know. We made the arrangements to Waterbury. They gave us credit. I don't understand the credit, the question that we made it, made the payments and everything afterwards. But anyway, so let's see, it was just two days later, I guess, I got a call, and he says, go down on the 6th Street sign. You know where the signing is on 6th Street? Yeah, yeah, there's a blind one down there, yeah. Well, there's a car number so-and-so. This says on the signing, and it's sealed. Go down there and break the seal and see if that header is in there. And sure enough, in a big box car, here sat this little header, come out special in one car. But it was there, and I said, yeah, that's there. All right, get it off, get it on your truck, and get it working. So I said, well, okay. So I went down there with the truck, a couple of guys, wheeled it out, loaded on our truck, got it over to the camcorder, set it on the floor. That same night, the guy comes out from Minneapolis. He says, I don't want to see that header or that trimmer. You got it? Yeah. There it is. Well, it isn't running. Get it running. Well, I says, yeah, I just got it. I just set it on the floor. Well, how long will it shake you to get it running? You got to get this order out. And I said, well, I don't know. Three, four days, I can't wait that long. Well, I says, gosh, I'll have to set it on the floor and make the tools for it. Well, get on it, make the tools. Well, I says, now, wait a minute. I says, I haven't been home at all. I didn't go home last night. I stayed right around the clock, and there is a limitation to what a fellow can do, you know. Well, he says, if it takes, if you had another day on you, could you get it done, tools and that? I says, well, maybe if I stayed here all night. Yeah, stay here all night. I says, who's going to hold my head up after a while? So I says, well, okay, we'll get it. I got it, and we made these screws the following day, and I trimmed them out, and he called me, and he says, have you got those screws now? Yeah, little box, four-inch square by four inches high. He says, you got them finished? Yeah. Are they okay? Yeah. All right, I'll be out and get them. This is the top buyer from Minneapolis. He comes out to get them. First thing he says is, hi, how are you? He says, tired. Have you got the screws? Yeah. Let me see them. Are they okay? Sure, they're okay. I'll enhance some to you and tell you that they were okay. If they weren't, all right. Goodbye, he says. Oh, what's your hurry? Yeah, he says, I'll tell you in a couple days. So it so happened that this particular screw was going into the sight on a six-inch gun. He says, now these things will go on a B-24, he told me the next day. He says, I put them on a B-24 that same night. They went out to New York, into the harbor, and they went on to the cruiser, where these guns were mounted. We're going to mount these screws into the guns. You see, he says, we were told that these islands down there were not fortified. We went in there and they slaughtered us. The Japs were all over the place, he says. So now we're going to sit offshore so far they can't find us. He says, with their guns, we're going to pump these six inches in there until there's nothing left on the island, he said. So there was a new sight then? Well, yeah, for a six-inch gun. They had six-inch guns, but they hadn't been mounted with these sights on them on this cruiser. So that's the reason, he says, I had to have those screws. That little old screw held up the whole thing, he said. So you could fill the order in? Pardon? You could fill that order in? Oh, yeah, well, all we needed was that one box full. He says, I'll tell you, Gene, I won't forget this one. He says, if you need any business, just call me and you'll get it. You had the door open? Oh, boy. And, boy, we became a very good customer of those. Never a complaint. He come in one day and he had $70,000 worth of business he wanted to throw at us. I says, I haven't got the equipment to do it. Well, get it. Get the equipment. He says, we're going to be in business here. He says, you make good stuff and that's what we want. Who was the go-getter in your company? Was it Campbell or you out there on the road? No, Campbell was a salesman. That's all he did. But he just said, well, you have to talk to those guys in Rockford. So he couldn't give them any detailed specifications? He could make promises that he couldn't keep, you know, because he was a salesman. That was all right. Many times he made promises that were wild, but... So he's a salesman. He had that authority, too. Yeah. Well, he was president of the company, too, see? He called me one time and he says, Ah, Gene, I'm in here at Grand Rapids, Michigan. He says, and I got the president of the company sitting here right with me. And he's got this part number here. I'll give you the part number. Yeah. He had been in there, Campbell had. Three days before in Rockford and told me to take this job off. And he says, I'll handle him. Now he was talking to the president. He said, I want that job put on property. If you haven't got it, get it on. He says, I want you to ship parts tomorrow. Now this is the president speaking. I said, yes, sir. I couldn't tell him with the president sitting there. You told me to take it off. Now I'm back on again. So, oh, boy, I tell you, that was... Were you able to fill those orders? Well, I had to go back out there and take that job off that was on there. We'd just put on there, put this one on, and run that job out and shoot it in there. Then that took the place of something else that we were in trouble on. When they got in trouble, they called Campbell. He, big shot, he told me what to do, and I'd have to do it. But you were the last guy though they had to depend on how much it was going to cost, how much material, and to get it off. No, Carlson and I would sit down and talk about that. He was in the office then? Yeah, he was in the office and he was in the shop too. But we'd quote the job. First we'd figure out what it needed to do and what material. And then we would decide the cost of it, see? But to find time to do that, you know, when you had enough to do in the shop without monkeying with stuff like that. There was a pressure on you. Oh, boy. So we went so far, it was during the spring, we took some lunch with us and took our business with us down to Black Hawk Park. Got back in a secluded spot and sit down where they couldn't reach us with the telephone. They didn't know where we were. And there we'd sit down and quote the parts and price them. Then go back and mail them out. So there have been some big deals being discussed in Black Hawk Park? Yeah. Without people knowing it? Yeah. Well... How about your wife now? Your first wife's name was Irene. Yeah. How did that affect her life now? Could you discuss any kind of particulars in effect with her? Or was she not interested in that part? She says, well... She says, you have to do what you have to do, that's all. She says, I'll try to handle the place here best I can. But I... So you didn't take the worries with you home then of calculating? I mean, it's not like it was a void. It got, after a while, I had got so many invoices come in. So I had to take the invoices with me home. I took them with me home. I quit at 10 o'clock over the camcorder. And I'd take a whole sack full of these invoices and sit down and pay bills in order to keep tap of the stuff so it didn't get away from us. I saved the company a lot of money by that, I'll tell you. So he put in $15,000, Campbell. Yeah. Did you pay him off then to even it out after a while? No, I don't know how he did that. I don't think so. Did you feel at any time that he was running it more than you did? Do you have any discussions about that? No, I don't remember how we did it. I left it much to him and Carlson as far as that was concerned. I didn't really care because I didn't intend to stay with the company anyway. No. I just thought I'll stay until you get it going and get it running. And then I'll—it's too much worrying, too many hours and that.