 We have 23rd of April, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Mildred Nelson, Blackford, Illinois. She was born 5th of July, 1900, in Blackford. Both your parents now, Olof Nelson and Emma? Olof Peter. Olof Peter Nelson. That's mine. And the mother, Emma? Emma Olsen. They came from Sweden and from Ireland. My father came in 1886, and my mother came in 1892. And I have information. Did they know each other in Sweden? No, they did not. They were a little bit too far apart. But, see, my father came to a cousin here. In Blackford. In Blackford. And then my mother's sister was a girlfriend of my father's cousin, who he came to. So my mother's sister married my father's cousin. So we were simply related there. Oh, I see. When she first came from Sweden, she went out to Colorado and stayed a year, and then she came to Blackford later. Did she stay with this uncle then, August Olsen? Yes. And you said he came many, many years ago. Yes. This Nelson, August Olsen. Yeah, he came as a stowaway on a ship. Now, this is what he tells me, but he had told his son-in-law this, too. He came as a stowaway on a ship to the United States. He was only, at the time, when he told me, he was 16 years old when he came as a stowaway. That was the only way he could come because there was no money to travel. And he came to New York, and then later he worked his way down to Chicago. So he was in a Chicago fire in 1870. So he was writing that in the memory of us. And then he said there were signs all over, Go west, young man, go west and take a homestead. So he went out, took a homestead in Colorado, and they had to stay there three years. So he was not married at the time, of course, because he was too young then. But then he went back to Sweden and got his sweetheart, and her three brothers came. Where did he get his homestead now? Was he able to scrape together money enough to... Well, that was free land, you see. But he had to pay for the title, though, to pay the purpose. Yeah, three years. They had to live on this land, on this homestead, for three years. And he lived there alone then? Yeah. And what was this homestead in Colorado? Well, here he tells about it being... Do you want me to read this? Yes. August Olson traveled as a stowaway to the United States in 1870. He worked for five years and became a naturalized citizen. Well, in the meantime, he traveled from New York down to Chicago. So he was there in 1870 during the Chicago Fire. Then he went to Colorado to take a homestead. And he had to stay there three years in order to get the papers on the homestead. Well, then in 1875, he returned to Oland and told such glowing stories of the opportunities for young people in America that quite a group joined him to try their luck. Among them were Beatrice Olson and her three brothers. They were neighbors on Oland and were not related to Nels. Beata stayed in Chicago with cousins for a year while Nels and her brothers went on to San Francisco. Beata joined them after a year, and she and Nels were married there in 1876. That's 110 years ago. Their first daughter, Mamie, was born there. When she was five months old, Nels moved the family across the country by train to Denver. From there, they took a narrow-gauge railroad up into the mountain to Georgetown, Colorado, up Red Elephant Mountain to a crude one-room cabin. Well, the one-room cabin was a cave cellar. They had to live in a cave cellar underneath. How long did they stay there? Or was it temporary? I don't know how long they stayed, but he told me when I was out there, where they lived was infested with railroad snakes. You met him in 1929? I met him in California in 1929. He was telling about he'd have to go and buy supplies, groceries, by horseback, and it would take him a day and a night and another day to come back. He said the one time he went, the children would usually be out watching for him to come back. This one time when he came back, there was nobody around, so he went to the entrance there and called to his wife, and she said, Don't come in. There are three rattlesnakes in here, and we have climbed up as high as we can, but find something that you will kill the rattlers with before you come in. So he got great big sticks and came in and killed the rattlers so he could get in. There were so many rattlesnakes there. There were so many rattlesnakes out there, he said, in Colorado. How long did he keep this homestead? Did he stay there for many years? It tells here. From there they took a narrow gauge railroad up into the mountain, into Georgetown, and up Red Elephant Mountain to a crude one-room cabin, see, up into the mountains there. Biaha and her three brothers joined them there and boarded with them while all the men worked in silver mines. See, there was mining country. After a year, Nels bought a string of burrows and had his own pack train down the mountain into the town of Dawson, Georgetown, and Idaho Springs. He bought supplies and tools for other miners. After three years, he enlarged the cabin and put in floors. He also built a store building up on the mountainside. Lillian and Ethel were born in that mountain home. That's the two daughters. After 13 years there, Nels moved the family down into Georgetown and owned and operated a successful store and saloon there. Tillman, the only son, was born in that home. In 1903, Nels sold all his interests in Georgetown and moved the family out of the mountains to Fort Collins, where they lived until 1915. The three girls were married there, and Tillman finished high school. Then Beatrice and Tillman came to Windsor County to live with Mamie, who had married Ernest Taylor, a merchant. Now this Taylor, he lived with the other two, that one son-in-law, but he died out in Iowa. Tillman worked for his brother-in-law and except for two years in France, had lived there until moving to Hemet, California in 1960. Well, I met Tillman's wife in Hemet. She and all the rest of the family had died then. Nels continued to live in Fort Collins until 1926, when he moved out to California. Then I met him in 1929 with his son-in-law and daughter. He and Beatrice never divorced, but they separated by mutual agreement. Mamie was not well and wanted her mother to live with her in Windsor. When Nels died in 1934, Ethel was with him, and according to his request, she had the remains cremated and a friend flew out over the Pacific and scattered the ashes on the ocean. Lewis Kecht, that was one of the son-in-laws, worked for the May Company in Denver for 40 or 50 years. Henry and Ethel met in 1903 when he was the director of the Colorado Agricultural College Band and traveled down to Georgetown to advertise the college. He was put up in the Olsen home. He moved from Illinois to Fort Collins due to malaria in his old home and lived with an uncle who was a banker in Colorado. Ethel was in the high school band, and the two danced after the concert. Later that year, Olsens moved to Fort Collins, and Henry began courting in earnest. They homesteaded in eastern Colorado after their marriage and spent some time in Whitehall, Illinois, before moving to Glen County, California in 1912, homesteaded with friends from Illinois. In 1922, they moved to Montebello, California to manage the Scott Adobe Ranch, originally owned by Mr. Chances in 1852, but later owned by Josephine Scott Crocker. The Crockers were the millionaires that held all the banks in California. But I had visited him in 1929, this August, Olsen, and his son-in-law, and they were caretakers of this Adobe Ranch. How was this Nils August now? Was he a talkative man? Yes, he was. He knew history. He was so interested in history. And he was interested in everything. Did he have any memories of Sweden? Because he left so young, though. Did he tell anything about the Swedish background? No. He said the reason he left, because there were so many stories in Sweden that you could get ahead in America. And of course, in those days, it was rough in Sweden. There were men on each farm and there was no room for everybody. That's right. And there were no jobs. You were brought up on a farm and then go to a city, there were no jobs for a young boy. So about his living now, having this farmstead, how was he able to survive, though, the first couple of years, I mean, to get bread on the table? I don't know. I know he said all the transportation was by a horseback. A horseback. But now working on the homestead, they didn't give him any cash. I know. No, there was no cash. How was he able to survive? I don't know. Unless he got money from some other, from Sweden or what, I don't know. But he was interesting. Now I wish, you know, at the time, you know, he did all the talking, I wish I'd asked him a lot of questions. Because he was interesting. And he was such an interesting man. He sat there smoking one cigarette after another, you know. How old was he then when you met him? I was trying to think. In his 80s? Yeah, he was in his 80s then. I was trying to think. You see, he was, in 1870, he was... Sixteen. Sixteen. And I was 30 and 29, that was 59 years and he was 16. So he was about 75 then. So his mother, I mean his wife then, they split up in later years. But they were separated, but not divorced. So... Yeah, she must have had a rough life, too. You never met her? No, never met her, no. But she also came from... Ulan. That was his girlfriend, school girlfriend. I wonder if she made kropkaker out in Georgetown. I wonder, too. So now if we turn to your parents here, Olo Peter Nelson and your mother. Your father, he came first. He came first to Rockford. He came first. He came in 1886. What kind of work did he get then? Well, he did mason work. Well, he was used to that from... No. Han var sjömann. You know, I went to that institute, a museum over in Dekoe. And I looked up when he came. And I knew the year, so I had no trouble getting the information. And he came, he had been in the Swedish Navy, so he was sjömann. I see, so he was there all then, so... He had served in the Navy, and he'd tell how about the Navy. In those days, that was nearly 100 years ago. And he said they traveled in Europe in these different ports. But he said the food was very meager on the ship. Sometimes he said we only had bread and water. We'd run out of food. But you can see that all those years ago. So he came here then to Rockford. He came to a cousin here in Rockford. What kind of work did he get done? Well, construction. And his uncle went into business with another man. And he was a... not a mason, but a plaster, plastering contractor. But then my father went in with another man in partnership. And this man's name was Lofgren. So the two of them did mason work. And that was going to be his main occupation then? And he'd tell later in the years where he had been working and what homes he had worked on. And one incident he told about was Herman Hallstrom that became a mayor of Rockford. Well, this mayor Hallstrom was related to this Lofgren that was in partnership with my father. And Mr. Lofgren said, I wish you would teach Herman the mason work. So my father taught him the mason work. And they worked together for a number of years. And then of course Mr. Hallstrom went into politics. And he became the mayor two or three times? The mayor, uh-huh. And he'd come to visit my father many times. And they would talk about old times and how they worked together. So it was interesting. Your father and Hallstrom, were they in the same thinking? He was a socialist, Hallstrom. No, my father was not. Was he a Republican, perhaps? My father was a Republican and a Lutheran, he used to say. And Hallstrom, he was a socialist. How did they go about it? I don't know, but they got along though. But Mr. Hallstrom was the type that was very gracious. He talked about everybody, he talked about everything. He never talked about socialism when he was with anybody. We never did that. No, he never talked to my father about it. But he was kind of rebellious during the First World War. Yeah, I guess he was. That's what the newspapers said. Do you remember that parade they had downtown in Rockford? The IWW? Yeah, and they jailed several Swedes and sent them to Bridewell. That's right. That was many years ago. It was 1917, I suppose, 1916? Yeah, 1916, wasn't it? 1916. Then I can remember the First World War. Yeah, that was during that time. I went to Camp Grant, and I had an aunt that lived there. I had a farm out there, and she was on one side of the road, and they took her pasture to the camp that Grant did. And used it for the grounds? Yeah. That was interesting too in those days. Do you remember the Spanish flu that was going quite heavily out there? Yes, do I. There were so many that died out in Camp Grant that they would put them on trucks and bring them into Rockford, and they'd have mortuaries in big garages that the government would rent. You could see, we were on our way to high school, and we could see these trucks coming in loaded with dead bodies, and you could see sometimes a leg or an arm hanging out, and they were covered with turpollens, you know. But it was terrible. And they were distributed to the home places? To the different mortuaries, these different garages that were made into mortuaries that the government had rented. That was awful. It was a sad sight. Oh, it was terrible. How about the rest of the city? Were they affected by the Spanish flu, the Western Barries? My brother was in the service out in Camp Grant, and my mother and I had had the flu, and our neighbor lady took care of us. Then as we got better, my brother came down with the flu out there, and his commanding officer said, Why don't you go home to your mother or your parents and have them take care of you instead of going to the hospital? So he came home, and my mother took care of him. But wasn't there a risk that he was going to give it to you? We'd already had it. You already had it? How did it affect you, actually? What happened? Did you get stomach flu? I don't know. You were so all in. You were so tired you couldn't do anything. You were in bed. Of course, that was so many years ago, you know, you cannot remember it all. But you didn't get the sniffles or cough or anything like that. It was just that the whole body was weak. Yeah, that's right. It was a terrible situation. And there was no remedy for it? No. We just stayed in bed. And then the neighbor lady had had it, and then she came in and saw that we got something made. She'd bring food to us. And the funny part, my father never came down with it. What kind of remedy did you take then? We coughed a lot. We took cough medicine. You did cough? Yeah, we did cough. And we took cough medicine. My mother used to say, I will drink a lot of water. And then we'd eat. Of course, you didn't feel like eating, but you had to eat something. Did you call a doctor to make a hospital? Oh, yes. But you see, the doctor had so many calls that he couldn't come. He came a couple of times to see us. Do you remember there were two homeopaths here in Rockford? Axel Olsson and Alfred... no, Alfred Olsson and... Yeah, he was a homeopath. Yeah, and Urbom. Urbom was another. Have you heard about him? They call them the sugar pill doctors. That's right. But they say... Did you hear that from the people up on 20th Street? What do you think about those doctors? There's a lot of praise for this Urbom. Well... Was his idea a practical reason to cure something? Well, he was... Because he was in clash with the regular doctors, of course. No, the other doctors were not homeopaths. No, I know that, but I mean, they didn't respect his ideas. No, they let him alone. They didn't bother him. But he used those sugar pills. Yeah. Now, I heard of a party that went up there with a broken arm. And he gave them the sugar pills. Had you... have you... I know... You never went to Urbom, though? No. Why? Well... A lot of Swedes did. I know they did. No. So you never had any of his sugar pills? No, I never had a sugar pill. How did you get into nursing, you know, after high school? Yes, I worked two years, and then I went in for nursing. I went to Chicago, to a hospital in Chicago. Tagostina? No, another Washington Park, Chicago. I entered training in 1921, and I graduated in 1924. I stayed in Chicago and worked in the big hospitals until 1936. Then I came out to Rockford because I got a job out here, and then that was my hometown. So then you were at the Swedish American? No, I didn't work there. I worked in a factory, nursing in the industry. National Lock, or...? Rockford Clutch. Rockford Clutch, I see. I'm a bargainer now. So they had a nurse then on call 24 hours a day? I came... I was in 19... I went to work in 1936, and I worked there until 1964, 28 years. I see. So you were never off a day then? I mean, you had your vacations, of course, but... Every day. You were not laid off then from... No, no, no, no. I worked permanently. I was permanent. I was there during the war, when we employed so many people, women and men, anybody you could hire. Did you also have a doctor on your staff then, or...? No, we had to bring them into Rockford, to the doctor's office and to the hospitals. So you took care of them first then as a paramedic, or what do you call it? I became emergency. Emergency, yeah. But it was really something during the war. It was a bustling town here then at the time, I understand. Oh, yeah, it sure was. A lot of production was going on. A lot of women worked in the factories at the time. Oh, we had so many women. How did that... Was there any difference when the women came in? Were they more careful in their work than in the... Well, it was maybe something real fine to work with. They were wonderful, but of course we had a lot of accidents with the women, you know. They ran punch presses. By that what I mean, wasn't that actually a man's job? Cut their fingers off. But you see, you were so hired up for help, and so many came from other towns. We had a lot of them that come from the Dakotas, a lot of them came from Iowa, and had heard about the work we had. All these factories in Rockford were doing war work. So... But if they accidentally cut the finger off, would they come back again to start working? Oh, sure. When it was healed, sure. We'd bring them back. They were not afraid. I mean, did they themselves... No, we came them back, and of course you had to pay them compensations. During that time. There was a law then during that time. Oh, definitely. You had to pay your company. They both pitched in. You had insurance companies, and they'd come out and evaluate the injury, you see, and then they paid them off. At that time, there was no trying to get the severed thumb or finger back again. Oh, no. There was not known at that time. Not in those days. When it was off, it was off. It was all production. Everybody was in a hurry. But you would think the people would get scared to go back to a place where you get the finger cut off. They were not afraid to. Well, they may place them on another job, too. I see. And of course, in those days, you had to have a physical to come in to work, you know. It was busy. Those were busy days. Of course, a lot of our employees were taken into the service, too, you see, and then we had to replace them. Were the workforce old then during that time? They used also older people? Yes. Like 70-year-olds? Not up to 60, no, up to 65. 65. But we had a lot of older people. And then a lot of housewives. A lot of them. They only came in. A lot of them. They had a full-staff nursery, I understand, in the factory. Not in our place, but some places. A national lockhead. Yeah. They had a full-staff nursery. They left the babies in the morning and went into work. And then, of course, you had to make calls on all these people, you see, check on them. In their homes? In their homes, if they were sick, and in the hospitals, too. So you had to go out and do something. You had to make house calls, so it was a busy time, but it was worth quite an experience. And the hospitals at that time in Rockford, there was the Swedish American and the St. Anthony. In Rockford. In Rockford. There was three hospitals. Three hospitals. And they could be sent wherever they wanted to go, or did you send them to the hospital? Well, no, we sent them to the Swedish hospital. They had to go where your company doctor went. And our company doctor was Dr. Lundholm, and they went to Swedish American. Nobody went to Urbo? No, we didn't send them to Urbo. Oh, so you have talked to Grodde. But a lot of people praised him, though. I met other people that said that. Oh, sure. So maybe this medicine stuff is up in the heads of people. Sugar pill and the... One never knows. No, no. The simple time... The psychology. There's probably a lot of it. That's right. The simple thing in life maybe is the best remedy for the whole thing. Yeah. But there are no homeopaths in Rockford today. Or are there? No. Chiropractors there are, but... Chiropractors, but I don't think we have any homeopaths. No? Of the past? Mm-hmm. So now when you grew up, then where in Rockford? You lived on the east side? I lived on the east side, over Alpha 7th Street on 3rd Avenue. It was right in the Swedish kingdom. My father bought that house in 1902. 1902? Uh-huh. And you were born then in... No, I was born on 2nd Avenue. But my brother was born on 2nd Avenue, and they wanted a lot where he could play and be out, you know. And so they bought this piece of property. Of course, that was so much a month in those days you paid. It was a two-story house? No, yes, but it was bedrooms upstairs. Was it a new house then at that time? No, it was old. The... What would you call it? The contract was built in 1854. 1854. The house was... But my father did a lot of remodeling. Like he said, it was a mud cellar. And he dug out and he put cement floors, and they did a lot of remodeling on the interior of the house. So, of course... And you grew up there? It must have been a farm at one time, you see, or something. How many years did you live there? And when you went to school? In many ways. How many years did you live at that place? My wife's mother then died in 1870, and then I sold the house. In 1970? 1870. In 1970, yes, she lived there. This is site two, continuation with Midler Nelson, Rockford, Illinois. Site two. Your father-in-law was all of P. Nelson. All of P. Nelson, yeah, when he came here. All of P. Nelson. But the grandfather, you see, was old, but they had to take the first name. So when he came here to... He came 1886. He was a young lad, and he... Well, he was a hooman. Hooman, yes. He was listed as a hooman in the institute. And then my mother came 1892. Why did he decide to come to Rockford? Well, he had a cousin here. And so that's why he came. And my mother came because this cousin married my mother's sister. And at that time, it was important for him to join the church. That's right, the First Lutheran Church. And there was the First Lutheran, there was the... for the sweets. And he'd tell about... they'd go every Sunday night and sit up in the balcony. He said the balcony was just full of sweets because it was a Swedish sermon. Why did they put themselves on the balcony? Why did they do that? Well, it was so big, you know, and they were... it was spacious, so they just went up there and sat. They felt more secure. That's right. They were all Swedish. He said all Swedish men, you know, young fellows. So the older people, they probably went on in the First Jewish Family Church. Yeah, and that was all there was to do, to go to church on Sunday nights. And then they were looking for girls there, too, I suppose. Yeah. There was one of them... All the Swedish service. Maybe that was the objective number one, to go there to find a girlfriend. That's right, I suppose it was. Because your father, he found your mother there. No, he got acquainted through his cousin, because his cousin married my mother's sister. And she first came to Colorado and stayed there for a year. And then he wrote to her, and then she came to Rockford, and then they were married. And that was my mother's oldest sister. So, you were two in your family. Yeah, my brother... An only girl and a boy. And a boy. My brother was older. So how were you brought up? You had to do everything your parents told you at that time. In other words, you listened to what they said. Yeah. What did you not give up? We went to Swede school in the summer. At the first Luther? Yeah. They had the Luther Hall on Kishwaukee Street, and we had to go there every summer. Your brother too? My brother too. And we had a cross of railroad track over there on 4th Avenue, and there were some children over there, and they'd all yell at us, Swede school scabs! Were they American kids then? They must have been, yeah. And they called us Swede school scabs. So we'd come home and tell my mother that, you know, and she felt kind of bad. She said, Well, I wouldn't worry about it. She said, Let them call you all you want. You're learning something. Did you understand at that time it was scab mental? Yeah, we knew that. You learned it fast. We'd heard about it. What were the rest of the kids? Were they taken in by this observation of others calling you scabs and so on? Well, I suppose they were in the neighborhood there, and they saw us going to the Swede school. I don't know if they were jealous or what, but that's what they called us, Swede school scabs. How many were you then at the Swede school? How many? How many kids? Oh, we were quite a few. Way, about 150. Way over. Even the ministers had a number of children, and their boys went, and they were so naughty. Were the ministers? The ministers. Reverend Seedorf. He had four or five boys, but they all went. They were about your age then. Yeah. So many. Then you had to have several classrooms then. Yeah, we had an upstairs for the higher, and then two rooms downstairs for the lower ones. And we had a Miss Buegren and Miss Lofgren that taught us. And then in those days, they had a student at the church, and he had to teach the higher-ups. What kind of subjects were you taught? Mostly Bible history. Religion. That was number one. Yeah, oh, sure. The catechism and Bible history. You had to learn that by heart? Well, yes, but you know, that was hard because we weren't—we were going to school. So you were not actually fluent in Swedish then? No, no, but my folks talked it at home. So you understood everything, but you had a rough time learning it? And then we went to Sunday school at the First Lutheran. And there was a Swedish too? And we were confirmed in Swedish. But my mother used to say later in years that was the biggest mistake in her life because we were going to school learning English, see? And it was just words to us. So you didn't get any meaning with it? No. But see, that was a tradition. All the Swedes brought their children up Swedish. So your mother said that there was a mistake? It was a terrible mistake. How could—why did she say that? Did you rebel against it? Well, she knew that we learned English, and we were more fluent in English than we were in Swedish. And she used to say that. What a mistake she made in her life. At Christmas time, did you have any Christmas play? Did you have to speak Swedish or recite something in Swedish? No, because earlier in our day, my mother had a younger sister that was living here on a farm. And she had four children, and they belonged to a covenant church. And they'd come in and spend Christmas Eve with us and stay all night. And then in the morning, he'd go back to the farm and feed the animals, and then he'd come back and they'd go to church, and then they'd go home. So they went to the covenant church, then? They went to the First Covenant Church. Well, then later, a number of years later, they moved to Minnesota to a farm because my mother had cousins up there, and they were retiring. And they asked if they'd like to come up and run their farm. So they went up to Uppsala, Minnesota. Did you ever? Yeah, Detroit Lakes. Not too far from Detroit Lakes. So they worked on a farm up there, a relative's farm. When they came over to your house in Rockport, they were covenanters. Did you think about the difference between covenant and Lutheran? It didn't mean a thing. Didn't mean anything. Did the parents now discuss the difference? No, no. We never discussed religion. They went to their church and you went to yours? Because later in life, later on, we had a relative that married into the Catholic religion, but we never discussed religion. So they stayed all of them? Yeah, and we were very, very friendly with them, and they were friendly with us. But my mother always used to say, never talk politics or religion. But being 110 people, students here in the Swedish school, how many of those children did understand what they were talking about, you think? The percentage. Some of them were born in Sweden, I suppose. I don't think many of them were born in Sweden, these children. Most of them were born here? They were born here, but they were all Swedish parents. My father used to say, ja, Lutheran or Republican. Okay, what he said. You mentioned here Pastor Seedorf. He was a pastor for many years. And he had a daughter, if I remember, that married a Swede down in Arkansas. And his name was Swenson, and he shot himself. Do you remember that time? Yeah, and then he had an older, yeah, Storberg, that was Storberg, I think. That was her fiancé. Pardon? That was her fiancé down in Arkansas. Yeah, that was Gerta's fiancé, Swenson, that shot himself. I see. What year was that? Was it before the First World War or after? Oh, before. Before First World War? I'm not sure it was before the First World War. And then the older daughter, her name was Storberg, and he was in the real estate. His name was Carl Johnson. But I understand she just passed away a few years ago up in Seattle, the oldest daughter. But they're all gone now. No, the one son lives down in Texas. Why? Otherwise, they're all gone. So, but you know... But there was some kind of commotion, though, when this happened, the seed of Sunilaw. Yes, there was. Do you remember that happening? No, I don't remember that so clearly. I think I was out of town when that happened. I think I was living in Chicago doing my nurse's training. And I worked in Chicago after I finished. So, all together, I lived in Chicago 15 years. So they passed your newscast then, so to speak. In other words, you were not here on the premises. But then, you know, I'd come home and then take trips home. My mother would tell me about the happenings in the church. But then Seedorf left because he didn't want English, you see. He was really Swedish. Oh, he was Swedish. So it's just one of those things. So then Reverend Loreen came, and he was English. He talked English. And he was fine. But he was also able to speak pretty good Swedish. Oh, yes, very much so. But he didn't press that point too much, did he? No, but he could deliver a message in Swedish, you see. But, oh, he was a gentleman. How was it then for Dr. Loreen to take over after this Swedish minister? Was he told, you think, to take a little bit more easy on the Swedish? Well, I don't know. Because that was in the late 20s he came. Yeah. But people went for him because he had personality, this Reverend Loreen had. And he knew how to talk to the people and approach them. So it was a good thing. So he was well liked then? Oh, Loreen was loved by everybody. And he'd go to visit all the old people and all the sick people. He really was a true minister. He lived his religion. But the pastor Seedorf, now, he stayed on for many years too. Yeah, he stayed. He was minister, I think, way over 20 years of 1st Lutheran. During the first 20 years. But he was a type you couldn't tell anything to. Was he high stock up? Yeah, he was proper. He'd been educated in Sweden. And he had a little complex that he was a little superior than the average. He was high church status. That's right. So you couldn't go up to talk to him then? Not very well. You didn't feel comfortable with it? It was all Swedish, you know. Yeah, but he spoke English too, though. Huh? He spoke English too, though. Not too well. Oh, I see. His English was not too good. So he didn't want to use it too often then. No. So what happened then to the young people, though? They were confirmed in Swedish and probably most of them didn't understand what it was all about. Did they continue to be members of the church or did they join another church? A lot of them left and joined other churches. Of course, a lot of them married and then... And moved away from there. Yes, and a lot of them left town. So, yeah. So there was a generation gap there between the... That's right. And of course, we had a lot of Lutheran churches in Rockford. And we still have. Yeah, all preached from the First Lutheran. Yeah. Several of them. But, I don't know. Emmanuel was one that broke away. It was all English. Yeah, and Zion. And Zion, yeah. And then it was Salem. Yes. And Tabor later. And they all came from First Lutheran. They all were branches of the... First Lutheran was the first one that came. I think they started in 1854, if I'm not mistaken. Yeah, the First Lutheran, yes. See, that wasn't... They had a smaller church over on First Street, I think it was. And then they built this larger church. And that opened up in, I think, 1885 or 1886. It was the Cathedral of Rockford. Yeah. It was the landmark. Yeah, that's right. But, you know, they were falling by the wayside. Well, I suppose people are moving out to the suburbs. That's right, to the suburbs. And they like to go someplace closer. Of course... Now they have cars, but they still complain it's too far to drive. And a lot of the young people don't go. They don't have time. And the shorter members, they walk from Cherry Valley, they said. That's right. 1850s. Yeah. And Pecatonica, they walked in. They walked. Uh-huh. Well, they said P.A. Peterson walked to church. I don't know where he was living, but he walked to church. So, those were the days. Today is too far to drive. Like somebody, my friend said about her granddaughter, the minister had asked her why her parents didn't come to church and why they didn't bring her. And she said, well, my mother and father want to sleep on Sunday morning. She told the truth. She told them why they didn't come to church. Oh, gee. Yeah, those were the days. Did you have to go to church every Sunday? I mean, could you tell your father or mother that you like to stay home and sleep over? No, no. We had to go to Sunday school. That was a must. But did your parents not go to church? Yeah, they went, too. I didn't meet them at the church. I see. So you didn't sit in on the service. You went to Sunday school. Yeah. But then later in life, when I was gone then all those years, there were other people that would pick them up and bring them to church. Then when I came home, then I went with them. A lot of times my mother didn't always go or my father, but sometimes they both went. But my father was quite deaf. He'd been a seaman, you know, and he got deaf while he was doing his waymanship. So we'd sit down quite far in front because they had hearing aids. They always had waymanship. They had hearing aids. They had hearing aids. They had that. Not in the early church in the Swedish, but when Loreen came, they had six pews down. They had hearing aids on each side. So they could be facilitated. How about the communion in those days? Was there only once a month? Yeah, in the chalice, you know, the big cup. Common cup, yeah. But only once a month? Once a month. Did most of them take the communion then? Yes, I think they did. Of the old Swedes. But not the young ones? Well, I try to instill it in the young ones, but I don't know how it worked. Yeah, it was a great time. So there's a different custom today, you know, it's every Sunday in some churches. Yeah, that's right. Your mother, now, was she a strong religious person? Yeah, I tell you, that had been instilled in her so hard in Sweden. She said that every Sunday afternoon, her father would read out of the Bible. And they'd had us sit, all the children had to sit around the table and listen to that. And she said, we were so instilled in that, that we just didn't know any different. And my mother, oh, she could, well, she could talk and she could give scriptures and she would sing. She knew ten verses of Trigadekningen bora. And she sang that up to 101. She just amazed the family, you know, and relatives how she could sing with these. During your daily life now in the kitchen, she never worked in Rockford? No, she was a maid when she first came. In the beginning? Everybody was a maid when they first came to Rockford. But after she married, she stayed at home? No, she stayed home. No, my mother never worked. When she wasn't home, then, did she read or sing by herself? She sang by herself. She did? And she had been, as a young girl, she had been sent to Calmer to sew skula, she said. So she could sew, and when she came to this country, she did a lot of sewing. She did a lot of wedding dresses, she said. But of course, in those days, the wedding dresses weren't white like they were today. But in her day, they were maybe a silk of some kind. And she did a lot of sewing. Like she said, it made a lot of extra money. Because one of the women that lives here, her parents were good friends of my folks. And my mother made that girl's mother's wedding dress, because my mother used to tell that. And then we had another woman that lived in the old building a number of years ago. And she said, your mother used to make dresses for me when I was little. She said, I had to go over and prove them, and I was about ten years old. She said, I can remember how your mother would sew these dresses for us. And then, but that's the way it was in those days. You couldn't buy the clothes like you can today, you know. So was she also particularly about you learning by heart, like Tryggar Kanningaara? Yes. Did you have to do it for her? Yeah, well, she wanted us to learn. My mother was great on education. She wanted us to have a good education. And she wanted me to go to college, to Rockford College. But I didn't want to go. I wanted to be a nurse, so I went to Chicago then. How did you get in your head of being a nurse? Wouldn't it have been easier to go to Rockford College? Well, I had a friend that was in Chicago. Well, my mother had cousins in Chicago, and they used to come out here and visit. And I talked to them, and then my mother would talk to them, and they said, well, I think it's very good that she goes to Chicago. They're good hospitals. They're big hospitals. So that's how I come. And then I had a friend that was in training at this hospital that I wanted to go to. So there was a drawing card. Yeah, that's right. But I had to have reference from my minister, so I had to go to CEDAW to write out a reference for me, and then other people you had to have references from. So they were particularly about the higher ed? Oh, yeah, and then your education, what education you had in high school. You had high school then? I had graduated from high school. That's one thing my mother said, we must graduate from high school. And then my brother was quite artistic. He liked to trim windows in those days, you know, the window trimmers, you know. So he went to a school in Chicago called the Kester School, and he learned window trimming, and he was very artistic, and he had to go to the Art Institute for a lot of artwork. Well, then the war came along. The first war? Yeah, so he was in the First World War. And then when he got through, he was a window trimmer in Chicago for Liddon's. Do you remember Liddon's? I think they'd gone out of business, though, Liddon's in Chicago. And then he came to Rockford and worked. What was his name? Floyd. Floyd. And he married a girl from Elgin, and they drove to California on their wedding trip, and they liked it so well they stayed. So he lived there 50 years. All his life out there. And she passed away earlier. And he also died? He died in Chicago in 1972. He came back to Chicago then? Your brother, did he come back to Chicago? No, he died in California. Oh, he did? Uh-huh. So like when you went to high school now, was your mother interested to follow along what you were learning? Oh, yes. In different subjects? Yeah, of course in those days certain subjects were required, you know. We had to have four years of English, and we had to have two years of language. So you taught her English then quite a bit, of course, when you came home from school? Yes. My mother had learned English a lot. Because she was young when she came? Yeah, and a lot of her friends were English, and she could speak very good English. But she was one that was very aggressive. She was up on everything, you know. And one of her great interests was to know about relation. Yeah. Names and years and everything. Yeah, and she can remember all the relatives back in Sweden. How did she learn that? There was an interest of hers, I suppose, to keep track. Well, she said she came from a family of her, no, my grandmother was a family of five sisters and no brothers. And those five sisters all married in Sweden. And like she said, her one muster had 12 children, and another one had 13. But she said, we were close. How could she remember all the names there? Oh, she remembered all those. She could tell you everything. She had a remarkable memory. And the one aunt, all her children moved out to Pennsylvania, all but one, and he still lived on Öland. And you know those cousins, then they were cousins to my mother, and several of them came to visit her. Of course, theyíd talk about Sweden, you know. And then there was a couple of cousins in Chicago from another muster, and then theyíd come out and visit, you know. So they were close families. Like she said, years ago in Sweden, they were close. So they paid attention to what they were doing and how they moved and so on. But they all became prosperous. The one in Chicago, his name was Adrian Nelson, and he was working for a concern that made dental Ö Everything used for dentists, you know, material. And he invented a lot of things. But he was a shrewd fellow. Well, now heíd come out and visit my mother with his family. So they were a cousin to you, then? The children were my second cousins. But now theyíre all gone. And there were three in that family, children. The last one died in March. Was your mother the only one interested in this, keeping track of each other, or the rest of them were also? Well, I think so, but a couple of them in Pennsylvania, especially the man, one of the men, he loved to come out here and to talk to my mother. And he loved to go to the wagon wheel. What was that? Was it a restaurant? Yeah, the wagon wheel out in Rockton. Oh, I see. So the first time we went out there, I took him and Ö this was my cousin Ö and my mother and father and him. And Iíll never forget, he sat at the head of the table and he said, you know, he said, ìThe king of Sweden couldnít have it any better than I have it.î And he was so impressed with Rockford that heíd come every year to visit, you know, and he always wanted to eat at the wagon wheel. And he was retired, and heíd worked for a paper factory out in Erie, Pennsylvania. But they lived in Pennsylvania? Yeah, they lived in Erie. What was his name? His name was Nelson. Nelson. Uh-huh. And then several of the other Ö he had another brother that lived in Wittenberg that worked for the mines. There are mines out there, coal mines. Windburn and Lenz. The what? Windburn and Lenz. Oh, is it? Not close together. Uh-huh. And there were a lot of Swedes he sat out there in Erie. Did you visit them out there in Erie, or Ö? No. I did stop in Ö I stopped once on a tour and just called them up. So you still have a second cousin living out there? I got a second cousin. She has just now been to Sweden to visit for the first time. And she lives in Erie? She lives in Erie. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Yeah, she just went now to Ö about a month ago, and she just sent me a short note, and she said she spent 24 days over in Norway and Sweden, and it was really a thrill, she said. So Ö So you still have contacts with them then? Pardon? You still have contacts with them? Yeah, with a number of the cousins I do. Uh-huh. Now, there is one cousin, a second cousin, that lives in Erie, and her son is secretary. Well, he has got a big job with the Ö What is it now? Some Ö Bible. It is an American Bible. See, I know Ö Yes, I believe it is American Bible Institute. Yeah, the Ö And they give out Bibles to all of them? All of them, yeah. And he is secretary. He has got a big job with them. He was a minister, Lutheran minister, and then he went in with his outfit, and his mother lives in Erie. So you have contacts with Sweden through Erie, Pennsylvania then? Oh, have you been out there? Oh, yeah, I have been many times there. It is a big place, isn't it? Well, it is Ö A lot of Norwegians too, aren't there? Well, quite a few Finns in Æstabula. That is before Erie. Oh, I see. Not too many Norwegians, but quite a few Swedes. So how is the contact now with Sweden? Do you have correspondence with them every year? Yeah, I have with second cousins there in Borholm. And then her son, Bo, I don't know what he does, but he is a commune, has charge of something over there on Öland. But I guess he has had a good education. His father was in charge, then he got it, the son, after his father retired. But they live in Borholm. No, the one that has charge, he lives in Mørby. On a great-grandfather's farm. You know, the oldest man in the family gets the farm doing it, which isn't fair. So that is handed down? That has been handed down. It is still in the family? It is still in the family. And that is one thing my mother was so thrilled about, because her father was born on that farm, my grandfather, and then his father, see, and the oldest son got it. So that is in the family. Your parents, now did they go back to Sweden? They were never back. Never back. Did she talk about it often? Yeah, she said that was another mistake. That she didn't go while her mother was living.