 This is cassette 2, side 1, a continuation with Kenneth Cadell in Rockford, Illinois. That's side 1, cassette 2. So you ended your work at Sunstrance in 1954? I left Sunstrance, yeah, in 1954. I worked in a test lab, and I worked with a bunch of engineers, and I realized not having an engineer's degree or anything like that, I was just a general employee, there was no future for me there. So this is going to surprise you. I left Sunstrance to go sell cemetery property for Sunset Memorial Gardens up on North Alpine Road, and I did that for about four and a half years, and after the first year, I got an override on the boys. I was sort of like assistant manager. The manager couldn't keep the boys too happy, because once they had poor production, he didn't know how to bring them up. I showed them how to do it, but I never—I don't know how to say it. I showed them that you can by just playing the percentages, making extra calls and that. Then after that, and I never monkeyed with them afterwards, because once—that was such a rough game going up and telling somebody, you know, you're going to die and I want to sell you your cemetery property. It's hard on people. How did you do that? Did you go house to house? We did that, and we call that surveying, scalloping the sidewalks, and then by recommendations. Say I sold you cemetery property and you got a brother and a sister, and they don't have any. Well, you would recommend them, and then I'd call on them and I'd say, well, you bought and recommended me to show you. There was a program, and Sunset is the nicest cemetery in the Rockford area, and that way it grew. See, this is what they call a pre-development program up there. This is thirty years ago now when Sunset First was first getting started, and they had to have some money to work by. So they hired an advertising company, Midwest Memorial Gardens, to come in with a crew, which I was one, and develop. Was it easy to sell the Swedes on this property, though, because didn't they want to be in the Scandinavian cemetery? No, it didn't seem to have any effect on it. It didn't bother. There's only one nationality that was, and that's up by Argyle, the Scottish cemetery. We could never get breakthrough to them. But all others, Swedish and Italian and everybody, and the Italian had to go against the church because the church wouldn't consecrate the graves in those days. They do now. Not at that time? But not at that time. But they said, they're not going to tell me where I can be buried or where I'm this and that. They're not what they call following the herd type people. So they were hard to sell there then. Were you able to sell any then? Were you able to sell many lots? Yes. My last year, we were in a lot and vault and marker program. We sold them in a package deal and that. But most of the time, because of the expense, it was individually lots and then markers and then vaults. I sold $110,000 worth of vaults, markers, and lots the last year I was there. And the manager, he was the guy, Rockford was the best property in this selling outfit. And the manager, he sold $114,000 and I was always second to him, which didn't bother me too much. It's just that he would go to pieces when he tried to ride with the guys. And I showed them that they can make sales if they make calls, but it takes a lot of guts to do it, believe me. And after so long, the boys kind of give out. And when I was doing so good, they wanted me to be a manager of a sunset cemetery up in Bismarck, North Dakota. That's the capital of North Dakota. But being Swedish, I says, I'm Swedish, but I ain't that Swedish. In other words, I don't like 40 and 50 below. I couldn't take the cold weather. I went up there and I lived up there for 10 days. You did? Yeah. And I enjoyed it and it was nice. The manager up there had leukemia and he could only come down to the office once or twice a week. So they wanted someone to take his place. But 10 days, that's all it took and you came right back to Rockford? I came back to Rockford and then they kind of tried to pressure me to take something else and they said that there isn't room for two managers in Rockford. And I said, okay, I quit. And that's when I went into real estate. When you left Sunstrand, did you get any pensions? That was sad. After you left, I realized the union had started, but they hadn't settled anything. And Sunstrand had their own system. If you worked there 15 years or more, and I worked there 15 and a half years, you were entitled to a pension. Well, I says to the personnel manager, who was a personal friend of mine anyway, you know Svea Sohner. He was very active in Svea Sohner. I didn't sing with him, but I went up and played a lot of cards. I knew all the guys. But anyway, I says, how much would I get if I take my retirement? He said, you don't get anything now until you're 65, but you'll get $7.00 in some sense a month. Oh my gosh, I says, well, what would I get if I cash in on my – he said, well, you'd get that now. $232.00. Then six months afterwards, the president of the union, Ole Rigg, he was Norwegian, he says, Kenny, we now just worked a new contract with Sunstranse, and you'd have had a juicy retirement if you'd have stayed six months longer. But I says, that's neither here nor there. That $232.00, I made that the second week selling cemetery property. So you made a good switch then, in other words? Temporarily, yeah. I lived good too. And we traveled, and like my kids were small, but we just went a little all over. And I'd work three, four days a week. When we went on a weekend, a weekend to us, selling cemetery property was Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. Four days. Well, they were the biggest days of the week. You sold most of it over the weekends? No, no, no. When we took a vacation or took a day off, it was always, we called a weekend Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. Well, that was a good weekend. You'd earn good, but you could make up for it. All you had to do was work harder. When I rode with the guys, and we wanted to make extra calls, and I'd call on a couple or a house, and maybe it was a brother recommendation. Well, my husband works nights. He works three to eleven. Oh, he does? Well, we might be around this way. Would you mind if we stopped by? That was an extra call. After eleven o'clock, it's impossible otherwise. You wouldn't want anybody calling on you. But usually, I'd lead into it, well, you don't go to bed right away, do you? And you kind of relax a little bit. Well, I'll show you what your brother-in-law bought, and things like that. And it worked. And I enjoyed it, but it was rough. Direct selling is rough. That's what they call that. So then I went from underground apartments to above the ground apartments. In other words, I went from selling cemetery lots to selling real estate. How did you get into that? The same company? No. There was a different company, though. It was a different company, yeah. And just down the street next to Stockholm Inn was a Rudy Gustafson real estate office. And my wife says, why don't you go down and see Rudy? Because I knew him. He married with his youngest brother when we were kids. I went down there and, sure, I'll take you on. You've got to study and take an exam and go into Chicago and get your real estate license, which I did. But Rudy was what they call a corner store real estate office. One man operation. I was the two. Well, then he picked up a couple of other guys, but he didn't have any organization. I realized that coming from selling cemetery property. That was the system. So then I went with Dick Connors. This Tableau Towers that was bought, Dick is the one that owns that. Connors and Baer. And Dick specialized in apartments, multiple dwellings, in fact, one poor family on the Alpine across from a Highlander grocery store rubbed off onto me and this and right across the street at 1220th Street. So I took a little bit something with me when I left real estate. So it was better to belong to a corporation rather than a private individual, real estate salesman. Like Gustafson, he didn't have any coverage then, in other words, in his business. Yeah. In the real estate, we formed a corporation with Connors. There were seven of us. There are seven corners in a septagon. So we called ourselves Septagon Corporation. And we bought and sold. Individually? Individually and as a group. But I mean, we did it for the group. No matter what I did, it was with the group, in other words. And it turned out two or three of us were doing everything. The others were getting the money out of it. So it took us three years to break it up, although we had been doing it for about seven years. So septagon and the seven was not too good? No, it was too loose. Too loose. Is it better than to be alone? Is it better than to be alone to control the whole thing yourself? Yeah, in a way, I almost was going to do that, but then I decided not to because it's a rough game. But the only thing I didn't like about real estate is open house and Sundays, which I did all the time because I know that's where you get your true customers, the ones that have just got that little inkling, they come and I jokingly call it throw an eyeball on the place and say, we're just looking. Well, then you're supposed to cultivate the just looking and say, we looked and they buy. But most of the guys that never had open house never sold anything either. And it's feast and famine, there's cycles and seasons and things like that. Was that during the late 50s and early 60s? 60s and 70s, yeah. Were they good years? Very good. They were good. So if you compare that time with today? Oh, it's rough today. Very, very rough. It'll never be the same because we were living in a false world then. You think so? I think we were going over our heads on everything. Well, they were building cars so cheap that them five mile an hour bumpers were big damages, remember? Everything was getting so out of line. Then the Japanese put us on our toes. When they start building better cars and the Americans realize that they're going to get a decent car, they got to buy a foreign car. That's terrible. But that's how soft we were getting. In fact, right now the automobile industry is hurting. That 2.9% interest on a new car, that's a big rip off. Last year, I got it in the paper in there yet, they had two increases on cars. General Motors averaged between $800 and $900. Then they came out with a 2.9% interest they could afford to. They took away from you in one hand and gave you in the other. So that's a false scheme. It is. It's right in the paper. And it's sad. I wish them luck in that, but they got to do like the Japanese. They are the leading industrial country of the world today. And it's sad to say that because they learned it all from us and then improved on top of that. At least that's my thoughts. But they are not selling any houses yet to the Japanese. They haven't cornered a house market in the United States though. No, no, no, they didn't. But they're in everything else. Basically everything else. Banking and... So it's harder to sell a house than in Rockford today? Huh? It's hard to sell a house today in Rockford? Yes, in comparison to years ago because people don't have the money. So the prices have settled down? And the prices have leveled off, but they're not down. You were in the Swedish tumbling team you said? SAGC, Swedish American Gymnastic. And that was all gymnastics? There was no running or... No, not running. It was gymnastics. No soccer running. They had a soccer team and weightlifting mostly. And then in those days professional wrestlers used to come down to the gym and work out and when they go to the shrine temple that's where they used to have their wrestling matches. And they practiced their favorite holds. They work on each other and all those big funny tricks that they do and picking guys up and that, that's an art. They got to do that just right or they'll kill the guy. That's right, it may sound strange but... You never tried it? I never monkeyed with anything like that. I knew better. I hit my head with a soccer ball at one time and quit. I staggered off the field and I said, I think I just quit playing soccer. I said to the coach because it just didn't appeal to me. But the Swedish gym was a lot of fun but it kind of petered out as the years went by right after World War II it got debated. Some of the guys, younger guys got married and that and they had their families and they didn't have time to come in. Just like all your Swedish clubs now, they're all down. Some of them had a thousand members at one time. Heck now they're lucky if you get a hundred and fifty. You don't belong to any now? No, the only club I belong to is the retired men's club at the Y. I play cards every Tuesday morning and we enjoy it. There's not too many of us that play cards anymore either. But I go fishing a lot and get out that way. I hate winter. And I'm Swedish. But it's better than North Dakota? By far, by far. I enjoyed it up there. The one thing I'll never forget is the only tree on the streets, now you look up and down this street and you see maple trees, Chinese elm up there in North Dakota. And I don't know why but I was told like these maple trees, it got so cold the trees would split. They would just literally explode when they split so they couldn't grow up there. It was too cold. If I ask you now, when you were in the selling business, cemetery plots and real estate, was it hard to sell the Swedes on those things? Was it easy to sell to a German or an Italian? No. Like I mentioned before, I was blessed in this way. I had no trouble with any nationality except the Scottish up there by Argyle in a Scottish cemetery. They would not break away from that. Even if they didn't own this, we were going to have our lots. Which I respected them for. Do they have any organization like the Swedes, the Scottish people? Other than the Scottish church up there, I don't know of anything else. But the Swedes, they were no different than any other nationality as far as that part. They were here permanently. They never—when I was a kid, I got relatives who went back to Sweden after so many years, but that don't happen no more. But no, the Swedes were no different as far as I'm concerned. I never thought of any one nationality that was better than another. Sometimes I could pick out the religion the people were by just calling on them and talking to them and I'd figure it out. How could you figure it out? I don't know. Just from the way they talked and that. They were either Protestant or Catholic or Mormon or Seven-Day Adventists and that. So you were able to detect that? I could kind of detect that. I don't know why. How did you come to that conclusion? It must be hard over the phone. How could you do that over the phone? Not on the phone. When I'm talking to them like— Face to face? Yeah. But you couldn't tell the difference between a Lutheran, a free church, and a Covenant or a Baptist, though? Not entirely, but I could kind of sense that their reactions were that of that type of people. The most easygoing of all religions, and this is going to surprise you, was the Mormons. They were the most gentle and the most—and they bought, too. They bought. But sometimes your Seven-Day Adventists and the Christian scientists and that, they would get kind of radical before they end up buying, but they'd buy. We closed on an average of five and six sales out of ten presentations. That's darn good. You didn't take a no for an answer? Huh? You didn't take a no for an answer? Well, when you got in the close, you had them convinced that just in case you had to do them a favor and get them to buy. See, that's how I felt. When I call on the family, I'm here to help them. They won't remember me someday, but they'll someday say, I'm sure glad we got these things taken care of. And I went on that theory. So when I knocked on the door, I was doing it for the good of them, not me entirely. Naturally for me, too. But I always felt I was helping people. I think that attitude helped me. Most of the people have this question unsettled when something happens. More or less, yeah. More or less. There's something you don't want to talk about. Sometimes you'll say, well, my folks have got some lots and so and so. And you better check the bylaws, because like Arlington Cemetery, not Arlington, but the one up in North Main and Auburn, Greenwood, you own lots there 20 years, and the cemetery takes it back. They do? Yeah. Without notifying you? No, it's in the bylaws. It just automatically goes back to the cemetery. They don't have to notify the owner? No, because it's in the contract. So you see, everybody had their game. It's best to read the fine print. Huh? It's best to read the fine print. Yeah, but that's the catch. We average people don't know what fine print is. Yeah, but it's terrible, though. How can you get away with things like that? You know, old people, they have a hard time to read. That's funny. But you know why you're talking to, and what do you want to have? Like at Greenwood, one couple bought from me because they had a tree right in the middle of their two lots. You can have it, but you've got to pay for the price of cutting the tree down. But you didn't tell them that, though, that they had a big tree growing there? No, they found that out themselves. They went out to check their lots one time and found out there was a tree growing there. Did you have stipulations in your bylaws, too, that they take it, they took it back after 20 years? No. Did I ask for permission? No. In other words, when you sold your lots, did you have the same provisions? No, no. The only provision at sunset was, say, you had four spaces. Say your wife passed away, and you passed away, but you had never done anything with the other two spaces, saying, I want to give these two to one of my sons. But if you had never done anything, then they automatically went back to the cemetery. In other words, they didn't automatically go to the next kin. You have to tell them, then. The owner of the lot has to tell the corporation. Yeah, then... In the writing. In other words, the one that bought the lot has to tell the corporation the intention to do that in writing. They had a deed, and they had to change the deed on their lot. And oral agreements were no good. Huh? Oral agreements were no good. No. It's got to be in writing. Yeah, yeah. But I guess that's only fair in a way, because, say, in your case, you got three boys, and there's two lots left over. How are you going to do it? Because most of the time, a husband and a wife, those boys get married, they're going to be buried with their wives. So the only reason why you had two extra spaces was in case of an emergency. One of the boys had a stillborn baby. Well, you got an extra lot, and you can put the baby on. I sold that way. There must be a lot of extra spaces, then, in the cemetery. Yes. They don't know what to do with. That's right. In other words, they know what to do with, but it takes many years to do it. They can't just do it right away. Like now, I've had my spaces out of sunset for way over 30 years. I bought six months before I went out there. Well, if there was a 20-year bylaw, I'd have lost my lots. But the— Do you pay one price, or do you pay monthly or yearly, or how do you do it? Well, when you buy, you pay with a little down and a little a month, $10 down. Lots were cheap in those days. This is going to surprise you. We sold lots for $75 a lot. One price? One lot. One price, no more? Huh? No more additional price, just one price, $75? Yeah. Then we owned the lot and the deed to it and all of that. But today, they vary from $200 and some dollars to up to $600, depending on what part of the cemetery. They have what they call developed areas, and there's still spaces available, but you pay right through the nose. Can you picture paying $600 for a lot? Ish. We had it that you paid $75, and then when the garden was closed, they automatically went up to $150. And now them lots that are $150, like my lots, probably $400 or $500. See 30 years has gone by. When you were selling cemeteries last night in the 60s, cremation was not in the picture so much then. The what was? Cremation. Cremating the body. It was not in the picture so much then at that time. It was full burial. Cremation was not too popular. It was coming in slowly. It's coming in slowly, yeah. Another thing, mausoleums were another. We didn't have them, but now they're all over the place. So they buy there instead then? Huh? So they buy mausoleums instead of small space? Yeah. For the ashes? With ashes as well as bodies. But we didn't have any mausoleums or very, very few cremations, but now that's common. Cremation? Cremation, yeah. Does the lot cost less then? No, uno. Why? Because it takes only a little space. But they didn't have an area set aside for that, and they never did. So in other words, cremation is you got to own the lot if you're going to put the body away. But you don't need all that space though? No, you don't. It's just wasted. Just like baby land, that's the only place where they have small areas, but then again, it's still about the size of this table. But they didn't do it with cremation. And that's even in the mausoleums, you took a whole vault anyway. Regardless of full burial or cremation. How do they do today then though? How do they do today? Well that's what they do today is... They don't have any smaller spots for cremation? They don't have any lots small or anything like that. Because all you need is just like a table here. That's right. There's ways to land. Yeah, well if we were near a large body of water, you better believe that could be put to pot too. In California and Florida, they have airplanes that fly out over the ocean and dump the remains. They do it once a week and the like. They take two, three hundred urns and dump them out and either throw the urns in too or otherwise return them to the people. My husband was in this urn. It's sad but it was cheaper. And it's a rip off in the cemetery game anyway. It is. It's sad. How about the undertaker though? How about the undertaker business? It was just as bad. Very bad. They hated the cemetery people because... See, the undertaker used to sell them... Have the embalming of the body. When they'd go out and call a cemetery, if the people didn't have lots, and buy a lot and they'd sell the people a vault, they had nothing to do with the lots and nothing to do with the vaults. But they made a profit. So when the cemeteries, the garden type cemeteries with no tombstones come in, they have their own vaults and their own lots. In other words, they didn't go along. So the undertakers were ever trying to pass laws to put the cemeteries out of business. Well, who should have a vault more than the cemetery? And that money... See, there's a state law. 15% of all money taken in at a cemetery has to go to a trust fund. Well, 15% of that vault... Cassette 2, side 2. So markers now, you can't have any upright markers anymore. Tombstones. Can you have the big ones like they had years ago? No, nobody does. Even like Will Wood and them, they're going to the garden type. Because for every dollar you spend to maintain a garden type cemetery, you spend about seven cutting around tombstones and maintaining them. It takes seven times as much energy. But years ago, you had all those big cemeteries, high markers and tombstones and side rails and everything, and people took care of the cemetery. Nowadays, you have a tremendous unemployment. Plenty of people to take care of it. But why are they afraid to do that? Because it costs money and there was no money put aside to take care of it. See? They didn't have... It was in 1948 that the trust funds in Illinois were set up. Any cemetery before 48 operated from hand to mouth and pocketed the profit. See those tombstones were a big ripoff too. But a person or a family, they can afford a $10,000 tombstone. They could easily afford to pay another $5,000 for upkeep. You would think so. It would be a tremendous slush fund to work from. That's right, but they never bothered with it. They just took the profit and ran the cemeteries. They never did bother to monkey around with perpetual care. And embalmment is a national law. And now it's... Everybody has to be embalmed when they die in Rockford. No. No? No, your Jews are never embalmed. They are not? No. That's why they're buried the next day. They die today, they're buried tomorrow. So no embalment? No. I thought that was a national law. No. No, it might be what they call a cemetery. I mean, the funeral director might say that's our policy or our rule, but it ain't no law. You don't have to be embalmed. Are most of the people embalmed? Almost all. Almost all? Yeah. No, it's just like I said, the Jews, they don't have embalming. Has it always been, as long as you remember, burial on the third day? Been what now? The burial on the third day. They don't keep the body more than three days as a rule. No, there is no given number of days. Sometimes there's, we call them immediate needs, and they got relatives in California and it takes them a week to get here. They hold it. They do? Yeah. Yeah, that's not a problem. But three days is usually the practice. Yeah, if you look in the paper, it's usually three days later. Yeah. But no, it can be any length of time in that way. But just one thing about the cemetery game and your monument maker people and all of that is the motive of profit. If there isn't any money in it, they won't have nothing to do with it. In Chicago, some of these tombstone cemeteries that are so old that there are no living survivors, they took the tombstones and used them for fill along Lake Michigan and put in copper, or not copper, but brass plates in the name of the people that were there. It was cheaper for them to do that because maintenance was so expensive that they could go right over it with a lawnmower or otherwise they could cut the grass in one day, which took weeks. In other words, they're never done on a tombstone cemetery. So the tradition has to give away for simplicity and economics. That's right. It's the almighty dollar. That's what makes the difference. That goes for anything in life when it comes down to it. That's why General Motors is ripping off, and not only General Motors, all the others are ripping off the people at 2.9 percent interest, but what the people don't know, they had between an eight and nine hundred dollar increase in 86 to cover that. But people don't remember that. No, well, we're innocent in that way. Buyer beware. Caveat emptor. Huh? Caveat emptor. Yeah, you know. Were you ever in the services? No, in Sweden. Huh? In Sweden. You were? Yeah. Oh yeah. I think, didn't they have automatic conscription in Sweden many, many years ago? I know my father-in-law came from Germany to get away from going into the army. Yes, sure. But then in Sweden, I don't know if my father... It was compulsory. Huh? Oh sure, you had to go in. It was compulsory for everyone. Yeah, that's what I thought. Yes. I kind of think that's why my dad came from Sweden in 1904. He never mentioned anything about that? Never talked about Sweden. Did you ask him anything about Sweden? Yeah, but he never talked much. He just make one answer and quit. How about your mother, Frida? Did she say anything about that? No, she never talked other than the fact, like I jokingly said, your kids and my kids are fighting with our kids, and that her brother was a great big, over six foot tall guy, and that was it. Because she had half brothers and half sisters, because her dad remarried and then they had kids. But it didn't bother me too much, but my cousin Bert Karlsson, he's our family historian. He takes care of it. When you were growing up, now you had no trouble with English because you were coming right up with your mother tongue. After the principal came home from school in that following year, from there on... You were American. I learned... No choice. I had no choice. But did you understand that some of the Swedes that came now from Sweden during the 20s and 30s, not 30s, but... I did then, but beginning of the... right after World War II, I know there were some Swedes that came over, I couldn't understand them. I didn't even try to talk to them because I knew better. I'd make them feel embarrassed. Did they have a rough time to find a job with that limited... not education, but I mean speech? It didn't seem to because everybody had an accent of the older people. Was there a favor, you think? Italians and Norwegians and Swedes and no matter what, Germans, they all had their accents because they had come over. So nobody paid attention to it then so much? That wasn't uncommon. But you could detect the accent from a Swede and an Italian and a German. Yeah, that's why we used to always guess their nationality. I used to catch hecklers, I'd say, I'd white their mouth so I could understand them. You were born here now, so you don't feel any pressure on you to be careful? No. Because you understand the language. They can't fool you. But the one that came now from a foreign country, he has to be a little bit particular to whom he's talking to and so forth. Yeah. It makes a difference. You are more... you put a shield between yourself. Yes. But you didn't have to do that? No, no. My dad never got into an accent either afterwards, so I couldn't get over that. Neither did my mother, but I got relatives that did. In fact, I think my Uncle Anton, he's 96, I think he still talks with an accent. He's the one that lives in Florida? Yeah. That's his heart. 96. But it depends on what year they came, how old they were. Yeah. I don't know anything about how... So your dad was quite young then when he came? 16 is quite young, yeah. Sure, I mean, that's like being a native after a few years. Yeah, he... I'm proud of my dad in a way. He went bankrupt, but I was working. You saved him. And I had to pay off half his bankruptcies. The guys wouldn't even give me a receipt. That's been wrote off on bankruptcy. But my dad insists, and then I have to give you the money. Why didn't they give you a receipt? Well, because that would acknowledge the fact that it was... he'd already wrote it off on his income tax. And they're not supposed to give you a receipt then? Because I was paying off the debt. Yeah, but you still requested a receipt over anything you pay. Huh? Yeah, but you have a right to receive a receipt though. I was supposed to, but I didn't get any. A couple, there was a couple cases in particular. But... Did they come back at you again? No, no, they couldn't because he went bankrupt. You see, dad was too noble. He paid off his bankruptcy debts. That's where I come in. I'm the one that paid him off, only he's the one that felt better about it. I've always been proud of my dad for that. That's something that don't happen anymore. That's just like you see in the paper, someone finding some money somewhere and turning it in. That's so rare. They make a hero out of them. Well, heck, when I was a kid, that was nothing. That was what we were supposed to do. Now it's a miracle that you do it. The times have changed. Yeah. When I was in the CCCs, when you say times have changed, I never heard of marijuana or anything like that. Now, in the services, I guess that's a big thing. Although they're taking blood tests on the guys now. There's in between meals. There's in between meals. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we're going to be okay someday because it was in the paper the other day about somebody says, I don't know what's happening to the younger generation. At the end of it was some guy a little over 2000 years ago that said that. We're still here. So you still think it's hope? I think so. I think so. I think we'll gather our senses and do what we're supposed to do. I knew one thing, we'll eat better from now on because that's a new world. See I'm diabetic, so I don't get the full benefit of all of my foods. So I need supplements. I'll show you what an egg crate is good for. You have to eat all those every day? One each day? Well, I take some blood thinner medicine. I take heart regulation medicine. And it also lowers my blood pressure. And then I take arthritic medicine. I had a stroke and I take stroke medicine. So half of them ain't vitamins, they're medicine. But I got tired of opening bottles all the time. So I use egg carton and I told the doctor about it. And I make a joke out of it. It says private stuff, what's that? And then taken while... The lime is best. What's it say? Funeral delayers. Do you have them all, Mark? You have them all, Mark? But what is this now? Private stuff? That's mine. And butt stretchers. It says very extra large butt stretchers. These were large eggs. It's your travel kit. When I go away for a few days, I take them and put them in here rather than bring that thing. They will keep you alive to return home again. My friend, I would be dead if it wasn't for the medicine I take. At one time my heartbeat was 104 to 108 beats a minute. And Indro, which is one of them, brought it down to 72 to 76. My blood pressure was high and now it's down. So I'm grateful.