 I said three, could be as you with Bernice Johnson, Rockford, Illinois, I said three, side one. Yeah, he wrote that book and all about the trial and I think it's so interesting. Well, so Terry says, I wish I could do something about this ulcer pain, he says it's awful. So I says, well, let's call up this doctor, Dr. Shadman, who wrote this book about the trial. It's all about it, there's a whole chapter that's all about the trial and how they made rules that you had to go your eight years, otherwise you couldn't become a home pathic doctor. And you know, who could afford all that? Eight years, that wasn't going to be doing them much good and then they have to go to a home pathic college after that. So that's how it died down. And I see you have a book about aluminum. Yes, and that is not a home pathic doctor, that's a regular doctor. But then you have a news clipping that says no need to stop using aluminum cookware. Yeah, sure, that just made me sick. It is dangerous, it is dangerous. Is the industry that's behind the ulcers? Yes, it is dangerous because the thing is for some people, aluminum is very harmful and it comes off of the pans. It really is a soft metal, you know, and for some people it makes them very sick. My father had that trouble. They don't produce them anymore, manufacture aluminum pans, do they still do that? Can you still buy aluminum? Yes, you can. Oh yes, they have them. You would think the Federal Health Association would give you the rule? Yeah, of course, everybody doesn't get it. It's just some people who are allergic that way. You know how allergy is. If you're allergic, well, then you're affected by it, otherwise you aren't. But I know definitely that that was what caused my father to die. So they are still selling it? Yes, that caused him to be so sick so long. And so I called Dr. Shadman on the telephone when Terry was here and I told him exactly what it was and he said, it sounds like aluminum poisoning, I'm sure it must be. And I said, but I don't know what to give him. And he said, well, get alumina and that's a medicine. Little pills, little pills that were called alumina. And you give them three doses, one dose today if you have it. It should be in 200 potency, that's the number. And give him two today, two a month from now, and two more the third month and that's all he has to have is that little bit. Now it doesn't even cost a penny for that little bit of medicine. But Terry did what he was told and he got better from it right away. What about copper now? Is this, that is aluminum? Well, I don't know about copper. I haven't gone into that, of course, because I don't know. But I understand that that is also bad for you. It can be. Because there's lead inside, you know, to keep it tight. And probably the homopaths know a lot about it, but I haven't known about it because I haven't known anybody that had that. Years ago, you remember in the 60s, they always had the slogan that said, better living through chemistry. Yeah. It was General Electric. You don't hear that anymore, no? No. And then they got all these ads. If you were on an island in the ocean, which would you rather have? Bayer or... Bayer or Dynamo? Yeah, that's right. It just makes me sick when I hear that ad. So, nature's laboratory, no mistakes are made. No. Here's the one to go. And you would think all those doctors, so many of them would, but they are too strong then to... Yeah. Their wisdom rises above the homopaths because they are too few. Yeah. Well, the homopaths couldn't fight it, you know. There was no way for them to fight this, this thing. It's been like that. Hahnemann himself who discovered this and was a wonderful, wonderfully intelligent scientist, they were against him all the time. All the time doctors were against him. This shows you've got to have a majority and a lot of money. Well, yeah. And he wrote so much. He wrote all the, you know, a lot of books and told exactly how to do so much. I think he was wonderful. But I did believe that because I saw it all the time. I slept in the living room because we lived in a tiny house and I heard these conversations all the time and I listened to them and so that's where I got my start. You know, they don't know a lot in Sweden. Pardon? They don't know a lot in Sweden. No, I know that. We went to a doctor there about a year and a minute, he stopped talking about homopathy. He wouldn't even talk to her. Is that right? Yeah. It's a trouble. Yeah. They were probably told then to react that way then. Oh, sure. They're taught that. They probably have seminars, you know, so the teachers know how to do it. Sure. They're taught that way and it's too bad. But, you know, once in a while a great doctor will find that he has to have it. For instance, Dr. Skinner. He was in England, a famous doctor. Had been there for years and he got sick and couldn't get better. He had terrible, terrible trouble with his stomach and pain all the time and sleeplessness. He didn't sleep for months and he was going down and going to die pretty soon and nobody could help him. And finally somebody, a friend of his says, let's try homeopathy because that's where you'll get some help. He didn't believe it at all. In fact, he'd been so against homeopathy that when they made their law about belonging to the medical society there in London, they wouldn't, anybody except homeopaths was the rule. Well, this time he's decided after being sick so long that he would try homeopathy. He got better immediately. Got better and worked for many years as a homopath. And he says there's nothing like it. It's the best in the world. But then by that time nobody would believe him. It didn't happen in Rockford. Some of the regular doctors got sick and they had to go to Ulbom and Olson. I never heard of it. They were out of dine, I suppose. But there was a Dr. Nyman many years ago in Rockford that was famous. He was a Swede too, you know. And a lot of people went to him. And I've heard in the later years that he gave homeopathic remedies to a lot of people. He did? Uh-huh. Didn't love Grin? Dr. Nyman. Didn't love Grin? Didn't love Grin? Dr. Love Grin? Not that I knew of. I don't think so. But Dr. Nyman did. But it's been kind of hard to get anywhere with it. But I'm sticking with it. But you are still interested in it. Oh, yeah. You are well read. I've helped so many people. There's so many doctors like in this convention now that are both kinds. They go to the hospitals and do all that. And beside that, beside that, have this homeopathy. They do? Yeah. That's the one she got in Chicago, the same way. He's recognized as one of the outstanding ones in Melrose Park in there. But he operates. And just, in fact, I got two circulars right on the door in my cabinet there. His woman was supposed to have a leg cut off because she had diabetes. But when he took her case over, he fixed her so she didn't have to have the leg amputated. But it's remarkable, though. I mean, a medical person doesn't... And they call him the sugar pill doctor, don't they? I think they call it sugar pills all the time. Well, it is. It's sweet. It's sweet. It's put into sugar. It has to have a vehicle. It's such a little bit of medicine, you have to have a vehicle. You have to have something that... On this, like the sock, the polio vaccine was put on the sugar cube. Was it? Yeah, they dropped a drop on the sugar cube when you took it. Oh, did they? It's the same thing with this. Yeah, it's got to have a vehicle, yeah. And so that's why it's called sugar pills, because sugar is what they make, put the medicine into, you see. It's that way. Oh, it's interesting. I just think it's great. So your family, now, you have never gone to the regular doctor then for a common cold or... Well, I've had to, you know, when our children were born. By that time, our doctors were old and they weren't delivering babies anymore. My mother had three babies delivered by Dr. Erbom, but the rest of us never did because there wasn't anybody. Well, this is what they look for and it looks like. This is echinide for cold. Echinide, that's for colds, certain kinds of colds. Do you take them as preventive medicine then? No, when you get... Or you just wait until you get the cold? If you get it, the minute you get a cold, the minute, if you get it right away. Or you don't eat in between, though? No. You can take three or four times a year. It's all right. If you feel you have a sniffing or a headache or something. Yeah, yeah. Then you take a couple of days. That's right. But it has to be... And you'll take care of it. Yeah. No shots. That's what I used to do at the station. No shots, no nothing. It has to be prescribed for according to your symptoms and that's the whole rule. That's the big rule of it. So you can't over the telephone then send a few pills to somebody. You've got to see the person and... Oh, yeah. And recognize the symptoms. Yeah, that's right. So when he came home from the gas station, you used to... you know he was ready to take a couple of pills. Yeah. But it was so windy and cold, you know, get down below zero and he was wet or sweaty or something working in the garage. He'd go out and wait on that customer and he'd get chilled. Yeah, that's one of the worst jobs, you know, running day. Sure. So you were always sick then from colds? No, I was not. Before, I mean. Yeah. Before you get this. Yeah. Well, and... The regular doctor couldn't cure it. I didn't go to no regular doctor. But, you know, he just went on glowing and sneezing. But then I gave it to him a few times and he got better immediately. So I said, the last time that I did that, I says, next time you go yourself because it's the first bottle on the shelf there. The very first bottle, A.C. Aconite, see? Aconite. And so then you take it yourself. And so he did. And for, oh, for 37 years, you know, I didn't monkey around with him at all. I knew he could take care of himself and he did. He didn't have cold and it would go away. In the morning, he was better. So this, only when he feeds it, coming on then? Yeah. Uh-huh. So is there a lot of C vitamins in those tablets, Aconite tablets? There isn't anything like that in the... All of this is just the remedy and the sugar that is the vehicle of it, you know. So there at least is enough then to fight the virus off? Yeah. And they put it up in different potencies, you know. Different size? Uh-huh. Different strength. For children and... No, not necessarily that way. It's rather according to what the condition is that you have that's wrong. Something interior and organic usually has to have a little higher potency than for colds or for some things like that. So you have to use the potency that's correct for that condition. And they are all safe, those tablets, you have no... All of them are safe. They never hurt anybody. And I've helped so many people with them. And that was a... that little magazine there, just a little tiny short one. You wrote an article? Last time. About what then? About the common cold? No, about my... about Holly. When she cried that time, her mother left her, you know. I wrote it up and so they printed it. This man, Dr. Moskovich, he happens to be the chairman of this group right now. And he's from Boston. And he said, you write something, won't you please? Because he's read my book, see? And I have had five articles in their magazine printed. But this little short one, he says, please write something now, will you? So I wrote up that little one and they printed it this month. You mentioned, I asked before here if you went to the regular doctors because Ulbom and Olsen were all of them. But then after they got older, the children, you cured them yourself then for the common cold? Well, I always help them if I can. Well, of course... Like strep throat, for instance, there's always a shagging symptom, you know, a cough. Yeah, and if I read carefully the symptoms, I can cough. How do you know if it's strep throat or a cough? Well, just the symptoms tell you. It's the symptoms that tell you. It's wonderful. It's a wonderful way to treat people. I took something for my... I had... What was it? Noestroid? Huh? Noestroid? What do you mean? Just recently. Anyway, I took a certain remedy, oh, for little scabs in my nose, and I thought it would help me. But, you know, right after I took it, about a minute or so after I took it, suddenly my hearing came back, just like that. Because of that? So I thought, well, it has to be that medicine. I don't know. I just think it's so funny. And since then, I haven't been using my hearing aid at all. I don't need it now. I can hear you perfectly, and I can hear... Yeah. It's strange. Yeah. Yeah, she could hear me. I had the hollow of my head out. So... Well, there was some salt that you put on there, or ointment or something? No. No? You took some pills. Pills? Uh-huh. I took pills that I thought... See, if you study a book like that, it goes according to symptoms, a lot of it, you know. So I thought, well, this sounds like it could help my nose. And my nose, I did get rid of the little scabs, but it took about a week before I was rid of it. I didn't take any more medicine. Well, hopefully he'll take care of the scabs, though. He doesn't know that. You just take it. It's wonderful. Oh, it's been fun. Yeah. Well, it sounds to me an interesting fun, because you can see something happening. It's really fun, because I've privately have seen a lot of miracles. Do you believe the new doctors of today, are they better prepared, or do they know more than the old timers? No, I don't think the doctors are well prepared at all. Do they create more problems than solving it? I think so. I think it's just worse than it ever was, because... Too much? Well, the medicine doesn't cure. It just palliates. But for a while you feel better, and then it can come right back the same trouble, you know. It doesn't cure it. And that's really what's against strong medicine, or medicine that you get at drugstores. You know, I've given my little book to several drugists, too. And I always wonder what they think of it. I don't know. It's against their religion. Oh dear. Well, this Holly, Holly is the little girl. That's your granddaughter? Yeah, that's the one that's on this trip, you know, that's going to go to Stockholm. She is on the Viking ship? Uh-huh. Yeah. Ballet dancer? I'm sure that she's always believed in this. And so she took some Arnica with her. Arnica is for injury, if you fall and hurt yourself or something. Well, it usually helps in some way. Even if you break a bone, it won't cause that to heal up, but you yourself won't have as much pain and stuff like that. And you know how you can hurt yourself so easy and so many times it helps. So she got the medicine with her when she was traveling? Yeah. From your medicine cabinet? Yeah. Some Arnica. She's been having it with her. And so when she was on the stage one time and she was hurt, she fell because she had to stand way up high, about ten feet off the ground in the act, you know, and she fell and hurt herself. At the Metro Center? Yeah. And so she swelled up. She hit her somewhere in her forehead. She swelled up, just something terrible and hurt. And so she took some Arnica and in about half an hour it was all better. The swelling was gone and there was nothing wrong. And they had been afraid that there was a fracture, but there wasn't a fracture, of course. And so she told the head of her, there's a, was a sort of a teacher that directed the group. She told her about it. And this teacher tried it out several times with different people who did it themselves. So then she wanted to, she wrote me a letter and asked me if I could please tell her where she could buy some of that medicine. So she did buy some in California. Yeah, but they don't have that at the regular drug store, though. No, she had to go to a, I wrote and told her what drug store to go to. Oh, I see. You have a list of those. Yeah. They had it in Denver in the regular drug store. Yeah, they did. Oh, I see. The regular drug store there up on that rock, and out there. Yeah, I had a, one of my granddaughters. Over a foot in the car. Yeah, she, a woman was picking her up, and was picking up several kids. They have, had a station wagon. And so she went out and she threw her books in the car and was going to step in when this woman backed up and went over her foot. And so she sat down on the curb and cried, and they went ahead to school, and then I, Ed and I took her to the hospital to have an x-ray to see if something was wrong, but it wasn't her. They said it was just fortunate that she was 14 years old, and it was softer, yeah. And so, but she did take some Arnica for that, and it helped right away, right away. So she is bought on that product. Yeah. That little one, that white, I like that. So she's going to make a trip now over to Scandinavia. Yeah, yeah. Holly. She is your great-granddaughter. Yeah. No. No, they're granddaughters. She's, they're my granddaughters. I have no great-grandchildren. None of them are married. This is my youngest one. And that's her older sister. And she is how old, 20? She's about 14, the younger. Yeah, the younger. 23. 23. Is Holly 23? No. 21. 21. 21. It's Cynthia that's 23. So she's going to visit Sweden then for the first time? Uh-huh. Where your grandparents came from? Yeah. That's, you read the letter. It sounds like an interesting tour. Oh, yeah. And she wants you to go with her. Yes. I don't want to go with her. I don't want to go on the ocean. Yeah, but how about Edwin? He's an old sailor. Well, he's not going by himself. He's not going by himself. The kids were over there, you know, our kids. They were over there when we were there in 73. Uh-huh. So they saw your birthplace? They came over there and saw everything, yeah. They wanted, the boys both wanted you to go with them. The boys both said they wanted to see Sweden with good dad. Yeah. And so he took them around. Except the older, the older, the old, is in Evanston. She was there in 58. Oh, I see. Yeah, she took a trip there. They know what it looks like. Yeah. And they have cousins, I suppose, over in the Philippines. All over. All over, yeah. Oh, yeah, yeah. I got a lot of relations over there. This Holly, when she was born, right around, see, I wrote to her, I wrote to her, I wrote to Ed's mother and told her, told them that Holly had been born, that she was sort of a Christmas baby, you know, and I got a letter right back from her. She says, the same day that your Holly was born, then our twins were born. Same day. And they've never met, you see. So now they are going to be in Stockholm, I think. I'm sure that John Eric, that's an uncle to these twins. He will make arrangements because he lives in Stockholm. He'll make all the arrangements, so I won't have to do it. So your son, the father of the kids, did he go to college? No, he went to high school and then started his own, or did he go to college? Well, you mean Holly's father? Yeah. He didn't graduate, he didn't get a degree because he worked in the gas station for Ed ever since he was 11 years old, you know, and really interested in automobiles, terribly much interested in them. In fact, when we went to Sweden in 73, was it 73? No. No, that was earlier. That was when we went there in 52. Then he ran the gas station while we were gone, the whole time. He was only 16 years old. Yeah, 16 years old. So he took responsibilities earlier. Uh-huh. And so he went, he got a job here with Buick, and then he went to General Motors Institute in Flint, Michigan. He'd work for two months, and then he'd come home to Rockford and work two months, then he'd go back to school for two months, and he did that for two years. So he didn't get a degree, but he did get a certificate, you know, and he was, he's really good in that kind of work. And then he went into his own business with real estate and buying antique cars. Yeah, that's right. That's what he did. So all his kids now, did they go to college? Yes, his oldest daughter just graduated last year. They were in Africa this summer for two weeks. Terry and Kay and Cynthia. We were out there taking care of the house while they were gone because they were having some remodeling done. And the youngest daughter was home, too. Yeah. Heidi was home then, too. But now Holly quit, you know. Like I said, she was going to college for a while, but she thinks she's going to go back. But she likes these trips. She's had lots of trips. Like when they stayed here, when it was at the downtown here, she used one of our cars, and she asked those two girls to stay, too. She asked me if she could. Two girls who were foreign born. They hadn't been here too long. One from Germany, one from France. And they called their parents and talked in a foreign language. It was interesting. But I was so glad that she asked two girls who had just joined them and didn't speak the language a lot, you know. I thought that was really good. Yeah, we had three girls there for a week. And the oldest sister, she is the artist. Wonderful artist. I've seen her in Denton, Colorado. Dillon. Dillon. Dillon. Uh-huh. That's the inland lake, you know. She's got a dog living with her. See that white dog up there in the top? It's a big white dog. And Sugar, her name is. And so that's all the companions she has. But she knows all the people in the village. See, they live on a hill and down below is a village. And stores. And so she goes to the church there and she's met a lot of the people. I was so glad she's outgoing. She stays there all year long? Oh yeah. She stays there. But she goes down. She has a truck. She doesn't have a car. But her living now, she sells the... Pictures? Yeah, yeah. She has sold quite a few. I mean, you said yesterday, she has sold quite a few paintings. I see. Now, this one of these, the top one, that's so perfect it's almost photographic. And still she painted that. So she has what you call natural talent. Oh yeah. You should see that. They got, like I said, three, four bedrooms up there in that place where she is. Terry's place. And she got animals and stuff, not animals, not live ones, but she got birds all over the whole place. She's learned how to do that too, taxidermy. She knows how to do that. So it's interesting. The girls are not just following a certain rule. So there's a versatile family then. You have all kinds of different interests. Oh, that's right. I'm glad of that. Very glad. Their mother died. Holly's and Cynthia's mother died when she was 29. Suddenly. Yeah, I think you do. Yes, I remember that. But then Kay is a wonderful person too. And that's his. Oh, that's their mother. So they get along very well. Yeah, now they can see the world. Yeah. And that was the end of the interview with Bernice Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Best of interview.