 Yeah, I'm sitting together with Torge Turner from Carver, Massachusetts. He was born 1920, 13th of September in Nynäshamn, Sweden, and came to the United States in 1923. And we have today 13th of June, 1986. So, can you tell me a little bit about your parents first? Your dad? My dad. What kind of work he was doing in Nynäshamn? When he left Nynäshamn to come to this country, he had just started working for the telephone company. Prior to that, he had done many things. He was, as a youth, he was a forester or lumberman, and he worked as a stevedore. And then he got the job at the telephone company. And then my mother got the message from the United States. Now, she had the dream of coming here to this country. Her sister Adele was here, and another brother, Hjalmar, had come here. So, they wrote letters to her? Oh, yeah, they wrote letters to her and got her excited about coming to the United States. My father was not, he was a quiet type. And from what they tell me about my mother, on the drop of a hat, she would be ready to have a party. Now, dad was very quiet. And he came here, and the first job that he had in this country was with the electric light company. And somehow or other, my uncle Ernest, Ernest Erickson, who was from Sweden, had started an auto body repair shop in Cambridge called the Cambridge Auto Metal. And my father went to work for him. Now, my dad went to work for Uncle Ernie, oh, I would say probably 1924 or 5. And he was an auto body repairman. And my mother passed away in June 1927. And that left dad alone. He had no one to take care of me. He couldn't work and take care of Toggy. So I went to live with my mother's sister Adele Erickson. And I lived at 54 Broadway in East Arlington. My aunt and uncle had one boy, same age as I, Herbert. But he was born in this country. So I lived with my aunt and uncle until I was about 14 years old when my dad remarried. I was the only child. That's right. I don't remember Sweden at all. Oh, yes. Right. Yep. No, I think my father and mother bought them in Sweden. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. My mother brought her koppa set, coffee pitcher and creamer and sugar thing. I have that now. And just recently I got a crystal cut glass crystal bowl that my mother brought. But, you know, when my father was left alone, he couldn't keep much of anything. He kept what he could because he went from rooming house and boarding house, living with other fellows, Swedish fellows. So you were raised then by your... I was raised by Aunt Adele. So they were like your stepmother then? Well, Adele was like my mother. She was my mother's sister, a wonderful lady. So when I was a teenager, my dad remarried. And he married a girl from Holland, Sweden. Her name was Annie Hansen. So I had the decision to make then whether to live with my aunt and uncle. I was just starting high school, just a freshman in high school. I'll go with my father. And that was a tough decision. But I went with my dad. You did? Yes, I did. I think probably because being just starting in high school, my cousin and I were from time to time engaged in... In brawls? In brawls, arguments, and so forth. And I guess maybe I thought, you know, I should give my dad a break, even though I broke my aunt's heart. I know that I did. I know that. Because she was probably the most affectionate and loving... Well, she was the matriarch of our family in this country. And when she passed away, it splintered. How many children did she have on her own? One. Adele had Herbert. One boy. One boy, yeah. And he would be born in July of 1920. So he's the same age as I am. Same age, yeah. So it was easy for her in one respect to raise you then, because you were identical twins. Yeah, in a way, yeah. But what happened now? A stepmother is not easy to move into. No, and Annie was 15 years younger than my dad, so you had a younger woman. But we had our moments when things weren't too good. But I'll say this much. Reflecting back on the move from my aunt's home to my dad's home, I began to hear more Swedish, because my Uncle Ernest, he didn't speak Swedish at all, so both Herbert and I didn't hear any Swedish from the time my mother died when I was just short of seventh birthday, until I was a teenager. And then my father tried, and Annie tried, through breakfast conversation, they'd speak a little Swedish to me, and my father insisted that I learn to say hui tusen, hui hundra, huiti hui, hui sjöka, hui men, so forth, and the alphabet. And so during my teenage years, I began hearing Swedish again, until probably I was 19 or 20. And when I was 21, I got married. So your dad, now, did he belong to any lodge in Boston or Arlington, Warsaw, or any other Swedish? No, none of the well-known Swedish lodges, but he and a group of his friends formed the Svenska Arbetsklub, and they were the ones, during the Depression years, during the, I'll say, 36, 35, 36, 37, 38, they ran the Swedish dances, or the Scandinavian dances, at the old intercolonial ballroom in Roxbury. But this was not a national group, it was just a local group. Did they belong to a socialist party, or just an independent arbetargruppe, as you called them? Just workmen. They were all workmen, you know, and laborers. My father was an auto body repairman, and others were painters and carpenters. I don't know, they just got together and formed this group. And for a while they had quite an active group, and had summer clubs, and they bought a piece of property where they had a camp available to the members of the club. It's gone now. Was it located at the coast, or? It was located, well, one summer they rented a cottage in Hingham on the harbor, and I think that the property that they had was out, I'm not sure just where it was, but it was somewhere near Walpole. They just bought some land and made a little camp out there, that's all. So there were also quite a few belonging to this group in Waltham. Or was there a separate group in Waltham, Mass? In Waltham? Yeah. Did they later turn into DeVos or Lodge? It could have been, but I don't have any recollection of that. Did you attend any of those meetings, arbetargruppens? Oh yeah. Did they assist? Well, they ran the dances at Intercolonial from fall until spring, and then when the weather turned warm, they had a place out in Roslindale called People's Park, and they used to run the dances out there. It was an open-air ballroom. You don't remember meeting Arthur Landfors? Arthur Landfors? He was a very good friend of my mother and father's. So you know him very well then? In Ingeborg, oh yes. Did they belong to this? Oh yes, they were members of the Swedish Arbetargruppen. So you know Landfors? Uh-huh, sure. So he was a painter? My father? Landfors, yeah, Arthur was a painter, yeah. So he belonged to that gruppent? Yes. And they were active then during the last part of 1930? Just before World War II, right, up to World War II. And the name of it was that Arbetargruppen of Boston, or you had a special name on it? Well, all I can ever remember is Svenska Arbetargruppen. And they disappeared? Yeah, but I think I can find out more information on it from my stepmother and give it to you. She's still living, she's 80 years old, she's remarried, married a gentleman from Sweden, a few years younger than she, by the name of Lundberg, Harry Lundberg. They live in Wakefield. It would be interesting to know if there are any records, you know, from like minutes and membership records and so on. I could check, because she was very active in it with Dad. So she was a good friend of Ingeborg Landfors. Oh yes. She's still living in Newtonville. Newtonville, at the apartment. Yeah, that's interesting. You don't know who you're going to strike, do you? That's why I wanted to come and talk with you. So this is very important, you know, to piece the puzzle together. Right. How about Ernest Anderson? You know him? Ernest Anderson, no, I don't know. In Harvard? No. He was in the same age group I suppose. Yeah. Oh, he was a little bit older than you though. He might have, yeah. So that was the organization's function, to have dancers that come together and meet. Did they also help people without work or so? Do you remember if they had a club or not? I think what it was, as far as I remember, was just a social club. Just a group of Swedes that got together, and because all of them were basically workmen, laborers, you know, carpenters, painters, auto body repairmen, sheet metal workers, those that were in the group. Why they started the dances I don't remember, but I remember, you see, when I went back to live with Dad, they were involved in the club, and they were running the dances. And that's when I learned how to do the shottish and the polka and the foxtrot and the hambo and the waltz. And the orchestra leader, and I think he's still alive, they used Freddie Anderson's band, and he was the accordionist, and I thought he was the flying fingers of the accordion. He could play it better than anyone I'd ever heard. He was virtuoso. Yeah, virtuoso, yeah. So how about, they brought a lot of young people in, together. Younger set, not too many old timers. Well... They were mostly the ones that came in the 20s then. Yeah, yeah. And they were naturally all Democrats. There were no Republicans in there. Jaggida Klubben. I wouldn't know, because as far as politics were concerned, it was never an issue. It was never discussed? No, never discussed. They may have been discussed in Swedish. But you didn't notice anything? But I didn't notice anything. As far as I was concerned, the club was strictly social and they worked very hard with limited amount of money, whatever they took in on tickets, and they paid the orchestra and they paid for the hall. Then they'd hang on to that money ferociously to buy the things for the next group, the next dance, and they just kept going, it was like hand to mouth. There wasn't any money in those days. As far as I was concerned, that was the big social event for all Scandinavians, because whenever you went to Intercolonial Dance Hall... Where was it located? Right downtown? Right in Roxbury. In Roxbury. Right in the heart of Roxbury, which is all black now. Dudley Street. Was it on the first floor? It was on the second floor, I think. As a matter of fact, there were two ballrooms down there. One was Hibernia, and that was the Irish, and then there was Intercolonial, and that was Scandinavian. But the club that ran it, kept it going until World War II, was the Svenska Arbeater's Klubben. And they was every week then? Every week from September until spring, and then in the summer they went out to Roslindale to an outdoor park which was called People's Park. But they couldn't dance there? Oh yes. They had an outdoor ballroom. They had a covered ballroom, and Freddy and his band came right along with them. So it was easy to be a manager or a treasurer then, because there was no union involved. It was just pay the fiddler and the renter. That's right. And Dad and Annie, my stepmother, were... Well, for a long time he was a driving force in making sure that the soda pop was purchased. And I can remember loading the back of a 1927 Chevrolet sedan with boxes of soda and coffee and different things. The women in the club, like Ingeborg and Annie and others, they baked Swedish coffee bread and they served coffee at intermission and sold the bread for revenue to keep the club going. So the whole family was involved then? Oh yes. You also had to help out to carry the pop in? If I didn't work, I had to pay to get in. As a matter of fact, a lot of the young people that had to pay to get in would make the comment, how come you get in for free? You always get in here for free. Well, I said, my father and my stepmother run it, and I said, I don't get in unless I work. Long before you get here, I'm toting soda up the stairs and coffee up the stairs and buns up the stairs and things like that. So they always served refreshments? Always served refreshments at intermission, yes. And it always tasted good too. Well, I suppose there was a lot of work out for Charley's and Hambor and Polka. At intermission they were ready for coffee. There was no booze. No, they brought it in, they brought it in on their own. They didn't sell any. It was all soft drinks. How much did they charge you at intermission, do you remember? Oh, I remember. Because it was a rough time though. It was a rough time, yes. Didn't have too much. That's right, it was right in the middle of the Depression. And at that time you still lived in Arlington? No, when I moved to Dad, we lived in Jamaica Plain, which is part of the city of Boston. We lived in Jamaica Plain. So there was your upbringing in the Swedish neighborhood? Yeah. And Roslindale was a Swedish neighborhood then? Yes, there was a number of... Roslindale. Roslindale especially, yeah. How about Dorchester? Dorchester was probably the part of Boston where the most Swedes lived, Dorchester. And then the next, as far as I could remember, the next largest group around that would be out in Quincy. Because a lot of them worked at Shipyard, Shipyard workers. Matter of fact, I'm trying to think. One of the club, one of the members of the club that I remembered was Anderson from Hingham, who was a blacksmith at the Shipyard. And his daughter Ella was a couple of years older than I. And she was the one that, she and her mother and her father were active in the club. And when I was 16, she was the one that had the nerve enough to take me out in that old 27 Chevrolet and teach me to drive so I could get my license. Yeah. And she's now, she married a boy by the name of Carlson, and she's a retired nurse in the Quincy Hospital. And I believe they just built a new home in Rockland. I've lost track. I haven't kept up with an awful lot of the... You've been away a little bit. Well, you get married, family starts growing up. During the war I was in the service for four years. So when I came back, things had changed. So you were drafted then shortly after the dances in Rockland. Well, my number was coming up. I knew it. So I enlisted in the Air Force before and just after I enlisted, my draft number came up. So when you enlisted, you could choose your own line? Yeah. But you were in New York. Right, right. I enlisted in the Air Force. So you went a long way then, four years of service to be a flier or...? No, I was involved in maintenance on the ground crew. Worked on B-29s. Were you stationed in the East or...? Well, I did my basic training in... I'll see. I was inducted up at Fort Devens, Mass., and then sent down to New Orleans, Louisiana, for basic training. Then I went to Mississippi to Gulfport for aircraft and engine school. And then I went up to Jefferson Barracks in Missouri, which isn't too far from where you are here, I guess. And I eventually was assigned to a squadron in the Caribbean. So as far as overseas, I was just down there with a group that was flying sub patrol. I hadn't been there too long before they shipped us back to the United States to New Mexico on B-29s. We thought we were going to the Pacific, but they grounded us right there, and that's where I rode out the war in New Mexico. I was discharged from there in 1945. And then you were not married at the time then? Oh, yeah. I was married. Oh, I see. But no children then? Yeah. When I got married, just before I went in the service, I had Eric. And when Madeline came down to New Mexico, we had Glenis. And then we didn't have any more until the war was over. Then we had one little boy that didn't survive. And we have a younger daughter who was 12 years younger than her sister. She's, I can't stop to think how old they are. Eric is the oldest. He was born in 1942. He was a real good student in school, good athlete. And he went directly from Scituate High School to the Naval Academy. Matter of fact, I was kind of proud because he was the first graduate of that school to ever go to a service-connected school without going to college or prep school. He went right out of high school. So he served, he graduated from the Naval Academy, and I think he had to serve five years because they had increased it from four to five. And he was in Vietnam for a short while and came back to the East Coast after Vietnam duty and married his old high school girlfriend. And he now has four children. And he is a teacher. What he always wanted to be was a high school math teacher. And he teaches at Littleton Mass High School. And he's happy. So you had four children then? I had four children, yeah. Eric, Glenis, G-L-E-N-N-Y-S, and then Carl, who didn't survive. He died at childbirth. And then Kim, who was the youngest. So when you came back then, what did you do? What kind of work? I came back and went to work with my father in the auto body repair business. In Cambridge? No, he was in Boston at Mattapan. He ran the Mattapan auto body. He had started off with two Swedes for partners, and then he went to Wisconsin, and I just can't remember. Big John, I'll have to ask Andy what his name was. There were three of them that were in partnership. And eventually it wound up that my father ran the shop. When I came back out of the service, the other two fellows had split and had gone their separate ways. And then he built a body shop. My dad built an auto body repair shop out in Randolph, and he moved out to Randolph and ran the North Randolph auto body. And I worked there with him until I— Did you work for him or—? No, I just worked with him. That was one of the situations where Dad had worked hard, and my stepmother felt that that was his business and that I was just working there, which was fine. We got along great. But in other words, I hadn't shown my worth up at that time. There were a few frictions. Oh, well, it usually occurs, things like that. Yeah. But I worked with him for a few years, and then I wound up going to work for an insurance company as an insurance adjuster. And I worked in that business for 19 years before I went into the motel business for 24 years. So the adjusting business, you had a good practice in your work, I suppose. Yes, yeah. Right. They were overestimating or—? Or underestimating. That's right. Not very often underestimating. Yeah. But it must be a hard business or not exactly? Oh, you can't straighten out the—? Nobody knows exactly. It's a matter of judgment. If you look at something and you think it would take two hours to repair it, I could look at it and think it might be done in an hour and a half. And that's the difference between adjusting figures and arbitrarily saying, that's it, all you're going to get is an hour and a half, take it or leave it. What we used to do was wrote our own estimate and then compared it with a repair shop. And if there was a difference of opinion, then you adjusted that difference of opinion to reach a settlement. Sometimes you had to go up and sometimes the shop had to come down. To get it going. To get it going, right. So, and your dad, he retired from—? My dad kept the auto body shop. When I went in the insurance business, and he kept it— the dates I'm not sure about now—for a number of years and then he retired. He sold the shop and the land that he had long before he should have. His land value were climbing in the future, but we couldn't see it. But he sold it and he retired. My dad's great love in his latter years was raising gladiolas. He was known as the gladiola king of Randolph. So he had a big yard and—? Oh yes, he had a big yard and everybody else's yard that was laying fallow, that wanted—that didn't mind him putting bulbs in, he put bulbs in. He planted his bulbs all over Milton, all over Randolph, all over Holbrook, wherever anybody had land that he could use. Why wasn't he interested in starting his own nursery business? Sight two, continuation with Togger Turner. Sight two. Once I asked Dad, I said, why don't you give up the body shop business and do this full time? And Dad said, if I did that, it wouldn't be fun anymore. I would have to worry about whether I grew enough to— and sold enough to buy the fertilizer and he said I would— Now it's fun. Now it's fun. And that's a man who came from Sweden who probably, as he told me, his father, who was a stonemason, allowed he and his brothers and sisters to go to school a couple of years during the winter. I think my dad went to school when he was eight years old and when he was nine. And he learned enough to read and write Swedish. And he was what you might call a relatively uneducated man, but he educated himself because before he died, he could read and write in English and Swedish both. And he had the green thumb. Kyle Turner was able to learn by reading in books how to propagate the gladiolas, and he's had a number of them registered with the Gladiola Society. He's named one after his second wife, the Annie B. When my father died, Leonard, the funeral director in Randolph called me on the phone and said, What am I going to do with all these flowers? And I said, What do you mean, all these flowers? And he says, Targe, I don't have room to put any more where your father is laid out. They're coming in from all over New England. Dad had achieved something that few men ever achieved. He had friends in gladiola societies all through New England, and they remembered him. And that funeral parlor was loaded with gladiola sprays, and that's primarily what came. The funeral director said, I never saw anything like it, and I never did either. What time of the year did he die and when? Let's see. It must have been 1941 in the fall. He was just short of his 70th birthday. When did he start to get this gladiola bug on his mind? Do you remember as a little boy? Well... You raised him up in Arlington? No, no. My dad, when I was living in Arlington, my dad was rooming boarding house, rooming houses, and so forth. He had no proper... It wasn't until he bought a house in Randolph that he found his backyard was deep with rich loam. Do you remember the number of the street where he lived? Yeah, he lived at 28 Mount Pleasant Square. 28? Yeah, Mount Pleasant Square, Randolph. So, he started to read about it. He didn't practice at the nursery? Oh, no, no, no. He just... All his own? All his own. So, he went to different shows, I suppose, and exhibited? Yes, he went to different shows and exhibited. When he won prizes. I never knew about it. Shut it off. So, when he entered those exhibits, those shows, there was with other artists, too? Yeah, he and Annie were both members of the Gladiola Society. And they traveled all over New England to Gladiola Society meetings. So, they got acquainted with people in that endeavor in all of the states. So, he was interested in his wife? Oh, yeah. She helped him. They both did a lot of floral arrangements and entered prizes. But primarily, it was my father's vocation, avocation, hobby. He just enjoyed it. So, when he came home from work, then he went right out to his yard? Went right out to his yard. Did you help him? No, no, I didn't help him. I didn't have much love for gardening at all. But he went to your home, I suppose? I was married and I lived someplace else, of course. But he didn't teach you how to do it or talk about it? Oh, he talked about it, but there wasn't a kindling of kindred spirits there. He enjoyed it and I encouraged it. As a matter of fact, one year he had so many bulbs left over that he didn't have room enough to store them in the cold cellar that he built at 28 Mount Pleasant Square. So, I said, why don't you let me package them up? And I said, we'll let the Boy Scouts sell them. So, we had a couple of years where we sold gladiola bulbs. And he made a little and the Scouts made a lot. So, he had a lot of bulbs then in the fall? In the fall. That's the problem. His yard got too small. Some land in Holbrook that he used got too small. Some land somewhere else that he used got too small. And he wound up planting a large tract of land in Milton overlooking the Blue Hills for a doctor on an estate. And it was just one of those things that gladiola bulbs grow. They manufacture lots of bulblets and bulbs. And you clean them and separate them and mark them for color. And your cellar becomes too small. That's what Dad's hobby was. He could have been in the business, but he refused to. He was in the business, but he wouldn't admit it. So, people bought them from him also? Oh, yeah. Sure. He had arrangements with a florist. I remember one in particular, Braeway, Braintree Weymouth. B-R-A-W-E-Y. That man would take all of the straight stalks that my father could bring to him. As a matter of fact, an interesting side light about the gladiola business. When my father passed away, my stepmother said to me, I would like to have you help me pick out a headstone. I said, Sure. Whatever you want, we'll go and do it. She says, Annie's got a talent for painting. So, she laid out a gladiola spray layout and brought it to the stonecutter and asked him if he could do it. He says, Yes. So, on Dad's headstone is a spray of gladiolas. The man that did the stonecutting wanted to buy that layout from Annie, but she wouldn't sell it to him. She said, That's just for Kyle. Where is he buried? He's buried in Randolph. Annie made provisions. She bought a four-unit burial spot. She said, I thought it would be nice if someday you and I and Madeline were all together. So, they didn't have any children together? No, Annie never had any children. No. So, what church did they belong to? They didn't. My father, like all Swedes, probably would have joined a Lutheran church, but he just didn't. I don't know what happened to Dad. We didn't get too much religious background as far as the Lutheran church was concerned. As children, Herbert and I went to a Baptist church, but there wasn't a Lutheran church in Arlington. So, we wound up being baptized as Baptists. Your mother, though, she came as a young girl from Sweden. She was born in Uppsala. Yeah, so she came with my father and I. They were married. They were married, sure. Right. So, they came together in 1923. 1923, yeah. And neither one could go back to Sweden, neither your mother or your father. My mother died in 1927. She didn't go back. My father, was she happy? She was the one that wanted to come here. She didn't have much time. She didn't have much time. She got sick and she died of pancreatitis, whatever that is. How about your father, though? He was a little bit more reluctant, also. He didn't really want to come. Did it take longer time for him to adjust? I don't know. The question that I would ask myself is, what does a man do who is compelled because of the times to work six days a week and have Sunday off and live in a rooming house, live in a boarding house after my mother died? If you talk to my father, you didn't get too much out of him. He was a real quiet, reserved Swede. After I had been married a number of years, I went to visit him one time. It was after the war and we were home. We were working together and I said to him, Dad, why don't you and Annie take a trip to Sweden? And he said, No, I haven't seen anything of the United States yet. I'm going to go down to Florida if I do that. And I said, Why not go back to Sweden? No, Toggy. He says, It brings back too many memories. I think my father, because he probably didn't really want to come, came to this country and made his life here. He had one son. At that time he had two grandchildren and he said, I don't want to. I had to pump this information out of him because Dad was not a talker, very quiet. But very much a nice guy. Everybody in his neighborhood got tomatoes and lettuce and carrots and strawberries and blueberries across the fence. He really didn't have to go to church to be a good Christian. He was a good human being. Matter of fact, like I said, when Dad passed away, I didn't have any conception of the number of people that knew him as a gladiola grower. And it was quite an eye opener for me to realize that this quiet man that I knew as my father would be so well liked and so well loved by people. But that was what he enjoyed. He enjoyed growing those flowers. So I brought him over to New England and he was known as a gladioli. Gladio, grower. Gladiolis. Right. Yeah, that's remarkable. But you would think that was probably a good sideline though from his bending with the fenders and scraping cars. That's a hard business, very difficult. But that was relaxing for him, I'm told. Very much so, yeah. And then she was doing the work for him in the garden. Yeah, you reflect and reminisce. I had a friend of mine who was in the service with me that worked for my dad for a while while I was out doing insurance adjusting. Of course, whenever my father had a job in the shop that required a left-handed tin knocker, he'd call me and say, I need help. And I'd go over and help him because he would have a hard time reversing his hands to work on the opposite side. So I would come because I'm ambidextrous and I could hold a dolly in one hand or the other hand. So I was the left-handed tin knocker for Pop. But it was the last couple of years he had the shop, one day he said to Dick, I don't want any more cigarettes. And he must have been about 60 at that time. And he stopped smoking cold turkey. He just made up his mind one day that he wasn't going to smoke anymore because he was coughing a lot and he couldn't sit down and work on his gladiolas. He used to have a bench that he sat on and he'd work around the individual plants and move the bench from one place to another. And he was coughing so much, he said that he just stopped smoking. I had never smoked, so I don't know what it would be like to stop, but I imagine those who have the habit find it difficult. He quit. That's that stubborn sweet in him. He made up his mind one day and that was it. That probably added another four or five years to his life. So when he died, what cause was it? Massive coronary. He had had angina for a number of years where he'd have blackouts and he'd be out in the yard and he'd just fall over. And he would have to get oxygen to him or take him to the hospital. But a massive coronary took him. He went very quickly and, as the doctor said, it was just a good way to go. It was over very quick. So he had retired from the... Yeah, he had retired. He had been retired for about five or six years. So he could really enjoy full time then. Yeah, then he did. He did. He even went to Vineland, New Jersey one day with his friend who was involved to buy one bulb for $35. One bulb? One bulb for $35. It sounds like a high price, but he probably knew what he was doing. Oh yes, he knew what he was doing. Because that one bulb would multiply and in a few years he'd have hundreds and then thousands of them. The gladiola business is a multiplication of one bulb, full size, putting off probably a half a dozen or eight good sized bulbs that will produce a flower the next year with 20 or 30 bulblets that you plant to grow, not for flowers, but to get bigger. They push off little bulbs and then you have the big bulb. Just to keep track of them. A lot of bookkeeping. Right, a lot of bookkeeping. You know what he had in the body shop when I came home from the service? He had one little ledger. On one page it was Inkunst and the other page was Utgifter. Inkunst and Utgifter. I said, what's this? That's the money that's coming in, that's what's going out. That's his bookkeeping system. But he had it down, he knew what he... It was straight and simple. Straight and simple. When he talked now about the two, well the gladiolas was not the business really, but what did he like to talk most about? He was very, he was not talkative you said. Not talkative. When he was talking to his friend and to you and he was sitting down, was he talking about his repair business? No, no. Gladiolas. Gladiolas. It was a necessity. The repair business was a... It was for a living. For a living purposes. Because if you wanted to hear some choice words in English and Swedish, you wanted to be in the shop when he whacked his finger. It's something he didn't like. That's the way you learn some of the Swedish. That's the way I learned some of the Swedish coloring, right. I suppose it's frustrating, but then the gladiolas, there was a release of tension. Oh yes, very much so. Oh yeah, he did that. He would get up at the crack of dawn and go out in the backyard and work and then go to work in the shop at 8 o'clock. He worked three or four hours in the morning before, go back in and make himself his favorite breakfast, which was strained oatmeal. My father told me that when he was a kid and got sick, that's what his mother fed him. Oatmeal, strain it for breakfast and lunch and supper until you cured all your ailments. And I hated oatmeal. He talked too much about it. Yeah. But they wanted it cured for a... For a lot of things. Now what do they do? Now they want you to eat oatmeal because it's full of what? It's full of fiber, isn't it? The old Swedes didn't even know what it had in it, but it was good for them, so they ate it. The farm bread was good, you know, a few years ago. That's right. Yeah, it was very interesting. So how about your children now? Have they taken any interest in floral arrangements or growing? No, Eric is strictly a... Ever since he got into high school, Eric was interested in teaching math. He happened to have an old math teacher that just lit the fire under about eight or nine of Eric's classmates, and I think there's about that many that are teaching today, which is rather unique because with his educational background from the Naval Academy, he certainly could have gotten a job in the high-tech industry and made a lot more money, but he prefers... He much prefers the challenge of teaching kids. So that's what he does. He teaches children. And the two girls, well, they're typical American kids, and they didn't get too much Swedish background because there wasn't that much around my house. But when Eric was 12 years old, I thought this might be interesting, I lived across the street from a lady whose name was Clara Clement. But Clara was a Swedish-American whose mother and father had spoken Swedish to her so that she could speak Swedish as well as a native. And when we moved in and she found out that I was Swedish, she wanted to talk Swedish to me, and I had lost so much of it that all I could say was a few things. But when Eric was 12, I thought, he's got to learn something about my family. So I had Clara write one letter, and I had my Uncle Otto write another letter, and we wound up sending him to Sweden when he was 12 years old by himself. And he stayed for three months in Nynäshamn with my cousin that would be on my father's side, Torsten Turner. And he was married to no children, so he was willing to take on the responsibility of a 12-year-old. So Eric went to Sweden, and he learned enough Swedish so that he could carry on a conversation with the kids. One of my relatives in Nynäshamn were in the movie house, so he went into the movies with his other cousin, so he got to know them. And he knows my family over there better than I do. So you never visited Sweden? No, I haven't been back yet, but I'm studying Swedish now. When I moved into Cranberry Village, one of my neighbors who had lived in Plymouth and then moved out to the Cape and moved back to Carver came to visit me. He only lives one street away from where I live in the community. His name is William Tessin. But his name is not really Tessin. His name is William Tessin. And his family are the Tessins who are the architects. And he didn't know this until he met somebody on the Cape. And the party he met said to Bill, You know, your name really isn't Tessin. He said, Your father had to be a Swede. His name is Tessin. You should take Swedish lessons down at Bostebo High School with Stanley Johnson. So he did. So I didn't know this. He came to visit me in February after we'd moved in the 1st of January. Still had boxes all over the place. His wife's the little magpie chatterbox. She says, Oh, Bill would be a lot happier here at Cranberry Village if he only could go back to Bostebo and take his beloved Swedish lessons. I was out in the kitchen making coffee and she said, Swedish lessons? Where do you take Swedish lessons? At Bostebo High School. I thought the only place you could get them, take lessons, would be up at the Viking Club in Braintree or over at Harvard University. Or maybe up in Worcester. I wasn't sure. And I said, What did you do? You gave up taking lessons? When do they start? Well, they probably start this week. So I said, You call up your professor down at the high school and you tell him you're coming back to continue with your lessons because he hadn't gone the spring before, I say. And I says, Ask him if it's all right if I come with you and sit in on the lessons. Well, he says, You probably want to go Monday night because that's beginner's night and this is semi-advanced. I said, If we go together, we'll continue to go. But if I go on Monday night, you might not go on Thursday night. You know, let's do it together. So that's what we started. And we've been taking lessons together. I help him with his pronunciation and I practice. And little by little I'm acquiring a vocabulary. And people will ask me, Targi, what do you want to take Swedish lessons for at your age? And I tell them, Just like my father who grew gladiolas for the fun of it, I'm taking Swedish lessons for the fun of it, for the companionship, and because I want to do something. It's what I want to do and it's no strain to do it. We have social activity, you know, just a group of eight or nine people about the same age trying to learn a little bit about their language and a little more about their heritage. So that's what I do. I'm having a ball.