 Yeah, I'm sitting together with Mrs. Anderson, Rockford, Illinois. Mrs. Violet Anderson, born 1908 to 15 in Rockford, Illinois. And both your parents came from Sweden. Your father from Dalsland, and your mother from Oden, Västergötland. And they came, you said, in 1902 and 1903. Yes. Your father in 1902. No, my mother. 1902. My father in 1903. I just found that out. Do you know the reason why they came? Yes. Because of, my dad said that, there were eight children, and his father had to go to Munkerdal to work, and walked home weekends. And there wasn't enough food to eat, they had to put bark in the bread. It was hard times out on the farm. And he just thought then, he just thought he'd come to America, and get money, you know, make money, go back. Were there any relations here before him? Well, no. He was the first one. There had been a brother here, but had gone back. But he was the first one. But he came to Akron, Ohio, I was just reading his history the other day. And then he was there a few months, and he came to Rockford. And so he was the first one of his family here. So he didn't come to any, did he move off at the time, or any friends? No, no. He had a friend in Akron, Ohio. Yeah. That's why he, his trip from Sweden, from Göteborg, was paid for to Akron. And when he got to New York, he had $10 in his pocket, he said. So he was able then to pay for his own ticket? Yeah, he paid for his own ticket. So nobody sent the ticket? No, no. He was able to pay for his own ticket, and got $10. So he, they let him through Ellis Island. They thought he could make it on that. So he had no trouble on Ellis Island? No, not really. He may have had to stay there. Mother and dad talked about it wasn't very nice, you know, on Ellis Island. But they had to stay there a while. But not too, they didn't have any real trouble. No. And your mother, now, she came from a large family, too? She came from a large family, too. There were eight children there, too. But she had two sisters here, before she came here. One is in Chicago, and one in Rockford. So that was what brought her here. So they corresponded, and then? Yeah, they corresponded, and then she... Gave her some inducement? Yeah, that gave her an inducement to come here, yeah. Did they send the ticket to her, you think? I don't think so. I never heard her talk about that. I kind of think that she was 21 years old, and I think she was working a little bit, so I think she was, or her dad helped her. He was a blacksmith. And I think she was able, I never heard her say that. I don't think so. And she came to? She came to Rockford. To Rockford. Right to Rockford, and lived here. Except for eight years, my father bought a farm in Minnesota. So we moved there when I was 12. And then we came back to Rockford in eight years. And they met here in Rockford? They met here in Rockford, and were married in 1907. How did they meet, through the church? No, they didn't meet through the church, and I don't know how they met. I just wish now I would have found that out, because I suppose just through other Swedish friends. I don't exactly know about that. I just know. And what kind of work was your dad doing? My dad worked for Sun Strands. He was on a lathe, they call it. Milling machine. You know, he was a lathe worker. Except for the eight years that he farmed. So they married, and? They married in 1907. And I was born in 1908. I'm the oldest of six children, and we're all living. My father died at 53, which was very sad, because he was still young. But he had gallbladder trouble, and they didn't know. The doctor told him he had indigestion. And he kept eating pork and didn't know he wasn't supposed to, and things like that, you know. Well, then he had to have surgery. It got so bad, he had surgery. And the doctor, those days they did not turn the patients, and they didn't get up. They stayed in bed. He got pneumonia and died from pneumonia. So otherwise he would have been okay. So the pastor, now they married your parents? Yeah, he was a Lutheran pastor at the Zion Church. So your father belonged to that one? Yeah, they belonged to Zion Church. Before, they both belonged, because I was baptized there in Zion Lutheran. But then later they joined the Evangelical Free Church, the same that Vernon is in Molina. And belonged there until they died, which I am a member of now, too. So he decided to become a farmer? Well, I'll tell you what it was. He had this indigestion thing, which I know was gallbladder. And he decided that, the doctor said maybe he should go out and get out and get fresh air. And so he thought he'd just try that and see. So he went up to Minnesota and bought a farm in 1920. And up north of Princeton, near where my husband was from, it was Oak Park, Malacca. But Oak Park was the name of the post office. But it was terrible. And in 1920, when we moved up there, I was 12 years old, and he bought seed potatoes for, I remember, $7.50 a hundred. And he sold them for $0.35 in the fall. $0.35. So that was a disaster. And it was a disaster. And everybody was in trouble. It was terrible. So you remember, you probably had to pick potatoes. I had to pick potatoes. I had to learn how to milk cows and pick potatoes at that time, which I had been a city girl all the time before. He rented a farm? No, he bought it. He bought it. Uh-huh. He bought it. My uncle came from Sweden after him. His brother? His brother. Two brothers. But the one brother came to our house when I was a baby. What was his name? His name was Axel Thorwald Johnson. He changed it to Axel Johnson Thorwald later. So his family is now Thorwald's. And he had my uncle, Arthur Thorwald, who came later, who was younger. He had him change his name, too. When did he change his name, too, in Ellis Island, at Ellis Island? No, uh-uh. It was after he got married. About the time that he got married, he was a pastor. He served a church in East Chain, Minnesota. But I laughed. He said that the reason he changed his name was that somebody else was getting his love letters from his girlfriend. There were so many Axel Johnsons. So he changed. Was he a Lutheran minister? No, he was in the free church. Free church. In the Even Junko Free. And he was Axel Thorwald Thorwald Johansson. And he changed it to Axel Johnson Thorwald. And they never got mixed up anymore. My dad, he wanted my dad to change his name, too. But my dad said no. He had a family and it would be quite a bit of legal matters and everything. So he wasn't getting his mail mixed up. He was single then when he did this? Yeah, it was just about the time he got married, my uncle. So his name is different. So did he join your father in the farming business there? No, he was pastoring the church out there, near there. And he was the one who helped him get that farm because he knew that he was looking for it. So he helped him. A friend of his was ready to sell this farm. So he had my dad buy it from this friend of his. It was just a helpful thing, you know. Do you think he had this in his head when he came here to be a farmer? No. To buy some homestead land, perhaps? I don't think he ever had it. I think it was because of his health. I really do. Because I remember what he talked, you know. He was happy doing the work at the shop, what he was doing. But he was so troubled with his stomach and it was that gallbladder. And I can appreciate it because I had mine out in 1949 and it was not a wonderful thing to get rid of. But, you know, in those days he didn't have any antibiotics. He died in 37. So he bought the farm then? Yeah, he bought the farm. But it was a hard time, a hard eight years. And potatoes, that was one of the main crops? Potatoes was the main crop up there at that time. Yes, it was. And we had 13 cows. 13 cows? 13 cows. So, milk, yeah. It was quite a lot. Yeah, so we had that. Did you stay there for eight years? Yes. I went to Minneapolis when I was 16 and started to work. Then I went to school later. It was almost impossible to think about going to high school. We'd have to go 11 miles and live in somewhere. So I went to Minneapolis and got a job and then later I went to school at Minneapolis Academy in Minneapolis and studied music. Oh, I see. How about the rest of your sisters and brothers? Were they born up there? No, just one. Five were born in Rockford. We were five children when we left for Minnesota. We went on, I don't know, maybe you don't want all the details. We went, I remember it very well because we moved March 1st and another family moved with us. They had three children and we had five children. And we got on a train, but our furniture went on a train, a boxcar. And we got one together and it took three weeks for our furniture to get up there. But we got up there in two days, you see. So we had to stay with neighbors for three weeks, which was something for our neighbors to take in a family with five children and fix lunches for all of us and send us off to school, you know. We had a good time. We kids loved it. We had a good, we still are good friends with these people. And your dad, now he had to buy cattle then? Yeah, he had to buy cattle. It was a high price. It was 1920 and they were just terribly high. I remember that spring he had to buy a couple of horses because they were just coming with tractors and, but he managed all right. It wasn't very easy, but we never were hungry. We had plenty to eat and we managed, but we just never got rich. And your mother, what did she say about the challenge for the rock? Well, she didn't want to go very much, but she just had to go because of his health. And so she made the best of it. But she did tell me when we came back that she cried when she left, but it wasn't only from sorrow, it was from joy too, that she was coming back. So it had been hard on my mother. We kids had a good time. We just loved it up there on the farm, but it was hard on my mother. So they stuck it out for eight years? They stuck it out for eight years. And he came back, got the same job back here in Rockford at Sunstrand. So he sold out, had an auction then? Yeah, he sold out everything up there. Not the furniture. We shipped that back, yeah. But all the cattle? Yeah, all that. And the farm machinery? Yeah, so he had a little experience there that was probably not so easy, but everybody was having it. People were going broke all over those days. You know, it was tough times. But the 20s, were the low prices there for the farms? Well, it was high in 20, but by the fall of 20, that's when the price dropped on the stuff. I don't know about the cost of farms. I don't remember that because I was just a kid, you know. But I suppose that was in accordance with that. I don't know. And there were other Swedish families up there? A lot of Swedish families up there. In fact, I was confirmed in Swedish in the church up there. We had a pastor who was a Norwegian. His name was Chenner. But he confirmed us kids in Swedish. We were the last class, though. And Malmö is not too far away? Malmö is not far from there either, no. Did you belong to that free church then? No, it's the same denomination. But that was too far. That was too far to go to church. We went to the Estes Brook Free Church, which was on the – my father gave the land for the church. So they started the church while we were there. I see. So that was a new church. New church then. Getting started. So you went into Minneapolis and then worked? Then I went to Minneapolis to work. During the whole 20s then? Well, I was back and forth between Minneapolis and here, and I went to school in Minneapolis, and then I'd come back here and work a while. So I just was experimenting around, I guess. But you found your husband? My husband, I found him up there in Minneapolis. My uncle was serving his church. He was the pastor of his church. My husband was five years older than me, so I knew him when I was just a kid, but he was a little older, you know. But then we got together in Minneapolis. Our young people got together, and that's when we got to – So in the free church, now, you had a youth camp in the summer? Yeah. At Buffalo and Minnesota. And here, our young people, we used to go to Camp Epworth, which is out here by Maringo, when we were young. But now we have a big camp up in Wisconsin that we go to. Camp Epworth, but there's a Methodist there. That's Methodist, but we rented that. When I was young, we had a lot of fun there. We rented that every summer and had our camps there. And the age group there was – Oh, it was just a – Eight and a half? It was really just the young people, yeah, high school and up. We went there until we got married, or longer. And were there still Swedish sermons in the 23rd? There was some Swedish, yeah, up in Minnesota. Even when my husband took the first church in Iowa, Marathon, Iowa, they were still having some Swedish. And while we were there, they decided to have English every Sunday night and Swedish every other Sunday morning. And things like that, it went little by little. So he was able, your husband, to talk Swedish? He was able to preach in Swedish. He was a second generation, and he wasn't perfect, but he was brought up like I was to talk Swedish in the home, you know. He didn't complain about the, you know, to write one sermon is a lot of work, and then write two of them. Yeah. And he would just preach either Swedish or English, but what bothered him was that we had so many people moving into the community that did not understand. And the young people wanted English. And so he tried to, and of course the older people didn't like that, you know, and naturally it was a little hard transition. We had to go do it kind of gradually so that it wouldn't be, but it finally got to be where you had to. And in our church here in Rockford, we had a Swedish meeting in the Sunday school building while they had English in the big church. So anybody that wanted Swedish could go. So here you had a bigger crowd? Much bigger church, yes. But in the small church it was hard to get in? Oh, you couldn't separate them there. No, you had to have one or the other there, so that was the way it was for us. And did you have evening service on Wednesdays or in the middle of the week? Yes, Wednesdays or Thursdays they would have midweek service. Maybe Thursdays those days, but now it's Wednesdays. And then we'd have young people's meetings, probably five o'clock on Sunday afternoon, and socials and women's meetings. And people didn't complain about that, going quite often to church? Oh, no, no, no. That was our life. And it was just wonderful. We just enjoyed it so much, yeah. They didn't complain about it. Your husband, what did he go to? He graduated from Bethel Seminary in St. Paul, which is the Baptist seminary. He graduated from there in 1932, and from Macalester College he graduated in 1933, and then we got married that year. And then he, so he was a member of the Free Church? Yes, he was a member all the time from when he was a kid. And then he went to the Baptist school because, I don't know, he just was close to home, and he'd gone to high school in Minneapolis. And then he was student pastor of this church where I'm, on my father's farm, for six years while he was going to school. And then that was, that's why he wanted to stay. So then he went to Bethel and got his degree there. So what, after he was through with Bethel? Then he started to serve a free church in Iowa. He didn't have to go to any special free church? No, he didn't have to at that time. It was accredited. It's accredited. Bethel was recognized, yeah. Det var Svenska Baptisternas skola, den. Det var det, ja. Det var det. Den er fortfarande i St. Paul, men den er på Bethel Drive. Yeah, it's still there. Yeah, that's right. North of the old place. And so you've been a pastor's wife then? Yes, I've been a pastor's wife for, well, 53 years now, because my husband's been gone nine years. So we retired in Rockford when he was 65. And I was a nurse here at Fairhaven for 12 years. The last 12 years of his ministry, he was administrator of a home like this in Iowa, Boone, Iowa. Oh, yes. That's the cradle of the free church. Yeah, that's right. That's the cradle of the free church. So we were there for some of the anniversaries. And then he retired and came to Rockford, because this was my home and nobody was left up there. So we just decided to settle here. My mother was still living, and it was very nice. I could be with her the last years of her life. So when your father and mother came back then, because your sisters, they were much smaller then. They stayed on the farm then. Yeah, they were on the farm, and they moved back to Rockford then. And we got one brother was born up there, my youngest brother. And so then he came back, and they rented a house for a while, and then he bought a house and bought another house. And he got the same job back? Same job back, until he died. And then the depression hit. Yeah, well he died during the depression, 37, you know. Well it was pretty bad, yeah. Yeah, in the 30s. Was he able to work? Work three days a week. Three days a week. Three days a week. And of course, we three older ones, by this time, I married in 33, my sister Norma married in 34, my other sister married in 36. So we were three of us married by the time he died. There were three kids still at home going to high school. So it was hard for Mother, but she... Did she take care of them? Yeah, well she cooked for a doctor, a Dr. Leonard in Rockford, and he'd send his chauffeur to get her and bring her over to his house over here down on Springbrook, and she'd go over and cook him a good Swedish meal, you know, and he'd have her as much as she could come. And she enjoyed that because the chauffeur would come and get her and take her for a nice ride. That was good service. And they paid good, and he took care of her without charging her one cent until she died. He was a fine doctor, Catholic man, Dr. Leonard, and ten children. They all had polio during the polio epidemic. All ten children. One died, and my mother left her kids at home and went over and stayed and helped to take care of his kids, and he appreciated that. All ten had polio. He spent most of his time in the hospital during the polio epidemic. And my mother would sleep in his bed and answer the phone and call him, and, you know, they appreciated it. And the kids liked my mother. She was their, she was... And he was your widower then? No, no, his wife was living and had ten, they had these ten children, and he died first and she died later. Or no, she died first, he died later. No, that's right. So it was just something that helped her a lot financially. She could, she could live that way. And then the kids, my brother started paying the payments on the house after my father died, and he got the house then later, my younger brother. They worked it out together. You all pitched in and... All pitched in and helped each other. In the time of need. Yes, right, right. So, because there were hardships then. There were hardships, uh-huh, but it all went fine anyway. How did the church operate during that time of hardship? Were they able to help out to get a job for people that needed it? Well, they sure did try. I remember that. Uh, I don't know, it was not easy. It's even hard now. We're having, I'm just reading our church paper now, you know, where people call some number if they need a job or if they can do something. But they helped all they could. Everybody had a... See, women didn't work those days. There was almost a law where you married... You got married, you didn't teach school or do anything else. It was only the pastor's wife, she got to work though. She was the secretary. She had to work in the church. Totally sick people sometimes. Yeah, that's right. But that wasn't all bad, but it was just, you know, the only ones that worked would be widows that had to and people that were... Why was it like that, do you think, did the man feel inferior in some place, some sort of a way? Well... If the wife has to go off to work and... I think so. I think... He couldn't provide enough then for the family. Yeah, it would look like he couldn't provide enough. And of course, we didn't have as high standards. We didn't have to have everything when we got married like they do now. No, they had to work to keep it up. Yeah, they had to. But we just got along. We bought all of our four rooms of furniture for $500 in Minneapolis and had it shipped free down to Iowa. And we still have some of that furniture. My kids have it and they love it. I can't believe that all that furniture for $500. Well made. Yes, it was well made. And so it was... Economics was a little different those days, I guess. But... So when they married, then they stayed home. Yep, mother stayed home and she did go out and work for this doctor a little bit. I mean, then after my father died, she could go as much as she wanted. They'd come and get her a couple, three, four days a week. And she'd go over there and cook for them and come back and cook for the family. And so it went fine. And you went to Sweden in 1961 to her. 61 was the first time that we went to Sweden. I took my mother back to see her. Your father never came back to Sweden? No, he never got back. No, I felt badly about that. And I got to see his... he had four sisters living when we were there. We went to see them. Now there's just one left. We saw where he was born. It was just the foundation. The farm was gone, but it was just the foundation. But it was fun to go there. We had coffee there. My aunts would bring coffee and we'd go out there and reminisce about how it was when they were kids out there in Dalsland. And your uncles now, did they return to Sweden? They went to visit many times, but not to live. But they went many times to visit my uncle. Both my uncles went back many times to visit. Where did they settle then finally? Well, they came to our house when I was a baby. And then my uncle Axel got a job. They both got jobs. But anyway, he felt the call of the Lord to go into the ministry. So then he went to Moody Bible Institute. Chicago. In Chicago. And I don't know where else he went to school. He studied then. And it wasn't too long until he took a pastorate in Minnesota and married a girl from Rockford. And then they settled down there. Then he took this other church. He ended up out in Turlock, California. And then he came back to Minnesota and he was our traveling evangelist for the free church. So he traveled all over the United States at that time. But then my youngest uncle, Arthur Thorwald, he worked here in Rockford at National Lock, I think. But he went to Detroit and started his own machine shop. And his sons are still running that up in Detroit, Michigan. He has two sons. He died a few years ago. But he was very, very good in setting up a machine and tool factory. We're still going. So how many churches did your husband serve while you had to move to? Well, we moved from Iowa. We were there three years. We moved to Loomis. Marathon? Marathon where we lived. And we had two churches, 23 miles apart. Central Grove was a country church. We served those two. And then we were there three years. In 1936, we moved to Loomis, Nebraska, where I just came back from there from the 100th anniversary of the church. We were there. My husband was serving the church for the 50th. So Barnhemmet, was that still there in Phelps? Yeah, Phelps County, the Barnhem. That was there. It was still children's home when we were there. Now it was there and it's a retirement home. It's different now. But it was really fun to get back there. My two daughters, two of my oldest and youngest daughters took me back now for the 100th anniversary of the church. So your children, they were born in some of those places? Yeah, two were born in Holdridge, Nebraska, when we were at Loomis. And that was—we were there eight years. And then one year in Grand Island, Nebraska. But then our daughter, youngest daughter, got sick with asthma so bad we had to move to Colorado very suddenly for just one year. My husband taught school one year in Johnstown, Colorado. And then we got a call to a church at Watertown, Minnesota, which is near Minneapolis, 30 miles west of Minneapolis. And we were there five years. Then we got a call to Texas, so we went to Georgetown, Texas, where our youngest daughter was born, and we were there five years. Then after those five years, we went back to Boone, Iowa, and he was administrator of the home for the aged, the retirement home in Boone, for 12 years before retiring here in Rockford. So you came down to Gustaf Johnson's home? Yes, yes, Gustaf Johnson's. Georgetown was—Brushy Church was his home church. And every year he and his wife would come down there and go to the cemetery next door to our house and come and knock on our door and say— Was it the day after he was retired? No, he was still serving Park Avenue. In Minneapolis? In Minneapolis, uh-huh. He started his own church? Well, that was Park Avenue. That was the one? Yeah, First Covenant is where he was, and he started Park Avenue. But it was either his father or mother that was buried there. I think it was his mother. And then whoever the other one was moved to California and were buried out there. So they had one grave in Texas and one out there. But they'd always come and put flowers on and stop and say hello to the—that's where he got his start. He was called Texas Johnson. Yeah. You remember that? Yeah, I remember. I don't remember him, but I— Remember hearing about him, I mean. Yes, that's right. Yeah, he was called that. There was also a record with his servants on. Yeah, oh yeah. I listened to it in Georgetown. Oh yeah. Have you been to Georgetown? Yes. Oh, you have been. The church has moved into town now. Yes. Oh, you've been down there. You're familiar with it? Yeah, I'm familiar. That's interesting. Yes, and you mentioned in Aldrich, you know, you probably—you served the Lume Church. Do you know any Gus Nelson and Lillie Nelson in Aldrich? They belong to a church in town, though, in Aldrich. I think they did. Yeah. But we knew each other. Yeah, because you probably— We were six miles apart. And Moses Hill was a covenant church there. And Westmark was covenant, but now it's free. And Holcomb, they were all about eight miles from us. So we were so many of us right there. There were a lot of free church members around there. A lot of free church members, different churches around there, yeah. And it was a necessity to have one church because the distance between them and the wintertime was too far to— Oh yeah. —blissage and— Yeah, you couldn't make it those early days. In the summer days, it was too hot as well. Too hot, right, right. And drought, you know, we were there in the drought. But they got irrigation while we were there, and that has saved their life in Nebraska, of course. That's right. It's very nice this year. Beautiful. They had enough rain. That's right. Yeah. It's beautiful. Tough farming there, too. Yeah, it was. Oh my, those days that we moved there. Oh, you know, we got $50 a month in Iowa in our house, and then the farmers would give us chickens and stuff, you know. And when they butchered, they'd give us. And we had a hard time to live on that, even the two of us. But it was 1933, it was depression, so you could get food cheap and everything. But we moved to Loomis, and they gave us $85, and we thought that was wonderful. They were better, well-to-do than— Well, they paid— —I mean, in Nebraska. They paid us better anyway because it was—it would really help. We didn't have to drive to another church, and we lived a block from the church, and so it wasn't as much driving. And so that was just really fine. But I remember how hard times it was for the farmers. And we'd go to the ball games on Wednesday nights. I think we had church Thursday nights, and ball games were Wednesday nights uptown. In Holdredge. Yeah, in Loomis. In Loomis. Yeah, and we'd sit there and watch the ball games and have a good time, even though the farmers were suffering. We made the best of it, you know, and everybody would just do what they could do, that was all. They all pitched in and— Yeah, it— —they had a good time. And they—and now those little kids that were just children when we were there, now they're the old gray-haired men and women of the church, you know. But it was wonderful to be there and see them active in the church and taking part and following—and following in their parents' and grandparents' footsteps. It was really wonderful. Do you think there were more religions out in the countryside than compared to the cities like Minneapolis, Rockford, Chicago? I wouldn't say more. We had—I wouldn't say more. I— I mean, all to participate in the works of the church. It was different. A country church is different from a city church, of course, you know. The little country church, everybody knows everybody, and some people have to do a lot of things besides not only one thing, but in a city church like I'm from here, you know, you got so many people, you can just do a little bit each. Like I mentioned before, a pastor's wife is a person that really has to put in a lot of hours without getting paid for it or reimbursed for it. Didn't you feel at any time that you—you said $50 a month on Iowa Marathon? Yeah. $50 a month. It was actually on tour. I taught piano lessons. I know, I taught piano lessons and got, well, either three lessons for a dollar if they were really hard up or 50 cents a lesson those days, just to help the kids out to get music, you know. I guess I didn't feel that way. I guess we—I was never used to having much. Well, we felt that we should have had more. My husband did feel it because he wanted to put away money for a car and he couldn't, so I know we felt it. But then he got—as time went on, it got better and better, so. And there was no pension plans that he prepared? Well, very little. They got in later. They got in later. There was a little pension plan, but it wasn't enough to help very much yet. I don't know how good it is now, but, no, I don't know. It wasn't as good as it should have been. It was something at least, but my husband was a very good manager, though. I just can't believe that he did as well as he did. With the little bit he had. When we came to Rockford, we didn't have—had never lived—had our own house, you see. It was always in parsonages. But— How about the furniture, though? Did you— No, we had to furnish our own houses. You had your own furniture? We had to have our own furniture. And there was a nice farmer out in eastern Nebraska that moved us almost free. Come with his truck and would move us. He moved us to Texas. And he—he—it was his hobby, was moving preachers. And he was a free church man from east Nebraska. And he was so good. And he just did that as a gift to the Lord. It was wonderful. But what was it we—what were we talking about? We were talking about— About how you feel. How you feel. How the preacher's wife feel. Yeah, I can tell you how you feel. You probably do, but you don't realize it. You're happy in what you're doing, and you get a blessing out of the work, and everybody's kind of— There's a few rich people, but most of them are average people. You have a few that live it up pretty good, you know? But if you compare it to today's pastors, now I'm— Oh, yeah, today, it's all— I mean, it's a different kind of— It's a different—I—I say they're so different. They wouldn't know what I was talking about, you know? And of course, we always got 10 percent discount at the store and stuff, which would be nice if we had enough salary so we didn't need that, but—but it was good. We did. But then—and now you don't have that. So the pastor's wives doesn't work nowadays? No, some do, but they don't have to. They wouldn't need to. Because nowadays, it's secretary and— Yeah, but some— —manager and politicians and everything. That's right, but some of them do just because they like to, I think. There's a few of our pastor's wives that have part-time jobs anyway, I know. We have—what do we have, about seven pastors in our church, I think. So— It was a trying period in the early 30s, you— It was a very trying period in the 30s for everybody to keep the churches going, that's right. But you didn't expect so much either in those days as we do now, you know? But I don't know. I never felt—even when we lived on the farm and we had hard times, I never felt that we were poor. I mean, we were rich in other things, in friends and wonderful parents and Christian heritage and all the things that count in life, you know? And that was so meaningful. So I don't know. You realize that times were hard, but they were for everybody, more or less. Yeah, more or less. A lot of Swedish people came over here, though, and did well and became inventors. Yeah, especially the Rockford people. The Rockford people. My mother's cousin, Rick Johnson, I had my cousin, his daughter, to the hospital this morning and—oh, he did so well on inventing machines and started a factory and, you know, just had a natural gift. Well, my uncle did, too. Yeah. So that— But I never— It didn't cost. Yeah, I never felt that way. No, I was always just a real—but I think a minister's wife feels, too, that you really have so—you can't be real chummy with just one person or you can't have close friends too much. I mean, you have to be the same to everybody you should be. That's always kind of hard because there's some people you can't help but like better than others. I mean, I think it's easier to love some people than it is to like them. You know what I mean. And perhaps the pastor's wife is in a more spotlight than the pastor himself because he can watch the pastor's wife, what she is doing, and especially the women, of course. That no doubt is true, I suppose, and yet many of them are also very sympathetic and understanding, you know, so you have a difference on what kind of people you have. There's always some that, of course, criticize, but you have to kind of let it just go in one ear and out the other. Do what you can that's best and make the best. Sometimes though when they bring you food, I always wonder about that. Yeah. You get so much in one time and you don't know what to do with it. Yeah, not anymore, but they used to, yeah, but it usually didn't work out that way. We'd go out in the country and somebody would just give us a chicken, you know, or— Or some eggs. Eggs, and so it helped our grocery bill, so it usually worked out pretty good. Yeah, I can't remember any problem. How about your daughters now? Were they interested to marry a pastor? Well, they didn't ever say, but my one daughter, oldest daughter, is married to a gospel singer, Chuck Olson from Iowa City. Oh, yes, I heard his name. I don't know. You probably heard his name, yeah. So he's out in full-time gospel. They studied for a year in Stockholm on his doctorate. He got a scholarship from University of Iowa. So he's a Swede born here? Well, his folks were Swedish from Boone, Iowa, and so he was—I mean, background is Swedish. Did they live in Iowa City? Iowa City. His mother still lives there, and his two aunts. His father died. But my husband and I went over to visit them in Stockholm when they were there in 1970. They were there for a year. Their little girl was three years old then. She's now a sophomore at Wheaton College. And they enjoyed that so much, and they want to go back to Sweden so much to visit. But he's out singing all the time, and you don't get too much money that way, so it's hard to get the—yeah. And then the other girl went to North Park, or she went to Cumberland Hospital, a nurse's training in Chicago. Yeah, North Park. So she's a nurse now at the North Memorial in Minneapolis. She's gone on and gotten her degree. She's teaching nursing up there. And the youngest girl went to Atlanta, Georgia after she got through one year of college. She just said that was enough for her, so she went to Atlanta, Georgia. There the first day she was there, she got a job with New York Life, and she's been with them ever since, transferred to Minneapolis. But now she had a baby 11 months ago, and she decided to stay home, take care of her baby. So. But the second daughter, her husband teaches music in the Minneapolis schools, and he's a pianist at the Crystal Free Church in Minneapolis. And the other daughter's husband is with Honeywell. He's a scientist and doing very well, live in Minnetonka. And they're active in the Central Free Church in Minneapolis. So they've stayed within the church. Not that that is important, because I think there are a lot of good churches besides the Free Church, but naturally when that's where you're brought up, you have a love for that particular branch. Yeah, when it can be, but sometimes it can't be, you know. So have you noticed any changes in the church since your beginning in Rockford in the Free Church and then over the years? Oh my, there's lots of changes. So many changes, yes. Like your husband, did he complain it was too fast perhaps? Well, not really, but see he was ahead of his time because some of the old pastors when he was young, they kind of made fun of him because he was in for education. And he went to college and he went, you know, took a lot of studies and he was a student. And so they kind of, the old pastors those days, they sort of said you didn't need to have a lot of education, just go out and preach. You know, if the Lord calls you, just go out and preach. So I don't know. That is different. So there was a turning point there, in other words, the old pastors. The old pastors, yeah. They had their ideas. They had their ideas on that you didn't have to study or go to school much, you know. Of course, a few that did, but not very much. But now they've come around where they like to have you be trained and have not too much, but have your good education besides have your calling from the Lord to go and preach, not only just to go to, you know, make a living. So there's a lot of changes in the church in other ways. There's more social ministry today, too. Yeah. I suppose. Yeah. Years ago, you didn't have to have all this counseling. We... The farmers, for instance, they never asked for any counseling. No. It was almost a shame to go to a pastor and ask for anything. Yeah, they should handle their own thing, you know. And of course, we did. If we had a need, we would get with our friends and pray about it and have it taken care of. But anymore, it's gotten to be... Of course, it's a different ballgame today. There's so many problems, and they're out in the open. And of course, TV hasn't helped it any. And I mean, and the pornography and all that is so bad for our children. It's hard for people to understand what's going on. Yeah, it is. It is. But there's a lot of changes in that way and a lot of more... I don't know what I should say. It's not... You don't have revivals like we used to have. There's people that are coming to the Lord, but it's more on a one-to-one and not great big tent meetings like we used to have when we were kids. Do you also remember the tent meetings? Oh, I remember the tent meetings here in Rockford, yes. Oh, yes, they were... And we had them in Minnesota, too. They were tent meetings that we had. And they were special pastors then. They were, yeah, traveling evangelists that would come, and they'd have musicians come, and then a lot of churches would get together and you'd have... And of course, we thought it was wonderful, you know. And that actually increased the membership then? Well, it would. People that would come to the Lord at the tent meetings would then go to their different churches where they wanted to go, and it would help. It was a big help, I think, yeah. But I don't think it would work now, but... Well, of course, Billy Graham, he goes out and has campaigns and he gets along. He gets along good. That's right. Yeah, that's right. So when you come in, do you remember the church in Loomis, for instance, or... Nebraska, the country church, compared to the one here in Rockford, all the free churches, the difference between night and day? Well, the way it was then, yes. Yeah, well, but even today, though, I really like the church. Well, even today, but the Loomis church, they've built a nice, beautiful new church, and they're doing real well for a little town. Not that they have a huge membership, but I mean, they've stayed there and the kids have grown up and their kids are coming, and then if they go away, then other people come. So they were doing real well. I was just amazed. And a lot of them have had to close up, you know. But some places, they do well, and they have done well there. So that is an example. And same way with Upper Nassau Brook, where my father gave the land for that church, that church is doing wonderful. It's out in the country, away from nowhere, and people are just flocking there. They are supporting it. Yes, and there are more people there. I just heard now, people that came back from there, Rockford people that came back from the Fourth of July celebration, they said that. Malacca had the centennial, too. They had big, and they said that lots of things going on, a lot of people at the church. So there's a different kind of a ministry, I guess. I don't know. They don't have to have an outreach like they have in the city, for instance, to get a lot of people up in Malacca and up in the Upper Nassau Brook. They have their membership. Yeah, they have that, and then the neighboring churches come and help them. They don't have to beat on the drum like in the cities. No, that's right. That's right. They can be more relaxed. Yeah, I suppose you'd say that. And they are able then to support the pastor, full-time pastor. Oh yes, oh yes. Yeah, they're plenty able to support. They have a nice parsonage, and same way in Loomis, they have a nice parsonage and a fine young man pastor doing a good work. But now your husband, did he have to have his own pension plan then to sort of take care of it? Well, yeah. He just invested a little bit now and then here and there, and he just was good at it. The last year, as he was administrator, that's when he built up his Social Security, too. We had a pretty good salary for us then. So I was going to say, when he came to Rockford, and he was a little worried about buying this house, but he had Vernon came, who happened to be in Rockford visiting, and Norma visiting my mother at the time. So they went out together and looked at houses. And I was at home laid up with a broken arm and a leg, so I couldn't come. But they went and found this house on Shaw Street that they liked, and Arthur was a little afraid that if he couldn't carry on the payment because of his salary wasn't that great, you know. So he said he would stand behind him, and so that gave him confidence, and he never had to ask Vernon for a penny. And it was just really good, and he paid many months. He paid twice, twice as much as he needed to. And by the time he died, I didn't know how it was. It was only a couple thousand dollars left to pay on the house. So he wanted to make sure to get the people to help. Uh-huh, yeah. And he died suddenly, so we didn't have time to talk it over. And so it was just wonderful to have that. And then I lived there three years, and then I sold it and signed in to come over here because I was a nurse here 12 years, so I knew all about this. And it took three years to get in here. I had to go in an apartment for a year. But I feel very secure here. Very fine. Beautiful area. Yeah, it's very nice. Is this owned by the Free Church? Yeah, it's owned by the Free Church. The whole thing? Yeah. Madeline and the... Yeah, all that. The Rolling Meadows. And then it's divided into the district society, which is Wisconsin, Indiana, Illinois, you know, the district. The Free Church is divided into various districts. You know, Nebraska has... Holdridge Home is owned by the Nebraska district, although they're all under the Free Church as a whole from Minneapolis. Do they have the same set up in the Holdridge area? Yeah. Same thing? Mm-hmm. Just about. They don't have duplexes. I shouldn't say that. No, the home. The home. Yeah, the home. They have the three levels of care. Now, we're going to get another level of care over here. We're going to build another wing here. I saw one down there at the Rolling Meadows. Well, that's houses. Yeah, they said... That's duplexes. Oh, yeah, that's right. Yeah, that's just duplexes. Yeah. But they're going to have... The next thing Marv says on the agenda is to get a wing for intermediate care because you have so many people that don't need total nursing care and they aren't good enough to stay over here in the residential care, but just a little help and they can be over here, which is nice. And that's open for any denomination? Any denomination. Well, free church people get in first because it's supported by... But we have a lot of Lutherans and Methodists and different churches that are members over there, people. We even have a nice Catholic, a couple of Catholic families over there that fit in very nicely. So... So that's an ecumenical move? Ecumenical movement. Yeah. Yes, that's right. That's right. And they have different pastors that come every week for devotions. And last week we had a pastor from... He was formerly from Court Street Methodist. He's a pastor of a church out on North 2nd Street now. And they just loved him. He was so good. Very good man. So people are more open then for... Oh, yeah....religions. Yeah, I think they are. 50 years ago it was different. Yeah, they were more... They were more... They were more... They were more set to you as well. Yeah. Nothing else. Like my mother when she came from Sweden and her... This Rick Johnson that I told you about that started this factory, her cousin, he married a girl from the free church and she was very unhappy, his mother. She didn't like that? Oh, no. She told my mother. He married Gertrude, and she cried. And she was a wonderful girl, a wonderful lady, the mother of this girl that I took to the doctor this morning. And he was such a good man, but he never accepted that difference. But he was just such a wonderful... He built a lot of buildings at our school in Chicago, gave money for our school and a lot of things here, good in the church. He was a wonderful giver to the Lord's work. Provided for the education and religious... Yeah, for that. Like Vernon has done for that school in Canada. Oh, he's done wonderful for that Trinity. I just read that book... Trinity Western. Yes, about the... Kel Hansen? Yeah, Kel Hansen's book, yeah. From Horace... Yeah. I'm surprised that Kel got that chapter in there about Vernon, because he never wants to be publicized. Oh, he doesn't like that. Oh, he doesn't like any publicity. What he wants to do, he wants to do it underneath so nobody knows what he's doing. But I think he really did appreciate that after... Yes, I'm sure he did. I think he did, but he doesn't want to give to be noticed to people. He likes to do it so that it's between him and the Lord. He's a good businessman, and he uses it the right way. Yeah, yeah. But that was nice. Yeah, I was tickled about it. Yeah, it was interesting to read that book. Yeah, a lot of things have been... Fight with Baptists up in British Columbia. Yeah, I know. It's really interesting. But they needed that school there. They didn't have any Christian college up there, no. And it was too far to go to the United States. And too far to go to the United States, and they needed it up there. So it's done very well. So you have traced back your family then? Well, some. Some. I haven't got it organized very well, but I have traced back some. You are the appointed family historian. No, no. I just do it because I enjoy it. Yeah, Clarence, or Klaus Ferdinand Johansen. He was born 10, 1984, Valborde, Udalsland, Sweden. One of nine children. He lived on a farm. His father worked at a factory in Munkadal, Sweden. Times were hard, not always enough food, as I told you. He added bark to the flour to make bread at times, or his mother did. He died in December 13, 1937, in Rockford, Illinois. And then it goes back to tell about the father was Johann that you have there. Johann E. von Nilsen was born in 1946, his father. And Nils Olsen was born in 21, that would be his grandfather. And the wife of Johann, Margrethe Niklasdottir, was born in 54 in Valborde. Well, I haven't gotten very far. I've just gotten a little ways on that. I enjoy that. When you went with your mother in 1961 over to Sweden, was there something that she was especially interested in to show you? Yes, oh yes. She was interested in so many things. One thing that surprised her was that the trees had grown up so much around in Västergötland. Since when she was a kid, the trees were so much bigger, of course. How many years would that be? That would be a lot of years from she was 21 and she was 80 then, so that would be 60 years, wouldn't it? No, it was 59 years. So that was so interesting. And she even saw some of her old schoolmates. And she just, they had parties for her. It was fun, you know. They just took her to one of the places where you could rent and have dinners, you know. Some of her old school friends had us all there for dinner. And they had programs and sang and played. It was a lot of fun. And then she, well, at 80 years of age, she went back up to, the church was on, the old church is on their farm, or by their farm. And when she was a kid, when she was a young girl, the klokaden got up and rang the church bell at 3 o'clock one Sunday morning. So he was kicked out. He was drunk. 3 o'clock in the morning? In the morning. He rang the bell. He was scared of all the neighbors. So they wouldn't let him ring the bell anymore. So then the priest asked my mother if she would ring the bell. So she rang that bell. And at 80 years, she climbed up in that steeple to see where she used to ring the bell. It was so funny to think that she had to go back and relive that, you know. And in the cemetery, of course, where my grandparents were buried, that was, they died after she came to America, so she hadn't seen their graves before. So that was interesting. Then she, we went to Boros, and there she used to go with her father to the toriat on Saturdays, I guess they used to go. And she had to go and relive all that and see all that. And I guess she was a great dancer when she was young, so then she had to go see, she used to dance up a toriat, you know, and to see where the young people used to go and have their dances. One of my aunt used to tease her and said she danced out of her wooden shoes when. Yeah, that was, so there was, and I don't know, she never told me that she wasn't born in Oud, a few miles from Oud she was born, which I found out the last time I was there. My cousins took me and showed me the place where they lived at that time. And I don't know why I've been so interested in all this. They just aren't interested. They don't think it's important. So I have to fish it out, you know. So I went and I got pictures of that and everything. It was, there was nothing there now, it was just a, you could see where the house had been, that was all, you know, growing up. But it was kind of fun to see that. And my cousin lives in her parental home now, so when I get there I always get to see that, which is nice. That's on the property where the church is in Oud there. So she was happy then after that visit? She was very happy to go and happy to come home. It was funny because we went on the boat, you know, we went on the Kungsholm. And we had been there for three months and traveled around and stayed with her sister most there, Sister Hannah, who lived there at Oud. We sat on the boat, the family came to see us off, they were on the boat for about an hour before we left the pier. And after we pulled out, she sat on the edge of the bed and she said, oh my, but it feels good to talk English again. It was harder for her to go back to Swedish and think as it was for us, although she's always was good in Swedish. But I mean, she mixed more than we did. So it was really funny. Oh my, but it feels so good to talk English again. She said relax now. Because Aunt Hannah took the into her mind to speak English. No, no, no. My mother, and my mother mixed, you know, she'd say, you should have said that to Storven. Storven, why not? That, that, what do you call it? Species? Yeah, that they have in Western Ireland is so funny, you know, their colloquialisms. They have this funny little thing that's so funny to hear them. But she said, minna borns kallad, I say, Svenskan, she said. But I don't know, the rest of them, I guess I started school and then I came home talking English and then the rest of them understood it perfectly, but they never talked it very much. And I would sing it a lot when I was young because I sang in church and we had a lot of Swedish and I sang in a string band that was Swedish. So I used it more. And that summer I just really had to use it, my aunt had, I wouldn't let us talk English, so I said, fuck that, I may, I had the Oud book with me and learned words I never knew before. Lots of coffee going on then, oh yeah, and it still is. I have some wonderful cousins over there. They most of them go to the Mihun Shirka, which is there in Oud. And my aunt was really buried from the Mihun Shirka, but in the Lutheran yard, church yard. I mean, her husband was in the Lutheran and they had the, what do you call what they have after the funeral, the service with the coffee? Yeah, Prishamnismet, they had that there. But they have a good relationship anyway. My aunt did not dare leave the Lutheran church, but she liked to go to the Mihun Syset and hear the pastor there. She enjoyed that very much. So she had connections there, but she was a member of the Lutheran church. Your parents, now, did they have any Swedish newspapers? Yes, we used to get big. Chicago brought it? Yeah, Chicago brought it. And then what was the other one? Svenska? Amerikanaren. Yeah, Amerikanaren, yeah. Yeah, they loved to read Swedish newspapers. So I learned that too, of course Chicago brought it. You know, the editor of Chicago brought it was Jacob Olson. His daughter lives in a duplex down here too. She does? Mm-hmm. Yeah, she's at Gladys Peterson now. She was Olson. He was Jacob Olson. He used to come to our churches and we were kids and preach and talk. But there's not much Swedish left. Our church, as we see in our church book, all the new members we take in, 40, 50 every now and then, there isn't hardly an Anderson or a Johnson among them. It's just... All four Indians. Yeah, so it's just different. Well, of course, the Swedes aren't coming over here anymore. They're not migrating like they did. You know, in Texas there were a lot of Swedes that came down there. The story that is interesting that they told me in Texas that was so funny was this one man that paid for a lot of Swedes to come over and they came by boat down by Galveston and then they came over to the Texas area where we were there and they got off, the Swedish people got off the boat and this Negro man was there and of course they'd never seen a Negro before and he started to talk Swedish to them and they said, Ja, han är svenska men han är så mörk, han är så, ja, så vänta till ni har blivit här så länge som jag är så ska ni bli mörka också. And they couldn't get over that. He was joking with them, you know. They learned to talk Swedish too. He learned to talk Swedish too because he had to handle the immigrants, I guess. Because they had to go and they worked so long on the cotton fields to pay their trip over, I suppose. They had to learn to command the words. It must have been awfully hard though. It was probably a hard area to come to. To come in such a hot climate, no air conditioning. What a difference to Harvard in the north. Well, I tell you, it would be nice to, up in Minnesota it was just like Sweden, you know, and northern Wisconsin. Even here it isn't so bad, but, oh, I tell you. They came to many different areas, they were not so good. They sure did. Yeah, it's really... Your children, your daughters, are they interested in the background? Yes, they're very interested. They're very interested, and so... But nobody... But they married non-Swedes though? No, they're all married Swedes. Oh, yeah? Oh, what was the son you're Swedish with? Olsen and Carlson and Palmquist. Oh, both. But, well, Paul, Carlson, he can even talk a little bit Swedish. He graduated from North Park. But, yeah, they're very interested. And of course, Edith and Chuck, the oldest daughter, who studied over there a year, they want to go back so badly, and they still have a lot of good memories from Sweden. They enjoyed it so much that year. It wasn't exactly easy, but... Because they couldn't work, see? They got a scholarship, and he was at... Studied at Uppsala... Well, he wasn't at Uppsala, he studied at the Kungliga biblioteket in Stockholm.