 I'm sitting together with Mr. Ruben L. Bean in Rockville, Illinois. He was born 1896, 27th of March in Katrineholm, Sweden, and came to the United States in 1912 on Mauritania out of Liverpool, England. We had 24th of July, 1986. Your father now, William Anderson, in Floda, what kind of work was he doing? Well, Floda, that was his work place, you know, Floda. Katrineholm is not in Floda. That's in Stora Malm, Sjöken. But my father was born in Österlund, that's a little cabin in Floda, Sjöken, about a quarter of a mile or so from, or a Swedish mile, perhaps a couple of English miles away from Floda kyrka. So his father, did he have a farm there? He had a father, it was Anders Egersson. He built the place there completely from, cleared the woods and everything. I don't know how they went about it, but you know, whether he never owned it, he built it, paid for it. I don't think they gave him a cent, under Egersberg was the harrycord that, and so he built I think, hewed out everything just from raw lumber until it was quite a place. It's just remarkable. Your father, when he was old enough, did he go into Katrineholm? Yes, then he, when daddy got a little older, perhaps he waited until then, then he went to Katrineholm, which was about a two hour walk. He walked there many times. And to build some homes there, he built several homes there. And among the several homes that they built was one, a two family house with attic rooms for the, on the third floor. And then one family home, that became our home, where I was born and lived until I went to this country. And dad bought that from his father. So he had some income from renting out that two story place in addition to his wages at the factory work, which were extremely low. Your father, he was a naval carpenter, so he could- He was a good carpenter and a good mechanic. Very good mechanic. In fact, he, at the factory where he worked, he sort of invented a machine for grading seeds and berries, for instance. That was, it consisted of a series of screens of different sizes. Something like that, yeah. And with that, and, but he had, it was a little different and improvement of them so that we could, I know we graded our lingonberries and they came out there perfect. The ones that weren't ripe came in one place and the leaves and scrap in another place and so on and so forth. And so, and I don't know what he got for each machine they sold, he'd get a couple, three crowns and there wasn't too much of a- until finally he, the company he worked for sold out to one of the big companies. What was it now? A large company in, I'll have to ask my sister. Valla? No, well he sold out a company and Valla bought the company. Valla and Flane. They were in the trashing machine business and this worked in very well. He tried for a while to run it on his own, but he was a good mechanic, but he was not a- the book work and the financial end of it, that was too much for him so he wanted to sell out, which he did. So then they moved to Valla where he took charge of that, making of that machine in the future. Do you have any recollections if he invented something when he was very young, like a little boy for instance? No, I can't remember that, anything like that. Your brother though, Gito, didn't he have a little power station? He was a mechanical genius and he did- invented quite a few things. He started to tinker with things when he was small. How's that? When he was small then he started to tinker around with mechanical things. Your sister mentioned that he built a little- Of course, the only job that he could get down there was below his- way below his ability, but then you couldn't do anything else. He got a job in the foundry, a dirty job there, and was the only job he had in Sweden. So he was much older than you- He was ten years older than I am, yeah. So he left for the United States already in 19- Four. Four. Yeah. So he didn't see any future then for his ability in Sweden to keep working there? No, no, there was no opportunity for him whatsoever. So his father couldn't help him out to get the position in the- Oh no, no, my father was just a worker. He had three dollars a day for ten days of work, and not only a good worker, but he was a good mechanic. In fact, he was the inventor of this machine that they sold. I see. But they still didn't make him- His father was named Priemus. Priemus. I see. So he left, and your brother, in 1904. And he came over to Rockford. And he started immediately to work for a mechanical- Yes, his first job was with a company by the name of Barnes. So they finally moved out of Rockford now and practically went down to nothing. And he went from two or three different places. I think it was the fourth place was a company, National Lock Company. Rockford at that time was a furniture town. I would say that it was next to Grand Rapids. And Jamestown, New York, was also a furniture town, but one that had three largest. Whether they were second or third, I couldn't say. Grand Rapids was the largest in the furniture. But we had some over 40, perhaps close to 50 furniture towns, furniture factories here. Not some large, some very small. And somebody, a Swede by the name of Levine Faust, quite a very prominent Swede. He was quite an inventor himself. He got the idea that they should make locks for all, that there was enough business for furniture locks. At that time, there was the simplest kind of a lock that you can imagine. Just one key that opened. Well, you could open almost with anything. But it kept the door closed anyhow, or the door closed. That's all it was about to do. So they started a lock company, what they called National Lock Company here by the name of Hoglund was the president of it. So that company, I think, was perhaps only a couple years old when my brother got a job there as a toolmaker. Was it called National Lock at that time? It was called National Lock Company. It was Levine Faust that had the... The founder of it, yeah. But he was interested in other activities. And so he, in fact, the name Faust Hotel here, that's after him. He gave that, of course, it went broke. And that broke him too. But there was a man that was no mechanic whatsoever, but that took over the management of this National Lock Company. And they struggled through. But he proved his ability there, so he became, after a few years, he became foreman. Not perhaps after five, six years. Do you remember if your brother wrote back to your parents or to you, for instance, now that he's telling you about the situation in Russia? Oh, yes, yes. He wrote to me very often. He was a very, very good son and thought very highly of his parents. And he was an extremely good and faithful boy, much more than I was. And no, he wrote to my back then. He became active in the church, free church, because he came over here with a man from Sweden, a man that had come from the same area as we were. And he came to this country and he ran a bathhouse. At that time, you know, bathhouse was a big business because all these Swedes and other Americans, they came over, they had to go to a bathhouse to get their bath at least once a week, because there was no facilities where they were rooming, you know, perhaps in the attic rooms someplace. So that man, he went back to Sweden for a visit. And his name was Emil Gustafsson. And I had a, we had an uncle in Kansas. My mother's family, practically all of them emigrated to the United States and settled in Kansas. And I, the only reason that my mother stayed, I presumed she was in love with my dad. She stayed. And her father, but they sent for him later on, so he came over there too and stayed with them. And this uncle of mine, his brother, only brother, my brother, my mother had several sisters but only a brother, and he lived in Kansas. And he, his wife died, so he was a widower. And he came over at the same time as this Gustafsson. So the two went back together and my brother was the third one that went to, and my brother, my uncle went to Rockford, and from Rockford he went back to Kansas. So in 1912 then, when you were 16 years of age, you were working to go to the United States too? Yeah, well I had America fever as high, much as anyone could have. How did it arrive then in your body, so to speak? How did you? I'm going down to Esther. Okay. How did you get this? Well, of course, I graduated from grade school only, and I was torture-less. I was kind of a dickens of a kid. But I wasn't the kind of a boy my brother was at all. I was a little more difficult to handle. Did you want to play around a bit more? Yes, that's right. And then I got into a little problems here and there. But I settled down so that I, out of five, or three, whatever it was, I graduated in the big church that morning. I got a reward for being one of the top students. In the state church or in the? They graduated in the state church in Sweden, the schools. There was a closely tied together state and church, and education. So your parents, were they religious people going to church? Very religious. They belonged to the Kunstverbundet. But you were confirmed in the state church though? No, I wasn't confirmed, because they had their own confirmation, and somehow or other I missed that for some reason or other. I took a year of, went to a business school for a year, after I had been working a year or two. And I went directly from graduation. I didn't want to wait. In fact, perhaps that was typical of me. I was a go-getter, if I say so myself. And I was going to be there first looking for a job. So I didn't go home and change any clothes. I went like the clothes that mother had made, and went out looking for a job. And I didn't succeed very well, but I did find a half-time job in a bookstore. In a category? Yeah, a category. And then eventually I did get a job in a manufaktura, if you call it that. It was a clothing store, not finished clothes, but cloth and things like that. And it was kind of a, not a first-class store. They catered pretty much to the country trade. And I had a job there. And where I ran errands, I had to get up early in the morning to get out there with the time to shovel the sidewalk. Because it was a corner store, so I had quite a length. And clean up the front entrance, the front steps, and mop up the whole store in the morning. And of course, my first thing of a job was to make fire in the stoves. It had to be warm by the time that they opened the store in the morning. And that was my first job. They kept you busy all day then? Yes, it was full time. Could you keep that money you earned from that work? Could you keep that money yourself then? Well, I gave, I'm sure, at least half of it to Mother. She needed it very badly. She was, she was, Mother was a very intelligent person. Extremely intelligent. And had more get up in her. Dad was a very kind man, but Mother really was the boss in the home, so to speak. Was she more business-minded than you think, compared to your dad? Yes, she was. She was? Yeah, she was. So, anyhow, that was understood, that it isn't like it in this country. I didn't even ask her. I took for granted that I, that I, I remember we had a, we had a, a tenant that was kind of a, well, he was a big, had a big, big mouth and he had a pocketbook. And when sometimes I was a little late on the, on his payment, monthly payment, but when he did come, then, then he would say to Mother, I remember when I gave my mother the first payment, first kronor, what it was, I told her, I remember it was a real joy, and she, of course, she got a good laugh out of that. And you kept the word. Yeah. So, but, as I, when I, when I got through with, with that year in, in, or close to a year where it was in business college, business school, which wasn't so elaborate, but at least I knew debit and credit and so on and so forth, something that you're not supposed to spend more money than you take in. There was a few fundamentals. Then I, I tried, I tried to get something else. But you know, there was very seldom that there was any opening, because if there was a boss and he had sons and they had a preference whether they deserved it or not. And so I had to go back to that job that I had previously, that store. And there I stayed until I was 16, and then Mother and Dad reluctantly let me plan to go to the United States. So your dad helped you then with the paper store? Well, yes, yes. He did whatever there was. I can't say that he could help so much, but that, there were so many immigrants going, so that, you got help from the boat, or the ship companies, various companies, I don't know. But that was, I got the help that it took to do that. But your dad had to sign or to give his consent for you to leave? I presume so, yes. Yeah. So, did your brother send the ticket to you? No, no, no, he didn't. My brother just had a tough time getting along as it was. But anyhow, he knew I was coming, and if I would have been him, in my kind of, I wouldn't have bothered with a brother like that. I would have said, wait until you're a little older and then come over. But I think because the mother and dad had agreed to it and were in favor of it, I did it for their sake, not for my sake. Anyhow, so. He took a chance on you then? Yes, he did, yeah. Your dad, now, did he go with you to Gothenburg? Yes, the train still goes through, comes from Stockholm to Gothenburg, and it stopped in my hometown. Then one minute after 12, or leave one minute after 12, and it still does now. And they had a farewell doing in the church because I've been active there. My brother came over after three years, which he promised. He came over in 1907, and he had a mandolin with him, and he was playing here in the church. While I learned, while he was home, I learned to play on that thing, so he left it with me, and that was something very unusual over there. So I was active in the string band church, and so they had a little farewell for me Monday night, and some of them stayed up and went to the train when I left. What did you pack in your suitcase when you left? Well, I can't tell you. I had some lunch for one thing, because we weren't sure that I was, and it came in handy. I had a present to where I was going to stay, which hopefully would help a little. And let's see. Well, I suppose I had some underwear, really all the suits that I wanted, all the clothes I had, what I was wearing. Do you remember if your brother told you what to bring or not to bring? No, he didn't tell me anything like that. So I can't say that. So what did your dad say when you were on the train down to Göteborg? Did he tell you? Well, I'll tell you. He was, he was just, I can't say he said anything at all. We went to Salvation Army, where we stayed over the balance of the night until in the morning when we walked down to the dock there and got to work and took a little steamer. Over to England? Over to Hull, England, you know. And… Can't remember he said anything specific that you should remember to do or…? Well, I can't say no. He was, he read the psalm, the 91st psalm in the morning and had a prayer and prayed and we left. I can't remember anything at all. He was very touched, of course, as he said goodbye at the gangplank when I walked up there and waved to him. To me it was such an adventure, you know, that I didn't really comprehend the meaning of the whole thing. You might say what it meant to me and what it meant to them. I think I was too young for that. So you were looking forward? I was looking forward, yeah. To what was going to come? Yeah. And how was the trip over now? Do you remember England or anything? Well, yes. They were storming and I happened to be low. There was a three-decker where we slept and I slept in the lower one and the boys above me were seasick and that had a moment and so I got up and tried to lay down on the deck. But then they come around and they're going to flush the deck and sweep it off. So I had to get up and go downstairs again. So I got through the night. I think there was only two days and a night, as I recall it. Then I got on a train and took a train from Hull to Liverpool. That was very interesting. I remember we went through a lot of tunnels and I've seen so little of Sweden except what I saw from a bicycle, if I say it. My uncle left an old bicycle that he bought. He bought a secondhand bicycle so he could get around a little when he was in Sweden visiting and he left that thing. I remember there was a rare tire of the thing was gone and of course I didn't have the money to buy a new tire so I got a hold of a thick rope that I tied around, laid as a tire. But the knot, every time the wheel went over the knot, always threw me out of the bicycle. So you were an inventor too then? Well, I don't know, it made me go over. So then when I came to Liverpool, they put us into a kind of a compound there that I think was a gathering place of all immigrants headed for the United States or people headed for the United States. I don't believe at that time, perhaps no ships from Germany or any place else, France, went directly to New York. You perhaps would know more about that than I did too. But I think there was people from the various, at least from Scandinavian countries and Ireland, they came to Liverpool and so that was a gathering place there and they had a place there to overnight them. And so there we stayed in a place there overnight, I don't recall it, but I remember that I wanted to see a little of this world and they were supposed to close at nine o'clock and I thought I'm going to go out and take a look, see what the city looks like here, which I did. And while I was out, I saw a fellow pushing a vegetable cart and it had some apples on it that looked so good to me that I decided I'm going to buy one or two apples. And I didn't know at that time that there was anything such a thing as dishonest people in this world. So I gave him Swedish money and he gave him some money back, English, whatever it was, but anyhow his heart changed me. He gifted me and I didn't know that of course until I handed over all my money at Liverpool, at Ellis Island when I went through the examination and they told me that you only have $24, you must have $25. And because I didn't have what they took and because I was young, they didn't let me in. So they put me back into a big, great big room there where everybody from both, they both came through and there was some three-decker room that I happened to get a top there and I was held there for three days and three nights and that was the worst period of all my life because I didn't know why I was there, didn't know if they were going to send me back, I didn't know if they even knew that I was there because there was no way that I could contact anyone. There was a little hole in the wall where they talked to people and when they called on people and they went to that little door and of course you couldn't get close to the thing because there was such a mob standing around there shouting and hoping to get attention. So I was there for three days and in the meantime, they had, which I didn't know of course, they had sent a telegram to my brother and they caught him when he was in church. And he didn't know what to do with it so his landlord took charge of it and went to a Swedish attorney that all the Swedes depended on around there and he framed up a telegram that they got there later on in the Sunday or when, but anyhow on Wednesday noon. This was early in the week. No, I couldn't talk to them at all, but anyhow then they let me through and I got on the train and that took three days I think on the train, perhaps for two nights and three days because it seemed to me that they took us up through Canada and that seemed to be a cheaper route, the cheapest way of course. To Windsor and Detroit. Yeah, perhaps. Anyhow I got to Rockford and… And that was only because of a few apples. Yeah, that was the biggest transaction that I ever had in my life, far reaching transaction. You had no control over it, you didn't know what happened or know what was happening? So I got here. How was the food now at Ellis Island when you stayed there for three days? I think I got some, I can't remember, I had some lunch, some sandwiches along. I didn't need them over the trip, over the ocean because we got food on the ship. But of course on the train I had to use my lunch because there was no dining car and I had no money. So it could be that I ate my lunch there. I can't say, I can't remember if there was any way to get lunch. There could have been that they came around with some cart or something. I should think they would have to. But there were a lot of people containing it from other countries? Not too many, there were a lot of people but they were all on their way through. Whereas I had to stay, whether anyone else was held or not I couldn't say. So after a long train ride you finally met your brother in Rockford? Yeah. And he was glad to see you and then get some greetings from home. So we went, and his landlord had a car. His landlord had a coffee business in Rockford and so he had a car and drove to, and drove to, and come down there so I had an automobile ride, I guess it was the first automobile ride I ever had in my life. Was to, from the stained train to the, to the, where my brother lived, or boarded. So you stayed with them then for a while? I stayed with them, they let me stay there. So my brother and I shared a room for, for, for about two years. Then he got married. Your brother? Mm-hmm. And what kind of work then were you lining up? Well I didn't get a job right away, but finally I did get a job at the same company, the National Law Company, where my brother had a job. In the factory or in the office? In the factory, factory, oh yeah. And my, my pay was ten cents an hour and I worked ten days a week except Saturday, then we got off at five o'clock, which was nine and a half hour this Saturday. And occasionally the old boiler went on the blink or the steam engine went on the blink and then we had to go home because we, we didn't, there was no, no work, no pay. So but I, I did, I got a job there and I did, had to do a hand grinding with some, some tools for, I worked in a department that made screws and they also make wood screws in that place. And, and then yeah, I worked in that, on that type of work and that was mostly grinding and drill press work, most of it. And I think about a year later I got a raise, I got eleven cents an hour. But I almost, all of it went to the board, I paid twenty dollars a month for room and board which was more than, than almost, most of the boys got, got by for sixteen. Why did you have to pay twenty? Well, the, we had an old maid, that, that, the sister to the one that owned the place and she kept house and I, he, I, I think he was living a little above his means and she had a, I think she used to, but had a support the whole house on, on, on what she get from me and so that I, not only that but I got very poor food there, you know, little fact. I think it really, for a sixteen year old boy when I see them, how much they eat, I, I'm surprised that I survived at all because the meals were, were very, very meager. Do you think they were a little bit tough towards the newcomer or? No, no, no, but I, I, I didn't dare, I felt this much about it, that if I should get sick, I wouldn't get kicked out there. And, and, yeah, yeah, and so that nothing happened fortunately, but, but that was the reason that I didn't dare to move, otherwise I could have gone someplace, gotten a room and eaten, ate, ate my meals on, on, on 7th Street or which was a Swedish restaurant there and you, you could get, I could have, for the 20 I could have done, gotten, gotten a room and, and, and a lot of good food and above all I would have gotten a good sized lunch pail full of food, which I didn't now. I, I, as I say, I. So they made, they worked pretty hard and the lunch was meager and. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So your appetite for work was not that great either. And meals were, in the afternoons weren't any more, at night weren't any bigger either because they had a habit of drinking coffee and having a little snack in the afternoon at the store where he worked. So he was, he wasn't hungry and so it, it, it was. It was a tough going then. Yeah, it was tough going but I'll say this, I never for a moment wanted to go back because I could, I could see the potentials here somehow. Comparing the two sizes of Tarno, like Katrineholm and Rockford, was it about the same size? Oh no, no, Rockford was larger then but not anything, I would say that Rockford was perhaps 25,000 or something, I couldn't say. But it was something like a small city. And it was growing all the time, more and more immigrants were coming. Oh yes, yes, it was growing all the time. So your brother, he married then and he couldn't take you in as a boarder or anything? Oh no, no, no, and I wouldn't want to and I don't think he would want me there. You wanted to be on your own. Yeah. So your curiosity now to find out different things, did they stay with you even in Rockford to... Who? Your curiosity to find out different things. Yes, yes, I did and I got friends, I was young enough so I felt more at home with boys born in this country. And got friends among them. But things, we had almost a little repression then off and on, very often, and we felt it very strongly and sometimes we couldn't even work a full week. But I, almost from the beginning, I began to go to evening school twice, twice an evening a week. And first to learn the language and then secondly to... And then after that I continued as night school for many years, took up mechanical drawing. And you joined the church then immediately when you came here? Yeah, I did almost immediately, yeah. Not immediately but quite soon. The Covenant Church or? No, well, they called it the Evangelical Free Church. It's something comparable to... To the Covenant? To the Covenant, yeah. But there was a little art growth there, you know, a little... You probably are familiar with it. Yeah, there was a split between the Lutherans and Covenant. Yeah, but they were very comparable. So there was one, and your brother? Brother, this man from the bathhouse, he belonged there so my brother went there and I went to where my brother went, so that's the way, simple as that. So I presume I would have gone to the Covenant. And you continued at National Lockdown for... Yes, I did. I did. It got along so finally they let me get into the tool room as an apprentice and I learned the toolmaker trade and became a toolmaker. And after a while I just seemed to do it, I was doing all right and so I got a little job as a foreman for... No, it wasn't that way. I felt that I was a little better than I was being paid. I was getting 25 cents an hour as a toolmaker. And I thought that I was worth more. So I never asked for a raise in my life. So I went out to look for a job and I went to a very large, much larger company, more of a sophisticated company. It was almost a privilege to work there because they had their own band and they even had a dining room for their employees and it was a high class company. Was they owned by Swedes too? No, no. The part of the Covenant company was their own. There was no Swedes there? No, no Swedes there. And I got a job there but they, of course I told them how much I was getting. They asked me and I did. So I think in order to not to be conspicuous, they offered me, I think it was 37 cents an hour. When I get back to pick up my toolbox and leave, then the superintendent had a long talk to him and told me that I had such a big future there. They had me scheduled as a foreman and well, I talked me into staying. That's national luck. Yeah, but I got a, short of time, I got a foreman job, a small department and then I thought I was going to get a big raise. Instead of getting 25 cents an hour, I got 26 cents an hour and the job was not as nice as being a tool maker because now I had to stay over after they went home and repair some of those greasy, greasy, greasy machines and anyhow, I stayed on the job because I thought someday at least that I'm, this is the first step to something better. Well then the war came along and I decided I wanted to, I wanted to get out and try something else so I tried enlisting in the Navy but they turned me down because I was, I was not a, you had to be a citizen, born here to be in the Navy. I said I'll let it go and then the draft come along and I was not in the first draft but I was in the second draft. My name was on top of the list, I knew I would soon be called out and about two weeks after the first draft I was called out and I was in a camp here in Rockford where the airport is now, was a big army containment. Camp Grant? Camp Grant, yeah. I was there for about a month. Then I was sworn to be unlucky to be, as it seemed, to be drawn as a group to be shipped to France to fill in with a company that was completely shot to pieces. And there was, well we were shipped away and we rode on a train for days it seems and ended up in Houston, Texas. And there we would gather in a big field, people from all directions. They were sorting out people there and they were asking for people, had a horse experience, I did a little lying there because I said that I didn't know one end of a horse from the other. But I thought anything is better than infantry, I just hated that. Running around, coming with a bayonet and hit a sack of hay without missing it on the run and I thought somebody's going to probably handle that thing like that better than I can and be there first. So well, then they called for machinists and then of course I felt at home. So I, the electricians, and I had done some electrical work so then I put me there. Then they called for machinists, then I really, so I made a salute and said that really, I said while I am working on electrical work, I'm a better machinist than I'm an electrician, or I go over there. Then they called for tool makers but I didn't dare to make because I thought if here's the jack of all trades, he doesn't know anything so you better go back to the infantry. So I stayed where I was and that was my good fortune. It's a little thing that can have bearing on your whole life. And so he said you're going to go to the pumping station. Well I thought that was a place where they ask you a lot of questions, pump you, you know. But it was actually a pumping station in the camp, large camp. They were outside of the city, they got their water from the city. But they didn't got, there were periods when they could not get enough water. For instance, in the afternoon when all the men came in from the fields and had a shower, then there wasn't enough shower, enough water to supply and if there was a fire, that was not. They had a great big tank there that held a tremendous amount of water and that tank was filled during the night when there was no need for so much water in the city. And then we are in this pumping station, we sit there and watch the gauge if they should go down below a pressure and we started up our pump, the pump. But they had civilians running that thing, three one for three hour shifts, one for each eight hour shift. And since it was cheap, they took two soldiers on each. So I was one of those. So I worked eight hours a day and different, sometimes night, sometimes. But it was an exactly easy job, not a thing to do except to see that it didn't go down and sometimes it didn't do anything at all. And I took up engineering, correspondence, because I could work there, I had a desk there and I could work there and that didn't do me any harm at all. But the commanding officer, when he come in to see me, industrious and I played a little politics too. I asked my brother to send me a book on centrifugal pumps and I was sure, read that thing and I was sure to have it later on so when the boss, when the officer came in he could see that book. If I remember he asked me, are you reading this? Yes, I said. I sent for it. So I became the boss after a while and in charge of the, the sergeant in charge of the other corporals. And I got a bigger job after a while and in fact I had a, I even qualified for a lieutenant and I was so close to it that I was, I had an order to pack up and be ready, which I was, to go to the officer training camp when the armistice was signed and then everything was stopped. No advancement, no. Anyhow, after I was there a year and a half. Did you become a citizen then during that time? Yes, I became a citizen in the Army. Automatically? Automatically, yeah. So anyhow, I, my boss, the boss of the president of the company sent for me, wrote to the commanding officer and suggested that I be released early because they wanted me back, which I was. And so then I came back here and I got my job back. And I advanced to a bigger job and, and well, this is getting a little too long a story. Well, but this is history. Well, it. So you're staying with National Lockdown? Yeah, yes. And how about your brother, was he drafted? He was there too. But he was not drafted? Oh, no, no. Because he was married? He was married, yeah. And had this. And by that time he had a bigger job too. Well anyhow, the National Lock Company was going to open up a plant and they thought about a plant in Carolina because the furniture industry had moved to Carolina, almost all of them. And then they were thinking about a plant up in Canada. Canada was getting started, growing too. So they bought a little plant that had gotten into financial trouble. They were making lathes and they bought that plant and they would make, have a plant where they could make machinery for themselves, for the hair locally. Country was expanding fast and all you had to do was to keep on with the stream, you might say, to grow at that time. Why was the reason that you would leave Rockford? I mean, why didn't they expand here? No, they weren't going to leave. They just wanted to take up branches. Oh, branches, I see. Because they're more profitable than the… Oh, excuse me. They're going to build some bigger equipment and all the factories, this National Lock Company was built like a furniture factory and you couldn't put a heavy machine in there because you didn't have enough ground floor to do it. So they needed a one-story building with crane and so on and so forth in order to do any building at all, which we did. We made some big presses down there. Well, we had a salesman, they had a salesman in Indiana where the National Lock Company had their biggest customer. They sold Serschel-Loback and some of those big companies. They were making cabinets and radio came into being and that was something new then. This is 1923, 24? That's right, yeah. And they made radio cabinets because people bought a cabinet and then they would like to put their battery in there below because the battery operated and make it more sightly looking and that was a big field for that. And they decided that perhaps they should come out with their own radio and this salesman was a very aggressive man. He suggested to them, why don't you let us submit a sample of a radio? Well, they said, you're no radio people, are you? He said, I think we have the possibility, let us submit a sample to you. And they agreed to that. When he went home back up here and through his sales manager, his boss, he was able to convince the boss to do that. Well they decided it would be a good job to send over to the plant that I operated because it didn't fit in any place. I hired, I looked around for, I don't know whether I advertised or not, but I got around there were, there were many radio hams, you know, and I interviewed many of them, but there was one young man that was a quiet fellow, but I could tell he really understood what it's all about. He just, he understood really the basic of everything. So I hired him and we set up a laboratory and we brought out some new ideas. At that time everything was made out of bakelite and we made, I think probably the first metal chassis. First we made it out of aluminum, then we made it out of steel, just as well. And we hit upon the idea of, that was my idea of, at that time you had a lot of buttons to adjust. I don't know if you remember or not, but there was probably eight to ten buttons that you, knobs that you turned on. Normally it was not necessary, but they had them there. And so we controlled, made a split knob that you could tune the station with that thing and then when you found the station to fine tune it, you tuned only half of the knob. And I tried to get patent on it, but there was some infringement on some patent, not on the keyboard, but on the idea, split idea, split knob idea was some place in France that had a patent like that. So and we got that business. We set up and made, and that worked very, very well. We had a production line and we, they were start from scratch and then ended up in a chute and down into a railroad car. And we really were in the business. Well there was a lot of things going on then, a lot of lawsuits going on and there was a lawsuit to radio circuits and one company, I think it was RCA or somebody, that owned one circuit that we were using. And they won a lawsuit so we would have to bow to them and to pay a royalty to them to use their circuit. Well our boss wasn't going to do anything like that. He wasn't going to let pay anybody for anything. So he said they will quit. And that was a terrible mistake because the hardware business could have been peanuts compared with the potential we had in that radio business at that time because we would have gone into a radio, you know, right off the circuit later on which we worked on and partly developed when they quit. Well anyhow, during that time that we were in the business, radio business, I made a lot of trips down to Indiana. I would take a train to Chicago, wait for a sleeper to Indianapolis and that sleeper was dropped, the train continued on to Louisville or someplace, but they dropped the Indianapolis car sleeper off there at 5 o'clock in the morning, I think it was, and we stayed there until we could get off at 7 o'clock. Then the salesman from, who lived in Indianapolis, would come there and pick me up and we would drive down to southern Indiana where we, Bloomington, where this factory was located. We made a lot of trips like that. So I got to be very friendly with this man there. I was in his home and we became very good friends, which will come into the story later on. Well we had a little problem. Our boss let us, gave us for Christmas the possibility of becoming stockholders in the company and we thought that was a tremendous advancement. We just, to think that we could be, well we didn't realize then that that was just a trick. We didn't understand it later on. He was, he had gone, he was to the end of his rope financially. He owed banks in Chicago, he owed banks in St. Louis and he could get no money, he was up against it. And what he was doing, he was borrowing through us. We borrowed, as an individual, we could borrow money. And he would get money that way because his credit wasn't any good. But we got on to that trick a little bit and I guess I was the ringleader in that.