 We have the 28th of January 1987 and I'm sitting together with Arthur Lewis Nelson in Tewesby Alabama and he was born in Tewesby Alabama the 29th of March 1921. You had that back. So your father's name now, you were born here Arthur Nelson 1921 the 29th of March in Tewesby Alabama. Yeah right. And your father now his name was? Frank W. Nelson. Are you from Sweden? No I don't. I don't know where he was born. Do you recall if he came from Värmland or Tewesby Värmland? I don't know. I forgot where he said he was from. See my mother and daddy didn't talk about the whole country. They didn't? Uh-huh. And your mother's name was? Hannah. Hannah Brostrom. Brostrom? Yeah. And she was from Sweden? No she was Swedish but she lived inside Finland about 8 or 10 miles. Oh in Finland? Sweden's Finland? Yeah. Inside Finland about 8 or something miles like that. Uh-huh. Do you know when they came to this country? Did Lloyd tell you that Carl Lakeblad that lived in Florida that his wife and mother and my mother used to go to church together over in Finland? No. Lloyd didn't mention Carl Lakeblad lived down in Florida? No. He didn't mention. He used to live over here. Of course, their place used to join mine. Oh I see. And he, she came here when they lived in Georgia. She'd come here to see mama one time. They were just girls over there together. They used to go to the same church. Uh-huh. And Mamie Eisenhower's mother and my mother used to go to church together. In Iowa you mean? No, over in Finland. Over in Finland? Or Sweden. Well she was from Sweden though, Mamie Eisenhower's mother, wasn't she? Yeah but what I mean though, see, Sweden just lived inside Finland. Yeah but there's two foreign portals. She came from the western part of Sweden, Mamie Eisenhower's mother. No. Your father. Anyhow, they used to go to the same church or something sometime together. Uh-huh. Well, that's what they told you? That's what I was told. So your father, Frank Nelson, he came from Sweden to where in the United States? To Iowa? Well, he first come, he was, first job he got over here was cutting timber. Then he got a job on the drills. Where was that, up in the up north? Up at Crystal Falls, Michigan. North Freedom. North Freedom, Wisconsin. And he got a job on the drills and he knew so much about it, they just made him big boss right to start with. Uh-huh. So he was over the whole way. He brought the first diamond drills down here to Birmingham. He had twenty some odd diamond drills running around Birmingham. That's how, U.S. Steel, it was TCI back then, Tennessee Coal and Iron Railroad Company. That's where he got all these minerals and everything started. So he was married then when he moved down there? Yeah, he lived at Bessever. Readers, that's Bessever. And Mama wanted to get out somewhere, so Papa come down here and bought this place to build a house. He stayed up there and come home on weekends. So they married in the Swedish Church up there then in Michigan? I don't know where they married, in Wisconsin or North Freedom, Wisconsin or Crystal Falls, Michigan. I don't know. So what year did they come down here? In the 19- They moved down here in 1912, I think, 10 or 12, somewhere around. And there were already a lot of Swedes here then? Yeah. That's the reason Mama come down here. And they came to this place right here? Right here. So he bought this land then? How big of an area is it? He bought 115 acres. 115 acres? Was they all grubbed up at that time? All woods, just spot cleared up here and there. Oh. So he had to start to clear them himself? Yeah. No, he had niggers working here. He worked down with drill. He had about- he was superintendent of coal at McDonald Drilling Expedition in their headquarters in Bessever. He had to look over about, oh, I don't know how many drills, somewhere around 20 or 25 or 30. And that drilling job was for- Coal McDonald Drilling Expedition. Oh, I see. Those coal? Coal mining. No, drilling wells. Drilling test holes for minerals. Oh, I see. Test holes. Yeah, he was drilling test holes with his diamond drills. He had the only diamond drills around here. Or just about all, the only diamond drills in this country anywhere. Oh. So he had niggers working around here to clear up the land? Yeah. How many- he could employ a few of them to- Well, he had- he just had one or two all the time. One or two working here regularly. So they cleared the land and took the stumps out? Yeah, and then started farming it. What kind of crop did they- Well, back then they just raised corn and cotton and some hay for the horses, cows. How about the- they said that they raised a lot of strawberries. Yeah, they did a lot of strawberries and grape. Mama had a lot of grapes, but the grapes fell down where she wasn't making nothing off of them, so she quit selling grapes, dug them up, quit selling them. What kind of grapes? Were they eating grapes? Yeah, eating grapes. So you remember picking grapes then and strawberries? Yeah. And then you shipped them down to the railroad and- Oh, I've seen lines down there where they shipped strawberries, horse wagons. I've seen them two or three miles long waiting to get unloaded. Was that a good crop? A good- Good strawberries, yeah. So that's what they made a living on then? Yeah, that, grapes and- How many were you in your family? Were you the only boy? No, I had seven of us, five boys- Seven? Seven, five boys and two girls. And you were the last one? Yeah. And you stayed on there all your- No, I was gone from here. I've been all over the world, that's about it, a couple of times. What kind of work then were you doing? In the Army. In the Army? Yeah. I went all over Europe, just about it. Second World War? Yeah. I stayed in England 19 months, and then I got tired of it, and I don't know how I could get out without getting a combat outfit, so I done that. Then I got sent from England to Germany, put in a combat unit, and I stayed with them until the war was over. Then I come back home, and I was over in California, and I reenlisted for a year. I was going to get out over there and work, and I got injured, so I had to go to the hospital, and then they discharged, got me well and discharged me. And then you came back home after Tootsbie? Yeah. Well, I worked in Mobile, Brookfield, for a number of years, and I worked in New Orleans some. Then I worked with U.S. Steel 22 years, and that's who I retired from. So did you have another brother taking care of the farm then, or how long did your parents live? My parents, my daddy didn't ever do no farming. He just, you know, helped some, just worked some. He never done no plying, no chopping cotton, or no nothing like that. He had the boys to do that? Well, he had always had niggers there working. So they lived on the farm too then? Well, no, they were able to go across the railroad over there, and there were nigger quarters. They're just about all gone from here now. The big trees you have here in the yard, is that the pecan? Yeah. And they bear fruits, you can... Yeah, they haven't bared none the last few years. They need something, I don't know what they need. Oh, I see. But they sold that too then, years ago? Yeah, I tell you, I had a cousin drowned back in 1921, and my daddy, while he's looking for him in the river, he'd come home, and he'd set these pecan trees out while he's looking for my cousin, drowned it in the river. And it goes down here? It's the Coosa River down here, out from Clannock. The Coosa River? Yeah. So when did your parents die, your father? My father died in 1941. And your mother? My mother died, oh, she's been dead, let's see, 15, about 19 years. And she stayed with you here then? No, I had to have her in a nursing home right about the last year, year and a half she lived. So you were baptized in the Swedish Lutheran Church here? That's right. And converted? Yeah. Did they use Swedish then when you were young? Yeah, Swedish and English, had a Swedish service one Sunday and an English service the next Sunday. So were you brought up talking Swedish? No, I never did learn no Swedish. You never learned Swedish? No, all I learned was talk some Mickey and Pojken and Flicka, but I picked up German over there. I got where I could pick, you talk pretty good German. Well, that was because of the service? Yeah, I picked it up pretty easy. You didn't learn any German around here though? No, uh-uh. But there was a German settlement south of here, wasn't it? Oh, down. Further south? Yeah, down around, I can't think of the name of that town. German and Swedish settled some down there. I can't think of the name of that little town. Silver Hill? Yeah, Silver Hill. You been there? No. Just across the Mobile Bay? Yeah, I might have been through there, but see I worked in Mobile several years down at Brooklyn Field. You don't remember if there were any people from Silver Hill visiting Thorpshire at any time? Well, some people from Silver Hill, a man and his wife come up here for my daddy's funeral. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. So the Swedish church is gone? Gone. What happened to it? I don't know. It's torn down? Yeah, I think Walderman Lestad let it go. See, there wasn't enough Swedish people going to church to keep it up. Did they join the Nanny Church or what happened? Well, they just died out and left here. And how about your, you have four brothers and two sisters. What happened to them? Did they move away from Thorpshire or did they stay on here? Well, I had a sister who lived in Mobile. She died. She had a family she was married. And all my brothers, I'm the only one living in my family. I got some nephews and nieces, but I don't ever see them. So you are absolutely the last one? Last one. In Torpsby, Alabama. Right. Did they talk much about Sweden, the Europeans? No, my parents didn't mention it. My mama told me one time, she said that her and my daddy got together and said, we Americans now, we'll just forget about Sweden and Finland. We'll forget about it. We are Americans now. We think about America. You don't remember anybody visiting from Sweden? Yeah, Berg, Emil Berg, he went back to Sweden. You ever heard of him? No, I never heard of him. I heard of another one or two from where I came over here visiting. Emil Berg come over here and lived with a woman, Miss Graham, until she died. And then after that he went back to Chicago and then back to Sweden. And how about your sisters, two sisters now and four brothers, did they move off or did they? One sister did. One sister went through college and just come home. My daddy got her some good jobs. She wouldn't go to work. No? Just stayed here. She was highly educated. But she never got a job? No, my daddy got her some, but she wouldn't take them. She didn't want to leave home. Did she marry? Uh-uh. No? The other sister did. And they were much older than you then? I'm the youngest of the family. And if I live, I'll be 66, 29th of March. Was it good soil around here for farming? Yeah, it's good here. It's good? Yeah, it's good here. But I tell you, on this place here, these people around here didn't, back then, these other people didn't put no fertilizer on corn, just put sodium. That's what rent the land and everything. My daddy, he had fertilized everything. And he sowed cover crops like vetch and clover and everything. So you helped out with the farming, too? A little bit, yeah. See, when I got big enough, got out of school, I went right to work up at TCI. First, I went up there and worked for a man who used to work my daddy on the drill, Gus Nelson. I worked in a pipe shop there, and then he was a pipe footer helper. And then my daddy died, Elliot Henry, he was superintendent of the tin mill. He come down to the funeral, and then he got me transferred from the ends of the Fairfield machine shop. So I worked as a machinist helper there, so I got to be a machinist. Tool maker, too, or tool and die? I've been tool and die maker, pattern maker, I've been everything. So here in Torespin, there is no industry that the people could live on, there was only farming? Just farming. That's all there was at that time? That's all. And the strawberries, now when did they cease to operate as a crop? Well, I don't know the year, I don't remember, because I wasn't around here. So how many acres did your father, or did you plant the strawberries when they sold them? Well, the average person just had about one to three acres. Of strawberries? Of strawberries. About one to three acres. And how many, they had milking cows? Yeah, everybody had milking cows. How many? Well, one to two to three. Oh, I see, so that was not a big operation, that was just a few for household use. Yeah. There was no creamery in town? No. No creamery? No, my brother ran a little dairy here for a while, sold cream, but he didn't make nothing out of it. And your brother's name was? Jimmy Nelson, James, we called him Jimmy. And your sister, now that went to college, what was her name? Anna. Anna? Anna Nelson. Anna Christine Nelson. Anna Christine, and what college did she go to? Piedmont. Piedmont? Piedmont. Where is that located? Is that here in Alabama? Yeah, it's, I think that's the name of the town, Piedmont. Oh, I see, so we can pick it up that way. But she stayed home then to take care of dad and? No, she just didn't want to leave home. My daddy got herself a good job. So she stayed in this house then? Yeah. And she died how many years ago? She died, I was on 3-11, I come home one night and heard her breathing here, she died in this room, got the doctor here, and she died about two hours after the doctor got here. He'd been treating her for something, she had something seriously wrong with her. And you were all born in this house then? No, not all of us, just me and my brother older than me. Some of them were born in Reeders and Bessemer, and the rest of them were born in Crystal Falls, Michigan, North Freedom, Wisconsin. Oh, the older ones? Yeah. But you were born here in this house? Yeah, right here. Me and my brother, just older than me, Frank, we were both born in this house. How many acres is it? Is it still 115 acres? No, I've just got 55 here, but my brother's got 30 acres. If I could ever call his wife, she'd go give it to me. But I'm afraid I've got to catch her up there now. So you're not able to farm anymore? No, I've been able to farm. I retired from U.S. Steel in 1951, I haven't been able to do anything since. You rent out the land then? No. You just leave it laying here? Just leave it laying here and give a boy a hay to keep him having to hire a bush hog, let him cut the hay off of it, haul it off, just to keep him not having to hire a bush hog. Bush hogging? Yeah, because bush hogging has gone up $20-$25 an hour now. Costs a lot of money to have this place bush hogged every year. This cemetery now is in Toresby. All your brothers are buried there? No, I've got a sister buried in Mobile. My brother, just older than me, he died two years ago. He's buried down in Gainesville, Florida. I've got one brother, Martin, he's buried in Elmwood in Birmingham. Then I've got one brother, Nelson, and Jimmy's buried in Toresby, and Anna. And they're your parents? And my parents. Was it a special Swedish cemetery? Yeah. Just for the Swedes? No, well, there's some other people buried there. Norwegians too? Yeah, Norwegians. Well, there's some English people buried there too. Do you remember if there were many Norwegians there? There was mostly Swedes though. Well, there's quite a few Norwegians and Danes. What did you do in your spare time when you didn't work? Did you have dances? I never did learn to dance. I never did do that. I was an athletic guy. I played ball. Baseball? Baseball, football, fish, hunt. What were you fishing here? I got a pond over there. I got fed up with it over in Scotland. England, there's work over there to sew your tie. A piece of bread on a hook, throw it in the water, fish would swallow it. So taking them off, there's more work than water for them. Do you have anything that your father brought with him from Sweden? No. Something he brought all the way? Something he brought all the way. You don't have anything Swedish? No. No, not at all. So he became all American then. Did he write back to Sweden? Get those pictures up. That was Audrey Persons. Was she of Swedish background? No, she's French. Of French background. She was married to John Persons and he died. She was what, eight years when I married her. John Persons, Ronald Reagan. John Persons, you remember when Ronald Reagan had that general elected hour every Sunday night? Her husband, John Persons, hired Ronald Reagan for that G.E.R. Oh, I see. And he died and then you married her? Yeah, she was what, eight years. I didn't marry her. She came over here and married me. Oh, I see. She lived in London, Georgia. And she came all the way over here? How did you meet? Well, she remembered me and everything. She'd heard a lot about me. She remembered me when I was a young kid. I was a good ball player. Everybody knew me. And did you have any children? No, she couldn't have. No children. And you married her what year? 1956. She lived nine years. And I know that he did because I saw it. It was your brother Frank? Yeah, Frank. He run that outfit. He was a technical sergeant. He run it. Were you in the same outfit? I was with the 28th Infantry Division. And there's you. That's me before I ever got in the Army. I was taking the state fair. This old boy here, he got one of his nuts shut out. There's me at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington. That's where I discharged from the Army from. And this is me. And that was the end of the interview with Arthur Nelson, Toosbury, Alabama. End of interview.