 Cassette two, side one, continuation with Bernice Jansen, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. One of the things I remember that I've thought about so much lately, because we have a grandson living with us here at this house, and he is mixed race. Our daughter took him when he was eight months old. And of course we hear a lot about race, about prejudice and everything, but my father, when I was four years old, I was sitting on his lap, playing with his watch, because he had a watch chain and everything. And my mother was talking to us kids, and she says, she had lived in Chicago, and she knew that some black people were very violent and awfully hard to put up with in certain areas, because she had lived in Hyde Park at one time, which at that time even was kind of mixed up. And it was near the Chicago University. And so she sat there one day, and she says, I want your children to know that you can never trust a nigger, she said to him. At that time we didn't think about calling him anything else, because I hadn't even seen one in my four years. I had never seen one. And then she says that you can never trust them. And my father, at the time she said that, I remember he drew in his breath and didn't breathe there for a few seconds. And I looked at him and wondered what was the matter, and then he says, Oh, Hannah, that isn't true. That isn't true. Yes, it is, she said. He says, It can't be. I'm sure there's many fine niggers in this world. That's what he said. And that helped me to understand that even at that early age that I shouldn't be prejudiced. But it is easy, though, to fall into that. Oh, yes. But you see, that was my father, the one I admired most, who was saying this, and I believed him, and I know that he was right. Now, that's all true. Some have to learn by experience, of course, and some have to listen to what others say. But I think the Swedes are a little bit withdrawn. They don't like to give yourself out. You've got to seek people out. And, of course, en den svarta som en säger. So you think a little bit first, you know, can I really trust that person? I think this is what they knew. Well, then I saw him right after my mother had said that. Then she says, But, you know, I just love Pekinginies. And I says, What's a Pekinginie? And she says, That's a baby nigger. And she says, They're so beautiful. And she says, I just love them. And so she wasn't hating anybody. She was warning us because she had her self-experience. What did she call them, Pekinginies? Pekinginies. Pekinginies. That's the name for a black baby. I see, Pekinginies. And so I realized that my mother didn't hate people because of their color. And we would go down to the Wisey's, and in the elevator there was a black woman who was running the elevator. And every time we went down there, my mother would say hello to her. And sometimes she'd say something about the weather or something pleasant, and this lady would answer her. And I thought, My mother doesn't hate her. I knew that. I could tell that. How about the Swedes now when you were growing up going through high school, like the Irish and the Italians? Didn't the Swedes feel a bit restricted to combine their... Well, sometimes they did. I know they did. Because the religion was completely different. Yeah, completely different. I didn't feel that way, though. Your mother never told you to whom to date, for instance? If you had come home now with an Italian guy, you went to the dances, you said, at this... was it Lyron? Yeah. If you had come home with an Italian boy, do you think your mother would have been appreciative? Well, I think she would have been critical, or at least wondered, you know. But I never did. I never did date an Italian boy. But I got to be good friends with many of them through the years. Of course, they said they were good dancers. They were so wonderful. They were good musicians, as a rule, they were. If they were interested in it at all, they were good in it. And I took piano lessons. I did a lot of playing piano. And sometimes in groups there were Italians and Germans and French and different ones, you know. And I would notice that so many of them had a talent. But your mother never warned you for any different groups, then? No, she didn't. Except that one time. It's the only time. But why will I remember something that happened when I was four? I don't know. But I still remember it. So that's... But it is probably... the religion is probably the biggest step you have to take if you go from the Lutherans, for instance, to the Catholics. It would be a split. Yeah, but... You would have problems. I have... my daughter has many friends who are Italian. She has, oh, I'd say four or five. And she has learned so much about them, and she accepts them for what they are. But when my daughter got married, a couple of those girls were not allowed to go to the wedding. They were not allowed to go to a Lutheran church. And now they don't have that feeling. It's all gone. And we give the Messiah at Emmanuel Church every year in November. And I remember one time when I came there, there was a whole row of Catholic nuns sitting there. And I sat in the same row with them. And I said, It's so wonderful to see you here. We've never seen you here before. Well, this nurse, this nun says, We weren't allowed to go, but now we can go to hear the Messiah, and we're so happy. And I remember that too. Because you go every year to Emmanuel to hear it. So it's more open now then. Yeah. And the black people came too. And for a long time they didn't. But now it's a mixed group, and that's the way it should be. So years ago people were more restrictive, even the Swedes. Baptists and the Covenants and the free church. They didn't get along too well either. No, I remember. They didn't exchange the pulpits every Sunday. And you know that a free church was just one block from Emmanuel. And people would call them Fjärdeävnubuara. And think that they were ridiculous, because they loved to have real meetings, where people became very, well. They're all synonymous. Yeah. Almost like the Pentecostal. And in Emmanuel we were dignified. It was different. And they were against playing cards and dancing and drinking. They were. More strict than the Lutherans. Yes. Oh, yes. There's another person you probably know very well. The police chief, Bargrain. Yeah. He was for many, many years. Yes. From 1903 up to 1940, I understand. Yeah. Uh-huh. How could he keep going for so many years? How active was he then, really? Well, he was a kind of alert person that moved around easily. He talked a lot and had a lot of friends. So he was a full-time police chief then? Yeah. He was highly respected. And you had the constable Lindstrom. He was from Gothenburg. Yeah. He stopped the people all over. Oh, yeah. I think one of the... You remember him, too? Oh, sure. I remember all that. I remember before him Erickson. That's the oldest one policeman on 7th Street. That's right, on 7th Street. I remember him from 1923. Oh. Weren't they pretty snobby all themselves? In other words, there was a very honorable professional to be a policeman, I suppose. Yeah, they had them off the streets. Yeah. And they felt a little bit bigger than the regular person, though. Yeah. Did you feel that they were a little too strong on you? They want to tell you certain things what to do? Well, no. They respected them, you know. They tried not to do anything against the law. Yeah, but nowadays, you know, their respect is not there anymore. I mean, they spit on them and everything. But in those days, they had respect with them. Oh, sure. Always did. And you said your father, he got a ticket or almost got a ticket once? Yeah, well, for parking right in a place he wasn't supposed to ordinarily, but he was working in the building and had to carry his material up, you know, upstairs. So, of course, he had a park right there. But you would think a town like Rockford, it was not that busy street that a policeman would understand practical reasoning, so to speak. Well, Copp Lundstrom was sort of set in his ways, you know. He really changed him. Yeah, and he wanted to be the authority. He really wanted to be. So then sometimes it was good to have a busab in to put him in the right place. Oh, dear. But if they arrested drunk snobbers on the street, what did they do with those people? Took them down to the police station. And they had to sleep over them overnight? Oh, yeah. And pay a fine? That's right. Or somebody had to bail them out? Yeah, one or the other. But they didn't have much bail then. They had to sit there overnight anyway. But did they release them if they didn't pay the fine, though? I think they did in some of them. Because I know one guy, Lambert, he never had any money, but he has arrested a lot. He tore up the whole police jail floor. He broke off the water pipes and everything. Oh, dear. It was more to have them in there outside. Oh, he was so down strong, you know. He worked for the same contractor as I did, London and Grimm. So when he used to took the pipes and busted them down there, the floor would flood the whole jail. Oh, dear. How about things like this, now? Did they come in the local newspaper, for instance, Rockford Star? When a guy like that broke the jail up? Well, if he broke something, probably they would, but hardly ever, though. They don't come out to small things like that. They don't come out with arrests, even, or ordinary ones. It's got to be something special, you know, like somebody gets shot. Like a murder. Or something like that, before they come out. But like Boussard, you know, for instance, when he swung around his... They never even published that, then. That was never in the paper. No. So a lot of things were going on that I didn't know about. Oh, yes. But do you remember any fights with the... You came in 1923, now. Yeah. Do you remember fights with the Irish people, though, on the bridge? No, no, no. That was before your time. Yeah, that was before me. That was when the Irish and the Swedes had a fight. And there was the bridge, there was the battle. Yeah, there was the dividing line, you know. Yeah, I heard about it, that's all. The Irish, were they drinking as much as the Swedes, you think? Oh, yeah, I think so. Yeah. About the same. But the Italians were a little bit more... They sold it rather than drink. They made their money on the Swedes. So how about the pressure, no, I mean, the prohibition? Yeah. Was there good law, for instance? It wasn't good. You don't think it was good? No, I don't think so. Not that way it was run. Because, you know, to tell people they can't do something, it doesn't work. Not making a law like that. Just like the train to put in these laws about child abortion and so forth. It's not going to work. And no matter how angry people become, it's not going to help. I think what it needs is education, a real thorough education. When AIDS started, I realized that we haven't taught anybody, really, what's important and what isn't. It didn't surprise me at all that it was a killing condition. But I know a lot of people were terribly surprised by that. You've got to understand how the body works. So not every law is good. What was the other thing before they... To prohibit. That word itself. Prohibit. Deny it. They can't break it, then. Yeah, you can't... They're going to break it, you know, to see. Sure. It's like hunting all the season or anything like that. It's more fun. It tastes better, they say. But it was on for many years, though. 1917 to 1930. 31 or 32? 33. 33 was the one. Well, what disgusted me with that, I remember so well, because we went out to a few taverns one night with my cousin, Bert Nelson, and they had free beer. No, they didn't have free beer, but they had free fish fries. Fish fries, yeah. About five cents a glass of beer. But above every... See, I don't drink, but I went along with them anyway, because I was interested to see what it was like. And right above the bar, of every bar, was a wonderful big picture of President Roosevelt. And what I didn't like was that they changed the time. You see, when they had saloons, they had to be closed by ten at night. And when they had open taverns, they could be open until one o'clock, and then later on they made it till later. And that is wrong, because keeping on at night is what causes so many of these automobile accidents, I think. Because people drink and they have no... I think anyone who drinks soon loses his sense of time. And time doesn't mean anything, even if it's really important otherwise. It doesn't when he's drunk. And I think that's what's caused so much trouble. Don't you think so? Yes, that's probably a good reasoning, too. An automobile is a weapon, and many times we don't realize that, but it is a weapon just like a gun. The poor people, they should drive horses instead. They will take them home. There's a lot of things that go too fast. But so many things have changed now in the last fifty years. From 1905 when you were born and up to 1930, not too much has changed. The cars came in, of course, and the telephone and the lights. But the way of living... Your parents, they had an authorse and a chicken coop. No. No? No, we had a horse, but we didn't have chickens. No chickens then? Oh, no. But you had the barn and... Well, they were in the city, you know, they couldn't have... Well, you couldn't have chickens in the city at that time? No, I don't think we could. I don't think you could have anything except horses. Because in Moline they had chickens up in the twenties. Well, we weren't... we had the grocery stores and meat markets right half a block from us. It was handy for you. Uh-huh, so it was awfully easy to go to the store. But then from 1940 after the war, then it really took off in different directions. In the last ten years it's completely changed again. I should say. Do you ever read the paper, Rockford paper? Yes, I do. Do you... have you ever read the articles by this woman who writes about 60 years ago on the Saturdays? Oh, Saturday papers I don't read because... Oh, you don't. Well, then you don't read her. But she's good. She writes about... Reversing back in time. And she tells everything about it. And it's just so interesting. I just love it. So the age changed quite a bit. Did you work at any time then after you got married with Edwin here? I've never been a very good wage earner. I worked as... because my mother got me started sewing very early because she couldn't treadle a machine. She didn't have the strength, you know, the foot power. And so I started when I was eight. And I became... actually took a big interest in sewing, and I've done sewing all my life. I never buy any clothes, any dresses or coats or anything like that. I always sew it myself. And that has helped us all the way through, although I never earned much wages. Just the fact that I had this ability and could do it for my family, and at one time we were seven here, I was sewing for all of them, that has helped so much. Because you can buy material for very little money, but you can't buy ready-made clothes for very little money. And then you get it the way you want it, too. Yeah, and then because I was so tall, you know, nothing fit me. She and another woman had a dressmaking shop even. For a year I did. In Rockford? In Rockford, yeah. On 4th Avenue. 7th Street and 4th Avenue. But you went through the whole Depression. You married at 28 and went through the worst Depression ever, I suppose. Yeah, and I gave up my dressmaking shop, although we were doing quite well, because I had lost 18 pounds. And so I went to Dr. Irbum, and he says, You know that your work isn't good for you. What you do, your sewing, all day long, that's why you've lost that weight. If you keep on, you won't live long, he said to me. And I really believed him. So I quit, quit the shop and took a job with a Harry Green family over on the West Side. They had four children, and I worked for them as a domestic. Because, he says, you've got to have a job with exercise. You must have a job where you're active. He says, Do you realize that you are a restless person, and you cannot sit still for many hours comfortably? You've got to get up and move. And so I hadn't realized it until then. But then I got that job. In one month, I gained back the 18 pounds. Oh, you gained back that? Exactly, what I had lost. And so I realized I had been wise in doing what the doctor said I should do. And I think he was very wise to tell me. They were skin and bones. How was your political belief growing up with your father? It was, I would say, far ahead of his time. I always believed like he did. I believed a working person should receive a decent living, and so I had to be socialistic. And your husband, he agreed with you 100%. He went to good wages, too. Oh, yeah, but I don't think he's paid much attention to politics. No, he's always been close. But you said you know Westerlund. Did you know Mr. Westerlund? No, I never met him. You didn't. Well, they were socialists, too. And so, oh, about 20 years ago, we were at a dinner one night, and I met him. He had come back from he had lived in Connecticut, you know, worked there. He said, I remember something about you, Bernice, real well. He says, I was the half a grade behind you in school. And we were standing in the hall one time. And he asked to write a theme or write what we thought about something, and it was political, he said. And he says, there stood the teachers, Ms. Knoller, Ms. Johnson, and Ms. Herrick, and talked. And then they said, we must agree. I guess we all agree that Bernice Peterson wrote the best article. And I was never told that ever until that day. That was so many, many years later that nobody had ever said anything about it to me. So I didn't know that. So apparently I wrote about working conditions at that time. I don't understand it, but I know it was something political. So you were made aware of it through your father, of course. Way, way after. And then the Sunday school. How many years did you go to Sunday school there on 7th Street as a socialist? I started when the socialist one. I think I was maybe about eight or nine years old when they started it, I think so. And I went there until they didn't have it anymore. They just had it for a few years. Then they quit it. And then in the 1930, 31, it disappeared completely. Well, there was no Sunday school. And the club disappeared also. I guess it did because the socialists were looked down upon terribly. The church people were harassing them more or less also, I suppose. Yeah. They wrote in the papers about it. Yeah. But we had Reverend J.W. Johnson. And my father and he talked and discussed and sometimes argued quite a bit because we saw a good deal. But he used to like what my father said. And the last time Reverend Johnson came to Rockford, he lived in Texas at that time, he shook my father's hand and he says, Mr. Peterson, I love you and I like you. Reverend Johnson, was it Texas Johnson? No, J.W. Johnson. He was a Lutheran minister. Uh-huh. I see. He was a very fine man. And I was confirmed with his son. His son was in my class in school too. I was thinking about the Free Church, Johnson. No, no, that was not the one. The Free Church were so concerned about movies and things. They were very closed off with the rest of the world. Yeah, they sure were. Nobody liked it, really. Well, I shouldn't say nobody. But now they just turned it on completely. Yeah. Now they are very open. Oh, are they? I think they are. I've gone to some of their meetings out here at the Free Church on Spring Creek, and they do speak out openly. But they didn't. So one time we had a, I was only 14 years old, and we were having a Luther League meeting, and you belonged to Luther League until you were 20, you know. And one of the boys stood up and says, I think movies are a terrible sin. I think they're just terrible. And the over at Free Church, they don't believe in that stuff at all. They think it's very, very bad. And he kicked on it and kicked on it. And when he sat down, I stood up, I says, can I say something? I said, movies aren't a sin. There's nothing wrong with moving pictures. A picture is worth a thousand words. But I says, it's what's presented on it that can be wrong. And I said that. And then I sat down, and when we left the meeting, six of the fellas stood at the door waiting for me. They were all older, much older than me, like 18. I was 14. And they said, thanks, Bernice, thanks for saying it. You just said what I wished I dared to say. So I felt pretty good about that. Young people in your time were not as spoken, as they are today, for instance. Yeah, no, they had to sit down and wait a little bit to work. Yeah, as a rule, yeah. Yeah, as a rule, we were rather quiet. This church, now, has it changed over the years since you came in there as a woman? Well, I don't know. Our church hasn't changed a great deal. The hymn is, for instance, sung today, or they're as easy to remember as years ago. We weren't inhibited like they were at the Free Church or at the Mission Tabernacle. We were more open that way. But I can't see that there's been an awful lot of change. I'm interested in church, too, like Decision Magazine, see? That's Billy Graham. I take that magazine I have for years because it has many good ideas. I don't agree with him on everything, but I think what he's done has been wonderful. And just twice lately, they've had great big conventions in Amsterdam, and they've invited all the itinerant pastors, that is, the people who are interested in preaching about the Lord, even through Africa and all those countries. And they had many, many thousands there at both those meetings, and I thought that was fine. They're opening up and listening to each other. Rockfort now is a very interesting city with all the hundreds of churches. Yeah. It's a really church town, Rockfort. Everybody seems to belong to the Assembly of God, the Free Church, Lutheran, Methodist, and Baptist. And they're building bigger and bigger and bigger churches. Yeah, they are. How can they afford to do that? I don't know. Like, the Assembly of God is an awfully big outfit. They have two big churches. And they also got the kindergarten near them. They have that home for the elderly, and it's all so big. And they have big orchestras and choirs, and they're paying the choir director, I think, more than the minister. Yeah. How can they afford all those things? Well, the members are the ones that do it, and then they're tax-free, you know. They don't pay no taxes. Now they say it's going to change. They're going to get into it. But the members contribute a lot to it because they're required to pay so much even. Do you think the older people are paying into the church, or the young people in the 20s and 30s? Do they have the money to pay, support the church also? I think we're all paying toward it. Yeah, they ask for a certain percentage, you know. They're always sending you letters and asking you for more. More and more. But I like church. I love church music. I like classical music. And it fills a certain need for me up until now when I got this hearing aid. I am just completely confused because I listened to that great tenor when he was in Montreal, and he was singing in the Boys Vested Choir, and it was so beautiful, and I've always loved that. And here, the bass drums, all the bass sounds and those sounds drowned out the talking. As far as my hearing aid was concerned, that's all I heard, and I was thoroughly disgusted. So your children all went to college and could continue on education. You were how many children in your— Three children. We have a daughter and two sons. Yes, but you know you have one brother. Yeah, and two sisters. And two sisters. You were four children then. Yeah. One sister lives next door. Right now she's in Florida. Two sisters are dead. Oh, I see. You were six children then. The first one died many, many years ago. Well, we were actually five children. My sister Beatrice died of diphtheria when she was five. Did you go to college? I've never gone to college. Oh, and not your brother either? He took over the business? But then the next generation, they sent— Yeah. When my brother was about to graduate from college, from high school, he said to my father, I'd like to go to college because there's a lot that I could learn about the business there. My father said, I'm sorry, I can't afford to send you. But that next year was good. So when I was going to graduate— Side two. So the 20s was a good period for your father and in his business. Yeah, very good. And then in the 30s, something happened. Well, in 1929, he went to Mayo's and they told him he had cancer. Already 1929? And so he was sick then, from then on, more or less, until 1938. He actually took his life, but it was just before—he had been sick so long. He had been sick for seven months, not able to breathe decently. He sat up most of the nights and it choked and choked. He'd go to sleep and then he'd go like that. Oh, it was just terrible to watch him. He told me one time he drove home from the cottage. He said, Eddie, when I know there's no hope for me, no chance at all, I'm going to end it all. I said, no, no, no need at all. He said, oh yes, because there's no hope, no chance for me. He said, so why keep on suffering? He had cancer of the bowels and all those organs. And they couldn't do any operations like they do today, I suppose, at that time. Well, it had gone too far, but it all started through aluminum. Oh, it's terrible. And a lot of people deny that. They say this doesn't hurt you at all, but it does. So your brother then took over the business in the early 30s. Yeah. So he came into a rough time. Yeah, but he did very well. And after a few years, he built a house out in Love's Park on, oh, I forget the name of the street. And it's right on the river. And he sold this house. So he lived here first? Yeah, he built that. At the same time this house was built, that house was built, and they lived next door. They were just newly married then, you know. And so he built the house in Love's Park and sold it to May and Harry, right? And that's where they've lived here ever since, next door to us. But May is my youngest sister. And my sister Doris, her husband died several years ago, and he had multiple sclerosis. And she took care of him for about 18 years. He was completely helpless. He didn't have any remissions. He just kept on slowly, slowly, slowly getting less able to do anything. So when he died, he had been at that time for two years on a fluid diet through a tube, you know. And your parents never went back to Sweden again? Yes. They did? Twenty-five. I made that possible. I just graduated from high school not too long before and had had a few jobs in dressmaking. And then I told—Dad says he was going to Sweden, and I says, Mom, you go too. And she says, No, sir. I wouldn't think of going. May is only ten, and I couldn't go. I couldn't go. I started sewing dresses for her. Six outfits. And I kept talking and talking until finally she decided to go. But she looked awfully unhappy when they left. And they went to New York on a train, and they stayed there for a week, and they went to Washington and saw a few things out east. Then they took the boat to Sweden. And they were gone all summer from the first part of May until October. And she came home ten years younger, just thrilled and delighted with Sweden. Everything was wonderful. So they stayed with your mother's relation that is going, or? No, they stayed with my father's. They were mostly on Öland because my mother's people had all come here, you see. I see. So there was nobody left over there, cousins or anything. And she just loved everything, didn't she? Was your grandfather still living on Öland then? No, he was gone. He died in 1914. But I have many cousins that live over there and many relatives. We got a family tree that's full of them. You started there. That was a good thing you mentioned that. In 1942 you made something very unusual for that time. A big, big quilt, or you call it? Well, I call it a family tree, and it's just like a drape, you know. It's five byÖ It's six by six. Six by six. Six feet by six feet. And that took many years. So how did you get all that information? Well, my Aunt Emma, although she wasn't my aunt, her husband was my father's cousin. She had a wonderful memory, and she lived in Ö Not ÖÖ Jyöpi? No, Järnslösa. Järnslösa. She belonged to that church. And she had such a wonderful memory that she never got mixed up on people. So she had all the information, and my mother and I went over there, and it was in November. And we decided we were going to send a Ö draw a little family tree and send it to the relatives. And so we spent hours with her, and she made everything clear. She certainly was right there on the button. She knew exactly about everybody. And so I made this family tree thing, and I had somebody downtown make copies of it, and we sent it out. And everybody loved it. And then I made the cloth one about ten years later, because the little children, when they're six, and kind of started to read, they start looking at the family tree. We had it all in the chart form, you know. But one of the little boys saw Eric, Eric, Eric, Eric, Eric again and again. And he came to me and he says, Aunt Bea, I know you've made a mistake because there's just one Eric, and that's me. Where am I on that, he said. I says, Oh, no, there's that many Erics. The names comes back then in every generation. Which name is the most appearing on that chart? The one that was favored. Oh, I don't know. Eric was probably one of them. The first two, we are descended from twins, from Nils Peres. Their name was, what was it again? Anyway, these two twins, both of them, they were born in 1793. On Oland. On Oland. And one of them is the father of Nils Peres, Nils Peres, so it had to be Peres. And the other one is? Olaf Peres. Olaf, yeah. And so that's how, and they became Olson, the Olaf group. And so then the daughter of, the granddaughter of Olafson married Nils Peres. And so that was an intermarriage, and from that all this big family came. You have a different color, though. You have a pink. Yeah, well, all the little names are ironed on tape, on white are blood relation. Pink is those who married into the families, or also the ones that were adopted. There are quite a few adopted. And so those are all pink. And so I just made that difference because I read so many times that people don't know who their relatives are, if there's some kind of an operation that's needed where you have to have blood relation, you can find it easily on that. So you have made it easy access. I just did it for that reason. And a big thank you goes to this lady you talked to that had this remarkable memory. Oh, yeah, Emma, Emma Nelson. How was she related to you now? Her husband was my father's cousin, but she knew my father's whole family, the whole relationship. She was here in Rockport? She lives here. She did live here in Rockport. She lived to be over 100 years old, 103, I think. And she had all this in her head? She had it all in her head. Once in a while, somebody, you know, has a mind like that. They got it all figured out. No, exactly. Most people don't. About this homeopathic doctors now, Urboom and Olson, quite a few people here in Rockport remembers them. Oh, yes. They were well known. Yes. And we had them all our lives because my mother had always had a cough, you know, a dry cough when she got a cold, and she coughed day and night. It was especially the night coughing that disturbed people so much. And they never could get any help. And when she worked in Chicago in Hyde Park, her boss was a dentist, and he took her to Chicago College, you know, and had her checked out by those doctors there, and they couldn't help her a bit. And then after that she got married and moved to Rockport, and then a year later they had a baby, and she coughed and coughed so much when she had a cold that she kept them awake, you know. And so finally my father went to Dr. Urboom, cured her overnight. She never had a cough like that again. What was his medication then? Some tablets or? It was little pills, but it's all made from very, mostly from plants and flowers and roots and seeds and so forth, you know. It's not made from any chemicals. So it didn't disrupt the stomach then like a lot of medication does? Oh, no. The whole approach in medicine should be on the person and that person's symptoms. And in the medical world they don't stress that. They instead study the germs and try to give something that will change things there, you know. But the germs aren't the ones that are responsible. Actually it's the person's own, the way they're made and how they respond to things that's what's important. So Urboom's and Olson's theories now would be very inexpensive compared to the regular doctors. Yes. You think that's the reason they like to have all this pill industry? Oh, absolutely. That is one reason why. Now in 1875 there was a trial in Boston and they tried several homeopathic doctors of good repute, wonderful doctors. But they had sort of a trial in secret. It wasn't open to the public or the news media or anything. And they found these doctors all guilty of practicing medicine illegally. Without the license? Well, they had a license I guess, but they hadn't had the education that the AMA said they had to have. And so they just destroyed it. They made a rule then that you had to go and have that eight years of education. And after that you could go to a homeopathic school and learn and become a homopath. But who could afford that? That's why it all dropped off like it did. And so many that had been homeopathic doctors. They just quit them? Yeah, as they grew older there were fewer and fewer, you know. Urboom and Olson, they went a long way to go to school. You see, this rule didn't affect them right away in 1875. It took some years before. But they were beginning to feel the crunch of it in the 1900s. And Dr. Urboom graduated in 1900 from Herring Homepathic School. And in 1903 Dr. Olson graduated from the same school. And they were wonderful doctors. How did they come out now with the Swedish American Hospital and the doctors there? Were they buddies or were they enemies? Very seldom that ever they had a homepathic doctor come in and prescribe for a patient there. But during the flu epidemic Dr. Urboom had a few patients in the hospital and none of them died. That was during the 1917-18? In 1918. The reason I know that is because a nurse, one of the nurses told me that. She was Lou Bowman. Lou Anderson Bowman her name was. She was a student nurse at that time. She remembered it so well. None of Dr. Urboom's patients died. What did he do at all that was different than the doctors at the hospital? He gave these very mild remedies that went according to the patient's symptoms. That's the only way you can prescribe is according to the patient's symptoms. And that's how it worked out. So they brought on the fever and the... Yes. And helped them to get well. And when I was only six years old, but I'd heard about it all my life, see. I knew that I got sick, got the flu, and got better in just a couple days. And so some of the kids that were out for 15, 16 days I told them about it. I says, why don't you go to Dr. Urboom? Why should we go to that quack? That's all they said. And I says, he's no quack. Yes, he is. So that's the impression the doctors were giving everybody about homeopathy. And they still do it. They still say there's nothing to those little bits of medicine, but there is. There is everything in it, everything that's needed. So this influenza epidemic, he didn't lose one patient at that time. In other words, he saved them all. Dr. Urboom saved... But many others died, though. There were hundreds of them. Oh, yes. I have, you know, in my little book that I typed up, it was hundreds and thousands of soldiers that died. That was so pitiful that so many soldiers died. You would think the rest of the population would sober up and believe what they were doing. In other words, instead of calling them quacks. No. People to this day don't want to change. So many people that know I'm interested in this, they don't want to believe it anyway. But I've seen it myself. I've seen it happen so many times. And actually I have given remedies to a lot of people that it has helped them immediately. Now, I would never charge anybody for anything like that because I would never want to be sued for practicing medicine. But the medicine can work so fast. Well, that's when you short something for the services, then they can get at you. Well, that's one of the things, and I thought they'll never get that one on me. Never. Play safe. I have studied enough and have enough books. Are you able to get those pills now that... Yes. Do you have them in the drugstores? Not here. Have you seen her drugstore? No. In here, in my room? How do you get them then? Do you manufacture them? I order them. I order them from Earhart & Carle in Chicago. And they have a drugstore there. And that's where I went. I knew Mr. Earhart real well. And he was in the homeopathic... He had a drugstore that was homeopathic. Serving the homeopathic doctors. I see. And they're still going. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. And before that was Barrick & Tafel. That was also in Chicago. But then they moved out of Chicago. They're out east, more or less, in New York. You told me before that when you were young you always made fun about influenza and so on. You were influenza-in. Oh, that was just something that we children... You know how kids have little songs. At that time, they were singing... They opened the window and, influenza... That was just a silly little song that they sang. But there was the practice of today in the hospitals to open up the windows and get things... Yes, there was. And I'll tell you, there's one woman in Rockford. Her name is Roberta Lindley. And she was a Chalstrom. Her mother was a Chalstrom, Esther Chalstrom. And when Roberta was born, right at that time when the epidemic was, and her mother got the flu, and her mother died, but Roberta lived. And that was very sad that her mother had... She had three little daughters. Her relatives took and adopted them and brought them up. So when a person got sick now from influenza or a cold, and they couldn't shake it off, what was... the doctors, they prescribed going to bed and eating a lot of tablets and pills and stuff like that, or what did they do for it? Well, they would give you the medicine. Sometimes if they went to the house... A house call. Instead of them coming to your office, they'd come to your house if you were very sick. They made house calls, of course, all the time. And they took the temperature and all that. Yeah, and then they put in a little water, they put just a little medicine from a little tiny bottle and stirred it, and then they'd say you take two teaspoons every two hours or something like that, and then you'd get better every time. And never failed. Never failed that I ever saw it. And I saw so many that were taking it, among our relatives, our relatives. That was Ulbom and Olsson's... First it was Urba for many years, and then when he died, then we had Dr. Olsson. And it was the same kind of doctor, same thing. I've seen so many wonderful things with that that it's just marvelous. Now, my sister lives next door. Her daughter was an R.H. baby. No, an R.H. baby. Oh, I see. And according to that, the doctor says your baby's going to have to have blood transfusion as soon as she's born, as it is born, because her blood isn't right. Your husband's and your blood are not compatible. And so that's why that baby's going to have to have blood transfusion. So short enough, her babies were rather close. Each time it was a year and a half between, and she had three babies, see. And so the baby wasn't doing well, of course, and so she got transfusion. And then she kept having them every once in a while because she would be fine for a little while, and then she'd weaken again and get weaker and weaker until she was real pale and her nails were blue, and she couldn't even eat, she was so sick. And then they would have to take her and have another transfusion. That was 14 in all that she had until she was 5 months old. Then my mother called when the baby was just very small to Dr. Olson and told him about it. Well, that I can cure, Dr. Olson said, just like that. That I can cure, you know. He didn't think it was hard at all. So my mother told me and Harry that they should take her to Dr. Olson, but Harry says, no, we're not going to do that. That's too dangerous. We can't change doctors in midstream. You don't do that, he said. But one day, May kept going and having those transfusions for her, but then one day she thought, I'm going to go over and see Dr. Irma. It won't hurt any to find out. So she went over to 4th Avenue and 7th Street and went up there, and the doctor looked her over, and he says, poor child, to think you had to suffer so long needlessly, he said. But he didn't check her blood. He just checked her heartbeat and her pulse, you know, and that was all. She thought, well, gee, he's not examining her. Surely it won't help. So she thought, now I've been foolish. I've done a foolish thing. But then the doctor gave her one little dose of medicine right there in the office, and then he gave her a little packet of medicine to take home and told her how to do it. And then he charged her $2. That was all. And she went out and got the bus right away, or streetcar, I don't know which it was, and it was only going a couple blocks when suddenly that weak little baby that didn't seem to have any strength at all stiffened up and started screaming and crying, and her face got all red, you know, and she was so strong that May could hardly hold her. And just a few minutes before she was like a dishrag, you know. And, oh, she was so happy when she heard her cry. She thought, this is good. This is what she needed. And so when she got her home, she put her to bed and went to sleep. She first fed her, and then she put her to bed. And then she called us up and told us, I'm so happy, you don't know how happy I am. The baby's all right now. And actually, the baby never had to have another transfusion. Never. But isn't this today still, you would think, the medical world? They don't pay attention. They won't listen. After so many years, though. They won't listen. They say, oh, see, this isn't possible. This isn't any good. It just isn't possible. That's all foolishness, you know. It is not foolishness. Heck, we've seen it right in our family. So many transfusions. I mean, the... Fourteen. All that was terrible, and trying to find people they could get blood from. May and Harry were working so hard and talking to people and seeing if they could get more donors, you know, and all that. It was an awful thing for them. And all at once, she didn't have to do that anymore at all. The baby was fine. And she grew up then and had no symptoms of anything? No, and now she's a little over 40, and she has a little girl of her own who's just about three years old and very good health. They're both fine, both the mother and the baby. Where would she have gone if her baby had been in the same boat, so to say? Oh, she would have gone to a homopath, I'm sure. But are there any around, though? Well, you can go out of town, you know. There's two in Chicago, at least two. There's probably more than that. And there's doctors up in Madison and a little all over. So they have them. Oh, yeah. I'm going to aóthere's going to be a convention now on May 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, and it will be in Oak Brook, Chicago. And I'm going to it, and Ed is too, but he doesn't go to the meetings. But we're going to be in theó So he has your assistance then? Yeah. I don't want to let him go alone. He won't let me go alone because we're going to drive in that morning and early. He doesn't want me to drive all that. He is your second in command. If your medicine fails, he takes his. You know, he's been helped so much too. I remember you mentioned that. Yeah, it was those colds he used to get when he had the gas station. He got over them overnight every time. So a regular doctor never cured a common cold, and if it gets worseó Not like that, no, never. He explains a lot ofó Because he wrote a book. That man is not a homeopathic doctor, but he wrote that book, and it's wonderful because he understands it. And I met him. I know him quite well. I've met all those doctors because when they have the conventions, I makeógo and make themósay hello to them and say who I am and that I'm interested so they know who I am. It seems to me that this system is too simple. It seems like it. So people just won't believe it because of that. Yeah. Sure, that's it. What's in a little pill like that to do you any good? What's in those pills now? They all say sugar pills. They're all made of natural things. It tells about it. It doesn't affect the stomach in any way. I mean, you don't have toó Uh-uh. Oh, no. Uh-uh. Constipation or anything like that because if you have too manyó You can take it for constipation and for all sorts of stomach trouble, but it will help. Actually, you take the medicine into your system, and it goes immediately to where it's supposed to go to. And no reaction by any chance. Uh-uh. And it helps. Nowadays, you hear people talking about they are mixing so many different medicines, and they get rashes all over the body and theó Yes. I know many women in my age, you know, you would know, who take as much as eight kinds of pills a day, and they never feel good. They never feel well. They react against each other sometimes. They never get over what's been troubling them. I've heard so many complaints about that. You would think people would wake up, though, but the medical associations areó Well, you see, now, I've talked to many doctors about this, and nearly always. They just turn away or change the subject. They won't discuss it. They won't talk to me. They won't discuss it. Not at all. But Dr. Skar has understood some of it because I've insisted. Heóand goes to him, see. And I say there's so much to homeopathy, you shouldn't ignore it. And so he really has been interested. He's retired now, but I know that he knows a lot about what I'm talking about. So the doctors, they say that if they have treated a patient for a little senile several years and they can't heal him, and they go to a homeopath and they save themó Sometimes. The regular doctor would say then he would probably be healed anyway. Yeah. They would never admit them that theó No. They always complain about that tiny dose, that it doesn't do any good. But it's the tiny dose that does it good, you know. It's that you're prescribed for you. It's not just the sickness, you see. Ever since they made the microscope, doctors have just loved to look for germs, and that's what they want. How about the high blood pressure, for instance, is a common thing nowadays. Yeah. And a couple of years ago, too. That can be helped a lot. Through medication. Uh-huh. So Queen Elizabeth has a homeopathó Yes. Absolutely. The royal family in Englandó You would think they would shake people up. Yeah. It's more so overólike in Germany, there's lots of it, I guess. They started in Germany years ago. Yeah. Sure. Dr. Hahnemann was a German. 1755 he was born. This is the program that he's going to now. So they're going to discuss this then, and he's coming there. Yeah. So those are highó So he is titled MD. Yeah. This Roger Mour. Lots of MDs there. MDs, yeah. Oh, yes. Uh-huh. They've all taken the regular course, you know. They interfere, though, with the pharmaceutical world. You know, I'm going to sell more or less medicine. Even a regular MD prescribed this medicine because they will sell much less. Oh, sure. That's aówelló Johnson and Johnson. I'll tell you, you know, the drug companies are behind all of this. Even in 1875, they're the ones who helped pay for that trial, which is what it was, a closed trial with closed doors. It was never publicized or anything, but they wantedóthe drug companies didn't want homeopathy. They want medicine prescribed. So there was a closed meeting. Yeah, there was a closed meeting to get rid of them. Absolutely. They couldn't make it public because they wouldn't haveó No. I suppose. Yeah. It was probably against the law, though, to outlawó Yeah. It's a doctoróthe doctor that wrote that bookóI know his secretary, the one who did all the work on the book when they were publishing it. And I talked to him one time when Harlan came home and he had ulcers, and he's talking to me about it, and he says, I don'tó