 You see, in the last 30, 40 years, they have passed so many laws. There's so many restrictions, and there's so many things that unless you're familiar with all these things, you know, it's hard for you to make the right decision. You have to have somebody that knows what is going on, and what the laws are, and what you can do, and what you can't do. You see what I mean? So you have to, you have to. There's no way for a regular person to... You take an awful chance, and especially if you're ahead of some group. You need to make sure that you make the right decision. And even some of them, they're consultants, make mistakes. But this seems to be accepted, though. Yeah. But if you make the mistake, you will have it. I'll hear about it. And especially, like I said, I'm an import, you know. How has it affected you? When you came in, did you find the Swedes that were already here helpful to you? Oh, yeah. You were a Swede, and they were Swedes. They wanted to help you. Oh, yeah. They didn't feel like, hey, you're a Greenhorn, you got to call first. Oh, they'd probably call me a Greenhorn, you know, but no, I said they were helpful. And the American people also, you know, all other nationalities, or if they were American-born, I really feel that they tried to help me. I remember when I went to school, night school in New York, the teacher I had there, he comes from Texas. And I didn't take his advice, I guess I should have, but he kept hyping at me, keep on, keep on going to school, you'll learn something, and keep on going. I went two years, night school, and I learned something, yes. But then, like I said, the depression come on, and I had a job working nights, and I couldn't continue. So, but no, I felt most people have been helpful to me. Only some, they tried to take me, but. How about other nationalities? Now, like you worked with Italians and Irish, Europeans and so forth. Were they different than the Swedes? Do you have different ideas? Well, it did, yeah, naturally, different nationalities. We don't have all the same ideas or anything, as far as that goes, as far as living and so forth and so on. But the older generation, you know, my age, we seem to get along quite well, you know. We have pretty much the same ideas, but as the younger generation grows up, you know, things change. I think we have to change with them. And if you're able to change with the system the way it goes, I feel that a person is better off. Keep up with times, and let it go that way. Years ago, you hear often, they said, well, they tell me, that if you were a Lutheran and a Republican, you were all right. It was easy for you to get a job in the construction and in some cities like Boston. Have you ever been aware of that? I never really had any problems with if I was a Lutheran or what I was. No, I never had, as far as religion is concerned. But yes, as a Democrat, a Republican, it may have sometimes made a little difference. But here, a lot of Swedes came now poor. Some of them didn't even have the money in their pocket when they came here. A lot of them became Republicans. Why? Was it a feeling of being in the same status as being with the businessmen or big farmers? Why did they... I can't answer that question. What kind of philosophy did they have? They were working people that came from Sweden. I used to... Like I said, this friend of mine I worked with down at the case company, the one that introduced me to my wife here, he was a very strong Republican. Oh, yeah, he wouldn't vote for Roosevelt. Oh, no, he couldn't buy his vote. Oh, no. But that was his idea. So he probably inherited that tradition from his parents. From his parents. He came from up around Wisconsin, there someplace. He was born and raised up in Wisconsin. And the part of it was this, that when he wasn't working, he was on relief and so forth and so on. I don't know, but oh, yeah, he was a strong Republican. We never... I know one time, him and his wife and Hildred and I, we went in the same car to the election booth, and he went in the Republican and we went in the Republican. And we never talked about it. We went back home. You chinned each other once. We could have stayed home. But that's the way it was. I think it's a good system. There's nothing wrong with that system. But you know, in Sweden we have many parties that are representing. Oh, yeah, yeah. They will never work everything. I don't know. I don't know. Is it good enough to have just two Democrats and Republicans? Yeah, I think the way this country is set up, I think... It would be confusing if there were too many. So because of this one thing, that if we had, let's say, a third party, they would work for changing everything. That would be the same as a strong union. We have to try to grab everything we can because we're a third party so we can get up on top. They probably forget who elected them to the job they have. I think that is one problem with the two parties we have. Once you elect someone, you kind of forget until the next election comes around who sent them. It's like the letter I got from the headquarters of the UAWA, United Auto Workers. Because of this, we have bestowed upon you to be a vice president. We recommend that you vote for so-and-so at the next election. That's when I resigned as a vice president. You didn't have to be steered into any...? That's when I resigned as a vice president, when I got that letter. It was like being... Told what to do. And they don't go with me, especially on something like that. You've got to be on the team. Yeah. But no, that part I didn't go for. But I know this with some of the... I know quite a few politicians. I meet them at meetings and so forth and so on. And most of the time we don't exactly agree on things. Just last fall, we had a meeting down in Winnebago, and one of the representatives, state representatives, were there. We have made complaints about the state superintendent of schools. A lot of us people, not just because Democrats and Republicans, we're all sort of not satisfied with the state superintendent of schools, Mr. Sanders. A lot of us people don't think he is just exactly what we like. So we got to talking about it at that meeting down there, and so forth and so on. And he kept telling about that he was just an ordinary farm boy, born and raised on the farms up there in Stevenson County, and he can, you know, all this and that and everything. So when he got done, I got up and so I said to him, I says, how come, I says, that you, you say you're just an ordinary farmer like the rest of us. I says, how come, I says, how did you happen to get to be a state representative, I says. So he says, why do you want to know, he says. So I says, well, I says, I'm just an ordinary state, just an ordinary farmer, I says, and I kind of like to find out, I says, how you can get a job like the one you got. You say you don't have much of any education, I says, I don't either, I says. So I want to find out, I says, how I could get in there. Well, he wouldn't answer me. So after the meeting, he come over and he says to me, he says, well, a bunch of us, we were standing there talking, you know, a bunch of people were standing there talking. He says, what do we people have to do, he says, to satisfy you people, he says. I says, oh, that's very simple, I says. If you fire Mr. Sanders, I says, as state superintendent, and appoint Miss Martin in Rockford, I says, to take his job, I says, we'll vote for you forever. He says, well, it's time I got to go home, he says. Now, here is a guy that comes out and asks us, what do we want you to do? When we tell him what we want him to do, he's going home, he's getting late. That's the type of people we have. So they don't want to answer any questions, and they don't want your input at all? No, no. But it sounds like that. Yeah, they come and ask you for input. They call it brainstorming. Yeah. You can have your ideas presented at this meeting. Yeah, sure, but there ain't no guarantee that we... You don't go for those tall meetings. No, no. So you've been a farmer here now most of your life, and you've been satisfied with... I'm satisfied. Out there in the open country. Yeah. How is the ground here now? Is it rolling? Is it good for the land? Yeah, most of the land around here is top land. Not as good as it is down south, no. But we've got some poor land and some good land. And that's corn and oat and bees. Corn, bees, hay. But you know, in the time that I've been here, it's changed. Everybody around here was milking cows when I came here 40 years ago. You had a little bit of everything there. You had pigs and hogs and... And horses. Yeah, a team of horses and a tractor. Did you start off with a tractor right away, or was it a... Yeah. And a team of horses? I borrowed the horses off of my father-in-law, because he had three horses, and I bought one. And then we had two teams. And that went on for three or four years. And he helped me buy a tractor. Did he help you and tell you what to do when the plan was out? He helped me get started farming. Oh yes, there's no question about that. Because he was born here, or was he... No, he was born in Sweden. Where in Sweden? Well... In Småland? Well... down around there someplace. I'm not quite... But he came here when he was just a young boy. So he had Nuremberg experience? Yeah. He started farming in 1905. How did he settle out here? Well, his dad came here. Oh, so he came as a farmer then? With his dad, and his dad, he was a skomakare. So han had skomakare fap i Pekatanika. A harness maker and shoemaker. He made boots for the farmers around there, you know. Oh, Jungberg. Jungberg, yeah. And her dad, he started farming right in back of me over there in 1905. And I think that the year he got married, I'm not sure, but I think that... He was a bachelor for a while over there, but then... I think the first year he farmed he got married. Then he moved over to the farm over there, and the next farm over there, and that's where she was born, on that farm there. And he kept moving around, different places around Pekatanika. And when he got older, he bought that small farm down there by the highway. How much land did you rent then? 160? The first one I had up there, that was 140 acres. And the one up there on the corner, that was 120. And the one next door to me here, that was 170. How did you get that land? Did they get to all those people living on it? The first one I rented up there, he lived in Rockford. And he rented a farm out. And the one I rented up there, he moved to Rockford. He got old, and he moved to Rockford, and I rented off of him. And this one down here, he lived up at the end of the road. And he had owned two other farms there. And he was an old American fellow. Him and I, we got along real swell. And he got old, and he decided to sell the farm. Him and I, we were wiggling on the prices. I tried to get it as cheap as I could. You can't blame him. He tried to get as much money as he could out of it. One day, he comes down to me, and he says, Axel, you've been talking about you want to buy the farm. So I says, yeah. So he says, you give me $31,000, and you can have it. So I says, I've been talking about $29,000. So he says, well, if you don't make up your mind, if you make up your mind today, you can have it for $31,000. We ain't going to worry about the money. You can have it for $31,000. If you don't, I'd sell it. All the years I worked for him down there, I'd been trying to buy it off of him. And he says, oh, you're doing all right. Why don't you just rent it another year? So I thought the guy was kind of giving me a good time. The day after, he sold it. You did? Yeah. So all fresh, he doesn't pay off sometimes? Yeah. He got $33,000 worth. But he offered it to me, because he didn't have to pay no commission then, see? Well, that was all right. I didn't feel bad. You know what I mean? Because he comes down, and he says, you can have it. The only thing we couldn't agree on was the price. He didn't have any sympathy, though, for you, because you had to fork out $31,000. No. He says, you don't have to worry about the money. Oh, I see. So he's got some time on you to pay. Yeah. He says, you just make up your mind if you want to buy it. You don't have to worry about the money, he says. He thought he was going to fix you. So if he had said, I'll split the difference, I think I'd have bought it. But he was just as stubborn as I was. Well, I thought he was kidding me, because for five years I'd been trying to buy it off him. And he'd go, oh, you're doing it, you're renting another year. And so every year, you know, it was the same story, see? Except this time I got fooled. So you got a new neighbor then, after that. Well, he was a guy living in Rockwood. He rented it out to me. You rented it out to him, then? No, no, he wouldn't rent it to me. Oh, no. No, he had to have—see, I paid cash rent when I rented off the farmers. I didn't work on shares like you do, see? And he had to have a bunch of cows, and you had to milk cows for a living. Oh, I wouldn't do that. Uh-uh, no way. I milk cows, I milk them myself. I don't milk one or the other. So then I decided, well, what the heck, I might as well buy that place up there. So I did. There's a lot of farmers making this sharecropping, though. I mean, you pay— Yeah, sure. It's not too good of an idea, then? It's all right, if you like the work. But if you pay a thousand dollars a year for a farm, for instance, then you know you had to make that somewhat. If you got to give the other guy your rent from half of it, everything— Well, I suppose he takes a licking, too, though, if he has a bad year. Well, this is the way I worked all the livestock. I kind of worked on shares to a certain extent. But all the livestock and that stuff, I paid cash rent for. And I paid cash rent for the pasture. Now, the grain, like oats and corn or beans, whatever you plant, that was on 50-50 with the landlord. He paid for half of the expenses, and he got half of the crops. But hay and pasture, I paid cash rent for. Now, when I worked for him, his 90 acres there where the buildings are, I paid cash rent for that. I paid him a thousand dollars a year for the 90 acres. And the 80 acres that he had over there, I worked that on shares, see, and paid cash rent for the pasture. So that way, I didn't have to raise quite that much money, you know. The farm up on the corner up there, that I paid cash rent for the whole farm. So when you sell the crop now, for instance, a thousand bushels of corn, you had to show the receipt to the landlord? Well, no. You see, when I picked the corn, I divided it. Right there? Yeah. He was with you then? I mean, you had one side for him and one— Oh, I see. Yeah. And then he can do whatever he wants? He can do whatever he wants with his part of it. He might keep it for another few months, though. Well, this guy, when I lived down here, he had big buildings up there. So he'd come and take his half. I picked so many rows of corn for me and so many rows of corn for him. And so they was divided right there. He'd take his home and I'd put mine in my place, see. And it worked out just fine. So your son, when he got old enough, he became interested in farming? Well, he spent four years in the service, you know. He was in the Philippines for three years. And then when he came back, he went to college. And he tried out to be a real estate salesman. Didn't work too good. And then he was going to be a building contractor, and I helped him along with that. And that didn't work. Sometimes it's pretty good business and sometimes it isn't. So when they started to build a nuclear plant out there... In Byron? In Byron, yeah. He got a job there. He applied for a job there. That's about three and a half years ago. He applied for a job there as a security officer. And he's worked there ever since. Eight hours. So he is a... He's a security. So he is a part-time farmer? He's a part-time farmer. He works half of the farm. Would it be possible now for him to live on the farm alone? No. Even if he had all of it, he wouldn't be able. He's got his wife and two kids now. He couldn't make a living. Why is it like that? I mean, you raised your family on the same plot of land. Yeah, but you see, things were much different in those days than they are now. What we sell is practically the same as we used to get. Now, I know... Well, home prices are a little bit higher now than they were then. But when I lived up there on the corner back in 1946 or sometime on in there, I shipped 100 hogs to Chicago. I got $6,000 for them. They were $60 a piece. And at that time, I got about $1.05 a bushel for corn. See? Well, now, of course, I know you get $60 or $100 or somewhere around there for hogs now. But at that time, I could buy supplements for about $120 a ton. Now, it's $200, $300. We get... If you take the corn to the elevator, you would get probably $1.34, $1.35 for it. When I started farming up here, I went into diesel power. And I bought diesel fuel for $0.17 a gallon. Now, it's about $0.90. I could buy a bushel of corn for $12. Now, it's $62. Seed corn, you mean? Seed corn. $62. I could get a bushel of beans for about $4 a seed. Now, I think I pay $12.50 this spring. And like the machinery I got up there, I paid about $2,000, $3,000 for one tractor I got up there. I paid $2,500 for the other tractor up there. I can sell them. Although I had them for many years, I can sell them for more money right now than I paid for them when I bought them. If you're going to go out and buy a new tractor, it's $35,000, $40,000. And there's no way when we only get $1.34, $1.35, and $4.50 for beans, there's no way that you can make it pay. So, no, there's no way. If he had 150 acres like I got here, and he had a barn so he could milk 40 cows, he could feed 40 cows on 150 acres. And if he could milk, let's say, 40 cows a day, he could probably live. Could you feed 40 cows on 150 acres? On 150 acres. But you had to buy a lot of supplements. Well, yeah, there if you had... You can raise hay enough and corn enough. Oh, hay and corn and silage enough to feed 40 head of cattle, yeah, on these 150 acres. Milk cows. Milk cows, yeah. Well, you could feed, you could have a few young heifers to stop along with it. But, first of all, you would have to have the barn fixed up, to probably cost you $15,000 to $20,000 to get that fixed up. Those things didn't exist when I come out on the farm. So there is no sense of doing things like that? No, no. You just won't pay? No. There's only two dairy farmers, well, there's three of them, three dairy farmers in this neighborhood here, where all of us was milking cows when I started. So they are all in the business? That's all. So they don't pay any debts or anything? They are dairy. Now, that fellow up there, he inherited what he's got. His grandfather gave him $32,000, and his dad was worth a lot of money when he died. So he inherited what he got up there. That guy up there, he works on shares. He milks about 45, 50 cows. The other boy over there, his dad started farming on that farm the same time as I did. And so, they built it up to be one of the best dairy farms around here, and the son is keeping on. Yeah, he's making a living. There's a family down here, always been dairy farmers, and two of those sons are dairy farmers now. But that's the way it goes. And the farmer right here, he still farms? If the farmer likes— You hire out for plowing and chiseling and whatever you do, and hiring and desking? If you farm like I do, there's no chance that you could support the family on 150 acres. No way. So you are doing it only for fun? You like to see it grow and you like to have your hands in it? Well, I make a little money. But I mean, you're old enough, you could have a car and not do anything. No, I don't— You still like to be in it? Yeah, I like to be in it. To see what's going on? Yeah, but no, financially, I wouldn't be able to travel around the country because I just don't have that kind of money. Now that's all there is to it. I need to make a little money on this farm to supplement my Social Security. Of course, I pay taxes on this place too, you know, 23, 24 of them. But this is land of your farm then? In other words, this land here is of your old farm that you took off then? Yeah, well, you see half of the farm is on this side of the road and the other half is on the other side of the road. I got 74 acres there and 76 there, 150. And I sold a house and 13 acres to my son. When he sold his house in Winnebago, we built the house. Well, we built three houses, him and I, besides this one, in the 80s. And when he sold his house down there in Winnebago, he was going to buy some farmhouse or someplace. And I told him, I says, if you want to buy a farmhouse, I'll sell you mine. It's less money than the rest of the people asking for it. So I sold him the house and 13 acres up there. And then he feels like he's got some, and I rent the land to him for cash rent. But I pay the taxes on the whole farm. So that way, we get along. There's one thing with us farmers, you know, we don't get as much Social Security as some of those people that worked in town because they're the shops. But here you invest in the farm, though. In other words, there's supposed to be the nest egg. I got the nest egg, yeah. I got what's here and that's mine. It's paid for. You know the value of it a few years ago when you got the offer. I didn't pay too much for it, but... But you've been invited. So, no, I'm well satisfied. I think I've done... How about your sisters in Sweden? You've got two left. Two left, yeah. Do you have correspondence with them? Well, one of them, she lost her memory. And the other one, I communicate with her. Is it the one that lives down close to Borås? Well, my sister, she lives in Borås. The other one, she is in a home not too far away from Borås. And of course, both of my sisters had a boy, a piece. And my oldest sister over there, her boy, he died. And the other one, he's still living. Have they been over here visiting you? The sisters have not. The last time when she was here, that's about eight years ago, at Christmas, New Year's. And when them two sisters come over here, and we all met down in Florida. Because my oldest sister, the one that lives here, she lived in Florida. Her and her husband. So we had a family reunion down there. And that was the first time the six of us were all together since my mother's funeral. So they came from Sweden then? Yeah, the two sisters came from Sweden. That was the first time the six of us had been all together. And my mother, she died in 1918. Long time. Long time. We've seen each other. That was your real mother then? That was my real mother, yeah. We've seen each other, but we never was in a group until 1980, New Year's. If you had bought this farm, I mean, get this idea, you know, of being a farmer before your father left, do you think he would have gone off with you here in Winnebago? I don't think so. He was ready to go back? Yeah, I bought him and my stepmother. They both wanted to go back in a bad way. Yeah, they were just, he was just there whenever he could and thinking about going back home. Well, I suppose your stepmother, she was too old to come over here and get to know you. Well, she never learned to talk English, you know. And she got along fine on 7th Street because up until 1937, there were a lot of Swedes on 7th Street, stores, you know, where she could go in and talk to them old-timers. Like Swedes? She never wanted to learn to talk English. She didn't want to. Well, it was probably impossible, I mean, being that old. She didn't even want to, like us kids, Eric and I, she didn't even want us to talk English, you know. Well, they probably bothered her, you know. She couldn't understand what we were talking about. So, as long as I lived home, I lived home until they left, you know. And then, so, I lived with them because Eric, he got married before that and they left. He left, see. So, yeah. So, that's all memories now. Yes, all memories. That's all that's left. If you had been beaten up in Vänersborg, you might have stayed in Sweden. Yeah. No, I used to, like I say, if I got home, I don't think, I probably wouldn't run across anybody. But the reason when we started, the reason I was talking to you, asking you about your pastor. Yes. I remember when I was in the Army, I think it was around New Year's or somewhere, I knew her, you know, pretty well because we'd been together. So, I decided I would go over and she told me I looked real good in the uniform. So, you had a uniform then? Yeah, I had my uniform on, you know, and everything. So, I went over to see her and I was in the house and talked. Them must have been your dad. Her dad was your... Farfar. Yeah. That's right. Yeah, that was many years ago. Many moons ago. That was, that would have been 1925, I believe. Somewhere around in there.