 We have today 17th of September 1987 and I'm sitting together with Margaret Fredrickson in northern Minnesota. She was born 27th of February 1918 in Chicago, Illinois. In your father's letter collection there are a lot of names and I would like to ask you to describe some of them a little bit more in detail. Daniel Birgis for instance. Well I remember Daniel Birgis as a small child. There were two young women who came from Pocatello, Idaho. One of them was Doris Ritzman. Doris and Florence Ritzman came from Pocatello, Idaho to go to the University of Chicago. Their mother read Socialisten, Svenska Socialisten, and she liked what my father wrote and sending her daughters to the big scary city of Chicago was frightening to her so she wrote to my father whom she had never met and told him she liked his writings and would he please look after her daughters. They became like daughters in our family in a sense. My parents weren't that much older than they were but they looked after them and they were frequent visitors in our home and of course while they were in Chicago they met young men and one of them was Daniel Birgis and Doris married Daniel Birgis. And Daniel was a socialist and I don't know what he was doing when he lived in Chicago. Whether he was a printer or if he was writing for the paper. I think he was writing probably for Svenska Socialisten. I don't know. My parents had known, my father had known him before Doris met him and the marriage did not work. They had a daughter, Nora Marie was the daughter's name. But when the marriage didn't work, Doris went back to Pocatello and Daniel ended up on the East Coast and remarried. I remember they had a son that we heard about and I was surprised when I heard the name of their son. I probably shouldn't have been because Daniel was an avid reader. He liked reading Dostoevsky, he liked reading Ibsen and he named his son Ibsen Theodore which we thought must have been a pretty difficult thing for a child to live with. But at any rate, my father followed his career then as he was editor of, I can't remember which one of the newspapers on the East Coast. Was it that one? Was that the one that he was editor for? Okay. So that's all I remember about Daniel Billiards. He came to your home then? Oh yes. Yes. We visited in their home. In fact, I have one strange memory, a childhood memory that is a confusing memory. These young people were interested in learning and they were interested in the arts and they were evidently supporters of amateur theater groups. And I remember being taken to see a play that I believe Daniel knew about and his wife. And we went into a storefront, I can recall. I think it was a little cigar store. And behind that store was an auditorium where they gave this play that was very frightening to me as a child. I have no idea what the play was. Was it a Swedish play? I don't recall. I was very little. But the memory of this odd place going into this odd setting, just a storefront and behind this then was this large room set up like a theater and the play was frightening. What it was, I have no idea. Carl Bengtsson. Carl Bengtsson. He and his wife were very good friends of my parents. And he was with the Swedish American Line, if I'm not mistaken. Yes. But he was not a socialist though? No. No. I don't know. I don't think so. He was a... I think they became... A cultural society. Yes. They became acquainted through the cultural society. That's right. I didn't know them very intimately. I guess I know a little more about Mrs. Bengtsson than about her husband. She had a sister who made Ria rugs and we have the one hanging behind you there and the one in the living room is Mrs. Bengtsson's sister that made those. My parents bought from them when they visited Sweden. When my parents made a trip to Sweden, they went on the Swedish American Line ship. I think it was Grypsholm. And they had an anniversary, a wedding anniversary on board. And the, I don't know if it was through Carl Bengtsson that someone on the line was notified about this and they came to my parents' cabin and said, we understand it's your anniversary and would you like to invite some shipboard friends in for coffee or you can have it in the dining room or you can have it in your room. And my parents were very surprised at this. I can't remember which anniversary it was. I should be able to but I can't. At any rate, it was a very nice surprise and I have a hunch Carl Bengtsson had something to do with that. And I think my father also wrote up the story of that trip and talking about the experience on shipboard and it was printed in the Swedish paper. And Einar Andersson, the editor of the Swedish comic called the interview. Einar Andersson was a promising young writer and he was asked to become editor of the Swedish American Tribune. And I know he came to my father and asked for help and advice. Was your father older than yours? Oh yes. Also remember that we went to the wedding of Einar and Beate Andersson and we visited in their home many times. My father had real respect for Einar and it was a mutual respect. They complimented one another very well. And my father enjoyed watching his career, appreciated what he did with the Swedish American Tribune. So he was the owner of that paper? I can't remember if he was the owner. He was the editor. I'm sure he was the owner. And I think he was, I believe he was the owner of the paper too. That's right. I believe you're right. And he came from Henselund. And I think my father gave him his first instructions on how to be an editor. So he didn't know anything about that kind of... I don't think he did. I don't think he knew a lot about it. But he was an awfully smart young man and he learned fast. And I know he came to my father for advice often. And their offices were close by because the Swedish American Tribune had their offices virtually next door to my dad's shop for a while. So he could supervise it. And Walfred Engdahl. Walfred Engdahl was a socialist who lived in Minneapolis and he was involved in the carpenters union, active in union work in Minneapolis. And my father had, I don't know how he learned to know him. I don't know when they became friends first. But when my dad moved here to Minnesota, they would see one another quite often. And Engdahl was a remarkable man in that he was so very well read. And he was really a scholar of Stenberg. And I think perhaps, I don't suppose there was anything in Stenberg he hadn't read. He was also extremely interested in Swedish poetry. And he and my dad would share their love of poetry. And we have a tape of Engdahl and the Swedish poet from the east coast Landfors. And my father sitting here in this house reading poetry together. They had a real love for the Swedish poets. So all three of them were interested in that. All three of them were interested in that. Yes. So Engdahl, he never lived in Chicago then? I don't think so. We were in his home in Minneapolis. He had built his own home on the north side of Minneapolis. And it was a work of art as far as the carpenter work was concerned. He and his wife were very active at the Swedish American Institute. Mrs. Engdahl was a hard worker. And I think they really missed her when she died. She had been out in that kitchen at the Institute helping with many of the dinners and many of the affairs that they had, social affairs that they had. Did they have any children? Yes, they did. They had two children. And the daughter, if I remember, is a fine pianist. She lived in the east somewhere. I can't recall. And the son, I believe, still lives in Minneapolis. I'm not sure what he does. Gustav Larsson. Gustav Larsson was another one of the old-time socialists. He, and he was also, well, I think that he was involved with Buchstugen, if I'm not mistaken, the publication that they put out. Again, a well-read man, but undoubtedly one of the self-educated, as all of these fellows were. They, none of them had higher education, taught themselves what they knew. And he, too, loved literature, did lots of reading. As I recall, he was a rather quiet man. And if my memory is right, I see him in my mind's eye as someone wearing glasses. He died quite young. He had how many children? One, two, three. Sig, how many Larsson children were there? Gustav. Well, I can remember three. And the one daughter, Astrid Larsson, still lives in Chicago. I believe one of the boys was a musician. And the other boy died when he was still fairly, well, a young man, if I remember correctly. The Larssons were amongst the first ones to go out to the sand dunes, which we will talk about later. Oh, I see. He was the same age as your father. I think they must have been close to the same age. And I remember the deep sorrow my father felt when he died, when Gust Larsson died, because he died fairly young. And he was one of the organizers of the Educational League also. Yes, he was involved with the Educational League, right. How about Oscar Larsson? Oscar W. Larsson. No. And I guess that's another name I should have scratched off there, because I don't have a good enough memory of Oscar W. Larsson. But he was one of the socialists, as far as I remember. Was he related to Gustav Larsson? No, no, I don't think so. I don't know, but I don't think so. And then we have Herman Hallström, the mayor. Yeah. You met him several times. Have you been in his home? Yes. They were very, very close friends. And again, he had been one of those Rockford socialists that my dad had learned to know. And Herman was a stonemason. He built his own home in Rockford. And we visited there about two years ago. We went back to see the house to see if it was as nice as I remembered it as a child. It's on London Avenue. It was 525 London Avenue in Rockford, right. I remembered that house with real nostalgia because whenever we went there, it was a special occasion. And perhaps one of the best memories I have is a Christmas that we went. We owned no automobile at that time. This must have been in the 1920s sometime. And we took the train to Rockford. Herman met us at the train station in a brand new Pierce Arrow car. Herman, by that time, although he was just a very young man and had not been in this country many years, was already mayor of Rockford. And the city of Rockford had given him this car for a Christmas gift. He took us to his home. And because he was a stonemason, his house was made all of stone that he had carefully selected himself. It was a beautiful home with a big stone fireplace. And I remember sitting around the fireplace. And I even remember the Christmas present that I got because I still have it. I was given a pencil and a pen and a letter opener. And I still have the letter opener. And it's the best letter opener I have. I've received many since. But the one from the Hallstroms that I received at Christmas is my favorite one. I hope I never lose. Did his family also, including children your age? No, the children were a little younger. I was a little older than his children. He had two children, Irene and Roy, and they are now living in Texas. Herman was, as I say, a beloved mayor in Rockford. And he ran for I don't know how many terms. I've forgotten if it was served her four terms, something like that. And then he later went into the insurance business. He was an insurance agent. School in Rockford was named after him, the Herman Hallstrom Elementary School. I don't know if it still exists or not. Yes, it does. And another time that we went there was for another special time was for kreftsexa. And when Herman did something, he did it right. He knew how to cook those krefter. And he also knew how to dress his guests with bibs and the newspapers on the table, newspaper tablecloths. And when he finished eating his krefter, he made, he mounded the shells so that you had almost a work of art. This round plate, the shells were stacked up almost like a kransekok. So he was an artist. He was an artist. He also was ill at one time and had to be at home and couldn't work. But he couldn't sit still. So he began crocheting, I think, and he did hook rugs. He did handwork of different kinds. And of course, anything he put his hands to, he did well. He also had an extra lot next to his house. He bought two lots. And in the second lot, he built a sunken garden that again was a work of art. My mother loved it. And he had all kinds of beautiful flowers that he tended with loving care. So it was a showplace. He had many, many talents. What did they talk about, your dad and Herman? What did my dad and Herman talk about? Did they talk about art all the time? Well, you know, I remember them as a child. And so I went off and played with the kids. And I can't tell you what their conversations were. Did they divide up the family? So the women sat in one room and the men in one? Yes, usually. So they talked about their own... And I do recall one time that Herman would take my father to meet some of his friends. One friend was a Mr. Buckby, who was a seed man. And he had a big... He lived out in the country. And I... I was taken along, I think it was on... Well, I can't recall. It seems to me that too was at a Christmas time, but I may be wrong about that. And I have such odd memories of that visit to Buckby's place. Mr. Buckby had a Japanese servant. He also had a phonograph that was more like a music box because it had big... Well, it had... I guess it was a music box, but it had big metal plates like a phonograph record, only it had holes in it. And then this... It played, and when it played, the music sounded a little strange, but I remember them playing that. He also... When we came there to visit, there was a Catholic priest there. And Mr. Buckby had had too much to drink, and he made the Catholic or tried to tell the Catholic priest to pray for Herman Hallstrom, the mayor. I can remember... You know, this... Some of these are really strange things. Maybe if my father told the story, it'd have a whole different slant, but this is the slant as a small child that I got for this very well-to-do Mr. Buckby. I do remember that he wanted this priest to pray for Herman. Your father, though, he didn't touch liquor? No, my father was a temperance, you know. He was temperance. No, Herman was not temperance. He may have been at one time, but... And you know, during... The odd part is my father, of course, joined the temperance, joined the Gu Temple in Sweden. And then when he came to America and came to Chicago, he found a good temple lodge and was very active in that lodge up until the time of Prohibition. And then he became so busy that he really didn't have time. And he, as long as he had to give up his membership in it, then he would take a glass of beer or a glass of wine, but he never... He would only do that if there was company and it was polite to serve your guests. But as long as he belonged to the good Templars, he would serve no one anything. If they were going to be served anything, my mother went out to get it. And I remember mother telling of having to go to a tavern and get beer to bring home because she was ashamed that they couldn't serve a glass of beer to some of these people that wanted it. Now, mother wasn't a drinker either. I mean, she'd take a glass of wine, but she was no heavy drinker. Not like Mr. Buckbee? No, Mr. Buckbee evidently had plenty. So you remember Herman Halston then? I remember him very... And he was a kind... I really liked Herman. We went to his son's wedding and he still had his lovely garden. His wife had been dead for some time. She died when she was very young too. So he raised his children by himself, really. And we went to the son's wedding and he went out into the garden and picked a beautiful flower for me, a begonia. He raised two begonias and this was a huge, gorgeous begonia that he pinned on my dress. And I was wearing a white dress and I remember it showed off so beautifully. Do you remember if they talked Swedish between them, your father and Herman? I would think so. Yes, I think so, most of the time. As the years went by, it probably became English more often. I know the Halston, they came incidentally for our wedding, didn't they? Yeah, I think so. But it seems to me Ruth was dead by then. I guess it was Herman and the kids that came for our wedding. But so the contact kept on through the years as long as Herman lived. Hjalmar Björk, did you... Hjalmar Björk was a poet. A poet, yeah. And my father had real respect for Hjalmar Björk. I remember him as a short person, not very tall, if my memory is correct. What kind of work was he doing? I'm not sure. I don't remember what he did. And I didn't know him well. I just, I knew of my father's regard for him. I guess that's most of what I remember about Hjalmar Björk. And this lady, you know, Ebba P. Blood-Hendrickson, she was a writer or author. She never visited your home though? My parents became acquainted with her after I left Chicago. So I just remember that my father kept up correspondence with her. They wrote very frequently. She was a... she had made a trip to Rome and had written a book about this. That's one thing I can remember about her. But I don't know a whole lot about her. And there is also in your father's correspondence, Mrs. Lyon. She is a frequent letter writer. Who was she? Was she a Swedish lady? No. When my mother came to Chicago, my father met her at the train station. She had met, my father and my mother had met on the boat coming over. Mother went to New Haven, Connecticut with a friend who had told her to come to America in the first place because the streets were paved in gold. And she would surely then have enough money in a year's time to go back and her parents could retire. Mother was a very truthful person and as a result she was a very gullible person. She believed what people told her. And this lady came dressed very nicely so she was sure this was true. Well, she met my dad on the boat. My dad was going to Canada. And he... I evidently fell in love with my mother right away and he did not want to lose contact with her. So I even have the first letter he wrote to her, which he wrote on the ship stationary but bailed from Canada. They kept up correspondence and he could understand that mother was very unhappy in New Haven. She was too proud to go home and to say she'd made a mistake. And when my dad came back to Chicago he wrote and suggested she come there. And so knowing only my dad and his cousin who had been on the boat, she trusted them and came. And I guess it was my dad's cousin that had found a place for mother to live. And in that home the young man, it was a Swedish family, and the young man in the family was working in a grocery store on the Gold Coast. Down near Sheridan Road and that area farther, a little bit farther south. And I think he was working in a grocery store on Clark Street, which was near the Gold Coast. Mrs. Lyon came into the grocery store to shop and she had asked him, if you know of any Swedish girl that could take care of my house for me, let me know. And he said he knew one right away and sent my mother to her. And mother worked for her for many, many years. When she first started to work for her, she lived right there, of course. And then my dad would come to visit and Mrs. Lyon, who was, her name was Geneva Erickson Lyon. She married Cooper Lyon. She had been born in La Crosse, Wisconsin to a Norwegian immigrant family and had come to Chicago and gotten established in the business world. And when she was, of course, a pretty conservative person being in the business world, in finance, really. And when she saw that my mother was going with a socialist, she was pretty worried about that. Tried her darndest to divide them up and see that this never got too serious, but she couldn't dissuade my mother. And when mother married my dad, she was a little disappointed, but she and her husband gave the reception for my parents. It was a very small wedding and they were treated to dinner at a place called The Tavern, which was evidently a very fine restaurant in Chicago at the time. And then, of course, my mother no longer lived at her house, but my parents got an apartment on Clark Street and that's where I was born. I think my mother was the type of person who respected a person's privacy. And if someone told her that they didn't want something told, my mother would never utter a word about it. You could trust my mother. Well, I think Mrs. Lyons' marriage was starting to fall apart. My mother in all the years never really told me about it. I could only guess. But the Lyons gave up their apartment and even came and lived with us for a while, for a short while while I was little. The two of them lived with us for a while. The next thing I knew, he had moved to St. Louis. He was involved in some sort of business there, and I just assumed he was there for business purposes. But he never did come back to Chicago to stay. I don't think they were ever divorced, but that was pretty much the end of Mr. Lyons as far as I know. Mrs. Lyons became like a second mother to me. She took much more of an interest in us than just a maid, just a servant and the lady of the house, so that the contact lasted their lifetime. In fact, I think my mother and Mrs. Lyons were like the very oldest friends. And I know my mother was, even after my parents moved here, Mrs. Lyons would call once a week to talk to my mother. And in Chicago, I don't think it was—it was every other day, I'm sure, she talked to her on the phone, even long after she left her. She learned to respect my dad, in spite of the fact that he was a socialist and later became a Roosevelt Democrat, and she hated Roosevelt with a passion, but she had a respect for my father. And they became very good friends, ultimately. I think she felt my mother had not made a bad choice. Was there any age difference between your dad and Mrs. Lyons? My mother—no, there was very little. I think Mrs. Lyons was probably about two years older than my mother. She ultimately—she started out as a secretary, and she ultimately became the financial advisor for a very wealthy family in Chicago. When she died, she had an estate of over a million dollars herself. The interview continues on the next slide. Next slide. Sorry to— She had a sad childhood because her mother died when she was quite young. Her older sister realized that when the father remarried, he remarried a woman that was very cruel to the children. And her sister Martina saw that Geneva had a strong will, and she knew those two female personalities were not going to click, so she said to the father, You've got to get Geneva out of the house. And they sent her then to a Catholic convent on Lake Pepin, and she went to school there for her high school education. In Wisconsin? No, Lake Pepin here in Minnesota. Oh, here in Minnesota. It was Villa Maria, it was called. The sisters there gave her a fine background in business education, evidently. She stayed there, evidently, through her high school years, and she didn't even come home in the summertime because the stepmother was so mean. And when she graduated from there, then she and a friend of hers went off to Chicago to look for work, and she really made her way. She had nothing more than that high school education. And she was not a follower of Mr. Roosevelt? No, she was an ardent, she thought the world and all of Hoover. He was her ideal, and she was a solid Republican all of her life. And my father and Mrs. Lyon would argue politics, but neither one ever changed the other one's mind. My dad, he wrote in one of the articles about sand dunes, PIR group, Krimper samman, alt mer. In other words, they're getting smaller and smaller. You remember that, or when your dad and mother? Went to the sand dunes. Went to the sand dunes. When did they do it, in the height of the summer, or? Yes, in the summertime. Summertime. Several of their friends built cabins in the sand dunes of Indiana. This property was owned by the consumer coal and ice people. They would not sell the property, but people could lease property there. The sand dunes were a very unique place in Indiana. In fact, so unique that years later, Senator Paul Douglas tried very hard to have it made into a national park. The vegetation there was so unusual. You would find cactus, you would find pine trees, you found vegetation that you could find in so many different climates. Somehow or other, all of these things grew there in the sand dunes. Where was it located? It was located, do you know where Burns Ditch is? Yes. It was from, it started probably like where Burns Ditch is, and went, which direction would that be? When you get down around the end of the lake, I can't think of what direction, toward Michigan City. That direction, toward Michigan City. It was in Indiana. It was in the Indiana dunes. The sand hills were pure, beautiful, white sand. The beach was unbelievable. You could walk way out to the sandbar, went so far out. Once in a while it would drop off, and then you'd come to a sandbar again. It was an ideal place for children, just wonderful. The Swedes, with their love of nature, found this a really little heaven on earth. Some of the friends then built homes there. Like summer cottages? Summer cottages. In order to do this, they had to get their material, it was about a mile or two, I don't know how far it was. It took an hour for us to walk from where you parked the car to get down to the beach. One hour? It must have taken us a good hour. There was a grocery store down along the beach, but I can remember when we would go, it would usually be to spend a week or two. My dad could never spend, he'd come for weekends. He never could spend that long a time. When we first went out there, there was no way to get down to the beach except to walk. The only time that you could ride was if someone was sick, or if you were bringing a lot of equipment down to build a house or something. Then the old charlison, who owned a farm up near the railroad track, where you would come by train, get off there, and then you'd walk. Charlison had a farm up there, and he had a team of horses and a wagon. I can remember once being down there, and a good friend's daughter got appendicitis, and charlison had to come and take her with a team of horses to the train so they could get to Chicago. The kid didn't die before she got to Chicago, I don't know, but she didn't. But at any rate, that's the way I suppose the materials for building those cabins was brought down to the beach. That's the only way they could have gotten things there. They were not elaborate cabins, and you had the little outhouse and no electricity, and a pump. Martin Sundstrom's had one cabin, and that was one family. Again, he was another good socialist, also an Education League friend, and a member of the Painters' Union, an officer, I think, in the Painters' Union. His cabin was up on the top of one of the dunes. How he built that, I have no idea. Even at a stone fireplace, I can't understand how. But we spent time up there, but they couldn't have any water up there because it was up on top of a high dune. So we had to hike down to the beach where the pump was and then carry the water up that hill. How my mother, who worked hard during the week for Mrs. Lyon, she'd go twice a week to her house, even after I was born, how she could think this was a vacation, I have no idea. And I don't think she did. She did it for me because it was such a wonderful experience for me. So how many families were there then when you were in the field? The Sundstroms had a cabin there. The Gust Larsons had a cabin there. The Oscar Borgs had a cabin there. And we were in all three of those cabins at one time or another. We would rent for a week or two from them. I don't think we ever rented from Borgs because the Borg family was there the whole summer long. Another family that would come were the Lindbergs, and they ultimately bought the house and built in Ogden Dunes and lived there. But those were the families that I remember. So this land, they was rented then? They could only rent it. Ultimately, when Senator Douglas wanted so badly to make it into a national park, one of the steel mills wanted to buy the land. And the people in Indiana said, Oh, yeah, these people from Illinois want to make it into a national park, but if we can make a steel mill there and make money on it, this is what we're going to do. And that's what happened. So that gorgeous area was turned into steel mills. So there was completely... It's gone. It's gone. And now I don't know what's happened to steel mills either. It's just a shame. He had foresight, and the people of Indiana did not. But it was a very nostalgic experience for us kids to be there in the dunes. How many kids were there? Oh, gosh. The Borg family, they had three. The Larson family, there were three. Sundstrom's had one. He would come there with the Johnsons and the Blumgrens and the Templemans. So we were not, we didn't, any of us have cabins, but we were part of the group that would go there. Templeman was my dad's cousin, the one he came to America with. And, of course, Larson and Sundstrom and Borg were all members of the educational league too. So they had good times together. How many years did you travel on there in the summers? As a child, we would go every summer for a little while. And then as I got older, after we were married, I remember going to visit the Borg family just for a weekend. And then because it was such a very favorite spot of mine, we went, we rented a cabin, Sig and I rented a cabin after our oldest son was born. It happened to hit a week when it was cold and rainy the whole week, a terrible disappointment. But at any rate, I loved that place. So the land was still in the 60s then? It would have been in the 40s, well, maybe early 50s. And I think it was probably sometime in the 50s or 60s that the steel mill was built. I'm not sure. I don't remember. I remember signing petitions supporting Senator Douglas. And I don't recall now when that ultimately happened. But the big business took over? Big business took over, yeah. You're talking about coal business now. How about Lautenschlagel? He was one of your neighbors. Our next door neighbor was Mr. Lautenschlagel, right. And he had a coal business on Crawford Avenue, which is now called Pulaski Road. And they were a nice young family, and that was his business. That's all. We were good neighbors. And were there a lot of Swedes on your block? Where we lived in Chicago? Oh, no. There were very few. Very few? Very few Swedes. There were no Swedes earlier then? Oh, no. My aunt and uncle lived a block from us. There was a family by the name of Johnson behind us. I don't know if there were any other Swedes in the neighborhood. Why did they select to live there, your parents? It was, the little neighborhood was being developed. Well, when we, first we lived on Clark Street. And then my dad decided that it really was, the rent was being raised every year. Was it down at Belmont? No, it was near Montrose. Oh, Montrose. Montrose and Clark. When they first moved in there when they were married, it was quite a new building, a very nice, they had a very nice apartment there. But the rent kept going up. And it just seemed wise to buy a house. Well, at that time my aunt and uncle had been married, my mother's sister, and they too wanted to buy a house, but they didn't have enough money and neither did my dad, so they decided to buy a house together. And they bought a house on Somerdale Avenue, up in the Somerdale District. They lived together for a year. My cousin was born while we were living there. But that was hard with two families living together. Obviously, after Harvey was born, it was just not enough room. So I don't know which one of them found this little neighborhood where we ultimately bought our house, but my uncle and aunt bought a house a block from us. And it was a very small neighborhood, and I think it probably appealed to my mother because it was like being out in the country. It was, the neighborhood consisted of three blocks, and each block was a block and a half long. On one side was the Montrose Cemetery. That was south of the neighborhood, was Montrose Cemetery. To the east of the neighborhood was the Chicago Municipal Tuberculosis Sanitarium. Across the street from that, south of the Tuberculosis Sanitarium, was the Bohemian Cemetery. Next to our houses, north and west, was a huge prairie that belonged to the Montrose Cemetery, but they said they were never going to ever use it, and so this land laid just a nice prairie. Beyond the prairie was a Jewish cemetery, so there was no more building that was going to happen around there. And when you came out to our neighborhood, the air was fresh and clean from all these trees and no other houses. It was a good neighborhood. It was a good neighborhood, yes. Was it called Brinford? It was called Brinford Park. And this was in the 30s then they bought this place? In the 20s. 26 was it? Well, no, it was 24. It must have been 1924. No, I attended first grade on Somerdale, and I started second grade then when we came to our little neighborhood. I had to go to a portable school. There was no school available for us, so they put up some portables, and that was to be temporary. It lasted through sixth grade for me. That's where I went from second through sixth grade. And the Depression didn't hit too hard, and your parents were able to keep up the payments? Yes. The house that they bought was a two-story house, so there was an apartment on the second floor, and they rented that out. However, the people that rented it were hit very hard by the Depression, and they were not able to pay the rent. And somehow or other, I don't know how my dad managed, but he seemed to keep his business, and the business prospered a little bit in spite of the Depression. I don't know how. So he was able to keep it. He's the one that I should tell you a little more about Oscar W. Larson. The only thing I remember is that he and his wife—his wife's name was Margit— and I think they had a daughter, and they moved to—was it Salt Lake City or someplace west? And I remember when they moved, Mrs. Larson gave my mother a set of glasses that I still have. They were so thin. They were like paper. And I don't know if she'd gotten them in Sweden or where she had gotten them, but she was afraid they would break, and she gave them to my mother. And you still have them? And I still have them. Because of the quality? I'll have to show them to you. Martin Sundström? Yes, Martin Sundström was another one of the old socialist friends, and he also was very active in the Swedish Educational League. He was chairman of the Educational League for some time. But he—when the socialists—after the Russian Revolution, some of the socialists became real Russian sympathizers. And my dad was very leery of this because he was realizing that they were not following democratic principles, but they were becoming a dictatorship. And there were a number of socialists who felt that this was wrong, and they couldn't follow the Russian pattern. So they tried to get the Socialist Party to denounce the Russian way and concentrate on social democracy, and they didn't win out. Martin Sundström was one of those that had communists—was a communist sympathizer. And he then stayed with the Socialist Party, and my father broke. But in later years, I think he was always sympathetic to what the Russians were hoping to do. I don't know what he thought of some of the things that Stalin did, and so forth. I can't imagine he was happy with that. He was—when he was chairman of the Educational League, I think he tried to get more radical speakers than they— they had quite a balanced group of speakers, always. But I think Martin favored those that were a little more on the radical side. He ultimately moved to Florida, and I thought that the place that they built was where the painters' union had property in Florida. We went to visit his wife a few years ago. Betty died just recently. We went down to see her. She had a lovely home in Winter Park, Florida. And I said to her something about this was where the painters' union— No, no, she said it was the communists that had this place. Now, how that could be, I don't know. With the McCarthy stuff and all that kind of business, I have no idea how the communists could have a place. I didn't go into it with her, so I don't know, but that was my understanding. Yes, they have a son, and he lives in Florida now, too. In Winter Park, too? In—yes. Do you remember— there were two people in Rockford, David Killeen and Harry Anderson? No, I didn't know them. So they were probably later than— Could be, but I don't— —in the 40s and— I don't—I didn't know them. —in the 40s and— Uh-huh, uh-huh. But they are not—doesn't connect any memory. No. And that was the end of the interview with Margaret Fredrickson, Northfield, Minnesota. And we have 17th of September, 1987. End of interview. September 17th, 1987. End of interview.