 My father Gustav Adiff Grantqvist came to this country arriving in New York City April 24, 1902 from Grönäs Sundomål, Varmland, Sweden. He and his friends settled in Ludlow, Pennsylvania where he worked in a tanning factory. They used oxblood for tanning officers boots at ten cents an hour. The first payday he bought a pair of patent leather shoes, wore them to an all night dance, wore holes in his nice shoes and that was it. Most of the old Varmland friends were in the northwest, particularly in Portland, Oregon. So that was it. He was on his way. He went to work in one of the big saw mills to get started but it was too tedious for him so he went fishing in Astoria, Oregon. He trolled the bar. They used to get 800 pound sturgeon and used horses to roll them in. Then took the fish down the Columbia River to the Willamette where an English canning boat was and sold the sturgeon at six cents a pound. Being a seasonal venture decided to be a carpenter and become a trade unionist and was known as Labor Temple Gus. He was real up to his death January 24, 1976. He was married twice. His first wife passed away February 8, 1920. He then sent for his second wife, Emilie Skuglund, his childhood sweetheart. She passed away November 4, 1959 in Sonomo, Sweden. I was with them both on their second trip and found out what a marvelous socialized medical system they have. It is unbelievable how the system works. Their pension plan is sound and everyone is accountable for. No one is sitting on the street selling pencils. They reforestate and have much better timber or as much as they had 100 years ago. The forest is full of deer, elk, moose, wild turkeys, grouse, hare and so forth. At night as you go out for a ride you can see all the animals on their way to the lakes for water. You can even see the animals bed down for the night. Dogs are not allowed to run. I even heard the call of the cuckoo bird. I have my father and mother's Afghan Batigat report of graduation papers dated the 31st of May 1897, signed by Semmelagor Lufs uncle who was the minister and their instruction in the Lutheran Church in Sonomo, plus the school teacher Gustav Werner's signature. I got a letter from my cousin in Sonomo saying the home of my father's namesake, Grännes, is under repair and is taking a long time as my father's nephew had a stroke. The real way to spell Grönquist is G-R-O-N-Q-V-I-S-T. I am not going to Sweden anymore as I had an accident with my 1964-65 six cylinder automatic Ford Mustang and being an American classic cannot be insured until it is 20 years old. It's being repaired and that costs quite a bit. I will stay home. I belong to all the Swedish lodges and one lodge, independent order of Vikings, Scandi number 68 has been and still am a secretary for 26 years. If you ever come to Portland and if I am still living you can get in touch with me at 1-503-285-6446. After my accident and the next week a lady friend of mine took me and some other friends to a lodge and clunk. We all just about got killed. People are so darn reckless. They are either drunk or on drugs and are just kids. Well, anyway, success in your enterprise. This is Ingrid Grönquist in Portland, Oregon. They are sitting together with me and she was born November 19, 1907 in Portland, Oregon. It is 19th of August 1984 today. So you are telling me you are driving a 1964-65 Ford Mustang. That's a rarity. I haven't seen one since maybe 10-15 years ago. You bought the brand new then? You come out and we will take a look later on. How come you got the idea? You wanted to be a little bit sporty then when you bought it? No, I bought it because it was a nice looking car and it was a pretty beautiful maroon color. I had a 1958 Chevy before and it, well, I wore it out. It ended up with my brother out on the Boones Ferry Road. He had to travel from Boones Ferry Road to Roseville High, Clearcross Town to teach school. He always had that car parked in the back of his house. One time he couldn't get to school and his car was on the blink. So he went to my car and stepped on the gas and away he went. We thought it was all done with. You never saw it again. He turned around and sold it for $150 and that's more than I paid for it. You had a bargain. You got into the jet set when you bought this Mustang because it was a flashy car at the time. Yes, well, the thing is I just bought it for groceries. To get my groceries. I wasn't thinking about no jet set. I was thinking about how to get the groceries in the house. That's all I thought about. A matter of conveyance. Nobody at that time realized it was going to be a valuable car, an antique. An American classic really, that's the truth. But you had an accident with it. Well, I'm all right now. But you were all right then anyway. But you scaled over a couple of vendors there. Oh, yes I did. So what happened, you got a ticket you said, but you got away with it. Oh, I got a ticket. The policeman fined me $36. Why could he do that? Well, under the circumstances in this neighborhood there are people that do that very thing. A woman cannot go down Union Avenue by herself, particularly at night time, unless you put yourself in danger. Why they do that I'll never know. But I happened to be going down Interstate, that's farther on down here. And they did the same thing to me, but they had two cars this time. And why they do it, it's... Drag racing? No, it's questionable people. On this street here? Yeah, on Union and Interstate. And now like yesterday, or was it Thursday, they had a big bank robbery down at Fred Meyer there. Did you hear about that? No, and there were two fellas that had real guns. And my neighbor lady, she works down at Fred Meyer, and she was just coming to work when all this happened. And I thought, well, I'll get up early tomorrow and go up to Fred Meyer and do my shopping. I was on there about 10.30, and I saw all these policemen out there, you know. And they were just investigating the FBI and the whole bit. But that's kind of a neighborhood it is around here. You don't go out at night by yourself. So just because of you being a woman? No, it's the neighbor. And this... And this northeast... He gave you a ticket. Yeah, he gave me a ticket. And you weren't preparing court time? No, I didn't. So I sat down and wrote a letter. I sat down right there and I wrote a letter to the judge. And she just said, no, she said, I'm returning your money. I've got the letter, you know. It was the lady judge? Yeah, lady judge. I didn't know it at the time, see. So you got the money back? She sent me my money back, see. Because I'm not responsible for what these... What the neighborhood is doing? What these people are doing in the neighborhood. And if they could identify them... You see, I had no way of identifying them because they come right up in front of you. And first one, and then the other one comes, see. And they're gone. They didn't even stop right? No, oh no, no. And they customary, they do that all the time. And they do that up on Union Avenue. What happened to that car? So did you... Oh, they don't get hurt. No? Oh no, I hit this car that was parked on the side. Oh, he was parked that car? Yeah, he thought it was parked in an old 1969 Cadillac, you see. And I just took the whole side off and I took my whole side off too. For heaven's sake. I could have killed myself. Were you alone in the car? Oh yes, you see, when I go down to shop, yeah. And Mrs. tells me not to go. She has a certain way to go down to Fred and Marv. Because she works, she gets up at sometimes 4.30 in the morning just to get down there at about six o'clock. She tells me exactly what streets to take and to avoid certain streets. So I do that. We do that, see. This is what we have here as a neighborhood association, see. And everybody around here protects each other, see. And when I go anywhere, I get on the phone and I let her know where I'm going, see. And when she goes, she lets me know where she's going. So if you don't return her at a certain time, they get worried? Yeah, get worried, see. You don't go out at night then? No, never. No. Although I do have a lady friend that picks me up on Wednesday nights, the first Wednesday in the month, and we go to La Nia. And you know where La Nia is. Society. Yes, Society La Nia. And by the way, they sold their place down there. Well, they did. Yeah. And I was there, picked up all of La Nia's books at the time when your son made a record. Yes. And I was down there. I was cleaning it up down there with other members of La Nia, see. So I got in on that La Nia one. And then the Scandia one. We should have taken the Rosen ladies, but they wouldn't let me. Yeah, stay out of there. You're a tough cookie. Oh yeah, stay out of there. Well, so, but you are in good shape anyway. Oh yes. You don't want to go out at night time either, then? No, no. See, if I had called you here about eight o'clock in the evening and said I'd come over shortly, you would have told me to stay out of there. Yeah, I would have told you, well, couldn't you come tomorrow morning? I'll get up early. I'll get up at five o'clock if you want me to. You start day early then? Yeah. So, your father now, Gustav Arnold Grönquist, he came from Sweden in 1902. 1902, April 14th. April 14th. 24th. No, he arrived in New York City April 24th, 1902. And he was the next youngest in the family. Yes, aha. There was, shall I give you the names of those? Of the family? Oscar, he lived here in Portland. Oscar Grönquist. He's passed away too. And Oscar is gone. And those are the only two brothers over here. And then Oscar, and there's Ida. She is, where's my book here? Oscar Grönquist, he passed away, he was born the 12th of December, no, the 17th of December, 1880. And he was first married July the 12th, 1902 in Grasse, Sundomål. There was no older man? No, that was my father's brother, Oscar. Oh, he was born up there. Yeah, he's born in Grannis, but he was married in Grasse. In Grasse. And that's right by the church in Sundomål. And he was married to Bette Johnson, and she was from Grasse. And then Ida was my father's sister, Ida Grönquist. I don't know when she was born, but the date, but she was born in Grannis, Sundomål, Sweden. And she was born to Johan Björklund over there in Sundomål. And then he had a sister by the name of Julia Grönquist. And I don't know much about her, let's see. And then there was Marie Grönquist, she died at the age of two. So it was Oscar and Ida and Julia and Marie. I think that's who they were. Oscar and my father and Julia and Marie and Ida. That's one, two, three, four, five children there. So he went to school in Sundomål? Oh yeah, he went through the whole works. Did he tell you anything about his beginning in Sweden when he was a little boy? How old he was when he started to work, for instance, to help? His father now, how was his work? Well, he... His grandfather was a tough old man, he walked... Yeah, he was a stub-leggar. Yeah, he walked all the way up to Norrland, to Söderhamn. To Sundsvall. Eight days walk. Did he tell you about that? He couldn't remember it because it was probably in his young years. Yes, he could remember and tell me about it. Some of those people I don't... I really can't comprehend, particularly on the women's side. But I do know this here... His father was married twice. His mother passed away, you know, left these children. And he married a second woman, and this second woman, she's up there. She's the one that was the aunt to Jussabjörling. That second woman up there, that's my grandfather. She was the aunt to you? Yeah, Jussabjörling. Oh yeah. When he was there in 59, he passed away in X-era, I think it was. Oh? Yeah, when we were over there. And they didn't like him because he was a riktefilt trött. I was telling one of my Swedish friends that, and they said, well, they all drink when they get up like that, up in the world. And I said, well, you can't do that and be what you're supposed to be. So he was confirmed then also in Sundomerskyrka? Yeah, I have his confirmation. Did he...? I have his books and everything. Oh, you say the whole thing. I've got it all, every bit of it. So he was a savior himself then, in the beginning. In other words, he brought it over here. Oh yeah, I have all of that. And the graduation certificate from the People's School. Yeah, I have it all. With the grades and everything. Yeah, I've got his Bible. And they were signed by Uncle Tusen Malagler. Yeah, uh-huh. And I have those books in there. Some of those that they, after they graduated from their school, they got little special books, you know, and they're kind of charming little books, you know. Do you want to see them or not? We can take a look at them, yes. I know how they look like. Oh, you did. Well, then we won't mess around with them. No. Okay. Well, anyway. The reason he left for the United States, what was that? Did he tell you that at the time? Well, all his friends, particularly those that lived here in Portland, Oregon, had left, you see. And at that time, he was well protected and well off. He lived on a farm where there was plenty of food and plenty to do. But he never did any particular work, you know. He was young and... So he never complained about working hard when he was a young boy? No, not at all. Not at all. No. The only time he ever really worked was when he landed in a chanting factory in Ludlow, Pennsylvania. That was his first bed he'd ever slept in his life. Yeah, that's where he got ten cents an hour and up until then, you know. You know, he just lived on the farm comfortably. So his father had it pretty good in the city? Oh, yes. They had it real nice, you know. Real nice, you know. There was no pushing or doing anything. His father was...he made good money too, you know, when he was working. And he was a stove-maker or whatever you call it. But they lived comfortably on this farm. My father had one of these beautiful black horses. That's all he ever thought of, you see. And they went out and they shocked the hay and did things like that, you see. And then all his boyfriends, you know, the picture of them were all coming over here. Over here. See. And well, he thought he'd take a go on a lark too, and so he did. So his travel over and a half, what happened then? Did somebody...he paid for his own ticket? Oh, no. His father gave him 40, equivalent to 40 dollars. See. And that was quite a lot of money. And he took him...he hitched his horse up for him and took him down to... I think it was down to Malcom or Deya or someplace. And he got on the train, see. And he went over to... Wait a minute. Can I go get that book? On the 7th of April Gustav Adolf Gronkus left the old country. And he arrived in New York Harbor April the 24th. And the boat he was aboard was called the Shimerick. And as close as I can get to Shimerick is H-I-M-M-E-R-I-C. S-H-I-M-M-E-R-I-C. And he went to work in Ludlow, Pennsylvania. That's the first job he had. Why did he go there? Did he have any relation there? He had some comrades that fell by the name of Fritz Abramson. And what ever became of Fritz Abramson, I don't know. But when he left Sundomal, they went to Guttenberg and they took a steamer to whole England. Then to Southampton and then to New York. That's how he got over here on that boat, the Shimerick. And that's it. So he didn't stay too long then in Ludlow? No, but if he stayed there a month that was enough. You don't expect a young Swedish boy coming from a well mannered home and having everything in his life, going to use ox blood to shine army boots, stay very long. He stayed there long enough to get himself a pair of patent leather shoes to go to dance. No, he liked to dance. He wasn't wild at all. He was not a drinker? Oh no, never. No, not my father. Was he a temperance man? No, he was moderate. Well, if you should say, would you like to have a drink or something like that, he might. But other than that, that was enough. I have never ever seen my father drunk. Never. And when we had, in this family, when we ever had to drink, you had to come home and drink. And you sit at the table and drink it. No bars or? No, no. Do you remember him dancing? Oh sure. I used to take him down to, here's a community center down here called Nut Street Community Center. I used to take him dancing twice a week. That's when I had my 58 Chevy. And I used to pick up his girlfriends. He used to call all day telling him, you know, hold on. I used to pick him up and take him down there, see. And he danced. And I'd have a real good time and he was dancing with all his old varmlanding friends. And all his Scandinavian friends. And then after the dance, I'd go home and I'd put the dinner on because my brother comes from Roosevelt and my other nephew who taught at school here, they used to come over here. And play cards with my dad while I got the table set, you see. And then I'd make the dinner and then they'd go home. And this happened all the time, see. That was twice a week. And he just loved it. So then that's how he went hunting with them all the time. So that was his pastime. And then we used to go to the lodge all the time. And those times you could go at night and we could enjoy ourselves, see. And that's the way it was. That's the kind of life we left. So he was not sitting still then? Oh, never. Never, never, never. So anyway, he left Ludlow? In about a month's time. And he never felt to go back there again? Never, never, never. Did he bring anybody with him then when he left Ludlow? Like this Fritz Abrahamson? I kind of have an idea he did, but I just don't know. He never did say. But after he came here to Portland, my mother used to take in... We used to live down here on Montana Avenue. I was born and raised on Montana Avenue. And we had a home down there. And all those old timers that came from the old country, particularly from Varmland, used to stop at our house. And they used to stay just so long until they got themselves a job and acclimated and leave. Just like it was a refuge for all those old timers, see. They used to come to our house. And you can see...you see that little duke there? That's one of them. One of them that left their little duke with us, see. That little apron thing there. So he had adresses of people here in Portland? Oh yes. He didn't stop in between Ludlow and... Oh no, no. He just went on the train and that was it. And he knew where he was going. There was a lady by the name of Mrs. Muddinson that used to live here in Portland. He had a place at that time where some of them would stop and board. And that's how he got hooked up with that eastern and western lumber company, you see, to work in the mill there. He didn't like all that sawdust coming out of it. Would you? Huh? No, I suppose it. No. No. I wouldn't either. Did he complain or...? No, he never complained. Never complained. He just did it. Well... He sensed that there was not the right thing to do. No, so then he used to come home, he used to have payday. And us kids all used to sit on his knees and he'd get the violin and play. Where he learned to play the violin, I'll never know. I still got his violin and it's all beat up. But he used to play the violin for his children, see. He brought that with him to Sweden? Yes, uh-huh. And he met your mother here in Bethlehem? Yeah, at the church. The Swedish Lutheran Church. Yeah, and I have their marriage scroll, you know, and everything. And they met here? They never met in Sweden? No, no. She was from Blakeng. From Blakeng, yeah. Mörrem. Uh-huh, Mörrem. Uh-huh. And how long did he stay in Portland before he married? Did he meet her? Well, he met her in 1907. 1905. 1905. In December of 1905. Uh-huh, yeah. And from then on out, it was, they used to play wist, you know. And all the children's families used to come to our house. My mother would make pink ice cream. Pink ice cream? Strawberry. Oh, straw-icey. Yeah, that's the way it was, see. How many brothers and sisters do you have? I have, let's see, I have to count them. I'm first, and I had a sister that passed away when she was 17. Her name was Elva. And then my brother, Einar, he's out there on the Booms Ferry Road. He's retired. And then my brother Dick, he's down in California. He teaches... ...up in Prineville. And her husband used to be in the beef business, you know, up there. And now they have, there's no money in beef, you know. So now they have subdivided some of their property and they sell bits of property. It's all in one conglomeration. It's called Sun Hills up in Eastern Oregon there. And they sell an acre to each house. And each house is elevated so no one, so you can always see the sky, you know. There's no obstructions or anything like that. And her husband has put in all the water system and the sewage and the light systems up in there. And it's just a matter of having the money of going up there and plunking down about 25,000 for a lot, you know, just alone. Well, anyway, she lives up there in Eastern Oregon and she has a beautiful swimming pool up there. So I can go swimming up there when I go there. And then I have another sister. She lives in a sweet home. And they have a farm down there, but they don't farm it. They rent it out mostly, see. And she married a, oh, I think he's German and French. He's a Mennonite. They used to be Mennonites. He used to be, but he isn't anymore, see. But they had two sons. One was David and one was Galen. And Galen is the younger. And David went to Oregon State College and he has, he graduated with high honors. And they operate together a great big, what they call, Christmas Valley in central Oregon, you know. That great big ranch out there. And they just work fabulous money. But anyway, they're very successful. So that's my family. Except for my brother, the one that lives out here on Boones Ferry Road. One of his sons teaches school out here in Columbia Boulevard, the one that used to come here all the time, have dinner with us. And Roy, he graduated from Linfield College too. But he has his doctor's degree in rhetoric and communication from the Washington State College. And he used to travel for Minolta. And then he used to play now Panasonic. But now some big Japanese firm has gotten a hold of him. And he's down in Sacramento, California. He's in with the Japanese. They have a great big business down there. And Roy's in charge of it all. So he's up and coming. And he has two nice girls. Two little girls, you know. Melissa, see those little girls over there? That's Melissa and Amy over there. That's his children. And I bought those little Swedish things over in your country for them, you know. Those little hats and little scarves and things like that when I was over there. And you know that picture above there? My sister Dorothy, she's an artist, she did that. That above it, see that blue? And those things, you see that Swedish smör, birch? Yes. We gave that to her, she liked it, her husband liked it so well. So she made it into a picture. That lamp is from way back, 1905. That's a little antiquey and she fixed that picture for her. Isn't that a nice picture? Pretty good. It says it is. So you have a big family then? Yes, I do. So how old were you then when your mother passed away? I was about 12. And I was a mother of what? What was the cost of the flu epidemic in 1920? Or the Spanish flu? Yes, that's when everybody passed away, you remember? Yes, I don't remember what it was. So you became the mother then? I was the mother all of a sudden, you bet, right now, period. 20 years? Yes. My youngest baby was only a year. When was she born? She was born February the 5th and my mother passed away the next year at February the 8th. Here was old Ag. I was sitting there. I was the chief cook and the bottle washer. I forget it. How did you get into that? Did some other lady help you out to start with? Not at all. Nobody ever helps me. I went, no. You had to go to school though? You were only 12? Yes. Who took care of the baby then? It was a one year old. Well, let me see. I can't figure that out myself. Because your father was working steady. Well, no, my dad, we had moved out to a farm. And out towards south of Borrow, south of Cambiont Borrow, we had a great big 58 farm out there. I can't figure that out myself. But it wasn't much later. But then my aunt came. My uncle Oscar's wife came and took the youngest girl. From Sweden? No, from where we lived out in the country. She came to my rescue there. But I really... So this farm was big enough to support the family? Oh, absolutely. So your father didn't have to work outside yet? Oh, no, he didn't work out at all. So you had cows and pigs? Yes. But I was left and I didn't even know how to make a cake really. I forgot to put the baking powder in it. It was just perfectly flat. And we all got so hungry for something good they all ate it up anyway. It was the funniest thing. What were you thinking then? Oh, I was just devastated when I lost my mother. Completely devastated. But... Had you... Because she didn't have time to teach you all the different kinds of things. She knew how to... You know how to wash and bake. She taught me how to make hot buttered biscuits. Baking powder biscuits that I could make. And I could cook and do things, you know, I could do things, lots of things. But that cake, I forgot to put the baking powder in it. That was the only thing that went wrong. You didn't practice what your grandpa had to when he was... I mean, oatmeal 18 times. Oh, no, no. No, no, no. No, we had plenty to eat and everything. Well, it's just like tomorrow you're gone, see. You're stuck. In a family you just say, well, there's six children there. Well, tomorrow the mother's gone. The mother's gone. Yeah. And she died at home? Yeah, at home. We were all sick. We were all dying at the time. But there was none of your children that died? No. We all survived. And your father didn't... My brother out in Beans Ferry Road was the strongest one. He used to cook the soup for us, you know. That's all they let you have those days, chicken soup. He was only a tenor level. Yeah, and he knew how to do it. I remember one time they were at... They graduated from Linfield College, you know, that Baptist school out there in McVinville. And one time the cook got mad and left them all down in Linfield College, so they wanted volunteers to cook for him. Who do you suppose cooked for? My brother. My brother? He filled in until the lady got cool off and came back. Could your father help you know? No, he was no cook. Tell you what he used to do. I'll tell you what he could cook. When he used to go down Astoria fishing, they used to hire people out of Astoria, you know, right off the street to go with them to cook on the boats when they were going across the bar fishing, you see. One time they got a Chinaman, and they had those long pigtails those days, see. And this Chinaman was making fried potatoes. And he put the peelings in them, you know, and he fried the potatoes just overboard. When they got him down to shore, they just threw them overboard and they couldn't stand fried potatoes with skins on, see. Well, the next time they got another fellow in there. He was a thin. And they no one got him out the bar there, and all of a sudden here were all these. And he was just completely lousy. They were just flying all over the boat. So immediately they took him in and they doused him for good. And got him ashore and sent him ashore, and said they never want to see him as long as they live. But then they decided, well, they didn't need to cook anymore, so my dad wasn't doing the cooking. So he was making the fried potatoes. So he peeled the potatoes, you know. And he had a way of fixing fried potatoes. He'd add water to it so they were nice and loose when you ate it. So it was piled up high like that, see. And that's the way they got by, you know, having potatoes. And to the day when he couldn't do anything else, you know, he fixed these potatoes, you know. Sometimes I'd be working down at the courthouse, you know, and I'd come home and here he had these fried potatoes this high and they were nice and soft and they were good. And he always put plenty of pepper on them. That's what I like the best. That's the only cooking he ever did. So he was a specialist in that. Oh, he was a specialist. No. How about the, like the cows, did you have the milk? He did. Oh, he did. You didn't have to go? Oh, no, I didn't know how to do it. I'd try but I couldn't ever do it. Because you had your hands full. Yeah, and he had the horses to take care of. No, I couldn't do that. Not the only thing I would do would be to turn the butter. You did it on the farm? Oh, yeah. We had a separator. How in the world could you take care of five kids there? That was easy. It couldn't have been easy though. Oh, it was. Change diapers and washing and... Oh, that make any difference to me. You didn't have any washing machine? No, no. No, I still had the galvanized tub down in the basement where I used to wash clothes. Where I used to wash clothes and I got that down in the basement. They're full of rakes and shovels and everything else. That was the washing machine? That was the washing machine. I hated to wash though. Because my mother, when she was living, she didn't ever allow us to wash clothes in the house. They had a place outside where you, the water, you could get plenty of water, see. So you could go and sit in the... Yeah, I hated to wash clothes. I hated to wash clothes. That's something I never could do. You had to do it by hand though. Oh, yeah. I still got my piano down in the basement. Oh, yes, I still have. I still have. And I still have my dad's tools. He used to build boats down here in the first world war down here in St. John's. I still have some kind of a tool that you hack the sides of the boats to shape them. I still have that down in the basement. Oh, I see. I still have that. I use that myself to this day. I try to get the weeds out of there, but it doesn't work sometimes. You need it to protect yourself now. Oh, absolutely. They're all hewing eggs. So how long...were you tired at any time that you wanted to skip the whole thing? Never. Never. You always felt that this was your place. No, it never ever occurred to me. Never. Never. I never get tired of anything. You never told your dad that you were tired? Oh, no, never. No, because he was tired too. Did he ask you? No, he never asked me. And I never asked him. You don't have to ask, you just know. No. How old were you when you stayed in the home? I went to school. Until you grew up? I went to school too. You went to school too? Oh, sure. We all went to school. Education was the first thing. But you see, then my mother came. So you remarried then? Yeah, that's it. How long after your mother died? Oh, my second mother? Yes. When she came, your second mother? Two years. Two years. So he brought immediately home to Sweden. Yeah, and she came over. And she was a classmate of him. Yeah, the one I showed you. There are several of them came to Portland. So he brought to her and asked her to come over. And you have to do it through the Swedish vice council, you know. They had signed contracts those days. When they sent them over here like that, they had to agree to be married within a certain length of time too. So that would be legitimate, you know. So he had to ask in his letter to her to marry him? Oh, yes. But wasn't it a hard letter to get five kids? No, it would be for her. Yeah, that's what I mean. She didn't think about it? No, she went because she loved my dad. And she never got married. Oh, I see. See? How old was she then? I don't know. How old was your father then when your mother died? Oh gosh, about thirty-six. She was the same age then? Yeah, and was about the same. And she came right away? She came right away. So that's what you call good old-tasure love? Yeah, that's Emily, the one in that little picture. In the middle there? No, on the right-hand side there. On the right-hand side? Yeah, that's Emily. She's the Skoglunds from Sundom. Skoglunds? Yes, Skoglunds. The one I showed the picture of in the posthed room when they were sitting outside there. That's where they come from. So she came from a good family. Oh, absolutely. That's a strange thing. Why didn't he write to her before he married your mother? I don't know, because she was in Stockholm and she was going through this, learning this professional trade in the Upprushela, you know. Learning to cook, see. Upprushela? Yeah, she worked in the Upprushela. She went to school there in the Upprushela. And from then out she worked in these homes, you know, like the Bernd von Thinesen or whatever you call them, and a fellow by the name of Dictor Tom. And then she worked for a doctor in Stockholm. And when she passed away in Hoggfors, that's near Sundom all, why her doctor friend in Stockholm was the one that made the arrangements that she could stay in the hospital and even made arrangements so she could be in one of those nursing homes there for a bit before she passed away. See? See? That's the way it works. You see? So she was where that was? Vestemark. Vestemark, Stockholm. Do you remember now where she came? Oh yeah, sure. Oh sure. Oh sure. Yeah, she came to my home, right to our home. And then after that, after we got rid of that old farm, we moved out here on, out here, what they call, Capitol Hill right outside of... So she came, well you still had the farm? No, no, she wasn't there. Did your dad sell the farm? He sold the farm and we lived out here on Capitol Hill, as they call it. See? That's where she came. Was it too much then for your dad to have the farm and the family and... Well, why would he have it? Because he was well employed doing carpentry work. Why is he so happy with the farm? He didn't need it anymore. And he worked in all these big buildings, you know, and he worked for big contractors, see? A big building. Yeah, uh-huh, yeah. See, that's the way it was. So there was a blessing then when you saw her come here? Oh yeah, absolutely. And the first thing she did with us was clean us up. Oh, I swear to gosh. I swear, I swear. And every time you come into the house, when you come in the house and you've been downtown or shopping or something, you go to the kitchen sink there and wash your hands first. That's the first thing. Oh, absolutely, absolutely. No, she wasn't strict, but she was particular that way, see? That's why I think house is just a disgrace, because she's not here to clean me up. Ha, ha, ha! Oh, we thought it was neat. Oh, yes, uh-huh. We had no objection to it. Oh, no, not at all. We got along real well. And all the time that she was with us, well, she particularly liked my brother Dick that's coming up here on Friday. She just loved him, you know. And, well, there wasn't anything too good for Dick, you know. And she loved him real well, you know. And he loved her too, you know. Oh, it was nice. Well, see. And my dad was all the ladies like my dad, you know. But he never was forward, you see. He never was. Everybody knew that my dad was, meant well and did well, and he was always a nice man, see. Only once in a while when somebody gets tried to take advantage of us and clunk, clunk, he knew when to stop. The brakes. I didn't. So how long did you stay home now? How long were you when you left? When I went to Washington, D.C. You went to school there in college? Oh, yeah. No, I went to high school. And I was out of high school two weeks and I got a job in a law office here in Portland. I worked in a law office for a long, long time. And then it was the time when they were starting that war, you know, and the Depression was on. And I had some real nice dear aunts of mine there who sort of more or less adopted. They were my mother's friends, see. And I borrowed from them. They took care of me. Looked in after me all the time, most of the time. That's where I got that big chiffonaire. And this is where I got my, this here, see. Because then he left me some money. And this is where I got my antique table and things and chairs and stuff like that. And lots of other things, you see. But they used to take, well, always were interested in me because I was a little bit forward. I was always meeting the challenge, you know, that there was out there. So I borrowed $250 from them, I think that was, and I bought myself a ticket on the Portland Rose for $90 and I went right back to Washington, D.C. by myself. Did you stop at anything? I didn't stop at anything or anybody and I went right to the Y. And I stayed there at the Y, you see. And then we took out all our applications, you know. And it was awful hot back there. That's the only thing I didn't like. The humid weather, so miserable back there. But I got myself a job and out of that, you know, to this day I have a lifetime appointment with the Army to this day. And I've got it in writing, see. And I have a record of all my things that I, you know, accomplished during that time, my spackies. And then I was interested in finding things like information. That was my quartier, whatever you want to call it. And people used to throw things on the floor. The reason they threw them on the floor is because they didn't know where they'd come from or where they went to be, supposed to be. So that was my job, see. So I used to get those things straightened out. And pretty soon I got interested in better information like compiling Army regulations. And I knew all the regulations and things like that. So then all of a sudden I got myself fixed up in the library. Nobody told me to do it. I just did it, see. So then they took and they sent me on orders to Detroit, Michigan. And I set up all those technical spare parts books, you know. And I worked in cooperation with those big spare parts people from General Motors and things like that. And I had a beautiful library. You could get any information you wanted to about it. And I used to meet the English generals, the Russian generals and all of them, see. So you worked for the Army? Yeah. So when you went to Washington, D.C., you already had a... I had an appointment. You had an appointment? Yeah, I took an examination. You went right in there and got a job from the First Amendment. Yeah, uh-huh. So then I got this beautiful job in Detroit, Michigan, you know. It was much cooler there, too, see. How long did you stay in Washington, D.C.? Oh, I forget how long. Not too very long before I was... Shoestyled there to Detroit, Michigan. Did you care about Washington, D.C.? No, no. It's too hot there. Too hot for me. And when I was the first one in that Pentagon building, the second floor wasn't even built, you know. And when it would rain, it would just rain right through and you'd be sitting there and you'd be looking way down those great big aisles and here comes just billows of smoke, you know, and dust, you know, and debris coming out, you know. And, oh, just about to knock you over. Ah, glad to get out of there. And so I went to Detroit and it's different there. People are up and coming and doing things. Detroit's a big town, you know. So then I got that all fixed up and then pretty soon, you're on your feet quite a bit there, you know, running free information and all that stuff. So then I got myself a job as a spare parts expert in guns, you know, artillery and automotive equipment and all that stuff. Well, then they were going to move all those people out of Detroit to Rock Island, Illinois. So I was one of them they sent to Rock Island, Illinois. So I went along for the ride, too. And then finally I got tired. I was wondering about that, that loop fist my mother used to have and that hair ring in that pitaya skirt. So I came home. I got transferred here to Portland, Oregon. And I worked up to the Army till it, you know, it was over with. But it was easy for you to get a job here because you had a good... Yes, uh-huh, yeah. With all your heat. Yeah, so I got a good job there, see. How long did you stay in Rock Island? Because it was not a cool place either. No, they had a lot of squirrels over there. We used to call them spare parts experts. You know, those squirrels that run around the parks there. They still do, don't they? They call them spare parts experts. Well, they were the callers. Yeah, that's what we called them. Spare parts experts. Yeah, we called them spare parts experts. Why did you get that? Well, that's our title, you see. That was our title, spare parts experts. Well, anyway, we used to call them that. So then I came home. I'm glad I did because my folks needed me anyway. Both your parents were still living together? Oh, yeah. How many years have you had in service then? About... Oh, I can't remember. Twenty? No, uh-uh, no. Ten? No, it was about ten, I would say. Yeah, but then, you see, I had my appointment here and I went to work down at the Corps of Engineers down on the St. John's Bridge there, see. Because I had the technical background, that's it. Well, then from then it's been hit and miss because there isn't that much, that kind of a... Opportunity. ...around here. Oh, no, not at all. Well, there's a complete difference. Oh, yes. But then when they got rid of the Army surplus material I was out there first. I was the first one, see. And that was... We were... Our design was to go out there and clean the place up. And they had what they called the big Lawrence warehouse that housed the stuff. And then the rest of it, they warehoused the stuff. And it was our job to get rid of it, see. I remember one time we had a whole warehouse full of dynamite out there one time. I'm telling you, we knew that out of there fast. We had to get that great big... What's that? Great big dynamite outfit from back east. Had to come in there and take it out of there. I went to blow the whole town up. None of them thought about it either. You could actually start a war by yourself. Oh, absolutely. I know all about it, you know. And I remember one time when I was in Rock Island, Illinois there was a fella that wrote for me from way out in... Am I in hurry now? He's way out in... Oh, I don't know where he was. Out in Burma Road or some doggone place. And he wrote a letter into the Rock Island arsenal. He says, you know, he says... He says, you know you people back there don't know what you're doing. He says, we can't kill a Japanese with these car beings out here. He says, send us some double-barreled shotguns. And I happened to see that letter. And one of the guys was just going to throw it away. And I just looked at that and I looked at that and I looked at that. And I said, well, I'm going to send this guy these double-barreled shotguns. And I did. You did? Nobody would stop me either. I did it. Nobody's going to tell me not to. Where did you get those from? They had them. In an arsenal there. So I had them sent all the way across the ocean. I did it. I think, you know, if it's there, do it. That's the only way to do it, you know. So any reply? No. Nobody knew it. So you were still hunting squirrels, all right? No. You can't kill a whole nest of Japs with a car being, you know that yourself. And he says, I can't kill them. And he says, you've got to have a double-barreled shotgun where you can spray the bullets, you see. And that caught my eye and I thought, well, I'll give it to them. And I did. So you were responsible then to ship off the bullets? Oh, absolutely. Everything. Out of that arsenal, that Rock Island arsenal, we could tell them in a minute what to do. We did it. It's a big place. They've got everything in it. Oh, I know. And when four o'clock in the afternoon comes, you could just hear the thunder roll, you know. It just moved in on it. All the paper at work just hit it at four o'clock. And all of a sudden you look at your desk and you had requests up that high on your desk. And you just didn't move from there until that desk was cleaned up. And we worked on every other Sunday and we worked on twice a week until 10, 11 o'clock at night. We hardly ever, ever got away from our desk.