 This is an interview with Mr. Reinhardt Galveston, Texas. He was born in 1905 in Galveston. His father was John Reinhardtson, who was born in Norway. His mother, Augusta Olsen, was born in Hultestad, in Ireland. And today, December 9, 1974. The man doesn't have as much say as the woman in the house. So the Swedish conversation dominated. But we went to the church services, and when we were small, all the sermons were in Swedish. Until I was about, I guess about 20. Then it phased out. And your father, he didn't... He didn't try to speak Norwegian, no. He would speak in Swedish, because... Oh, he understood Swedish perfectly, then, no problem with the sermons. My father had been a merchant seaman, and he'd traveled all around the world, and he knew the language pretty well, the Swedish language. So what year did he came to... He came in about 1890 or 91. Right here to Galveston. Yeah, and my mother came here about 93, I guess, 1893 or something like that. So he stopped off here and stopped for good. Yes. He didn't go on the sea again. No, as a matter of fact, he was a crew member. He just didn't rejoin his ship when it sailed, because there were opportunities here for employment along the waterfront. And a lot of Scandinavians encouraged him to stay here, because there was that work. He became a longshoreman and what they call a screwman. They used to have a specialized way of loading cotton on ships, and they used to use equipment, they would make a bail tighter, fit tighter, and they used to use screws and jacks. So he became what they call a screwman. Oh, I see. So this was the main sailing port for cotton. Yes, it was. It was the main port in Texas. It was bigger than Houston. Oh, yes. There was nothing up there. There wasn't anything except a little canal there, a little bayou. It was dredged, I think it was about maybe 20 years after my dad came here, before they dredged out the channel up there. So there wasn't any port of Houston to speak of. Just small barges. That's right. They took all the foreign ships in. Yes. And the big ships could come in too, there was no war. Oh, yes, they had pretty good-sized ships coming here, you know, flags of all nations. In fact, there were mostly foreign ships in those days. The United States didn't have any merchant marine to speak of. It was all Norwegian and Scandinavian. German and British and Scandinavian and so on. So what was the reason for your mother coming over here? She came directly to Galveston? She had a sister that was here ahead of her and had encouraged her to come. What was her name? Her name was Johanna, and she married a man named Jackson. He was also from Sweden. I asked my mother that question, and it seemed to be a matter of economics. They were raised on a farm, and it seemed that the boy, they had a brother, Alfred, that stayed there, that he would be entitled to the farm. In fact, her father died at sort of an early age. He was lifting a stone or something, and he ruptured himself causing internal bleeding. So he died rather early for a Scandinavian. I think he was about 45 or something like that when he died. So the son was going to carry on the farm, and it left the girls kind of out on a limb, although she had two sisters that stayed in Sweden, and she had two sisters that came here to Galveston, the one that preceded her, then she came, and then a younger sister. They did domestic work. I guess all they were qualified. They were handicapped, they couldn't speak the English language, and they hadn't had any particular training. The girls from Sweden were very much in demand by the people that were able to hire domestic help, the businessmen here. In fact, my aunt, my mother's oldest sister, worked for one of the, and her husband, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jackson, worked for the wealthiest man in Galveston, the Sealy. I don't know if you've heard of the name Sealy. Well, the Sealy Hospital and Sealy Bank and all that. So he was the yard man and coach man, and she was the cook, I guess you'd say. And my mother worked for a prominent Jewish family here named Blum's. That's all I can remember where she worked. Then she met my dad, and they decided they'd like to try to see what they could do. She joined the Zion Lutheran Church. Yeah, she was a charter member. Have you heard about Captain Anderson? Yes. Can you tell me a little bit more about him? I don't know what you know. Well, as a matter of fact, not too much. I know he was a Lutheran, and he was a captain. But what kind of captain did he have? Well, that was a sort of an honorary title given to him. He was superintendent of construction for the Galveston Wharves, and he was well thought of by Mr. Sealy. Mr. Sealy also owned the Galveston Wharves. It was a private company in those days. And Anderson was very—well, he was a religious man, and he did missionary work. Anderson. Huh? Anderson. Anderson. No? Let me see. N.J. Nils J. Anderson was his name. And I don't know that—a captain was honorary. He was never a captain of anything that I know of. But he was superintendent of maintenance and construction on the Wharves when they would build—they didn't have to have big construction contracts just to build these sheds. They were simple wooden piers, and he was a pretty good carpenter, and he got to be a superintendent. And he told me that he used to go down to where the Scrumon meet, you know, the longshoremen and Scrumon. They had a lot of Scandinavians, and he would invite them to church. We'd have a man come down from Austin, Stamleen. You may have heard of that name. He used to— I didn't know what to call him, Pastor. Yeah? Well, he was up at Palm Valley. Have you been in Palm Valley? Yes. He was up there. He may have served here temporarily, but he used to come down on special trips to try to get this church organized. And Anderson would go around and invite these people, and they used to laugh at him and kid him and so on. And he was accused of kind of blackmailing them. If you didn't come to your church, you wouldn't work for the Galveston Wharves. But he said that was not so, but a lot of people accused him of favoring the Swedes and particularly those that came to the church. But he knew from experience that they were honest, reliable, hard workmen, so that's the kind of people he wanted. Let's see what else I can tell you. He was a treasurer of the church for many years, and of his own funds he would help provide for the ministers. He didn't have any children of his own, so the church, I guess, was his hobby. And he was much concerned about it. So he saw the need for a minister. Yeah, so organized. And it happened that my mother was here and others, my mother's sister, and they all became charter members. Was it a tough time in Galveston in the 1890s? In what way? Well, I mean, you know, a lot of sailors come together, and sometimes there are roughnecks. I don't think it was any worse than any other city of comparable size at that time. They had saloons and they had fights. Was there more saloons than churches? They usually measure, by the way. Well, I don't know. I wouldn't be surprised. In fact, that's in the days when people used to go to the corner store and buy a bucket of beer, you know. But yes, I guess there were more saloons than churches. But I don't think it was – I hadn't heard my dad or mother say it was particularly bad or tough in those days. So this Captain Anderson, then, he got the size of a group together and – Yes, and started the church, yeah. And there was Pastor Stemlin, then. Well, he was one of the early ones. I'd have to look at the records there. One of the early ministers that we had here probably doesn't mean anything to you unless you are familiar with the history of the Augustana Synod, but Pastor Sagerhammer, who was president of the Pacific Synod, his father was an early minister here. Did you ever see that on the church road? Yeah, yeah. This would be something for you to look at in the future. When you get out there, there was a coat. He was here a short while. And I don't think he was married then. And this may or may not be of any interest, because if you're getting a history of the whole Swedish, this is just a little incidental thing. But I had one of my cousins, an older one, was kind of interested in this Sagerhammer. I heard mother talk about it, and then when he pulled out, she was probably a little disappointed. She probably had notions of, you know, the girls get B.A. degrees now. In those days, they used to look for a P.F., pressed fruit. Oh, yeah. That's what they wanted. There was a sure way of life in many ways. Yeah, so I think she played the organ or piano or something. Anyway, mother used to talk a little bit about it, that she was a little disappointed that it didn't materialize. However, she moved to Kansas, and she married a lawyer there, and then they moved to California. She has two fine children. She's dead now. So the flestas som kom hitill Håhan. Do you understand Swedish? Yes. The flestas som kom hitill Håhan. Våstri sailors som kom till Galveston. You would say so. You mean in the 90s? Early 90s. Yeah. Sailors and then others who had skills in carpentry or in the building trades, painters, carpenters, bricklayers, masons of different kinds, came here because of opportunities. People who came here would write home and tell them of the opportunities that were here. My uncle, my mother's brother-in-law, came here, and he was a carpenter, and he lived to be about 90, and he was... He stayed here? Yeah. His family never did come over. I don't know what the problem was. They were a little fearful or something, but he had two daughters that stayed there. He had two sons that came here, but they were farmers, and they settled in Kansas. And from Kansas, they later moved to Colorado and did some irrigation farming at Los Animas. I don't know if there was a Swedish community there or not. But anyway, then they moved to California and were gardeners and got into the lawnmower repair business and that sort of thing. Now, that's the type of work that the Swedes did, yeah. But we had a few professional people. There was a man here that, well, he wasn't very active in our church, but he was considered one of the prominent businessmen here. He used his knowledge of seamanship so that he organized a fleet of tugboats. His name was Sudermann. And he was a successful businessman. He had at least, I guess, at least a dozen tugboats that were used up and down the channel, towing and assisting the big ships into the harbor and up to Houston and to Texas City. And he was also active in politics, then? He was active in politics, yes. Yes, he was. How about the stevedores now and the longshoremen? Were they organized earlier in Galveston? Yes, I believe that there was a union, a crewman's association, which... And they were strong enough to... Yeah, they were organized, I'm sure, before 1900. I feel sure that they were. And the carpenters, of course, had a union organization, and the painters and the bricklayers and the plumbers. I don't know... Was the horticulture into the union? I don't remember. It was later, but when they first came here... In fact, that was why my dad jumped ship. Actually, that's what he did. He didn't rejoin his ship. He wasn't accidentally left. He was encouraged to stay here because of the employment opportunities, and he went to work right away. And he liked the area, the Clydesdales? Well, I don't know how well he liked it, but... He was a fellow that wasn't very fussy about where he lived. He's lived... He's sailed, you know, and he's been all over the world, and he's sailed for seven years, so he's... Seven years? Yes. He was acquainted with the hot climate. He was in Africa, and he was down in Australia and so on, so... He's no stranger to any different weather conditions. And he didn't go back to Norway? Never did go back, no. My mother went back to Sweden once after her first child was born, and she stayed there a year. Her brother, Alfred, came over and stayed a while, but I believe that was before my mother's father died, and when he died, or anyway, he went back to Sweden. So you remember... No, you can't remember the hurricane or the storm then, but... I remember what she told me of it, yes. And what have they told you about it that they remembered? Well, it was a terrible ordeal for her. The place where she was living is now out in the Gulf. The seawall, it was about at least 100, 150 yards out into the Gulf now. That much of the shoreline was washed away. And they were right, their house was right close to the beach. And what I remember is they didn't seem to understand what was coming on. They knew the water was rising, but there was no particular alarm. And as it got worse and worse, they stayed in the house until it was too late to do anything about it. The water was too high to wait, and the houses around them began to get blown into bits and a lot of wreckage. So they stayed in the house as long as they could, and then they had to climb out, and from this house, they climbed from rooftop to rooftop and tumbled over the debris. And in the process, they lost their two children. They don't know just how. One was washed out of mother's arms, for one thing, and they don't know what happened to the oldest girl, who was four. The youngest one was an infant. And at one time, my father was in this debris that he was completely covered by the water. My mother just reached up and grabbed him and pulled him by his scalp, his hair, and pulled him out so they could breathe and work himself free of this wreckage. And in the process, she also had an arm broken, and of course, it was this terrific wind and rain beating on them and cold, and it was just an ordeal. It was in October. It was in August. No, it was September, September the 7th. 8th. September the 8th, yeah. It was in September. Wasn't it daytime, this truck, or...? Well, I imagine it was, but it lasted several hours. It lasted into the night. So it was a... I haven't even thought about those details in recent years, but those are the highlights. And the church, of course, her interest was in that. The Swedes that were here, their center of interest, the thing that united them in a foreign land, was this church where they could get together and meet each other on a social basis and hear their own language spoken by a pastor and I don't know how many of the... what loss the church suffered, it's probably in the records, but it was quite a blow to them, too. The church was... I don't know where it was then. Very important, I mean, to reconstruct homes for people that lost their belongings and so forth. I don't know just how much aid they got, but somehow or other, they had determination. There are lots of the members of the church lost everything, but they didn't give up, and I don't know how they got help. There must have been some temporary aid from some source. The church wasn't in a position to help them financially, because they always had to struggle to pay the pastor, that's the history of our church here, and pay the bills, but somehow or other, we've managed to do it, haven't we? It did come from devout Christian homes, and being in church and associating with church activity was just as natural as breathing to them. And then they were in a foreign land, and they couldn't speak the language, and they felt at ease there. They felt with their own kind, even though they came from different parts of Sweden. And then I guess the pastor was the type that would understand their problems and would encourage them. So it was a natural thing for them. Do you remember the changeover from Swedish to English in the sermon? Oh, yes. What did they say to all the people about it? They didn't like it. Well, they kept it up. It was like emigrating to a new land. Yeah, but after all, when the changeover took place, most of these people had been here for many years, like 15 or 20 years. So your mother didn't have any problems with English, though? No, because gradually she had learned it by her association with other people, her neighbors and her friends. She spoke in a broken accent, but gradually she understood it. And she had a lot of friends that were English-speaking. So she missed the Swedish, because those people only thought God spoke in Swedish. They couldn't understand English very good. So they liked the old familiar Bible passages and the old familiar hymns that they had. They weren't the same in English, like the song Trigger-Ekening and Vara. You can sing it in English, but it's not the same. The translation is a little different. The changeover was this, that it was gradual. First of all, they went into English services in the evening. Hyggemassa, the morning service, was in Swedish. Then gradually, it was every other... The congregation would vote on it. The English-speaking people who were having difficulty with the Swedish, they started fighting for English. They had bilingual pastors in those days. You had to learn Swedish to graduate from our seminaries. Swedish and Greek, I guess. So gradually it got to be every other Sunday. And finally, the Swedes were so outnumbered that as a concession to them, they permitted one Swedish service a month. And then it ended when we couldn't get any bilingual pastors. The last one that I remember was Herman Larson. Wasn't he the last one that could speak? That would go back just right after 1930. Yeah, it phased out in 1930. And he was a native-born American, and his Swedish was book Swedish. It wasn't natural. But we had a pastor, Harleen, who was... I guess he was born in Sweden, but came here at an early age. But he had the ability to talk conversational Swedish so that even I could understand his sermons. But when we had some of those Swedes that come down from central Texas that would try to spout off like a Swedish pastor would, well, it would be a lot of phraseology, and I couldn't quite understand it. But Harleen had the ability to just make it conversational, and he would use the simplest Swedish. Maybe that's because that's all he knew. But he was a self-trained person. I guess he studied at college. But most of his Swedish came from studying it and practicing it, even though he came here at an early age. I think he was born in Sweden. But that's about the way the Swedish was phased out, and I'm sure that's the way it happened in most communities. How about other activities? Outside the church, for instance, were there any groups founded here or formed by, like, you know, societies? They had... Well, that's part of the church. But I mean outside the church. Was there a Swedish group that had, like, dances or parties? It seems to me there was. It was called the Swaya Society, but I don't know who sponsored it. But they had Swedish dances and stuff. Was the Galveston organization internationally oriented, or you don't know? I think it was local. I think it was local, yeah. It was... See, all the Swedes didn't go to church, you know. No, no. But there were a few that felt that they wanted to have a... But when they married, didn't the minister take care of them? Did they go to the... Oh, they did get married in church, yeah. But there was a Swedish group, as I recall it, in the... Before 1920, it sort of phased out after that. They would have social affairs maybe three or four times a year. Well, we never went because I was small, and my mother... She probably thought that they were a worldly group. She wouldn't associate with them. That's right. And maybe she was never invited because she couldn't dance or anything like that. How about the sick and aid societies? You haven't heard anything about that? Nothing. There was none that I know of. They went to the church then if something was needed. Well, or maybe the social group did something. But the Swedes had a way of not needing much aid. They were healthy. They were healthy, and they believed in helping themselves, and their families helped them. They weren't the type that... Did they associate with American groups so much? Yes, they did. Some of them did. You had to. I mean, as far as groups are concerned, what do you mean like a... Well, like a lodge, playing bridge and lodges and things like that. Well, some of them joined the Eagles, which was a social club. Did you go somewhere else? Well, we had... There was my drinking uncle. I could tell you about him. Well, he had to have both sides to make it even. They used to meet at Vic Fredrickson's Saloon downtown, and Vic Fredrickson was kind of a little politician. And I don't know what it amounted to, but there were quite a few of the Scandinavians that would meet regularly at his beer parlor down on 23rd and Between Market and Mechanic. They cashed the checks there on Friday, so... I wouldn't be surprised. I'm sure they did. Yeah, that was a sort of a social... for the men. I don't know what the women did. That was in the days when... That was a man's sanctuary. The women couldn't break that. So they would discuss the politics. They discussed politics and the work and so on. I don't know what went on there. Well, I did know that the ladies, the Swedish ladies, used to get together and meet in the homes, not as a social, but as good friends, Swedish like Miss Johnson and Miss... Oh, well, that was... Well, you, Mrs. Franke, you're a sister of Harold Reinhardt, yes? Yes. I live in Beaumont now. I didn't know it. Houston, isn't it? East. East of Houston. Right. So maybe you remember something from the old days when your parents... How about the ladies? Your brother just said his uncle here went to one place, but how about the ladies? What did they do there now? Well, I think in the church work, they used to work, and they'd have chilly suppers and brazaz around the Christmas time, and the ladies would make things and sell them and auction them off. They used to have an auction sale down there, and they'd make a little for the church, and then they'd sell food to the sides, and they had many faithful workers there. They're all gone now. Like my brother mentioned, Mrs. Angstrom, and her sister, Mrs. Westman, was another faithful worker down in that church, and my mother and several others, and then besides that, Mother and all the Swedish people used to get together once a week and meet in the home and just have a little coffee and cake and celebrate their birthdays or just social together, you know, just to keep in contact with one another. And I can remember the church on 18th and Market when they met in the building up in the back before they had the new church, and I was confirmed in 1927 there by Pastor Harleen at the Vine. Was that in Swedish? No, just English. So that was already passed off then. But I can remember the Swedish being held on Sundays. I used to have to stay with Mother because that's all I had, and I just stayed there. I could learn to sing with the hymns and go through the Swedish ritual. I understood it. But sometimes, as like my brother said, the pastors there, it was hard to grasp, you know, because there were different speaking rogues there that you couldn't hardly, Pastor Harleen really brought it over very good. So they had problems too then, the pastors? Yes, that's right. To make a servant stick. That's right. So how about the ladies now in the home? Could they get the husbands with them to church on Sunday or they had problems maybe sometimes? Do you think that was the ladies' work really that built the church up? Well, I think sometimes, yes, you know, kind of get together, work hard, really. That's right. They put extra money in. They put faithful workers down there at sign. I think that's what helped, you know. In fact, I've heard a lot of the ministers say sometimes if it wasn't for these faithful ladies, the ladies' aid of the church, we wouldn't be where we were sometimes as it is. It's a true statement. That's right. But speaking about these others, like I said, they're more centered around the church here, these group of people. They were always living and working for the church. That's the group you know, Anna. Yes, that's right, but I don't know about that. She's interested in it more than any others. No, I don't really. There was a, what she was talking about, these family, these friends that get together, there was a way that they had communication with each other and there were several groups of ladies that would meet in the homes for socials and at birthdays and things like that, and they would visit that way, but it wasn't only a church-related. It was a religious church. They crossed their religious lines there, yeah. And Mother had a lot of friends that were in, say, in the Methodist, Scandinavian Methodist or some that had even joined other church groups or had no church. How about the Methodist? No, I mean, there were two churches there, Lutheran and the Methodist. Scandinavian Methodist, they called it. It was mostly Swedish, though. That's why it got the name Scandinavian. Well, Scandinavian is Norwegian, too, and he's not interested in Norwegian. Yeah, but I mean, they said Scandinavian, but it was Swedish in that case. We include everybody in that. How about the... There was a religious difference then between the Swedes and the Scandinavians, but did they still cooperate in community efforts, the Methodists? Like today, for instance, you know, all the church groups are going together in ecumenical ways. Yeah. Did they do it at that time? We had joint picnics together. The Methodists and the Lutherans? Yeah, sure. Did they exchange pulpits? No, no. They didn't do that? No, they didn't do that. Well, he's not interested in Norwegian. I'm telling you that. I know, but I mean, there was some that came over to that church I was at. Interview with Harold Reinhardt, Galveston, Texas. We'll continue on to the next page. This is page number two, Interview with Harold Reinhardt, Galveston, Texas. Today is December 9, 1974. We had joint picnics, that's all. No, they didn't exchange pulpits, no, although we've had, I guess we had exchange of other programs. What do you think was the difference then that kept them apart? Was it because the Methodists didn't want to be Lutherans? Well, I think it was based on the type of service, the ritual. I think the Methodists that joined that group liked the informality of the Methodists. They didn't like to be confined to a set ritual that we follow. We had one man who was very active in that church. He was superintendent, and my dad asked him that question, Why did you leave the Lutheran Church, Alfred? Well, he bluntly told my dad because there were no Christians in the Lutheran Church. So he was a little bit self-righteous there. I guess it was similar to the, it was the closest thing rather, to what the Covenant Church in Sweden, this Methodist, met their need. The type of singing, the informality, and that sort of thing met a need that they had that the Lutheran Church didn't satisfy. But there wasn't any friction between us because we were all pretty good friends. That's why I say we would meet outside of the church in social affairs. We had an annual picnic together, and the women, of course, would meet in the different homes. I was going to tell you about a character that was interesting here, and that was a Swede that had a vegetable cart that he called on the Swedish homes. He used to go to the produce row and get tomatoes and apples and celery and carrots and things like that, and he had this cart that he pushed. He would call on different people, and he would, if they were all like my mother, he didn't have to buy any meals because there was always coffee and cookies, and if you were hungry there was eggs and potatoes and things like that. And he was a little gossip too. He would carry the news about what's happening down in Mrs. Jacobson's house or Mrs. Olson's house or Mrs. Swenson's house, and then when he left our place he'd tell about what happened at the Rhine Arts. But they didn't all work as longshoremen. We had one that was a vegetable merchant that pushed his wagon all over Galveston, and he lived to be, what, about 75? His name was Lindquist. He was important, I think. So you had some different characters there. They all played important in the living. I don't know if that's any different than anything you've heard, but I've never seen another fellow like that or heard anything like that, but we had our Lindquist. Is Galveston being a very important seaport now? I'm sure you've got a lot of, maybe not stranded seamen, but sometimes seamen in trouble, they always get in some kind of hush with the law. Did the church help out then in a way? Well, they had what they call the Norwegian Seamen's Lutheran Church, crossed from Zion Lutheran, Swedish Lutheran, and at Christmas time they were a separate church, you know. They had their church and we had ours, kind of called it the Norwegians had theirs and we had ours, but at Christmas time they found out when a seaman ship was coming in, a foreign ship like Norwegians or Swedish, and they would plan a big Christmas party for the seamen to invite them, those who could come off to shore to this Norwegian Lutheran Church. And they would give a Christmas party and the ladies would go together and they'd have cookies and coffee and sandwiches, and they had a big Christmas tree and then they had a man by the name of Mr. Ash, they pronounce it Norwegian, and he spoke to the fellas if they were Lutherans, I mean Norwegians, he'd speak a little message in Norwegian about the Christmas season to them, or if it was Swedish, they'd get somebody to speak in the Swedish language to the boys if they couldn't speak English. And in between they would get these ladies of the church to bring gifts like stockings and writing tablets and different little odds and ends the boys could use when they went back on the ship. And then they would put some kind of little notation in Swedish or Norwegian, like, to the man with the largest feet, come up and get this package, just some little humor, you know, or to the one who writes home the most, come and get this package, it would be in their language, see, and they'd understand what they were saying, they'd come up and get it. And then they would dance around the Christmas tree like they do and have music, and they had a real joyful time, and everybody talked to the different boys and made them feel at home, and they said that was the wonderfulest thing they ever had, to be away from home for Christmas and have a place like that to go. And they really enjoyed it. And the same way around New Year's, if there was a ship in, they'd have like a little New Year's party and have coffee and cake for them to come over there and join it. And that's one of the ways they figured that they could keep, you know, these seamen from wandering off and gallivanting, maybe getting in the wrong direction, you know, and getting places where they maybe shouldn't be or something. And that really helped out a lot. And then we had this seaman, Senator Bethel. Seaman's Bethel, yes. Was there a host not too far from the churches, or...? It was centrally located. It was, you might say, downtown. It was one block from the Lutheran church and two blocks from the Swedish Methodist church. And was that... And most of the......run by the two churches then, or financially backed up by...? It was financially backed by steamship people, steamship agents, tugboat companies, and others interested in the maritime work in the harbor here, the shipping interests, the longshore interests, all those that had to do with the port activities, the Galveston wharves. I believe that all the churches in the community contributed something to it, and later on it became an agency of the community chest, or United Fund. And the reason for it was to give the seamen a nice stay in Galveston? Yes. Those that were waiting for a ship, it gave them a good home, a good room to stay in, in a good environment. Because the only thing that's open for seamen when they hit port is, you know, what we call vice, beer joints and prostitution and things like that. And so this was to encourage people to have a good place to stay. They had recreation facilities, games, pool, checker, and so forth, and the chaplain would conduct... He was also the chaplain, this Reverend Sarner was his name. Was he a Methodist? He was a Methodist, yes. And he was in charge of that for many, many years. Was he also the Methodist minister? He was not the regular Methodist minister when he was chaplain, but he did serve as a substitute during a vacancy or during a vacation of the minister. So his main job was to be the administrator of the seamen's... That was his, yeah, that was his main job. And there was a building then not too far from the churches. That's right, and not too far from the port facilities near the docks. And, of course, Galveston has most of the churches, and that day were centrally located within... Three-fourths of the churches were within a half a mile of each other, the different Methodists and Presbyterians and Baptists and Episcopalians. So it was convenient from that point of view. It was convenient from being just about two blocks from the center of town. It was convenient to the ships and to the docks and terminals. So it was centrally located. End of interview with Harold Reinhart in Galveston, Texas. And it is today, December 9, 1974. End of interview.