 This interview with Carl Oscar Theodor Olsson was born in Galveston, Texas, October 17, 1900. His father was Carl Peter Olsson, born in Aschheim, Germany. His mother was Esther Sofia, born in Helsingborg. And it is today, December 4, 1974. Carl Peter Olsson, a Swedish-speaking man, was born in Galveston, Texas, October 7, 1974. Carl Peter Olsson, a Swedish-speaking man, was born in Galveston, Texas, October 7, 1974. Carl Peter Olsson, a Swedish-speaking man, was born in Galveston, Texas, October 7, 1974. Carl Peter Olsson, a Swedish-speaking man, was born in Galveston, Texas, October 7, 1974. mother's name was my mother's name was Sophie Nelson and they they was born in Sweden he was born in Sweden but I don't know the exact where put where they exactly where did they knew each other before I don't know I don't know about that I have been trying to run down the genealogy of my parents by writing to Sweden but so far I haven't been able to establish her birth date or her actually maiden name which I think was Sophie Nelson but I'm still trying to gather that information both parents on my side of course and parents all all the way back or from Sweden my parents are the only ones that came from Sweden to America sometime in Galveston sometime about 1889 or 1890 so your parents they were living in Galveston they were living they were living at Galveston the time of the 1900 storm and they lived in the middle section of then Galveston and were quartered up in a two-story building on 15th and in Strand Street when the hurricane struck for the information I've had passed on down to me they stayed in the home that they lived during the storm they were not hurt they were they were not hurt and I had one I have one sister four years younger younger than myself he was born 1896 she was there with them the parents my parents she faintly because I've spoken to Olga about it but she's four years she's four years older than me but when the storm she's four years older than I am she was born 96 she mentioned very little she remembers some things about it but as a four-year-old not too much no so your mother then she remarried no no no my mother she start working after my father died and my mother passed away in 1914 and she died in Del Rio Texas her remains were brought back to Galveston she has she is buried in Galveston by the side of my father he went there she went to Bernie Texas in January 1913 for her health and you go along I went I went with her my brother and I went with her and she stayed in Bernie Texas until March 1914 and then she decided she the doctor told that she should go to a higher climate and she started out with my brother and I to Alpine Texas and we had to go through San Antonio to Alpine and my mother told my brother that he'd better go back to Galveston so we put him on a train to go back to Galveston I went with my mother from San Antonio West toward El Paso to go to Alpine but she got as far we got as far as Del Rio she had tuberculosis and we got as far as Del Rio and we had to get off the train and we found a place to stay in in Del Rio and she died on March the 7th 1914 at Del Rio Texas then I took the remains back to Galveston I think we buried her on March the 9th 1914 in Galveston. You were only 13 years of age then? 13 years of age that's right. So you remember what happened? I remember quite a bit of it I do yes I stayed with her and ever since 1914 why we stayed in Galveston the three of us and then in 1917 I met a young lady in Austin by the name of Naomi Stowell and we came up here from Galveston two other young men and myself from the Swedish Methodist Church in Galveston and in those days when you attended the convention in the Methodist Church they put the delegates up in various homes of the members of the church so we were privileged to stay in the home of Mr. and Mrs. Carl Stowell in Austin Texas. And they were all Swedish? All Swedish and there I met my wife-to-be and then I married her in April the I mean June the 22nd 1921. You mentioned you were a delegate for the Methodist Church? Method we used to have what they call effort league conventions once a year and we'd meet at different towns for instance we had meet at Hutto Texas for instance Georgetown Texas Galveston Texas Houston Texas Dallas Texas wherever they had a Swedish Methodist Church and we'd go from these various places to the various places as delegates and we were coming in 1917 to the home of the to the home of Charles Mr. and Mrs. Charles Stowell for an effort league convention of the Swedish Methodist Church. Your parents they were Lutherans? My parents were Lutherans in the Galveston Church and when I had to establish my birth by virtue of being with the railroad established my birth for retirement purposes my birth was recorded in the Mount Zion Lutheran Church at Galveston Texas and there my record was established for my birth. My sister is still Lutheran my brother is still a Swedish Lutheran my brother brother still lives in Galveston he's retired from the Missouri Pacific Railroad and my sister lives at Farmington New Mexico. So did you join the Methodist Church then or did your mother join too? No my mother never did leave the Lutheran Church my sister never did leave the Lutheran Church my brother never did leave the Lutheran Church but I did. I was raised with a family that is I wasn't raised exactly but I was so closely associated in living with Reverend and Mrs. Sauner and he was at one time pastor of the Swedish Methodist Church and we lived across the street from the Methodist Church so I just fell into the Methodist Church by virtue of association with the Methodist people. Was that after you come back then from Del Rio? Yeah that was after my mother died in 1914 and I left Galveston in 1920 August 1920 I had been with the Santa Fe Railroad from 1915 yeah so I started with them without 15 years old and I worked there for five years at Galveston then I got a job up in Austin Texas with the Southern Pacific so I worked with the Southern Pacific from 1920 to 1965 45 years and then I retired. So your first job then as a railroad in 1915 was that? That was at Galveston the Santa Fe Railroad. I was an office boy with $27.50 a month at Galveston Texas. Running errands and running errands and mailing out mail and opening mail and such as that is what an office boy would do. And that was a good job? $27.50 was a good job with with 50 cents out for hospitalization that gave me very little to live on but we made it. So then you moved to Austin? Then I moved to Austin in August 1920. Yes and then you married? I married her in June 1921 I was here ten months before we married and we have two children I have a grandson he's 29 years old and I have a granddaughter she's 20 22 years old. So when you come to Austin there was still railroading then for 45 years? I've been railroading from 1920 to 1965. And then you belong to the Methodist Church? I belong to them we belong to the Methodist Church. Because your wife was Methodist? Yes she was Methodist we belong to the we both belong to the Methodist Church. Here in Austin? Here in Austin and then we joined the Free Church in about 1946. Here in? Here in Austin Texas yes. So you never belonged to the Decker Church then? No we never we never belonged to the Decker Church. And you've been living here in Austin? Ever since August 1920. Well with the exception of a few months spent in Houston with the Southern Pacific moved us down there for a short time and I was moved back to Austin but I didn't stay there just a few months there. So the Free Church now they've been what you call the Swedish all the way through I mean Swedish preachers and they preached in Swedish the first time when you came here? Oh yes yes the even the Methodist Church. Oh you belong to the Methodist? We belong to the Methodist Church first and during the time there when Reverend Howe, Reverend Howe he died in December 1918 but we did hear him preach several times but it was turning switching to the English language then even then but then they'd have they would have occasional Swedish services and then when Reverend KG Norberg came well then they switched over English entirely but prior to that time they'd have maybe one service a month in the Swedish language but after about after about 1926 or 27 somewhere in there they switched over entirely to the English. And well you became a member here in Austin Church then the Methodist Church? Yes. The United Methodist? Well it was then it was called the Methodist Episcopal Church North and Methodist Episcopal Church South. And it was located close to the capital? It was located close to the capital. And was it entirely Swedish then the church? There was no Americans in it? I would say 99% of the Swedish to Swedish are Swedish extraction. Yes and then more and more Americans came in? Men more came in which demanded the English language. Yes but did they marry into Swedes then? Yes yeah they'd marry into the Swedish Swedish family. And that's the way they come into the church? That's correct. Yes but how about like today now for instance there are other families today that's pure American? That church is all American now. That church that we belong to, that Methodist Church. The former Swedish Methodist Church was all Swedish but after they reunited with the Methodist Church they formed what they call now the Memorial Methodist Church and the United Methodist Church and I understand that they're predominantly English-speaking now and the Swedish is very the Swedish is very very few left. Yes and did this Methodist Church now have a connection with Illinois, the Swedish conference up in Illinois in Chicago? The Methodist Church? Yes with the Swedish conference? Well I don't know but the headquarters I guess the headquarters of the Methodist Church was in Chicago yes that'd be that'd be part of it. So you have exchanged them with other Swedish pastors from other parts of the country? Oh yes yes when you call a pastor we do that in the free church. And then you joined the free churches? We joined the free church in about 1946. And there was the one that was founded off in? That church originally was founded the Austin, present Austin Evangelical Free Church was originally founded at Decker and also at Elroy, Texas. They are both small farming communities south of Austin, country churches. And in about 1923 the Decker community church, free church, and the Elroy free church decided to fold up. But the members got together between Elroy and Decker and they said let's form a church and begin at Austin and have a free church in Austin. So in 1925 or 1924 they did that. They bought some land and finally built a church, established it, and the congregations from the former Elroy and the Decker free churches they moved into Austin and the church here in Austin started in April 1925. And that it was Carl Nelson was the first pastor of that church. I guess that's Carl Nelson, C.G. Nelson, C.G. Nelson, and a lot of the Swedish was used then. In fact a lot of the records of the early records maybe of our church were in the Swedish language. So the members now are still living at Decker at that time. Did they go into Austin for worshipping or did they join another church? A lot of them came to Austin. Some of the original families, very few of them, are still living at Decker. They belong to the Austin church and will commute back and forth. That's the descendants of Henning Jonsson. Well they're descendants of some of the original. Yeah, he comes to our church. How come this free evangelical church, they had a little group that almost in every place where the Swedes settled on like Georgetown or Brushy or Decker yeah and in Elgin. Yeah, Elgin, that's right. And in Brayden. Kimbrough. Yeah. The one in Elgin is just a new church. It's Kimbrough. But it's an outgrowth of the Kimbrough church and also the Austin evangelical church here at Austin. It's Kimbrough where my parents went to that church after they left the Lutheran church. They lived around Kimbrough. My dad was a farmer there before he came to Austin. And they attended this Kimbrough free church. And then that's the church. The tornado came and blew that down and then they rebuilt it. Kimbrough a few years later they moved into Elgin. So there's an outgrowth of two churches from Kimbrough. One at Elgin and one at Austin. Now he mentioned to me a while ago if he could get some information from the present church here and I told him I'd give him Martha Swenson's name and he can call him and find out what information he'll get. He'll know all about it. Because he's from Kimbrough but instead of moving to Elgin he moved to Austin. Where was your mother born? She was born in Armersokra, Småland, Sweden. And that's on the same day? September. So your father's name was Stål. That's a typical name for a soldier. He told us about it. What did you say? Your father's name was Stål. That's a typical name for a soldier. He told us about it. I don't know. Did he tell you anything about Sweden? No, not much. But you speak Swedish in between? Yes, we did. And what year did he come to Texas? I don't know. I don't know what year he came to Texas. Where did he come to Austin? I think he did. Did he buy a farm? Yes. Out in Kimbrough? Yes. And where is it? Where was it? Where is it located? It's near Elgin, right? Yes. How big was his farm? I don't know. He worked on the railroad as well. He had a small farm. Yes, he did. So you were born in Kimbrough? No, I was born here in Austin. But I have a brother who was born out there. How many siblings did you have? Three. Two girls and a boy. And your parents were Lutherans? Yes, in New Sweden. And then I went to Kimbrough to the Lutheran Church. And you went there after a while? So you grew up as free evangelists? First we were Methodists, and then we went to the Free Church in Austin. Our parents were... how do you say it? Dead? Dead. Dead when we went to the Free Church. I hope so. But they belonged to the Free Church, your parents, you said, in Kimbrough? Yes. I don't know. There was another well-known man who was a free evangelist. Gustaf Jansson. Where was he born? I think it was out in Georgetown, in Brunswick. It's north of Round Rock? Yes. Near Northeast. So his parents belonged to the Free Church? Yes. They called him Texas Jansson. He went to Chicago and Minneapolis. But they called him Texas Jansson. So you know him, or were you childhood friends with him? He was older than you, right? Oh yes. But you know him very well? Yes. I think he was 25 years older than me. Your husband may know him well? He doesn't seem to know me that well, but you know him better. She knows him better than you and me. So you lived here in Aastrid? Yes. Was that after he became a preacher, that he was acquainted with you? Yes. So he often came to visit? Yes. When he was a preacher, we went there. He lived in Chicago and Minnesota. But he came down here for a revival meeting. Oh, so an evangelical revival meeting. Yes, a revival meeting. So we went to them. You have a record here that he has recorded, a preaching. We should listen to that....and those who have been with the Lord during the days of rest, came back to the earth in the company of Jesus to enter the body which is for the saints. This happens before the living. Often we have talked about meeting our beloved in heaven, but we would have met them already here, if we had the self-knowledge to go home. Do you hear the lonely old man who sits there in your hut, with the memories of the happy days left, where it is yours to give up? Soon a new day will come for you. The faithful servant you left in the grave will shake your hand again. So that voice you heard in practice now, you have heard it many times? Yes. And you understood in Swedish what he said? Yes. So you understood what he said in Swedish? Did you like the uplifting sermon? Yes. You thought it was good? Yes. But he was just as fluent in English as in... Yes. So it was no difficulty in which language he spoke? No, he could preach English and Swedish. How long did he belong to the Free Church, Jansson? Did he go to school after a while in Chicago, or how did it come about that he went to the Mission Friends? I don't know. You don't know? Or did he go to school here in Texas? He became a Jew. I think he did. So in your home now, Mrs. Olsson, do you speak a lot of Swedish? Not much. Not much? No. But you went to the Swedish school, right? I was young, I think I was twelve years old. It was your school in the summer? Yes, in the summer I went to the Swedish school. And it was the church that you attended? Yes, Methodist Church. Here in Jansson? Yes. And how long did it last? It was only three months, I think. In the summer? Yes. And what did you study? What subjects did you study? Did you study religious studies? And of course, Swedish. I don't know. Were there many of you in those classes? You must remember what you learned, you can still speak Swedish. Not too many, I've forgotten. There weren't many of us who went to that school. It was the priest who was... how do you say... a teacher? Yes, a teacher. So your children couldn't speak Swedish? No. We have one daughter. She can't speak Swedish, she can't understand. We just didn't talk Swedish after she was born. So you have one daughter, the only child? Yes. And she's married to an airplane pilot, or someone who flies the big planes? Yes. She lives in Houston? That's right. And what company does she work for? Pan American Airways. But they don't fly out of Houston, do they? No, they don't. They fly on the west coast, or the east coast? Yes, San Francisco and Los Angeles. He flies from Los Angeles. And he lives in Houston? Yes, he does. So he has a 2000 miles journey to get to work. That's right. So he flies long trips abroad to Japan and... Yes, he flies to Japan, he flies to Saigon over in Vietnam, and he flies to England, France, and to South American countries, what? Manila, Guam, all those South American countries. So he's been away for a long time? Yes, he's been away while he's been home. End of interview. And that was Carl Oscar Theodor Olsson and his wife in Austin, Texas, reporting. This was D-Day, December 4, 1974. For more information on the US Department of State, visit www.fema.gov. End of interview.