 My parents, my mother she was born in Småland. And you know at that time they came down to Skåne and took some in a Tumland baiter, sucker baiter to take care of in the summertime and in the fall to take them up in the fall. And they always had a man, a gang, took them down there. It was kind of a foreman farm. Both women and boys? Right. I mean girls? Well she was a young girl then. And all her sisters came down after that. She had five sisters. They worked on the same place all along but different time. And my dad he worked on a farm as my mother did too after she had been down there so many years in the workers I told you about. So they worked together. Mother she was 21 when she was married and my dad was 25. And after that, after they were married they went back to Trelleborg, to town there. And he knew the town because he was born and raised there. And he got a job, they bought a house there along the water there. Did he work in the beet fields too? No, no, no, no. No, he worked on a farm and she did too after she had been down there, just going there for a few years. She stayed down there. That's the reason all her sisters and brothers came down there too. And he got a job as a, he drove a bread truck in the country many years ago. He had two horses and a bread wagon and he drove around in Sweden and the country and sold bread. And he knew everybody there, you know, because he was born and raised there and he knew everybody around town there. And he liked his whiskey and he got too much of that sometime. And sometime, that's why my mother told me all this now. He got too much whiskey sometime and the horses they knew themselves. He laid in the wagon drunk as a, you know. So the horses they knew better? The horses, they knew their way home. He didn't have to, he just laid there drunk in the car. And he, the boss or the owner of the bakery, he had to loan him money to buy that house he had. There was a duplex. So my mother's brother, he lived in half of the house. He was the owner too. So he, you know, he didn't know who he had to sell bread to. He couldn't, he couldn't, he couldn't. He didn't know how much he had to sell or nothing. So he got way in the hole there. So the fellow that had loaned the money, or the boss, he wanted to protect his money. So he put a lien against, I mean, not a lien, but what do you call it? Put a, so he wouldn't lose his money. He, I don't know what you call it now. I know what you mean. In other words, they had to protect themselves so he didn't. Yeah. And he sold the house, he sold the house. Everything. How many children were you then at that time? He was, at that time we were five kids. And you were born too? Yeah, I'm the second one. Now I'm the oldest, but I had a brother. Did you help your dad too in this bakery delivery? No, no, I wasn't that old. Just at that time, what I'm talking about now, I was only four or five years old. At this time, I'm talking now. So then he had to move out on the farm as a starter, a regular starter. And he drove a team of horses, you know, in Sweden there. Even if they had about a couple hundred acres of tundland, he drove them. The farmer himself, he didn't work at all. But they took that much help, four or five hired hands, to work the ground and farm it. And then another one to take care of the cows, you know what I mean. So your mother helped out too then to be a starter? Yeah. They both helped out. She was milking the cows perhaps? No, not at that time, later on. So they had to move out on the farm, yeah. And he worked like that, I told you now, for a couple of years. But then he started, so Røkdøy, do you know where Røkdøy is? Yeah. And my mother, she helped milk the cows too. And he took care of all the cows, 40, 50 cows they had, to take care of them and milk them. And I was just a kid when he started out, I was just about five or six years old. And then the time went along. You had a house right on the farm then? No, they had a long house, there were five, six families lived in that house, full of lice and everything. You know, it wasn't too, it wasn't as bad as it was those days. There was no pest control? No, no. So you remember those years though? I remember it, I remember it, up to about six years old, or five years old. Not all of it, but my mother, she, but after six years old, I think I can remember most of it. And then we grew older, I had to help, help my dad. With the cows? Yeah, and all that, and sometimes he got too much whiskey and he, after I got up to about ten, eleven years old, I had to take care of everything. He lay drunk. Where did he get the whiskey then? Well, you know, they had, at that time they had all the whiskey they wanted. At that time. Later on there was, they could... Did the other workers drink too on the job or got drunk? Huh? Did the other starter too drunk, got drunk? Maybe some of them did, I don't know, I couldn't tell you that. And then I was, and then of course when I got twelve, thirteen years old, the nest got too small, so they had to push me out to work for farmers. They hired me out to a farmer the first time. I hadn't quit school then. I worked from March to June, going to school every day and take care of all the farmer's cows I worked for. And later on after school was out, I had to take a team of horses and then had another kid, a younger name, that took care of my job, I had. So you were a man down the... I was a man when I was twelve, thirteen years old. You did a man's job? I did, yeah. So, yes, how much did you get paid then? Could you keep that money? Well, no, well I... I was hired out for eighty counts. A month? Eighty counts for the whole time, for eight months. Eight months? Ten counts a month in the... Could you keep that money? Well, yes, I could keep the money, but they had to buy clothes for them. Buy clothes for them, most of the money. So they were hired out up to the 24th of October, you know, in Michelsnow. Yesterday? Yeah. And during the summer, this farmer I worked for, he had loaned me out to some other farmer he knew. They were stressing, and I had to work out for a day. And, you know, he paid me two counts for that day, that farmer. And I remember all this stuff, you know. And then, when the 24th of October came, my farmer that I worked for, he wanted me to stay a day over. Because I had worked for that other farmer, and I was paid two counts. But I didn't want to do it, so he took off two counts for me on my wages. So, you know, there was traffic going then. So after the 24th of October, they didn't want you anymore? Then I also had to go to the L'Asse-Auf-Preston to become a mayor. And this started at the end of October? Yeah. And you stayed at home then? I stayed at home then over the winter, when I went to L'Asse-Auf-Preston. What were you doing then for... Then I had to take care of most of the cows. You know, help my dad and... Oh, your father was a stallion? Yeah. And milk the cows. Sometimes I had nine, ten cows to make. No, I didn't get paid for living at home. And then after that, it was confirmed that I was to go back to the farm. They hired me out to a farmer's. I worked at a farmer's until I was 18 years old. And after I was about 14 or 15, 14 I guess I was, my dad, he bought a house not too far from the farm that he worked. He bought a house with three... three... three... three... ten land yield. So he had a cow, raised a cow and a couple of pigs a year. Of course, there was still... there was still... there was still four of them home. We were two boys that were out working for farmers then. And then the third boy, he... he started learning... this was outside of Ashland, just about six kilometers outside of Ashland. So it was easy to walk back and forth. But he went into Ashland, he... he said, boy, he was two years younger than I am, and he started to work learning the painter trade. So he was there for that painter learning his trade. And, you know, he stayed with that painter until he let my brother take over the shop. And he died and, of course, my brother, he kept on painting too. He's still living too. So how about your parents? How did they... Their parents, they still live... they lived in that house. There's a house in there that's used... resembles... resembles my house where I was... where I left in Sweden. This house. It resembles that. A house like that. You mean they were a stockholder, you said? No, no, no. That was their own house. They bought it later on. Do you know what it looked like? Yeah. And she does too because she saw... But... It's interesting. It comes later on. So, he started a house there. There were seven families, you said, living together in a big... I don't know if there were six or seven, but at least five. But I was only a kid then. I was just three, four years old. You had kids to the other family. I had kids. All of them had kids. So you all played together then? All played together, yeah. What did you do then? Did you have fights and... I guess we did. I don't... I don't know. You don't want to remember? Well, I didn't... No, I didn't... I don't remember that far. Do you remember if it was hard times sometimes? Oh, sure, it was hard times. In what way? You mean... Did you have enough to eat? Well, you know, we... The... He had so many... He had to plant potatoes on. That was part of his wages. And he had so many liters of milk. Oh, I know. Oh, you know, yeah. Was it enough, you think? No, it wasn't enough. Of course, there was too many kids. We had too many kids. And then there came some more kids after that. We were seven... We were four or five kids then. And then came... Came a sister of mine. She's 80 years old now. I remember when she was born. I don't remember... Yeah, I remember when she was born. But, you know, when they restarted, they had to take on so many acres of bait to take care of. So they would make extra money. And my mother, she was, you know, she could work in the spring, but not in the fall. In the fall, I remember, my sister was born. And so we had... I was five years old, and I had to be out with my dad in the evening, because he took care of the job in the evening after his days with work in the moonlight. And he had a little kerosene light with him. So that's the way... How... At times like that, it was kind of hard. So daylight was work on the big forest? Night. Drive a team of horses and do things, whatever we were supposed to do, like... There were four or five... Was it a big farm then? It was a big farm with 200 acres, 200 ton of land. Well, that's about 400 acres. And... And there was work every day of the week? Did he have Sunday off? Well, as long as he drove a team of horses, he had Sunday off. Not every Sunday, but he had most of the Sundays. After that, he took the job as a ryktaj. Then he had to work seven days a week. Seven days a week? Did ryktaj have Sunday too? Oh, yeah. Sure, they had to feed the cows and milk and... Did ryktaj have Sunday too? Yeah, they did that too. Oh. Yeah. So that was a steady job. Do you remember, though, if you went to church on Sunday? We never did go to church. Never? Never did go to church. None of the others either? My dad, he never did go to church. My mother, she was kind of religious, and she was brought up that way in Smurrund, but my dad, he never did. So we never did go to church before... When we went to confirmation. Then we had to go to church every Sunday as long as we were going to the confirmation class. Did everybody go to church to be confirmed as your classmates? Yeah. Everybody? Yeah, they did, yeah. But other than that, they never... After the confirmation, nobody went to church. In my family. And in most of the families too in Sweden. So you didn't see the pastor too often then? You didn't see the pastor too often? No, no, no. You had no reason to see him? No, that's not... He never made any house calls? No, no. You know, the... The regering, what do you call it? The church belonged to the... The state. The state, yeah, the state church. We paid after I got 15 years old, I remember. We had to pay into the church. A tax. So you remember that? Yeah. A tax. We had to pay three, four crowns. That's all we paid. And I don't know how to... I guess we got enough money to run the church that way. Yes. So how about... did you have any other churches like the Mifunshus? Yeah, they had that in the cities, yeah. Not out of nowhere. But not on the countries? No. Inga Baptist? Fersnys, I mean. Southern Asian Army. So then, did you go to the military service then after... Well, then I... Yeah, they're coming. So then after I was 18 years old and quit the farm work, I went up to Göteborg and worked in a shipyard there in Götterdörken. And I worked there. I worked everything. I worked with everything. I quit there after I had been... I guess I was homesick from the... even if you had a hard time in being so many kids at home. You still want to go home? Yeah. I stayed there for quite a while. But then I did all kinds of work. I worked in blacksmith shops. And then later on I worked in a place where they built ships, Götterdörken, near Skåne. In Göteborg? No, it was in Landskrona. In Landskrona. And that's where the Götaverken is? Yeah. I worked there for a couple of years. And like I said, I worked a little bit of everything. Working the woods. Let's see. Hold on. Yeah, I was about 20... 22, 20... It was years before I had to go into the military. And then we had to go into the military. And I had to go in there for six months at that time. And after I came back from the military, well, like I said, I worked with everything. I worked on buildings. I was tempted to break layers. You had a lot of hard work there. Common labor. Were you the only one from Göteborg, down to your place? Did you have any friends with you from the... No, no. You were alone? Yeah. Well, then, after... It was around 1925, my uncle, he lived here no more. My mother's brother, they were all down there. There was seven or eight kids. And... Let's see. Yeah, he... He talked me into going there. I had a little money, but not much. And he loaned me the rest of it to get there. That was in 1925. He came home to Sweden in 1925, to Christmas. His name was Hilding Håkansson. So I lived with... I came here, and I lived with him for about four or five months. So I had paid back my... But I owned him. I owned him 600 crowns. I don't remember how much it was in dollars. How did you get about not to... You bought your ticket in Sweden, though. Did he buy the ticket for you? No, I bought it myself. But the way I was... He helped me in a way, because if I had to go through the regular channels, it would take me a whole year to get in there. But if you went to a farm, as a farmhand, you could get in there right away. You could pay right away, almost. You had to go to a farm, then? So he had his wife. She had a... She knew some farmer in Oakland, Damascus. Ekedal, I think his name was. So he... I was supposed to come to him, but I didn't go there. This is the way to get in here sooner. Ekedal was his name. So he signed the paper? He helped me with the papers. Whatever he did, I don't know. He helped me with the papers. I was supposed to go with him at the time when he went back, but I didn't have all my papers ready then. So I had to go with the following boat. The boats were running then. Did you leave from Copenhagen? No, I left from Göteborg. Göteborg? On what boat then? Drottningholm? I don't know if it was Drottningholm or Stockholm. I don't remember that. I guess I don't remember that. I think it was Stockholm. The name of the boat. And they went straight to New York? Straight to New York, yeah. And you came there to Ellis Island? Was Ellis Island closed? No, I had to go through there. We came in the 7th. 7th of April, 1926. Towards the evening. We had to stay on the boat until the following day. Then they had a ferry come and pick us up and took us to Ellis Island. And we spent most of the day there. We had to go through all our papers and doctors and everything, you know. We had to go through. Towards the evening, they took us to a different railroad station where we were supposed to go and sleep here in this country. And there was a lot of fellows that were going out to California, and girls too. So I thought I would go with them. I had them to go with until we got to Omaha, because, you know, there was a straight chute to Omaha. But no, no, I didn't get there. They just took me and a girl. The girl was from Helsingborg, Sweden. And she was going to Kansas City, and I was going to Omaha. And they took me way around. I don't know where they... Well, first they stopped in Philadelphia. And then a lady came and took us off the train, and we had to sit there. And she locked us in in a jail there. It's almost like a jail, you know, that you sit down and wait. Of course, you had to do it so they didn't lose you. So they put us on another train, went to St. Louis. There she took us off the train again. And the girl, she was going to Kansas City, and I was going to Omaha. And they put me on the train, and it was the wrong train, I found out later on. Because after I had been on the train for about an hour or so, they took me off the train again. I didn't think it was right, so I said, no, I don't want to go. Well, they knew I wouldn't want to go out, but they finally got me out. And this week was the place of the season where they had took me off. And I was supposed to be here in Omaha the day before. So you lost the day, that's the number? Yeah, because they sent me on, way on. What happened to the girl from Kansas City? Well, she had, first we left New York, they bought lunch box. And they lasted for three days. Three days? There wasn't much in them, but we didn't eat none of it. Well, you were told they were supposed to last three days? No, no, they didn't tell me what. They cost a dollar, this lunch, and I had to last it for three days before we could eat or nothing. The girl, she had such a headache, toothache, so she couldn't eat at all. And I didn't really feel like eating either, because you know when you come to, you're all worried about things. Did you have any food packed with you in the suitcase from Sweden? No, no, we didn't have to have that. What did you pack now when you left Trelleborg? We left, we lived in Estovia then. In Estovia, what did you pack then when you left for America? Did you pack anything special, clothing or? No, just what I had on me. Just what I had on me, that's all. I had my mom's, she gave me the Bible. It was packed on? Yeah. How about an overcoat? I had an overcoat, it was in wintertime, see, and they had to… What did the pastor tell you now when you went up to him for a practice fatigue? I don't remember what he said. He never seen you before since confirmation? No. There was a new pastor in Estovia. Yeah, there was another pastor, yeah. But he hadn't seen me, but I had seen him, so I knew him. At that time they had a press guard, and there was a minister's radius. And he had to arrange the press guard and some other farmer. And so whatever he got from that, it was his radius. So were there more people on the same boat now than you from your area? Were you the only one from…? No, we were 600, 700 on the boat. But there was no one specifically from your area? Yeah, there were several of them. Not my friends, no, but you got acquainted with right away because they had to go in a certain place to go into the boat and so on. No, I never knew anybody that… none of my friends, but they got to be friends later on. So it was bad times in Sweden at that time, 1926. It was hard to get a job. Yeah, I had work now and then. And you decided to leave? I decided to leave, yeah. Was it hard enough, what did he say about it? Well, you know, it took it hard, both of them, but I had decided to go. My uncle, he just talked me into going there. Like I said, I didn't have no trade of any kind, like my other brother later on, the long trade. And then there was… I came in on a Saturday night, 12 o'clock, April the 10th. To Omaha? To Omaha, just before 12 o'clock. Next morning, we went to church. I had to go to church with my uncles. They went to church every Sunday. They were religious? Yeah. What was your uncle's name? He was Hilding Haakonsson. He belonged there to a church in Omaha. Then he got me a job for a Swede. He was a cement contractor, putting sidewalks and cement floors and things like that. He paid me 45 cents an hour. And I worked for him for two, three weeks. And we put in some sidewalks for him on a place. This contractor, he was a gentleman. He knew I came from Sweden, so he wanted me to work as a carpenter, which was good. It was all right for me, so I worked for about three months with him. But then I quit him because my uncle, he got me another job. He knew a Swedish fellow here. His name was Ruben Ekström. He was a foreman for a skugman. That was his name. He was a duplex. He built many duplexes. And he gave me a job, so I was there. I quit that job and started with selling Swede. But he went broke, this guy. And after a year, the following year, it was me and another fellow Swede. We left for Oxford, Illinois. What kind of work? Were you a carpenter? I was learning to be a carpenter. You didn't try it in Sweden? No. The German, he thought you were a Swede, you've got to be a carpenter. So you started to help out then on the jobs with the saw and the hammer and the square. And you did it day by day. Yeah. I worked up on the 52nd and 11th Ward here in Omaha. We built three duplexes next to each other on the 52nd. And they're still standing there. Every time I go by there, I think of that. I only been there for a few months at that time. Because they were all Swedes working for him. So you all talk Swede on the job. So you had no trouble then to start as a carpenter? No. I had no trouble, no. But at times getting to these stuff here too, in Omaha, because the contractor, he went broke. So there's another fellow and me, we left for Rockford and went there, tried to get work. And we did get work. He did. He had a fellow who was younger than me. So he was a contractor from, had come in from Iowa into Rockford and just started up. So he needed an apprentice. So he put him on as an apprentice. But I had to work as a laborer. I worked as a laborer for him for a while. And then later on I tried to get work as a carpenter. But there was in, this was 1927 when I went to Rockford. In 28, in 28 we, they were building a bridge over Rock River there in Rockford, Illinois. The bridge over the water was there, but the approach from the east side up to the bridge wasn't there. I got a job there as building forms for the concrete, you know. And this was in 28, in the wintertime. And there was no union job at the time when I started. And they had trouble. They wanted to be union, to keep union men there. And I don't know how they did it, but anyway. They picked out the boss there, he picked out me and another Swede to join the union. They even paid for it to join it there in Rockford. They paid for that because they were having trouble with something, but they demanded somebody had to be union men there. And it was enough to just keep two of them? Well, as a union, but the rest of them were non-union. And the union then went along with that? Oh yes, they did. So you became a union man then? I became a union man only about a year. As a carpenter? As a carpenter. And I tried to hold up my end, but it was hard, you know, being a union man. Working for union work as a carpenter. Did you get more pay then? Oh yes, sure. They paid more. How much more? Oh, I don't remember what it was. But anyway, I made pretty good money. I was there for about eight or nine months. And then it was 28, it was all done in the close Christmas. You know, I went home at that time in Sweden to stay. In 1928? It had only been two and a half years. And I went home to stay because I had made good money. And I paid back my debt I had from my uncle. And I had money so I could go home to Sweden. And money so I could go back here again. Used to being here for two and a half years. Once they thought I was home in Sweden, it was something remarkable. So they were glad to see you back then in Sweden? Yeah, but I didn't stay. I had stayed home for a while, but then I went off to Göteborg and worked in Götaverken again. I worked there for a while. How long were you here? I didn't know. I stayed home from Christmas to June, so it wasn't too long. And then you went back here again? I went back here again in June, 1929. So how was the situation in Sweden in Götaverken in 1929? Was it bad for the workers or was it unionized? It was unionized. You had to have a union book to get in there. It was easy for you to get in there? Oh yeah, well, they needed people there. I worked as a carpenter then. So what happened then in June? Did you have a return ticket to America? No, I didn't have a return, but I had money so I could buy a ticket back again. And I even went to Rockford, see. I left Rockford and came back to Rockford. And I even, after I had been in, you know, that was in 1929, well, I didn't know that everything started to go backwards then. You didn't notice anything? Huh? You didn't notice anything on the workplaces and so on? Everything was going all right? Just for a year or so, but then the depression started in. And no work. I bought a car. I bought a car too when I came back here. So you had quite a bit of money? I don't know if I paid it. I paid 250 pounds for it, not dollars. 250 pounds in dollars. I don't know if I had the money or I just took it on payment. I think I did. You needed a car? Yeah. But you know, I didn't even have to have a driver's license at that time. In 26, in 29. Never had a driver's license. I never. And you could drive, if you could drive, you go ahead and drive. Oh, did you learn to drive? I didn't. I bought the car. I couldn't drive. There was a fellow that had gone back home to Sweden. He wanted to get rid of it, to rent, you know, to rent. It was a car that was three, four years old. And, but I didn't have that. I had it, drove around the following year because no work to be had here, there in Rockford. So there was bad times then? And there started to be bad times, so I went around. Another fellow and I, we went looking for work. We went to, we were heading for Minneapolis. We went to a place, the Chatefield, I remember the name of that Chatefield. They were building a big church there. There was reform work for the foundation. They were starting on it. And I was there, we worked there for a couple of weeks, three weeks maybe. We were laid off. We were heading for Minneapolis. We went to Hastings, Minneapolis, Minnesota. And there they were building an elevator. And now we got, they stopped in there and put us on there for a few days. And, and then they laid us off. And we went to Minneapolis. My other fellow, my friend, he got a job there. He got a job. Just a short job. It lasted for a week or two. And I stayed with him. I didn't work. I couldn't get any. So we went, after he got done, laid off, we went back to Rockford. And then things got tougher and tougher there. I sold my car and went to Omaha again. It was 19, I think it was 1930 in the fall. I wasn't married then. You were single? Single, yeah. You didn't have a girlfriend in Sweden that you visited in 1928? No. Seven? No. And, let's see, what else? Yeah, and then, you know, I worked here off and on. And there was a friend I knew here in Omaha. He was a painter. Him and I, we were trying to work our way back to Sweden on a boat. Trying to hitchhike from here to Sweden, or to New York. We only got to Chicago. And he got, what do you call it, cold feet, yeah? He got cold feet. He didn't want to go anymore. No. He went back to Omaha by himself. How did you hitchhike? Was it the train? The first day when we started hitchhiking from Omaha to New York, we took the highway. We only got to Emerson 60 miles out of here. From Omaha, 60 miles in a day. But we waited. There came a freight train at night. Open railroad cars, you know, had been called in. You sat in there? We sat in there. We rode all night. We came up to Boone, Iowa. You know where that is? Yes. And we got off there. Went to a café. Went to a café. That fellow had a couple dollars. And I maybe had a few dollars too then. And the girl that we asked for this and that, you know, for stale bread and all that stuff. Tubercane. Yeah. And the girl there in the café, she knew we wasn't real bums, but we told her we were. And she didn't charge for the coffee and the rolls that morning. She didn't charge for it. No. You know? But we had to go in and did go in bakeries and ask for stale bread, stale rolls and whatever they had. We got it. Everybody was bumming the freight then at that time. Was it a lot of travelers like that? Oh, yeah. The trains were full of them then. So they didn't chase you out of the train. Where did you sleep then during the night if you could? On the railroad cars or? Slept on the train and the cars. We used to travel at night. Not in that time? No. So if they had caught you, then what would have happened then? Huh? If they had caught you at the railroad stations, what would have happened then? If they had what? If they had caught you riding the train. Oh, well, they did catch me. I happened to... When he left me in Chicago, I walked most of the time, most of the way, from Chicago to Rockford, which is 90 miles in between there. Maybe I rode half of the way. That walked at least 45 miles. And I got there. I had been there and worked before, and I had to go to the contractor I had been working for to get his name on it so I could check in on the flophouse. They got a soup line and the furnace was with the bed there. But I got lost a couple of times. You didn't have any money? I stayed there. I stayed there for... This was in November. I stayed there through the spring. Went back out to Omaha again. And then that night, when I left Rockford for Omaha to catch the train, it was kind of chilly. It was getting to be cold. It was in November, too. No, it was in spring. It was cold anyway, so I was waiting around there in the railroad yard. So I went in the car. It was open there. I walked back and forth to keep warm until they come to train. Then a railroad detective came and flashed a light that was showing in my eyes so I couldn't see who it was. He had a gun and he said he would shoot me if I didn't come down right away. And he saw I was a real bum. We stood and talked. We got friends before I left him and he told me I had to do it. Take it the next morning. So he told you to take a train the next morning? Yeah, and I did. And there were only open cars? No, no, there was closed cars. I had a little experience then, you know, for riding freight trains. He helped us look for a train that you could close. But it was very cold in there, though. Yeah, it was. Of course, you know, even if it wasn't the summer times, it was cold because the speed of the train, you know, did that. I came back to Omaha. I didn't have the money to come back to Omaha. I checked in. I had it. I had some, I guess. I checked in there in Salvation Army Hill down on 10th Street someplace in Omaha. I didn't go to Monaco then at night because I got off in Council Bluff and walked over the bridge because the dime, no, because the nickel then to walk over the bridge. And I paid 25 cents for bed, sleep that night in Salvation Army. So where did you get the money now after being through November to spring? I mean, you had no work. Well, I had work once in a while. I could get a job. That fellow, Ruben Ekström, that was the Swedish boss I worked for, he was a religious man. Salvation Army, they had, of course, they had to give me a name when I had a bed at Salvation Army. I told them you had been there before and all that, and they had called him up. And by God, he gave me a job for three weeks coming in here. But I don't remember the wage I had, but I was glad to get the job. And I stayed with my uncle then for about three weeks. What was he doing, your uncle? He was the, he took care of, took care of the gardener. Oh, gardener. Yeah. Well, he must have had plenty to do for you. No. No? No, he didn't have anything. He used to do it for himself. He didn't hire anybody. He used to work for himself. What about the slaughterhouses down on 24th Street? They didn't have anything either. I did. Later on, I did that. After I was married, I worked down there. I remember. So, after we go into that, you came back to Omaha and then you stayed, stayed on. You never went back to Sweden again? No. No, I didn't. You came to Germany. They wanted me to come back. My parents wanted me to come back. You would try to get the money together some way. Of course, they knew I was tough there. But I didn't. I didn't. I was ashamed to come back the way, you know, that way. And you didn't have any job lined up in Sweden either? No. No. It was hard there too, I think. That's the way it went. But then, finally here, here in Omaha, I got a job. After been loafing, been in bread lines and soup lines and whatnot, I got a job in a hotel there, Hotel Corn Ant, on 16th and Harney Street there, as a maintenance carpenter. Fix everything that went wrong there, you know. Doors didn't work right and windows didn't work right and keys, I had to make keys for all the, you know, and I had $80 a month, which was pretty good. But in that time, I taught. So I stayed there for three years. Three years? Yeah. Steady work? Huh? Steady work? Yeah. And then I quit. I was courting my wife too. That was the time I worked there in a hotel. How did you meet your wife now? Well, I met her in a park. We saw each other in a church, mission church or whatever. So you started to go to Sherston after you came back here? Yeah, I did. Did you join the Sherston? No, I didn't join. I didn't join before, after we were married. I joined out in California in a church there. Oh, you went down to California also? Yeah, I was out there after we were married. We went out there. I had, at that time, I had, this was in 37, we went out there. I had a, no, 28, a 28 Chevy. I had a 28 Chevy. And we started out for California in that car. And we got there. It took us five days to get there. Oh, that was not bad. Five days to get to Oakland, California, just this side of San Francisco. Was that a sightseeing tour or were you looking for a job? No, it was just looking for work. And you had your wife with you? Yeah, we were married then. She was ready to send you off? We had been married for a year then. And she didn't have a job here no more? Yeah, she worked before we were married, yeah. Not after we were married, no. So she quit then? Yeah, before we, she married, yeah. She thought like this, now I have a husband. He's the one who's going to work and I stay home. Did they usually do that when they married, the wife? Well, they didn't do that as much then. No, this is 50 years ago. They didn't do that then. So you took this long trip out there and... We stayed out there for 12 years. I bought a house out there. For 12 years? 12. You got a job there in Oakland? Yeah, I worked there as a carpenter. Yeah, I guess for 12, 11 years I think it was. Then we came back, no, then we went to Sweden, that's right. We had two kids then. One was five and one was ten. And we sold the house we had. I had a house, I bought the house out there for $2,200. What year? 1939. 1939 I think it was. And we sold it. When we sold it, I got close to $10,000 for it. Because things were getting better then. So we went up there to her parents in Strasbourg, Nebraska. She was on a farm. So our boy, he stayed there with her parents over the winter and went to school. And we went to Sweden in 1942.