 Yeah, it's July 17, 1985 and I'm sitting together with Wesley Knorr, Kent, Connecticut, but we are in Jamestown, New York at present time. And you have been affiliated with the furniture industry of Jamestown for many, many years. Yes, since 1929. Of course I worked here in the plant summers when I was going to high school and college. So I really probably started working here summers about 1921. So you have, we can say, about 50 years' experience. So you went to school here in Jamestown and brought up here. And then you went to high school and— Then I went to Dartmouth College. For how many— Four years. Four years. And you graduated there with a high degree of learning. Yes, summa cum laude. And were you all set at that time to go into business or— Yes. We had the arrangement at Dartmouth where you could take one year in the business school. That was your major. And that's what I did. I took three years of liberal arts and then one year in the business school. And then I came from there right to here. Who gave you the idea to go to Dartmouth? Your parents or your teachers? Well, I would think it was primarily because some of the boys that I knew in high school went to Dartmouth. There was no one else you could step in on to a good future. And you came here home in the summer to work for your— Yes. And your dad was in charge then of the Union National or— Well, he was out primarily out in the assembly cabinet room. And he was always associated with that. His original job in the furniture industry was hand carving. He learned to hand carve. And he did that as long as there was need for hand carvers. And then he went into the assembly and the cabinet department, supervised that. So he never worked in the office department then? No. No. He had other people to take care of that. Yeah. But he knew how to carve and how to make the furniture the right way. Yeah. And it started off with good quality furniture from the beginning or did he have outlines? Well, I think it was always good quality. There's entirely different designs than we have nowadays, but I think it was always good quality furniture. Did all the furniture makers have that in mind at those days? They didn't spit them out faster and they could check the quality? Well, of course, my memory doesn't go back that far. But, of course, the time I went and came into the business, there were manufacturers of varying quality furniture in Jamestown. I think we probably were making the highest quality, but in general, Jamestown always had the reputation of building good furniture, even in what might be considered the lower price ranges. It still was built well and good solid construction. Based on the reputation to obtain more prospective buyers. Yes. And then you went to Jamestown in 1929. Yes. In what month? Well, I started work here July 1st. July 1st. Did you see any sign of a slowdown you mentioned before in 1926? Well, of course, I naturally didn't know too much what had been happening before 29. I found after I got here that the peak year really had been 1926. And from there on, it began to slow down, not only here, but I think in general in furniture. What was the reason for that? Frankly, I don't know. I suppose it was sort of a precursor of the Depression, but why it happened to hit the furniture industry, I don't know. How about the house market through 1926 to 1929? Was it also weak or was it slow? I don't think I really know. I don't know. Because the early part of 20s, they built a lot of family dwellings. Yes. They bought their own house for the first time. But then it was— Well, I don't feel as though I have any real knowledge of what the housing industry was doing at that time. So you started in July 1929, and then what happened a few months later in October, for instance, there was the Black Wednesday? Well, no, it wasn't—actually, I don't recall. We were too concerned about it. So the stock market didn't affect too much then? I don't—I'm sure it had its effect, but it wasn't dramatic. It was just a gradual tapering down in volume of business. It got to be very, very difficult, you know, to make a profit. So how many were employed then in the Union National? Well, at that time, it was over 200. 200? And then you had operants in also in different sections of the United States. Yeah. And there were salesmen on the road. Oh, yes. All the time. And at that time, of course, our prices was comparatively competitive so that we—oh, we could sell companies like Macy's, Carroad's Furniture, and we're doing that. So that—well, the thing was, of course, in order to do that, you had to keep your prices almost too low, so it got to be very difficult to make a profit. To compete. Yeah. Who—the competitors now, were they in Rockford and even South at that time? Well, there wasn't too much competition in the South at that time. That developed later. Our competition mostly was in Michigan and— Grand Rapids. Indiana, Grand Rapids, and Rockford, and Illinois, and so on. How about the raw material? Did they come from surrounding areas or did you have to check— Well, we were using quite a lot of mahogany, of course, which had to be imported, and we were buying lumber from the South, shipped in by carload. We were buying—at that time bought practically no local lumber. So it was almost island, the furniture making, like maple, how many times did you— Yes, of course, we didn't use any—we didn't make any solid maple furniture. We used quite a lot of oak at one time, but that was before I came into the picture. And there was also shipped in because there was no local oak? There is local oak, but I'm sure they must have had it bought and shipped in by rail, because at that time they had no way of handling lumber except by rail. Came in on a siding and had to be unloaded from a railroad car, put into the kilns. Did you have buyers also for the raw material to buy it on site or what did you— No. Most cases we had salesmen that called on us. With the raw material? Yeah. I see. And I think the main reason that we got started buying our lumber locally was because when freight rates got so high. And then we just set up a lumber yard so we could buy lumber by the truckload and handle it. And then we started buying more and more locally, and now nothing comes in by rail anymore. All by truck? All by truck. And this company, or a lot of Swedes? Oh, yes. All the foreman's were Swedes? Oh, yes. And when they hired somebody, at that time you had a chance to get greenhorns to write all the trains that would be? Yes, although by the time I came here, of course, the period of immigration had pretty much ended. So we didn't get many greenhorns, but there was still a kind of reservoir of skilled Swedish craftsmen in the area, and if we needed a cabinetmaker, we could almost always find one. So you didn't have to import them? No. You were all there? Uh-huh. So then when you came into the 30s and started to be weaker and weaker, and then you had to lay off people, and there were no unions then at that time in the 1930s? Yes, we had a union. There was a union? Uh-huh. The carpenter union or? It was a front-shell worker's union. A special union? Uh-huh. And I was the head of the union. And you were the head of the union? Yes. And you were the head of the union? Yes. And you were the head of the union? Yes. And at that time we had very poor leadership inside the plant, which made it very difficult to— Oh, you mean to come back to unions or? Yeah, yeah, to, you know, come to a reasonable settlement with them. And they were demanding too much? Demanding too much, yeah. For the time? For the time, uh-huh. And you couldn't reason with them? No. No, we tried very hard to reason with them and point out to them that things had reached the point where they just had to work with us and reduce our costs or it would be all over. And they just couldn't see it our way, so. But you were in the 19—so there were bad years in theory all the way up to 1937, 1938? Yeah, up to 1939. 1939 was when we reorganized. So they continued, then, to put pressure onto the union all those years to the thirties? Oh, yes. Without realizing how the rest of the time will look like? Yeah. So did you have agreements with them? How often did you meet with them for arbitration or settlement? Well, at that time the contracts usually were just for one-year contracts. for one year at a time. So there was a lot of discussions every year then. Guillenmour-Oh, yes. Quintana Newton So—but it was still open and you operated all new ships during the Depression. How many did you lay off because of all ships? Guillenmour-Well, I don't remember now the numbers, but I imagine that we were probably down to about a—well, probably a hundred. Quintana Newton So half of the workforce— Guillenmour-Yeah, was gone. Quintana Newton But it was not pretty bad anyway, a hundred people at that time. Guillenmour-No, no. Quintana Newton So you kept them on the payroll. And it was a ten-hour work day then. Guillenmour-Well, by that time—let's see, thirty-ten. No, we'd gone down to an eight-hour day then. Quintana Newton Eight hours. Guillenmour-That was one of the things that hit us very hard, you know. We had to go to an eight-hour day and pay the same as we had for practically a ten-hour day. Quintana Newton Oh, I see. Guillenmour-It was federal law passed, you know. Quintana Newton Eight-hour work day? Guillenmour-Eight-hour work day. Quintana Newton So the U.N. didn't press that particular eight hours. It was federal. Guillenmour-It was, yeah. Quintana Newton I see. But they demanded equal pay for the same— Guillenmour-Well, that was—we were required by law to do that. Quintana Newton Okay. Guillenmour-And, of course, that alone increased that cost tremendously. Quintana Newton But was it also in law that you have to have the same pay for eight hours as ten? Guillenmour-Uh-huh. Quintana Newton Federal law? Guillenmour-Yeah. Quintana Newton When did they take the pay? Guillenmour-Well, it was during Roosevelt's administration. Quintana Newton Oh, thirty-four, thirty-five? Guillenmour-Yeah. Quintana Newton I see. Guillenmour-Yeah. And I think that's one of the reasons we got into difficulties, because it raised that cost so much. Quintana Newton So you could see immediately there was a tremendous drag in your budget, you know, to keep going. Guillenmour-Oh, yes. Yeah. Quintana Newton And there was no way to get it done, no reason for them to— Guillenmour-No, they— Quintana Newton Get the law to back them up? Guillenmour-Yes, as far as that particular phase was concerned, it was a very difficult phase. Quintana Newton And you were not able to get it done? Guillenmour-No. Quintana Newton And you were not able to get it done? Guillenmour-No. Quintana Newton And you were not able to get it done? Guillenmour-Yes, as far as that particular phase was concerned, we had to do that. But of course, they could have agreed to reduce the rate per hour. They could have voluntarily done that. Negotiated such an agreement. Quintana Newton You couldn't press them into it? Guillenmour-No. Quintana Newton I see. But you were going on one year at a time up to 1938? Guillenmour-Yeah, up until 1939, actually. Quintana Newton Then they hit with the strike? Guillenmour-Yeah. Quintana Newton So what did you do then when they came back at you and said that they won't do it? Guillenmour-To back up a little bit, I've been thinking a little bit, it was a sequence of events. It was, I think, in late 1938. We were beginning to run out of cash, to the point where we couldn't pay our bills. We knew we had to do something. And it seemed the only thing to do was to reorganize, make some kind of a settlement with our creditors. So we went ahead with that intention. And then at the same time, we started negotiating with the Union and said, now we've got to reorganize and we're going to have a new corporation and we're going to start over again. But in order to be a success, we're sure we have to reduce our costs. And we want to negotiate a contract with you which will permit us to pay lower wages and so we can operate. Well, they just refused to even consider it. So finally on May 1st, 39, we just started up again and advertised for employees. And I went around and talked to as many of the former employees as I could and asked them to come back in person. And so we opened up on May 1st. There was a tremendous picket line out here. But we had some men, you know, that fought their way through and came into the office and applied for work. And we managed to get some pretty good men. Q So how many could you count on every day? A Well, of course, it naturally started rather small. But we couldn't use a tremendous number in the beginning anyway. It had to gradually build up. And I can't remember, of course, just how many, but I suppose the first day we maybe hired 15 or 20. And of course, the more we hired, the easier it got to be. Q It was that many? A Because they saw that there were people coming to work here. And at that time, of course, there was tremendous unemployment in Jamestown. People needed jobs badly. Q So it was a very bad time. A Yeah. The interesting thing is one of the men that we one of the first men we hired as a cabinetmaker, he was Italian, fought his way through the picket line. And later on when we had a union again, he became union president. But he was a very good president. He was one of these kind of men that was reasonable and you could negotiate with him. We negotiated a lot of contracts with him that we could live with. Q But you had to reorganize then in 1939? A Yeah. It was formerly Union Furniture Company. Q Union Furniture Company. A Furniture Company. And we also had another company, National Furniture Company, which was in a separate building. So when the new company started up, we decided to combine the two names and called it Union National Incorporated. But it was a new corporation. Q So how long did it take them before dissolving one company and starting another? You could do that almost overnight so to speak? A Well, I suspect I don't remember exactly now, but I suppose it took maybe six months. Q And they were all ten and no negotiation during that time? A Well, no. By that time we discovered of course they weren't going to. Q Who was this spokesman? Was he a Swede? A No, no. Q Was he a professional educator? A No. Well, the president of the Union was Swedish. But the Union business agent was not Swedish. Q Was he a professional educator? A Well, that was all he did. Q That was his line of work? A That was his line of work. Q Was he taught from outside and from New York? A No, he lived in Jamestown. He lived in this area. Q But he didn't work here at all? A No, he didn't work here. Q So he gave them all the insights on how they should do and how they should move? A Well, he had a lot of influence I'm sure. Q But what did he gain then when hundreds of workers were talking job? Did they kick him off? A I don't think he had anything to gain. No, he – but somehow that doesn't seem to make much difference sometimes, you know. Q What did they – what happened to them after? Because they apparently lost, in other words, the job. A Yes, they lost. Q They lost their job? A Yes. Q And they were not paid? A No, they were not paid. Q They were not paid? A No. Q They were not paid? A No. Q They were not paid? A No. Q They were not paid? A No. Q So if you compare the scale, the pay scale, before we closed down then and with the new one, how much lower was it per hour? Fifty cents or? A Well, no, because of course those days rates weren't that high. I suppose probably we maybe reduced the pay scale by about, oh, in the neighborhood of 20 percent. Q Twenty percent? A Yeah. Q How was the buying power during the new scale compared to the couple of years before? Could they buy as easy for the same kind of money? Because the prices went down. A Well, yeah, prices went down. I don't, I wouldn't say that they could buy the same, but they were glad to have jobs, you know. Q And there was no unemployment insurance at that time then? A I don't think there was. Q Because they were out the whole, almost whole year? A Yeah, some of them were. Q How about the rest of them, like your neighbor? Did they have the same kind of problem? A Well, this neighbor of Vance D, of course, they operated without a union for many years. I understand they have a union now, but that's just quite new. Crawford, of course, has had a union for some time. Q Did they also suffer during the Depression? A Well, Crawford went through several different changes of ownership, and I'm not sure just what their history was. There was an Atlas Furniture Company one time, of course. It was owned by Swedish immigrants. Q Who was that? What was his name? A Well, I'm afraid I can't tell you. I should remember, but I don't. But they had a number of stockholders. It wasn't one of these family businesses. Q Oh, I see. So it was more public then? A Yeah. But I think they were all Swedes. But they had a number of stockholders, and the Atlas Furniture, of course, was quite successful for a number of years. Then Crawford bought them, bought the plant. And actually I don't recall whether they were in difficulties when he bought them or not. Q So this Italian of it brought—he's telling me, as I say, how was he handled by the Swedish workers? Did they look down on him? And he took a big chance, almost to get killed. A Well, yes. Of course, anybody who came to work here had kind of a rough time with the former employees around the picket line. Q They couldn't park their cars out there? A No, none of us. But they could drive down into the plant property and park. Q They couldn't get inside the fence then or the gate? A No. They used to throw roofing nails and so on in the driveway so that when they—we'd have to clean the driveway every time where they could drive in or out. Q But they couldn't do this, anybody saw them, because there was a penalty for that, I suppose. A Well, sure, it was illegal. But the city administration was not very interested in antagonizing the unions, you know, so they didn't give us much help. Q So Sam Carlson, was he a pro union leader? A Well, Sam Carlson wasn't mayor at that time. Q Well, there was nothing in between there? A Yeah, it was after his time. Q Oh, that's right. He was before 1980. A Yeah. I can't even remember now who the mayor was. But we had difficulty getting any kind of police protection. When things got too bad, then they'd send somebody down. But they were very, very reluctant to give us any help. Q How would you think that would help a person or a company that supplies hundreds of workers more money to the city? A You'd think so, but they also were interested in the union vote. Q So there was politics playing a role. A Politics, yes. Q But for the welfare of the people, actually, I don't know. A Yeah, that's right. And every—I think almost every industry in Champs-États that's had a strike has had that problem. You get very little police protection. Q So that's a strange way of— A I know. Q —see it objectively. A It is. Q So what happened after those workers were picked? They had to leave everyone. A Yeah, so one by one, you know, they'd give up and find jobs somewhere. Q And they moved away then? A Well, most of them stayed in Champs-États. Q Did they try to get in to organize again? With the workers, they came back and they probably thought a little bit before they made another exit. A Well, what happened is we got the union back again primarily because we were having some legal problems with the government. The union, of course, claimed that we'd broken some of the labor laws because we refused to negotiate with them after a certain point. And my cousin finally decided that he didn't want to try to fight it out in the courts. So he said, if you drop all the charges, we'll let you come back in as a union, which they did. But it was a different union. Q It was? A Different leadership. Q Did you demand a different leadership in that union or— A Well, we had no choice, of course, in the leadership. But fortunately, they elected a much better leadership. Q The workers you had? A Yeah. And this one Italian I mentioned, he was president for many years. He got to the point where the men respected him and he had enough individual courage so that if he felt something was right, he'd say so. So that we were able to get along very well with the union. Q How often between the negotiations and contracts at that time? Three years or— A Well, when we first started out, it was one year. But then we got the three-year contracts. We've had three-year contracts now for a long time. Q What was the difference that they had in one year at that time? Was it better to play safe or bang your tail up for three years and you get into the— A Well, we felt it was better to have a three-year agreement because negotiating is such a difficult, unpleasant— Q Emotion. A Problem, yeah. Q Waiting it off. A Yeah. And we usually had some kind of a wage re-opener. So if there was a big change in the cost of living or something, they could negotiate on wages but on nothing else. All the other provisions of the contract were frozen for the three years. And it made it much easier. So quite often we'd have to negotiate, you know, every year, but it would be just on the one item, which would be wages. And in those days, a big settlement might be six cents an hour. Q The money was worth a lot of weight then. A Yes. Q So there's a difference compared to today then. There's a lot of money involved now. A Oh, yes. Q You don't have to buy anything. A No, no. Q So— A Well, I see the type of settlements they have now. I just can't believe it, you know. It's so different than I was used to. Q So then like vacation and hospitalization and stuff like that, they came in after the Second World War? A Oh, yes. Q Much later after? A I assume we must have had some kind of a vacation plan, but that would be about all. Q They got a year or two weeks or— A Well, I think at the beginning, I don't think the maximum would have been one week. Q One week. With pay? A With pay. And gradually, of course, it became more and more liberalized over the years. Q So then they had—was your father, was he living at that time when they had this strike? A Yes, yes. Q What did he say about it? A Well, there wasn't much he could say. Q Yes, because— A Actually, he was a very good man. Q He was a good man. A Yes. Q He was a good man. A Yes. Q He was a good man. A Naturally, he was disturbed. My uncle, who was really the one—the general manager for many years and died shortly before all the things went really bad, fortunately for him, I can't imagine how he ever would have been able to go through it. Q So he had a rough time. A And then my other uncle was involved. At that time, he was—had retired because of health. He was still living, but he had retired, so he was not directly involved. Wait a minute. Now he—no. No, at the time this happened, he died because the cash which was put into the business came primarily from his life insurance, which he left to his children. And that would be Jack's father and aunts, who were able to use their father's life insurance to provide some working capital for the reorganized company. Q So they put a lot of money on the line, that job. A Yes, they took a lot of chances. Q And she died too in this continuation with Mr. Wesley Norwood, Ken Connecticut, July 17, 1985. So she was a little young lady at the time, but you would think she was being hesitant to see all this trouble in her real life. A Well, I'm sure she was, but her brother, of course, who became president of the reorganized company, he persuaded them that they should try it. And he had faith that it could be done. And he deserves a lot of credit for— Q Well, he was the one that actually pushed a little bit— A Yes, that's right. He was the one that had confidence that— Q And his name was— A Alder Norwood, Jack's father. Q Alder Norwood. A Jack's father. Q So he could have a vision then. A Yes, he had a vision. Q Silver lining. A Yeah. And I remember we—before we started operating, we sat down and we took some pieces of furniture and we just went to work on them and reduced the cost as much as we possibly could and finally came up with some very attractive prices. And we had one salesman in New York who was a marvelous salesman, and he took some of these pieces and we repriced them and took these sketches and he went around New York and he would sell the whole cutting before we even made it. So then we'd manufacture it and we could ship it right out, you know, and didn't have to put anything in the inventory. That's what we did for the first couple of years. And the first year we operated, we just about broke even, and then the second year we made a profit from there on. It was a profitable business. Q Very savvy. So you must have lost a lot of customers over this year of problems. A Well, I suppose we did lose some, but we were able to offer them such attractive— Q To come back to them. A —purchases and attractive prices for our quality furniture that it sold, sold well. Q How did you get around to a better figure? In other words, you had to tell the workers to press a little harder and— A Well, of course, we had this agreement with them to reduce the wages. Q Yes. A And then we cut our overhead as much as we possibly could and just shaved corners wherever we could. Q Did you reorganize the flow of work moments? A Well, that was done over a period of time, yes. Q Period of time? A Uh-huh. Q To make it more efficient? A Oh, yes. While I was here, I think that every process and every machine and everything changed. It's entirely different from the time when I started here. Q So you couldn't continue like 1926? A Oh, no. No, no. Q It didn't work? A All new equipment. Of course, one of the problems was in the late 1920s, they didn't have capital to put into new equipment. Q So you lost? A Yes. But we started making money in the 40s while we would keep buying new equipment, you know, new machine. Q So you plowed profit into the equipment then? A Oh, yes. Q So what happened then during the war? Then you had to return or what did you do? A Well, during the war, of course, it was difficult to manufacture furniture. We couldn't buy metal hardware, you know, and so we did all kinds of things. We would replace metal hardware where we could with wood, and we bought antiques and restored them and refinished them. And then we also did war work. We got war contracts. We did a lot of work for Bell Aircraft in Buffalo, and we picked up odd contracts like that that required woodworking. We even made parts for wooden airplanes. Q Gunstocks? A No, we didn't make any gunstocks. But we did make wing sections for aircraft because there was an operation called American Aircraft, I think it was called, and they had a big plant there in the airport to build plywood wooden plywood bombers. And so we made parts for the bombers. Q So did they supply, the government supply you with the tooling then? A Well, we had to make our own tooling. Q Did you have to buy the tools? A Yeah, but of course, the tooling we made was mostly, of course, assembly. We would machine the parts and then assemble them. But we made mostly assembly out of the tooling, the assembly tooling, and dies and jigs and so on out of wood. We made them ourselves. Q You said there was a shortage of hardware. Did that mean that some of your suppliers went into the war industry then? A Well, they were prohibited from using metal for furniture. Q They had to go into lockers and war equipment? A Yeah. And no longer could we buy metal drawer pulls and handles. Q How were those years now from 1940s and up to 1945? Were they, you grew up even? A Well, we made money because some of that war work was profitable. Q And the workers, or union, couldn't strike them during that time? A They couldn't what? Q Strike? A Oh, I think they could have, but we never had any problem. I don't recall that there was any restrictions on the strike. Q The patriotism prevented them to? A They hadn't forgotten the hard times then. They were still recent enough, you know, so we didn't have any problem negotiating, reasonable. Q But there were no strikes in the United States during the war, though? I thought there was a problem. A I think probably a war industry might have been in trouble. Although it seems to me, as I recall, that the steel industry threatened the strike, and then I think it was Truman, I think, was president. Well, that was another—yeah, it was Truman, I think, said that he was going to mobilize all the workers in the Army, put them back to work as Army people. So I think maybe in something that was actually critical to the war industry, they would— Q Then it would stop? A They could bring all kinds of pressure to bear, you know, to keep them from striking. We wouldn't be in that position because although we were doing a lot of war work, it wasn't that critical. Q And the rest of the industry, the metal industry in Jamestown, they was good for war material then? A They did a lot of war work, yes. Q So did they do all right then, Jamestown, they said, Jamestown doing the OCS? A Yes, I think so. We actually used to machine some aluminum for some of the companies that were doing war work. We found we could shape aluminum on our woodworking equipment. Q Oh, I see. A So we did all kinds of different things, you know. Wherever we could find some work, we'd take it. Q Did you get replacement or were workers that were called out for service? Was it easy to find them during the wartime? A Well, we didn't have too much problems. I recall I don't think we lost too many men to the service. We did lose some that came back afterwards. Q Could you replace them with women? A We started using some women at that time. Q Some were sent to you on the— A Yeah. And, of course, older men, older workers. Q Came back to pitch in when it was needed. A Yeah. Q And then after the war, 1945, then you had to retool again. A Yes. Q So what did you— A Of course, business was good then, of course, because there was a pent-up market for furniture. There hadn't been so much—as much furniture made, you know, and you could sell almost anything you could make. Q So the house building started to take off then? A I suppose the house building did, yes. It must have, yeah. Q Everybody needed furniture. A But I can remember, well, even during the war, of course, furniture was so scarce that what you had was—there were people begging for it. Q And you could get the raw material without any problem? A We could get the lumber and so on. But our problem was the—anything, any metal fittings or parts— Q Well, it took a long time. A That was—in many cases, we couldn't even get it. So after inventory of metal parts was gone, why, you couldn't get any more until after the war. Q How long did it take then before you could order on a regular basis? A Well, I don't—it didn't take too long. I suppose about—I don't—of course, can't remember for sure, but I would think around 45, 46, when things loosened up and they were very good years for the furniture business. Q Rockport has a big plant, M-Rock. A Yeah. Q Did you have something similar in Jamestown locally? You could buy the hardware from or— A Well, we had—there's a Weber DAP company in Jamestown, which is affiliated with Kilo Brass of Grand Rapids, made some metal hardware. But most of what we bought, we bought from M-Rock. Q Rockport. A And National Lock and companies like that. And it didn't take them long, of course, to get back in production once the restrictions were loosened. Q Did you visit Rockport at any time before their furniture industry? Was they already gone when you came into it here? You know, they were big in the 20s. A I know they were. No, I never visited Rockport. I was out at Grand Rapids, but I never visited Rockport, buddy. Q Because they had problems with labor. A Yeah, I know they did. Q They actually moved south, I think, the owners or they sold off. A Yeah. Q So then also the socialist element came in quite heavily. Did you have them here, the organized socialist party? A There were a few socialists. We had one socialist in our plant who was our hand turner, and he was a thorn in our side. He used to work very closely with this union president that caused us so much trouble. Q Oh, I see. A And I always thought the two of them were—our union president was our automatic lathe man, and he worked right next to the hand turner. And the hand turner was, I'm convinced, a very strong socialist. Q Were the two Swedes together or was it one Swede? A They were both Swedes. Q Both Swedes. So then after—you said the Italian element came in in the 30s, late 30s. A Yeah. Q And not too many before that because— A No, there weren't too many as I recall it before that. Q Mostly Swedes were higher end. A That's right. Q And you had a reputation that—on what assumption were they higher, you think, the Swedish workers? A Well, most of them, of course, had the experience and the skills that we were looking for because they'd been working in the field in the furniture industry, and so that's—it was just natural to hire them. Most Italians had to learn the business, you see. Q Oh, I see. So you had to retool them. A Yeah, we had to retrain them. Q Retrain them, yeah. So the foreman, was he doing the hiring or did you do that in the office? A Well, I—at that time I was acting as superintendent and I did all the hiring. But very often, of course, if there was some question in my mind I'd call the foreman in and let him also interview the applicant, see what he thought. Q So in the late 30s then when you reorganized, then you were looking for trained mechanics? A Oh, we—wherever we could, of course, we always hired trained. Q So they could be for writing for the Germans also? A Yeah. But as time went on, of course, we had to do more and more training ourselves, and actually some of the best men, of course, we had were those we trained. Q Did you see any difference between the Swedes, Italians, Albanians, and Polacks and Germans in a way? Because you had to put them in the lower pay scale and then move them up. Was there any— A Well, I can't say that I saw a great deal of difference. Q They all adapted after a while? A They adapted. And some of the Italians make very good woodworkers. Of course, after the Italians, then the Puerto Ricans came in and they're quite the same. Q So they didn't produce as much as the— A We didn't—haven't had as good success with the Puerto Ricans as we did with the Italians. Q So they don't have that kind of line in their work, in their blood? A They don't seem to have, no. We've used them mostly in finishing. Q I suppose there's many facets of the work you do. A Oh, yes. Q They don't all have to know wood, I suppose, in the different paddle makers and haulers and lifters. So then you continued on. You said 43 years from 1949 and up. Did you during this time think back? I mean, you had very good schooling and you apparently had a very easy way to get through school. A Yes. Q So at any time during those troubled times, to relocate to some other kind of line of work? A Oh, I did have some thoughts in that direction. At one time I wondered if I shouldn't go into medicine, and I did kind of seriously look into it. Q Oh, you did? A Yes. Then I would have had to start with a pre-med course, and I was at that time I was about 32 or 33, something like that. And I found, of course, that I went and actually went and talked to several medical schools, and they weren't too interested because when you figure how old you're going to be by the time you're ready to go to work. And I began to see, of course, there were a lot of difficulties. And also I looked as though more and more as though there was going to be opportunities here. Q It was a challenge, though. A Yeah. Q Did your dad influence you at any time, though? A No, I don't think he tried to influence me. Q He let you think it over? A Of course, I'm glad that I stayed with it because it we made a success of it, which was it gave us a lot of satisfaction. And I like Jamestown. Q And your wife, is she also a native of Jamestown? A Yes. My wife was a native of Jamestown. Unfortunately, she died in 1975, but she was a Congregational Minister's daughter in Jamestown. Q How many children do you have? A Just one. Q What kind of line did he look for? A Well, I talked to him about coming here because I said we certainly could use you here. But he went to – he was in the Navy for three years as an officer, and then he went to Horton Graduate School. He had a degree from Dartmouth by then. Then he went to Horton Graduate School and got his Master's. But he said, I don't want to – from the furniture business, he said, I want to go into management consulting, which he did. I think he made the right decision. He's been very successful. Q How did you learn this business now as a young guy, all about the wooden construction? A Well, of course, I worked here summers, which gave me some experience. Q So you started with all kinds of works to get the feel of it. A Yeah. And then my first job, of course, was to install a cost accounting system. That's what I did when I came back here in 29. And I worked here a year at that. And then our factory superintendent had a business he had some financial interest in that was in trouble. He said, I think I've got to leave here and go over and see if I can save that business. So my uncle said, well, he told me, he said, you're going to be a superintendent. Well, I wasn't qualified to be a superintendent, of course. I hadn't had the kind of experience that the usual factory superintendent has. But I figured I'd better try it. And I learned, of course, quite a bit during that year when I was installing a cost accounting system because I had to learn all the operations. Q How old were you then at that time? A Well, I was 22 when I started here, so I was 23 when I— Q When you got this offer? A When I became superintendent. And I only was superintendent of the Union Furniture Company. It was also a national furniture company. So I had to go back— Q Both plants? A Both plants. And gradually, you know, you'll just learn on the job. Q What kind of line were they in at the time? A They were making bedroom furniture. Q Strictly bedroom? A Yeah. This plant at that time was making practically all dining room. Q They were specialized in that? A Yeah. But then as things began to go bad in the 30s, we figured it was foolish to try to operate two plants. Neither one of them operating anywhere near capacity. So we started making bedroom furniture up here and gradually closed the national plant. Q So during the 30s, now when there was a rough time, a hard time, if anybody could understand that, still you see like the Navy over here and all over. Why did they flock together in one section of town, so to speak, when the competition was so severe on the market? A Well, most of them, of course, had started long before that. Q Yeah, long before. A Yeah. Q Climbed onto it, so. A Yeah. Well, you know, once you started operating in a plant, what are you going to do? You stay there. Q You stay. Either get off it or. A Yeah. Q So what the reason they stayed so close together? Was that because of? A Well, most of them were here because of the railroad. You wanted to be on the railroad at that time. Q Oh, that's what dictated the string. A Yeah. Because we used to ship at that time. Everything was shipped by rail, you see. And so you had to be on the railroad siding. Q You mentioned, you know, the hardware, Amarok and National Lock. Didn't some kind of, of that kind of manufacturing settle here then to make use of your demand? A Well, actually, there wasn't much of anything except this Weber nap. Q There was only one. A And then the hardware company started, but that was much later to make furniture trim. But that was much later that they started that. Q How about springs to mattresses and cushions and fabrics and so on? A Well, there were no springs made here. They were all. Q Shipped in? A All shipped in. Q You would think somebody would grab that line? A Well, I don't suppose there was enough market here to justify a separate plant. And it's not much of a problem to ship springs. Q They were already located somewhere else, were they, didn't they? A Yeah, sure. Q So you got the area. So that's, now it's a different ballgame. I'm sure you're looking into it, how it looks now today, for instance, 1985 compared to back in 1940. A Well, it's. Q Does it look complicated to you now compared to that time? A Well, I'm not sure I'd say it was complicated. I think it's more difficult to operate at a profit now than it was in the 40s. Q Everything is cut off. A That time, of course, there wasn't this tremendous southern production to compete against us. Q So they made a bad inroad? A Oh, yes. Q Both labor and other. A And, of course, some of the southern plants now are making quality furniture, well-styled, well-built, well-finished. Q How can they do that? Do they have the, you would think a worker receives half the pay almost. How can he be dedicated and? A Well, you see, the time they started the furniture plants down there, they had no choice. They either work on a farm for even less or work in a furniture factory, and they were glad to get into the factory. Q Did they move down from here? A No. I don't think there was really much of any direct movement from here. Q No Swedes moved on there? A Well, there may have been some went down to work there, but I don't think anybody – I can't think of a plant that was actually moved south. Some of the Swedish workers and supervisors and so on went down there. Q Temporary? A Well, some went down and stayed there, of course. Q They stayed? A Uh-huh. Q So they could sueeze after a while too then? A Yeah. Q And the raw material, they have it down there? No, they don't have any raw material particularly down there. A Well, not any more than here, no. But I know we had a finishing foreman here that went to work for a plant down south, you know, and so that was happening. They'd come up here and hire supervisors. Q I see. A And sometimes skilled workmen too when they could. Q So there's almost a park for the – A Oh, yes. Q – daily bread? A It is. Q Does it seem to go in cycles, 10 years or 20 years, you think? A Well, it could be. Of course, business seems to go in cycles, and I suppose the furniture business also will follow somewhat the same cycle, but then also I think areas go through cycles. I'm afraid that Jamestown, of course, is losing its place in the furniture industry. I think at the time I started here there must have been 40 to 50 furniture factories. Q Did many? A Most of them small, but there were so many of them. There was one family I'm sure you heard about, the Anderson family. Q Yes. A And there were these, I guess, about five brothers, and they all had their – they all had a furniture plant. And there was so much of that, but of course they didn't grow with the times. Q They were small themselves. A They were small. They didn't grow with the times. Q Couldn't they unite them like you now? Are you united in one package? A They could have, but most of them were one-man businesses, you know, and when the owner and manager was through, the business went. Q Fast in and fast out. A Yeah. Q So at, you say, 45 or 50 furniture factories at one time. How about the metal industry? Were they also as numerous? A No. Q No? A No. But they were mostly larger operations. Q Operation 207? A Yeah. Q And then off metal? A Yeah. Q Did they suffer during this hard times in the 30s? A Well, I'm sure they did. Of course, our metal finally went bankrupt. Crescent Tools sold out. Q But it was after the war that they were – A Yes, yes. Q But I heard it was bad management going on. Was there some kind of – A Well, I think probably it was, yes. Q So there was not the labor – A Well, they had a bad labor situation too, but I think the – I'm sure management had something to do with it. But our metal did have a lot of labor problems. Q So there's always – both parties got to be on the toss. A Oh, yes. Q And have a vision for the future as he was coming along. A Yeah. Q So that's – A At one time, of course, almost every industry in Jamestown was owned by Jamestown people who actually managed the industry. Now there's practically nothing left. Q There's not a lot of people coming in and dictate that. A Yeah. Q How is the city government treating the factory owners today compared to the 30s and 40s? A Well, unfortunately, I don't think they've had any cases where they had to sort of choose between enforcing the law and defiance of the unions. They've been spared that decision. But I'm afraid that if they got to, you know, another bad strike and you need police protection, I think you might have trouble getting it. Q They're still looking for wards. A Yeah. See, we have a Democratic administration, and they're apt to be – Q Worker – A Worker-oriented. Q How was Sam Kaltzman? Do you know him in the 20s? A Yes. I didn't know him personally, but of course everybody knew about him. Q How was his government? He was a Republican, they said. A Yes, he was a Republican. Q But his ideas looked Democratic. A Yes. He was what you'd call a liberal Republican. But I think he – I just have the feeling that if it came to enforcing the law, he'd enforce the law first and worry about the votes afterwards. I think he was that kind of a man. Q So he had some good ideas as to the – A Oh, yes, I think he did. Q The water and electricity and – A Yes. Q The milk bottles, he couldn't get away with that. A No, he couldn't get away with that. Q What was the reason he went against that? I mean, he had the two, three ideas. A Well, it didn't make too much sense, really. Q It didn't? A I don't think that a milk plant, you know, supply a city is the same as supplying power and water. Q Then milk was more valued, I suppose, in the 30s than it is today. A Well, I don't know whether it was or not. Q No, they drink up. A Yeah. Q The farmers – A But there was no need, no need for a milk plant. You had plenty of supplies of milk, you know, and I don't think it would have been any more economical for the city to supply – Q So the businessmen didn't particularly like this in Cotswold? A Well, I think that there may have been some question about things like – Q Nagorod Mar? A Yeah. But although I think his municipal power plant, of course, always had, I think, the support of the business people, he appointed businessmen to operate it. Q So he was a smart politician then? A Yeah. My Uncle Edward, I remember, who was general manager here for many years, was also chairman of the Board of Public Utilities for quite some time.