 This is cassette number two, and it continues with an interview with Mrs. Estée Albright in Moline, Illinois. In order to solicit money for what they call the Jubilee Fund. And so... 1910, 1999? It was 1909. Or maybe it was around there anyway, either 1908 or 1999. And that money was supposed to go to the Augustana Synod? Augustana Synod, that's right. Not to the college? Well, no, this was supposed to go to... for the Jubilee Fund. But why was it in Aurelius or the Minnesota people against fundraising like that? Because it was for everybody's... No, it wasn't for their conference, it was for Augustana. Yeah, but Minnesota conference didn't belong to Augustana though. No, you see, the Synod... the Synod had different conferences. Each conference was a child of theirs. But this was the Jubilee for all the conferences in Augustana Synod. No, it was going to be for Augustana. The Jubilee Fund for Augustana. Oh, I see. And so then my father got busy and they worked. I know he worked for four years just to be able... So it must have been around 1905 or 1906 that they okayed the idea. Then he spent those years from there until 1910 gathering the money. And they made the money, so they got the money from Sweden. That went to Augustana. You see, we were in a way kind of mixed up. There was the Synod with, I say, the children. The Minnesota conference, the Illinois conference, the Michigan conference, the Iowa conference, and they were divided up presumably like states but not exactly. So many of the conferences outside of Illinois said, we're in favor of doing something for the seminary but not for the college. But the college was owned by the Synod. And so in a way it became a stepchild. None of the conferences wanted to help Augustana, even though it was a child of the Synod. Anyway, the money went, the Jubilee Fund went to Augustana. And then we got the money from Sweden. The King Oscar Fund went to Augustana. And so they got more than they had figured in the long run. So it was quite a festive occasion in 1910 when it was a joy to behold that they had made it and they had endowment. The Denkman Library was set up. The Denkman Library was being built. It wasn't finished. And Seventh Avenue was paved, and they built a great big, the Synod met them, they built a great big building which was almost exactly north of where Carlson Hall is and had quite an affair. And the Bishop von Scheele came as a representative of the King, and it was really quite a glorious occasion. Before we go into that now, though, let us talk about your parents and you came back from Sweden in 1902 or 1901? Well, Papa started his work at Augustana in 1901, that fall. So he went back to Yale after? He went back to Yale after, yeah. So what did he tell the people there of? He didn't have the deep interest to stay in the East. Well, I can't say he didn't. I guess he did have interest in that. He felt he had learned a lot, and they were in a way happy that one of theirs was becoming president of a leading school and that they gave him a lot of advice as to what he should do. And I know when he got to Augustana, he was in constant correspondence with his professors there. And I know one of the professors says, You are doing right in starting with the library, because the library at that time was just a little room, which you might say it was on the same floor as, it wasn't the top floor, it was the third floor in Old Main. That was the library. And they had Professor Grenier, who was a teacher of Latin, I believe, mainly, to become the librarian, and he knew absolutely nothing about the library. And I know my mother's cousin, the daughter of her uncle, Strand, from Chicago, she was one of the librarians at Chicago Library. And my father got her to spend one summer with us, and she was trying to arrange the books according to the Dewey Decimal System, and they had the Grenier System, which nobody knew what it was anyway. And she would have quite a fight with him in trying to... He was still a supervisor. And every day he'd fuss with her about what she was doing, you know. And finally then, he took a day off, and he must have gone to some library and found out that that's the way they did it there, too. So then he kept still after that and let her... Andie Christine Strand, Mama's sister, Mama's cousin, she was with us, and she worked that whole summer. So your father's decision not to go back to Augustana, he must still have this vision of doing something for the Swedes or with the Swedes, because at Yale University, there was already established a big school. And I am sure they paid him much more money than the men down here. So he must have something in that feeling. From childhood, you see, Augustana, money for Augustana, for skolan. And every... His father would go out and start congregations, meetings sometimes in the homes of people, and there he'd make his appeal for Augustana. I mean, from the time he was a little child until the time of his father's death, it was really Augustana, Augustana. It was his dillement, too, to carry through. So he came as a teacher in first, to Augustana, 1901. No, as president. I thought it was 1904 he started. He started in 1901. 1901, when he came, he came as president. 1934 was the year he ended his... Yes. So 1901, that was after Hasselquist died then. Hasselquist had died and Olson had died. And C.W. Foss was acting president. President, yes. So when Papa came here, he came as president. He had been a teacher way, way back, just out of college. Did they call him or did he ask for the presidency or what happened? In those days, the Synod called. And there was quite a fracas about it, because different ones thought that Papa would never do, because... He was a young man then. He was a young man and he was not a minister. And they had the idea the only one that could be president was be a minister. And my father was not a minister. He was a professor, doctor. What did happen then? Did they have to... Oh, there was big fuss. Big fuss in the Synod. But Papa felt that feeling that so many in the Synod felt that the president of the college should be a minister. So he, after he became president of Augustana, he would sit in when he could in classes and take the examinations whenever they gave him at the end of the year. And after three years, he was ordained. Minister. Yeah, they offered to ordain him anyway, because they were ordaining some of them before that as a minister. But he says, No, I won't do it until I'm gone through the regular classes. So after three years, he, of course, he wasn't in the class all the time, but he would be there for the examinations. So he was ordained, 1905. So he went by the rules then. Yes, he went by the rules. He did it to quiet that feeling that he's got to be a minister. But at the time, the college was so much oriented religiously, so he knew there was nothing to him, actually. He was not foreign to it, religion and Swedish Lutheranism, because even the school had to be a lot of religious undertone. That is right. It was very important at the time. Yes. So then he continued on then. And what did he do at first then? He had to do his system, I suppose, had to come in there, and the library was one of the most important things. Yes, I know. His professor said, You are doing right to start with the library. And he wanted to increase the library. And then when Denkmans came with their offer, it just overwhelmed my father. He was so pleased. You were too young then to remember him, but I suppose he was very magnetic and full of drive. Oh, yes, full of a lot of pep. And he didn't want anything to go by without knowing anything. I have filmed all the letters, you see, of your father's correspondence back and forth in Noridius and Hasegwesen. And they said that even when I came to unload a load of gravel or sand, he went off to take a look at it, you know, where it was dumped. He didn't want to be by chance, so he took interest in everything. Oh, yes, he did. He did. He was interested in everything and was active in everything and seemed to have endless energy, endless energy. He was never tired. And at that time, there was a connection with the Theological Seminary. Oh, yes. He wanted to make a University of Augustana, and the seminary would be one of the graduate schools, and he wanted to have other graduate schools as well. Maybe that would have been a blessing for all the Swedes, because then they would have a university and no fuss about the raising money or anything for competing. That was his idea. Why didn't he propose it to the Senate? Oh, yes. He talked about that, and then that would be the aim in the distance, to establish a large university. And then there were some that felt the seminary should move more to Chicago, and the father was against that. And when finally father got the seminary buildings, he thought, this settles it. Well, it didn't. So what did he say about this university idea going down? This was toward the last, he said, my dreams have flown away, because I had dreamt of a large Swedish university and of graduate schools. But apparently, all the different little conferences that had little schools here and there felt their school was more important, and it was just too bad. They were just killing themselves. So he didn't get support then from Kansas Conference? Oh, no. I talked to my father once about that, and I said, well, when it comes down to it, it's only Michigan, Iowa, and Illinois that are really supporting you. He says, when it comes down to it, yes. That's what he said to me. The rest of them, they were working for their schools. So they were afraid too much money was going to be pulled away from Uppsala and St. Peter? Sure. Yeah, and of course my father was really sorry to see all these little schools coming up. And of course after a while, they had to disappear, because they had a lot of them. And all that money. In Minnesota, they had several, North Fargo. Yeah. In a way, they defeated themselves. That's what they did. And of course he felt that all the Swedes coming over rightfully belonged to the Augustana Synod. But I think we would get about one out of ten Swedes that come in. They wouldn't feel that they were part of Augustana Synod. But when he was dealing with Sweden, and Bishop Shealy and Uppsala and the people there, then he got good support. Yes, he did. They supported Augustana. Yes. Because he knew them personally. That's right. So then the other colleges were bypassed, so to speak. Yes. Because they didn't have the connection with Sweden like he did. Well, no, you see, they didn't exist, money at the time. Yeah, but St. Peter and Bethany and Uppsala. Bethany was existing. And I know on the way back from Sweden, after he'd studied there for two years, C.A. Swenson had been over there in Sweden. And then when he came back, he heard what Papa had been doing in Sweden, and he said, Here, I was there for a few months, and I could have done that for Bethany. And he was really quite perturbed that he hadn't. But he hadn't. So he didn't. And then he was going to the Florian, was the name of the man who was sent there. He was going to go over there and do the same then for Bethany if he could. And Papa was opposed to his doing that after he had already worked for Augustana. So Mama said, The trip home from Sweden, and you're going back to Gale, was an awful trip for Papa because he'd paced the deck and thinking, If Bethany comes in and tries to horn in on the funds that I've been gathering and trying to get it for Bethany, well, he didn't want that. So he spent a miserable trip coming back, all of which I knew nothing about at the time. You were too young then to remember that. No, to realize it even. I mean, they might have heard him talk about it, but it didn't mean anything to me. But then when you got older, in 1910 and 1911 and 1912, then you remember what happened. I certainly do. So here you met Eric Norrelius. Yeah. You saw him many times in your father's home. He was on the board at Augustana. In those days, the professors at Augustana would take in the board members. They didn't send them to the hotels. In fact, the hotels that we had, I don't think, were the kind they would want any of the homes. And Norrelius was in our home many, many, many, many times. They stayed for several days then sometimes. Yes, yes. So I got to know Norrelius very well. I liked him very much. How did he look like? Was he short? Yeah, kind of short. Shorter than your father? Yes, yes. And he had a heavy gray beard. It was sort of trimmed a little bit and rounded a little bit. It wasn't long. But he had such a kindly way of talking. How did he speak now compared to your father? Did they speak Swedish to each other in the home? Oh, we spoke Swedish in the home all the time as I was growing up. That was the rule. So that was the main language then? Yes. We spoke Swedish. As soon as we crossed the threshold, we spoke Swedish. We did that until, I would say until 1905 or 1906. By that time, English began to creep in too. Because of the children that got to go to school? I think so. The younger ones didn't learn Swedish as well as the older ones had. So could it happen that your father or mother spoke Swedish to you and you answered back in English? No, I would speak Swedish. That was the rule. Oh, yeah. I didn't dare to. I'd have to be very polite and use the polite forms. I could not call him du. And I could not call him even ni. I'd have to call him papa. I'd have to say, will papa come? Your father? Mm-hmm. I had to speak. So you never used papa? Papa. If you called on him. No, I mean, in speaking, will papa ha? I couldn't say, will ni ha? Will papa ha? I'd have to use that form. How about Norelius now? What kind of... He spoke Swedish most of the time. How did you talk to him? Did you say ni then or fargror? I would say ni to him, yeah. How about your father, Eric Norelius? They didn't say du to each other. I think they did. But he was much older than your father, wasn't he? Yes, he was a friend of my grandfather. No, they would say du to each other. They did? Yeah. But I've seen reference to letters that called somebody fargror. Was it Hasselquist that called fargror or was it Esbjorn? Even older pastors called them that. I don't know. But your father, you remember they said du to each other. Yeah. They did? But I was not allowed to say du to papa. No. And they don't follow that rule in Sweden anymore. But he at least... So they were respected, huh? Oh, yeah. How about other pastors now that came into your home, like your father did? Did they also talk in du form to each other? Yeah, they did. They did? How did they... Yeah, but like your father now, he was younger, I suppose, than a lot of them. Yes. But they still had respect because he was the head of the... Yeah. Of the establishment also. That's right. How about the ladies now? Did they ever call your father du? No, more and more the younger ones were speaking English. And father kind of gave up finally in insisting that Swedish be used. So they went over to English? They just went over to English. It was kind of a slow process, but it happened. How about now, Kristoffa Martina Esbjorn, she came over to your home. Did she call your father du? That I do not remember. I do not remember. But she spoke Swedish most of the time and preferred Swedish, I know that. And I spoke Swedish to her. And you called her... I called her Grandma Esbjorn. That's what I was taught to. Yeah. So she preferred to speak Swedish? Yes, she did. Well, I suppose a lot of those old Swedish people now, they stayed in their home all the time. And English was limited, so they did not feel like they had to speak English. No, no, no. I do not think that Grandma Esbjorn ever preferred English at all. She would slip into Swedish. She could speak English, but she spoke Swedish most of the time. But I know that she understood English. What happened when your father came home with... I suppose there was a letter telling them, for instance, that Erik Norrell is coming in next week or two weeks from now. And what possibilities are coming. Well, he was dead then, but other people in the same position. What did you tell your mother? I mean, bringing home four or five different guests here, or maybe two more sometimes. I know. Who was the boss in the kitchen? He was when it came down to it. He was? Many times my mother had tables set up, and we had no more room at the tables. And my mother would have, when we had big dinners or something, she had her regular crew, a regular cook. She brought in girls and sent to help her? Oh, yeah. Oh, she had to. And I got to know them pretty well. She had the cook and then two waitresses and then maybe a kitchen girl and maybe another one. Were they Swedish ladies? No. Well, they were of Swedish descent. Some students maybe helping out? No, no, no, no. They were a regular professional team that worked in Molina and Rock Island. And my father would say, come in and tell her there would be an extra one coming in for the dinner. But Gustav, I've got the, we don't have room. And then Mom would go out to the cook and he wants one more. And sometimes they had to put a little card table up in the living room for the spillover. And Papa would come in and say there'd be so and so many extra and then he'd just beat it back to the office. Let Mama worry about it. And my mother was at her wits end many times when she didn't know how she was going to manage it. But that's the way it was. You had to squeeze in another one. Squeeze in another one, yeah. Nowadays they don't have problems with any spillovers. They don't take any guests, I suppose, the college presidents. I don't think they do. The official affair, well, they're at the center or at Western or... So they don't have to worry about it. But there must have been a... Did the college take care of those expenses? No! They went on the president's salary? At the Synod of 1910, they all seemed to realize that Father was having tremendous expense. And they took up a collection. And they gave Papa $2,000 with the collection there. And he certainly needed it. Because every day, I know I kept count, we'd have at least 65 people every day there for two weeks. Different dinners. The presidents of the conferences there. And then this, you know, and that's... it was different groups. And... So it was like a full-fledged restaurant then. And then some slept in your home too, I suppose. Yes. And when we had the bishop there, Bishop von Scheele, she had one room. She had my room. And he had the room across the hall. So each one had a separate room. And then there was a girl who had been working for her boarding room that year with us. Mama assigned her to be their maid to look after them. And then we had Norelius. And then we had this man from Rockford who had been a tailor at one time. Anyway, he was one of the old synodical people. And then Reverend Peters. There were three of them that had been present at that first synodical meeting. So they were our honored guests. And so they kept us busy taking care of them. The bishop, he was standing on his dignity too and wanting this and that. He was a kind of a sturdy fellow, wasn't he? Yes. Not very tall? A very good-looking man. Very, very nice-looking man. I've never seen more beautiful blue eyes in my life than his. They were... Did he speak in Swedish or English most of the time? I never heard him speak anything but Swedish. Maybe he could speak English. But I never heard him speak anything but Swedish. So he was one of the guest speakers then at that time? Oh, yes. Oh, my, yes. He brought the greetings from the king and... Yeah. So how was the feeling at the college at that time? Did they feel good about the connection with Sweden? Yes. Very much. Very much. The older folks especially felt... Well, they felt that they were Americans that respect, you might call it, for Sweden. And some of the old folks had been born over there. It was their home country. No, I think they all felt very much happy over the connections with Sweden. And the same generation are born here like your father. They had the same thing instilled in them that honored the old country and the... Yes. He had great respect for the mother country always, in spite of the fact that he was born here. During his time now, old Main is sitting there on the hill. And then the library, the stone wall facing 7th Avenue, where is it? That was built by the Young People's Society. Yeah, they have the names in the... YPS and then the... That was during your father's time. That was put up after Papa had graduated and before he came to Augustana. When he came to Augustana, that wall was there. Wow, since that old, I didn't realize that. Yeah, that wall was there. And there you have... But the street was not paved, but they had that wall. The wall was there. And that's when Sycamore and Kirkland and... Yes....Ecatonica, Sewing Circle, everybody pitched in. They all pitched in, that's right. Do you remember how they looked like, Augustana, at that time? At one time, it was a big slough or something. They had to fill in a lot of... Yeah, I certainly do. There was a deep slough right back of our house. You see, our house was built where the Science Hall is now. And that ginkgo tree was right outside my bedroom window, and there was a deep gully. Oh, you lived so close then to the... Yes. There was a deep gully and there was a stream running through there. And in the winter, with the snow and the water would gather more. I used to skate back there. It wasn't very good skating, but I did skate back there. And they decided to take off the top of Zion Hill. That's where the Founders Hall is now. They took the top of that off and dumped it in the sew, so now they have what they call the green. So Founders Hill was much higher then, actually. Founders Hill, the hill on which Founders was, was much higher. And they just scraped it off and... They scraped off the top of that and dumped it down in the gully. So you were growing up and went to public school in Rhode Island. Yeah. How were the students at Augustana at that time? Do you remember them when you were coming home from school? Most of them spoke Swedish. And in the classroom, frequently they'd be called upon to recite. And they'd start in English and the first thing you know they were speaking Swedish. And the teacher was saying English is the language we're supposed to use. And then they would get back and try to speak. But most of them spoke Swedish, preferably. They hadn't been here very many years. And they used it also outside on the campus too then? Oh my, yes. They would be speaking Swedish between each other quite a bit. But in the classroom, whenever they did that, the teacher would admonish them. You speak English. So most of the teachers were Swedish. And Williamson, the English teacher, was born here. He was an English... Yeah, I remember him. He was sick and dying at the time. And I know my father took me with him when he went over to see him. And he lived in what we called the boys' dormitory. He had a room there. So I just have a vague memory of him. But I remember I went with my father to see him that time. So that's about all I remember of him. He was there in the 1890s, I believe. Yeah. So maybe that was a good way of solving the language problem. In other words, to have an English teacher, you have to get it the right way. That's right. They were foresighted enough. The only place we had to speak Swedish was for Moritz and in his class. I took every course in Swedish that was given at the time. In fact, he recommended me to teach Swedish at the University of Minnesota. And I was scared to death. But anyway, in Moritz's class, we spoke Swedish. And when we took Swedish history, the book was written in Swedish. We recited in Swedish. The examinations were written in Swedish. I took Swedish literature, the same thing. We spoke Swedish. So after graduation from high school in Rock Island... I didn't go to high school. You didn't go to high school? No. I went to... Elementary school at first. I went to the elementary school, and when I was through with sixth grade, then my folks sent me to the preparatory, which is supposed to... At Augustana. At Augustana, which was supposed to be the same as seventh and eighth grade in one year. And there were a bunch of Swedes there that had just come over. Yeah. And so I was the most out-of-place kid you ever saw. To me, they were all old men. And they were ready for the ministry, and some of them... Most of them were going to see if they could take the short course to become ministers. But some of them went right through college. So like your father, now he was 11 when he started. He was remarkably young. Yeah. And you were about the same age then, 12? That's right. That's right. So did your father or parents help you with anything on the subjects, like reading and arithmetic? He was too busy with other things. Did he check you out sometimes if you could go? Oh, maybe. Maybe he would drill me in Latin sometimes. But you didn't go to him for advice on how to learn? No. No. And your mother, she couldn't follow along. Could she help you with the courses? No. No, she never did. She was too busy having babies. No, when I think of it, it was a big mistake to send a kid there my age. I was the only girl with a bunch of old men. How about your brother, Paul, now? Did he go the same route? And the rest of the children, too? He had trouble with my brother, Carl. Carl began to rebel and all that. So he sent him to high school. Oh, I see. So he didn't want to be too close to home, I suppose. Well, he... Maybe he learned from you. Well, it could be. He probably said something and he fished it up and... It could be, but he rebelled. These people were mostly Swedish and wanted to speak Swedish. A great many of them, they were coming in by droves, you know. And every year there'd be a new batch there and all of them rattling off Swedish to each other. So I don't know. Carl, he objected. And Birger Swenson, he was one of them coming in there. Yes. They were almost about the same time. Birger was there after I... Well, I knew him, but... And that was really after I had gotten through with most of those classes. By the time I got to college, it was the first time that I was with my peers from the time I had been in sixth grade. Then I was with my peers because there were girls my own age and boys my own age and people from the Tri-Cities. So for the first time for many years, I was with my own age group. Did you have any questions about continuing to college then or did you make some suggestions to your parents to go to another one? I wanted my father to send me to another school. Yes. Many times I used to beg him that. Just asking the impossible. I would never do. I would never do. So I knew. Whenever Papa said, We are going to go to another school, that meant no. So you learned after a while. I learned. It was very polite of you to let you know in that way. Papa was always very gentle and very sweet. Could you change some ideas? What did you find hard to master, for instance? Young people always have some rebellious feelings. They got to change things because this is stupid and so on. Did you have the same thing when you were growing up, trying to tell your parents, we do it this way instead? Well, the one thing I objected to was that everlasting rule that each class had to average 80, and I couldn't see that because I used to hear some of the professors talk about that sometimes among themselves, and they always felt, Well, the girls don't need it. The boys need it to get maybe a new job, and so they gave them the lower grades because... So they were really chauvinistic at that time. In other words, the girls were just there for something to do. Yeah, I saw too much injustice there with that grading business. That doesn't mean that they all did it, but it meant that the women in general... They should be married. They'd be married. They'd get married. The boys need it, and so they'd give them the higher grades. They did, and I heard them talk about it and even admit it. And as I say, that doesn't mean it was the case with every teacher. It certainly wasn't, but I know that it happened, and it happened a lot. But at that time, there was no way to have any justice made. No. So how long did he live now, Carl Espen? Well, he lived until he was killed in an automobile accident. He was the one on 7th Avenue? Yes. He was going down to mail a letter at the depot. He was crossing the street, and he was married and had been married a while. It happened just like that. And why he had to go down to the depot to mail his letters, I don't know, but anyway, that was his custom. He'd go down and mail the letters down there, so they'd go off. And he died instantly? I think so. I don't know. I think he was killed instantly. Was it a business street, 7th Street at that time, or 7th Avenue? Well, it was getting to be more and more so, yes. What year was it paved? It was paved about the year 1907. 1907? Mm-hmm. And that I remember well because I was given my younger brother to take care of, and he'd be in the buggy, and I'd have my roller skates. And it was just heavenly to roller skate on that smooth, and it was closed off. It was started down where Moline was, and I was pushing that buggy, and we'd roller skate and roller skate, and then it was up further. Everything blocked off, so there was no traffic except the workers. And that whole summer I had a grand time. Yeah, it was a nice summer. Going down, it was fine. Coming up, I had to work a little. So 19 or? I would say 19, it must have been 1907, either 1907 or 1908. Because 1909, I was in Kansas, and then it was already done. And it was done for 1910, you see. For the big celebration. Mm-hmm. So you remember that one, then? Oh, yes. A lot of cars and the buggies were parked outside on 7th Avenue. Did they have a lot of cars at that time, pastors and laymen, coming into the celebration, or did they go by train? Well. Well, they took all train cars, I suppose, from Minnesota and different places. Oh, yeah, quite a number, yes. Coming up from Kansas. Mm-hmm. Many times when Father was going to have a dinner party, certain ministers, in those days they maybe brought their families with them, and when they were invited to dinner, they'd bring their families with them, and then it was up to me to take care of the kids, because the kids weren't supposed to be in this. Today they wouldn't do that, but many times I'd have to get what food I could from the kitchen, and we'd go out and I remember we'd boil potatoes and cook whatever we had there, but I'd take care of the ministers' kids that were brought in together with my kid brothers. Yes. And I was the regular one to take care of these kids. Mm-hmm. So I understand that with a big gathering like this, not for a jubilee or a conference, that you couldn't sit with the grown-ups to eat at the gatherings like that, but for instance now if Dr. Ewald came from Chicago and his wife, did you eat your kids, I mean your kids eat with them also, then the grown-ups? If it wasn't a state party, if it was just... And there was room enough. Oh, yeah. You sat at the table then? Oh, yes. Oh. I sat at the table if it was just a couple, yes. I see. So, but as soon as it got to be really stuart, then... Then you, it was forbidden territory. Well, it was just understood. There was no room for us. That's right. Oh, no. Mama would have place cards then for the guests. Oh, place cards? Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. I see. Many times I helped make the place cards, you know, some extra painting or artwork. Did they serve wine with the... Never. Never wine? Mm-mm. No? No. And coffee to drink with the food or how did they... Coffee at the end of the meal with the dessert. Almost... There was nothing during the meal? No, we always served it last. Oh, I see. I still have it that way myself because I was just brought up that way. But the customers, they always drink coffee before and... No, we served coffee last. It's a dessert, you know. Mm-hmm. I see. With a dessert. We even had finger bowls. So, who said the prayer? Hmm? Who said the prayer for the meal? You read the prayer. I mean, who did that, your father? Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Always. Always? Mm-hmm. Your mother didn't say the prayer? No. No, she never did. How about when the kids were with... Did you say it sometimes then or they alternated with the kids to say it? Well, we knew sometimes we'd say it together. Papa wasn't always home. When Papa was home, he always did. And when he was not home, then it would be for us kids. And sometimes the kids would say it together. Did you use the one, Välsigna Gud den mat vi får? Yeah, we used that. This is page number two, and this is tape number two. This is a continuation of the interview with Esther Albright in Moline, Illinois. The verse, Välsigna Gud den mat vi får, Välsigna detta kroppens bröd, Och var oss när i liv och död, was read in Swedish, either by Papa or one of the kids. The younger ones? No, the younger ones didn't do so well. In fact, as time... Am I recording now? Yes. As time went on, they were younger and going to school and didn't learn the language the way we did. But I did, and naturally, living over in Sweden, and then the Swedish influence of the language was stronger when I was younger than it was when I was older, but I had already learned it. And I took all the Swedish courses that Augustana offered, and Professor Morrison recommended that I could teach Swedish at the University of Minnesota. I was scared to death. I thought, oh, I could never do that. I don't know why I felt that way, but I did at that time. I just couldn't teach Swedish at the University of Minnesota. I thought everybody there knew a lot more Swedish than I did, but Professor Morrison recommended me. But when I got the offer, I felt, no, I couldn't do it. But you went ahead and you didn't do it? No, I didn't teach Swedish at the University of Minnesota. I don't know why. I didn't accept the call. You were not brave enough to? I didn't think I could. I don't know why. I just was afraid. So what kind of changes did you notice? Now, you were growing up with the Swedish. You had no problems. You could change over from English to Swedish or vice versa. I was bilingual, and when I would be reading, I know one time later on, my husband asked me when I was working at my thesis on Gustav Mandarin and the growth of Augustana College and Theological Seminary. He said, what language are you reading? I said, I don't know. I'll have to look and see. It just was natural to me to read either one. It didn't make any difference. But I wasn't conscious that I was reading Swedish or that I was reading English. Your sisters and brothers then later on, they noticed a different? Well, my brothers. Your brothers, yeah. Yeah, because my sisters died in infancy. Well, that's right. Yeah. So my brother Gustav knew less Swedish and Carl less than that. And they didn't seem to have the same interest to pursue it either. No, no. I can't say I didn't have interest in pursuing it. I enjoyed it. But I was just scared to death. I thought up there they know a whole lot more Swedish than I do. So what did you accept then? I accepted teaching French and English in the high schools in different places. But wouldn't French be more difficult than you would think? I know. If you think about it. But now I think, well, dear me, here I was and could converse in Swedish and everything. And I certainly knew less French than I knew Swedish, but that's the way it was. And I had a chance to teach in Alsace-Orraine. They offered me a position in France, but it would have taken a lot of money, and my father couldn't afford it, and neither could I. So I would have learned a lot more French. But then as time went on and as I was teaching, French wasn't so strong, and so I was teaching English, and first thing you know, I took my master's in English. And was about to take my doctorate, but it would take a whole year of residence at a time when I had three girls in college and I couldn't afford that. So I didn't take my doctorate, but I was accepted. And that was in 19... Oh, it was way back. Let me see. When I thought I would go for my doctorate, that was in about 1940, a doctorate in English. And I was accepted at the University of Illinois. And so I just let it go to a second master's. You see, I had got my master's in education, and then I continued with English. And Dr. I think Hildebrand was the one in the head of the department at the time of English at the University of Illinois. Anyway, he accepted me and he said, That'll be all right. But when I found that, studied more carefully, the years, one solid year down there, I couldn't do it in other ways, summer work or maybe occasional winter work. I had to have a solid year of residence, and I simply could not do it, not with three girls in college. It was too much of an old. It's very true. You were still at D'Aristana or in your home in 1914 when the First World War broke out. Yes. What was the feeling then on the campus? Was there any kind of pro in one way or another to start off with? Pro, German you mean? Yes, to start off with among the teachers, for instance. I will say that the newspapers, the Chicago Tribune, I remember, came out with criticizing these people who were living in rather very fine circumstances for supporting the war, and it seems to me that the Tribune and the newspapers in general were leaning toward the German interests. Yes. However, I don't know that that was true of the Augustana people, but I mean I think the general atmosphere all over was leaning a little toward the German interests. What happened then when the tide turned, in other words, when America has to be involved? Oh, they went all out against Germany, but it took a little time. Well, I think it just took time for them to begin to feel that Germany was in the wrong. But there was an element there. Do you recall if the Tribune or other newspapers made a turnaround? Yes, they did. They did? Oh, yes. But I know the cartoons especially in the Chicago Tribune, which we took, I know, at the time, I would say not outstandingly for Germany, but there was a general leaning toward the German interests, yes. So you believe a cartoon can really tell a newspaper's feeling at a time? Oh, the newspapers don't allow cartoons unless they agree with the people that are at the head of it. They won't print them? No. No. And I suppose a lot of people turn to that page and look at the cartoon. Those cartoons that I remember especially were on the front page. You'd see it all right. So they were more blunt than years ago. Yes, they were. In the state of colors. That's right. And then when they went to the other side, they went almost too far. They were ready to spy on you and to find where maybe you aren't exactly true American. And I don't understand some of the feelings that they even tried to interpret some of my father's sermons as showing that he was pro-German and, you know, reporting that to some kind of a committee in Washington. In Iowa, didn't they have a law against foreign tongues spoken in churches and gatherings? They got big. Well, I don't know if the law was. They were very, very sensitive, I know, about it. And my brother had a charge in Des Moines, Iowa, and I happened to say one evening as some visitors came in that we were of Swedish heritage and Norwegian, and my brother was just furious with me afterwards. He just sailed in to me and says, We don't say those things. We're Americans. Well, I had no intention of trying to break up my American citizenship by saying such things, but oh, I know Paul was so sensitive about it, especially as the guests were there and we had spoken about our Swedish heritage, and that was all wrong. So even any ethnic press would be un-Americanized? Yeah, they were already getting so sensitive about any little thing that was said. And I know one time, this was when I was in college, and we had to make some kind of talk about this and that and the other, and at the time the Lusitania had been sunk, and I took the side that we were foolish to send the Lusitania because it was supposedly loaded with armaments, and I said, What else can you expect when we're loading it with armaments and putting passengers on as a guise? What else can you expect? And my speech teacher, that was Miss Iva Pierce, she was just furious, almost without ability to speak, that I said such a thing, that all she could do and that she felt that we could say was to condemn them completely and absolutely for breaking all laws. And the newspapers were full of the fact that the boat was full of armaments. Well, I wasn't for Germany or against Germany at the time. I was just simply saying, What else can you expect when you send a boat loaded with armaments? So you tried to be objective? Yeah, that's right. But oh, Miss Pierce just about went into a tailspin. But as I say, they were super sensitive. Do you think that has something to do then, after the war, the pastor seems to have been very reluctant to speak up politically in any form? Today, of course, they go overboard to choose a party. But before they've been reluctant, do you think there was a lesson they learned in 1917? Well, I tell you, as far as the party is concerned, in those early days you had to be Republican if you were a Swede, and if you were a Democrat, there was something wrong with you. Was that, I heard a thing that if you were a Democrat, you were either Catholic or Irish. That's kind of a truthiness thing. Yeah, that's right. And the Swedes didn't want to be mixed in with that. No, the Swedes were Republicans. And in general, I would say the Swedes were. And I know there was one of the staunch people in the Augustana Senate who came out for the Democratic man who was running for president, and all the rest of them at Augustana thought he was crazy to think he would do that. So he was going against the wind. And this Republican thing, you know, they went back all the way to Hassegrist time because... Oh, yeah, they were Republican. Oh, yes, they were Republican. Yes. In that way. So your father didn't have any special interest in politics, though? He didn't... No, well, he was interested always in the presidential conventions, and he was a member, was sent as a member one time in the Republican Party. I think he attended the convention in Chicago, and he was very much interested, yes, I would say, in the affairs of the Republican Party. So he was often guest speaker at John Erickson Republican in Chicago. Yes, yes. So he was not afraid to... What about the Democrats? Did he speak at any of the meetings? Never. No? Nothing I know of, anyway. No request? No. So during the war, First World War, the college went all out, the students could join the army. In other words, they got the... Yes, oh, yes. And in other words, if they weren't midterm, they went out to serve the country. My class was almost practically disappeared, because the boys who went into the army, this was in March or April, they were automatically given credit for the subject they were taking, and we were just depleted out of my class. They came back and graduated with other classes years later, and we always felt that they belonged to us, but it isn't the way it went. Yes, the boys went almost en masse, and Swett Berg already had some military credit, so he immediately became one lieutenant or something like that, and had some of the boys in charge. And my father would go and visit them at various camps. Did he have recruiters at the college coming from the army or... Did he have what? Recruiters coming from the U.S. Army to the campus to... There were some, yes. I know my kid brother, who was, he was a kid brother at the time, Gustav, he went in and was getting enrolled and enlisted, and then when the man found out that he was 16 years old, he just about kicked him out of the... Yes, recruiters were on the... You want to enlist in it, or what happened? Well, my brother was trying to enlist. How was the feeling among parents? Were they afraid to send young boys off to military service, or were they restricted against it, or any opposition? No, they were highly concerned, I will say. I remember one time, this was one of the ministers. He had a son who was going, and oh, he was on the board, so he was staying in our house during board meeting, and he was practically weeping every time we'd have breakfast together about his son going in the army, and felt so bad about it, and I remember we always, in the morning, would read a little bit from the Bible and then say the Lord's Prayer after breakfast, and my father had lost his voice at the time, and this, in fact, he was the father of Mrs. Fritzscher-Frick-Sauer. What was his name now? I don't know. I can't recall. Well, I know, but the name won't come to me. Anyway, he was so broken up, he just couldn't, so I had to read from the Bible that morning, and I was mad at him. I thought, why couldn't he? But anyway, he just was hardly, he couldn't restrain his tears, and I know another minister, Pastor Seedorf from Rockford, he was very much concerned because he didn't know what army life would do to his son's religious views, and was concerned about that, and of course he was concerned about his life, too, but he was concerned. He expressed himself more as being concerned about religious views and the effect the army might have on that, on his son. And so many of the ministers expressed deep concern, but I can't say they were ever against it. There was nothing they could do, in other words, to stop it or to take any other actions toward it? No, no, they all were in favor of going against Germany, but the fact that they were going in war and all of the problems involved, well, as there was, there were about five of the Augustana boys, I think, that were killed. But I guess when it comes right down to it, that record wasn't so bad. All of them could have been killed. And there was no deferment because of studies? There was deferment for those who had declared themselves to be ministers, if they wanted to use it, and some of them didn't use it. But I know they come to my father and say that I have planned to be a minister. My father generally knew those that were going to plan. If they wanted to have deferment because of their plan to be a minister, and they came to my father and told him that is my plan, then my father would sign their papers. And that would be good enough to? They could stay at Augustana and continue their studies, if they so chose. But as I say, most of them didn't, even though they were going to be ministers, they went with them. And after the war, what happened then? In other words, they were all behind the effort to go to Germany and defeat them. Oh, yes. Was there some kind of harsh feeling against German or the German people at that time, the years that followed the Augustana, you think? You didn't notice anything? I can't say I noticed anything, but I will say this, the German language was taken out of every high school as far as I know throughout the United States. It was? I was qualified to teach German. I'd had four years of German. So there was one? They'd even burn the books. So I think for several years there, German was just taken out of the schools, public schools. And I think Augustana must have suffered that because maybe many didn't sign up for German. What happened to the German department at Augustana then? Well, it showed that it... They had to be beginners then coming into college. It'd either be beginners or it suffered because there weren't so many as there had been. Was there a German teacher at Augustana at the time? Professor Esbjerren, Karl Esbjerren. Oh, he was the German... He taught German. He taught German. So he had an easy load then. Well, it eased his load, that's sure. That's right. There were some classes I know where he had only two members. And two members for a whole class, that's not very many. And some maybe... Well, in my class I think there were about six. That's not very many. So you helped out also teaching at Augustana German? I studied German, yeah. Did you teach anything at Augustana? Not at... I didn't teach at Augustana at that time. I went to the high schools, and in the high schools German was completely out. Completely gone. Out. And they stayed on for... For several years before they brought German back. What affected the head of Augustana, or Illinois as a general, this national alliance, Nationals Verbund, after the First World War? It was supposed to stop all wars. In other words, it was the last war ever. Yeah. What kind of feeling did they have among people who were at the college level, for instance? Well, I think they all felt that it was... It was the end of it. I think it was. I think they felt that way. And they actually believed that they could end it right there. Yeah, I think they did. I think all of us did. So the military service was not too high-ranked after in the 20s and 30s? No. It was very low-key. That's right. Anything with military symbol. It was. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So, and then you married a German. Well, his mother was English, had come over... Her family had come over in the 1600s, and his father was of German descent. So he was both, because he had a German name, he was half... He was naturalized from an English... English, and yeah, so she... American. Her people had settled in Martha's Vineyard, way, you know, way out east. And then when she was about a year or two old, they traveled to Wisconsin. And then she was a graduate of Rockford College and became the head of the elementary school in Etiskola. And then married this German, so he was, my husband was both English and German. How did you meet him in... I went, I was teaching in Etiskola. Oh, I see. I was teaching English and French at the time. You mentioned Rockford College. I noticed that a lot of people have their story on it. Was it about the same level as Augustana at that time, or bigger? Pretty much. It only, it was, at first it was just a girl's school. Only for girls? Yeah, at first. It was a female seminary, but it was a college. No, I'd say that always it has ranked pretty high. In fact, Jane Adams from the Chicago whole house, and my aunt went there. You see, my grandfather was a minister in Rockford. And my aunt Lydia attended college with this Adams. They became friends and were friends all their lives, corresponding. And so I would say that it had pretty high ranking, especially they could certainly brag about Miss Adams' work in whole house. So that was more like a private college to start off with? More like a what? Private college? Oh, yes. It was private? To my knowledge, it was private. Yes, I'm sure it was. And it was located right downtown? Yeah. Right in the beginning. So I see that a lot of writings and a lot of people have gone through there. But it was definitely not Swedish. No, I understand that. And in fact, I think they felt that they were, some of the people who were there felt that it was the Wellesley of the West. Well, the element, the Swedish element, they felt that they were educating for higher situations. I know there were two girls that left the college at the time they were trying to register because they wanted to take some home ec and this and that and the other, and the lady there told them, the registrar told them, we don't teach scrub women and you better go another school. So they came to Augustana. So I don't know, maybe their department of home ec, whatever it was anyway, they came because they felt miffed with the registrar who felt a little snooty. I see. So they were a little bit higher up. They were higher up, yeah. Ivy. Yeah. College of the East. That's right. So then they went to, but Augustana didn't teach any. No, we didn't have that. Anyway, they felt miffed by the conversation they had had with the registrar, and they attended Augustana then. If you go into, we were talking about home economics and so on, it goes more or less to the women's side of teaching. What kind of influence did women of the time have on Augustana? Was it only male-oriented decisions, you think? Well, to a great extent, and people felt that it was oriented toward the men. However, the women were accepted as students early in Augustana's history and were given the right to be regular members of the college student body. So in a way, I think Augustana has, in the articles that I've read, bragged about the fact that they've always accepted women, and while maybe the very first women signed up more for piano and voice and things like that, but they were accepted early in Augustana's history. How about the decision-making of the college? Were there any on the board or were they ever heard? At first, no. There were only men in most of the ministers, and the teachers who had charge of the various departments were definitely men, and then they could have women come in maybe to take some overflow classes, but they were not recognized as really a regular teacher. And I know Henry Atnaseth told me that she felt the university women had done a lot to helping her because she was a woman. And in fact, the argument that Augustana had with the university women who at that time also checked on the various colleges, and they said that you have to have not only a woman teacher to teach overflow classes, but you have to have women who would be accepted as full professors or head of departments, and they have to be accepted just exactly as a man. And my father did all he could to get the university women to accept Augustana because at that time they had the agencies that would come in and check all of these things. Didn't Augustana have it awful trouble to belong to the North Central? Yeah, that's right. They wanted to be a member of the North Central, and they wanted to be also recognized by university women's agency. So my father did all he could to get Henry Atnaseth to come and to be the head of the Department of English. She was a graduate, had gotten her doctorate from University of Chicago. There was no reason why she couldn't be recognized as far as preparation. And so my father did that. He and Henry Atnaseth told me, she says, without the university women, she says, I question I would have gotten that position. Oh, I see. There's some pushing there, too. That's right. So your father didn't have full approval, I suppose, of the board. They liked to have their own. Well, members of the board were men. There was one woman that came in later on, Mrs. Katie Anderson, but I think she was the only one for years and years and years. Nowadays there are many more women on the board. But in those early years, that wasn't the case. You would think a lady like Mrs. Emmy Ewald, Ellen Carlson's daughter, she was very peppy. Oh, yes. Didn't she have any influx in the college, or didn't she? Well, there was that element still, recognizing the men only. And it still riles me. She was really the one who promoted the gathering of the funds, it was through the missionary societies, I think, to build the women's building. And then later on, when they were going to change some things and build another women's building up further in the hills, oh, the feeling ran high against it. Well, anyway, the result was that a new women's building was put up on the hill, and many declared that the girls would be so frail they couldn't stand to climb all the steps. Well, anyway, when they were going to put boys in the dorm, and it was called, see, the women's building. Now, Emmy Ewald was really the one who got that money through her efforts. And so they named the building after her father. But not after Emmy. No, you tell me. They didn't want to stoop that low. They didn't want to stoop that low, no. And they could have called it, if they wanted to call it Carlson Hall for Emmy Carlson, all right. Or Emmy, they called it Ewald Hall, in memory of Emmy Ewald. I don't suppose they could put boys in a dorm with a woman's name on the top. But anyway, they could have used her last name, Ewald Hall, and then had a plaque in all memory. But no, the board couldn't do that. What kind of person, you met the person, you have to tell me. Oh, I knew Emmy. She was in your home many times? Oh, many, many times. She was a good friend of mine, Aunt Lydia. I see. How did she react to opposition, was she aggressive? She was aggressive. She was? Oh, yes. She was not afraid to speak up? She was not afraid to speak up. And I know one woman journalist, this was in a meeting out east, said, I thought the Scandinavian women were quiet and retiring, but this woman that I observed was far from retiring. No, she would declare this and that and the other, and I attended some of the meetings that were, because I was a kid then, but I'd attend some of the meetings that were held in this area when the convention was here. And she would try to arrange all the delegates according to the place they represented, the Kansas conference and the Iowa conference and this, and she would go around and get them all fixed up and go around there and really, she rolled the roost. She was a good leader then? She was a profound, aggressive leader, yes. I know my father, my brother, he happened to be accidentally in their home one time when she and her husband, Pastor Ewald, were having some kind of argument about something, and she was quite intent on her point, and my brother heard Ewald say, Kvina. That always tickles us. But Emmy was very, very good. I know that morning when she finally was going to resign as president of the Missionary Society, that is, over the whole thing, I was home, usually taking care of a lot of errands, and I took her in my car over there, and then she went in and she says, I asked her, I plan to resign. I said, you do? Yes, and she gave me a big hug and a big kiss. I think maybe it's time for me to step down. And she resigned. How did you address each other? I mean, you were a family friend with her, but you never called her, do you speak Swedish with her at any time? What's the most English you speak? I don't remember. I might have spoken Swedish, but if I did, I would say, ni. Ni in Swedish? Because the difference of age there would be. That's right. My father always told me to speak to the older persons with ni, or in third person singular. And she called you Esther then? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Yes. I always liked Emmy. And as I say, she was a good friend of my aunt, and she was in our home, and I had great admiration much for what she was doing, and she ruled the roost. There was no question about that. Was she more powerful than her husband, you think? Because he stayed in Chicago at the time. As far as I know, and what I observed, I would say yes, but maybe he was ruling his place over there. I'm no judge of that. Because he didn't have any national law. No, no, no. And she went to China and all over the place. Oh, yes. But the men on the council, they let her go so far. It still riles me. It's not frustrating to see things like that happen. That Erlon Carlson Hall should be called Ewald Hall in memory of Emmy Ewald. They just couldn't make themselves. No. It isn't right. Are there any more women that you know of during that time that was as powerful as she was, for instance? No. Nobody as powerful as she was. No. She was top. She was more powerful than many of the men. In fact, when she first organized this Women's Missionary Society, my mother was a member, a charter member of that, because at the time it was organized, it was in Bethany, Kansas, and my father was teaching there then, and my mother was expecting my oldest brother soon. So we used to laugh and say that Paul was present at the meeting, too. She, well, the next thing to her might have been Mrs. Peelblad, but she did the legwork. She was the one responsible for I think it was the Mischunsteigning and put in many years and a lot of work, but not the kind of publicity and aggressive work in the public. She did a lot of work. I see, groundwork among the people. She was not afraid to talk to anyone. No. To get her point across. No. So Peelblad, you mentioned, he was the president of Bethany. That's right, and Mrs. Peelblad was the editor of Mischunsteigning, and we liked to claim her very much because she grew up in First Lutheran Church, and it tickled me, too, to talk about women. When I was writing the history of the First Lutheran Church, I made a point of that Mrs. Peelblad and how she sprang from our church, was brought up in our church, and was our organist. Then when she was married, she went down to Kansas with her husband, and I spent quite a bit of time writing about her, and it amused me when one of the members of the church council, see, he teaches religion at Augustana. Fogden? Fogden, yeah. He was going over some of the pre- I wasn't ready to publish it, but I showed him what I had, and he went, Enough of this woman. He doesn't even realize that she was our child in the first place, and we were proud of her. Enough of this woman, and I thought, Oh, dear. So there was corrected history. Yeah, well, I left it all in, believe me. I didn't take it out because Fogden didn't even know the history. I know another thing, too, that amused me. In the early days, First Lutheran Church in this whole area was considered the director of religion over, oh, quite a large area, and then if any church wanted to rise from its position as a mission church to a regular church, they had to get the okay from First Lutheran before they could do so, and then he wrote, By what right did First Lutheran have to do this? By what right? This is the way it was. Myron knew absolutely nothing about our early history, and here he was, By what right did they have to do this? Well, they did. This was the setup, and I couldn't get it through Myron's head that that was the way it was done, that First Lutheran was the big boss. You had to be careful with those professors. They have their own thinking. He had no thinking about it. He didn't know about it, but he put himself as a... He had to question it. Yeah, and so I thought Myron was no help. So you have been a lifelong member. You were born into the First Lutheran. No. I was born out east. Oh, yeah, that's right, in New Haven. In New Haven, and then we went to the Scandinavian countries, and we came back to New Haven, and then we came here, and my father at that time, because he was very much Swedish, and we joined what was called Zion Lutheran Church, now called... St. John's. Now called St. John's, and so I was brought up in Zion Lutheran Church. So most of the Augustana people belonged to the Gamra Zion kyrka. Well, see, they still use Swedish at the Zion. Now a block away from us, a block to the west, there was Grace Lutheran Church, which was English, but my father joined the Swedish element. So we had Swedish sermons, and I was confirmed in Swedish, and it was nothing but Swedish, 100%. Then you moved over to... Well, I left. I taught, and I was married, and I taught in different places around here, and when I came back, I had my papers in at St. John's, because my mother was still living, and as long as she lived, I stayed in the church at St. John's with her. And here I was living in Moline and teaching in Moline. So after her death, George Engdahl, who was a pastor, and he and his wife were old college friends of mine, I transferred my papers to Moline. He was the pastor in South Bend later on. Yeah, he was the pastor in South Bend later on. And so I joined. I suppose I logically should have joined up here, but because George and Gerda were down there, I felt that was the only place to go. So I have been a member only since I came back. So how has it changed now over the years, from the early beginning, when you started to go to the first Augustana Lutheran Church, confirmed, and Sunday school, and Luther League, and later the Ladies Aid, and so forth. How has it changed now? There's no such a thing as Ladies Aid anymore. No, they have changed. The powers that be in Philadelphia decided to change things and make it possible for every woman to be involved in the church. And they changed the different kinds of organizations. In fact, they obliterated the Michuns for Annie. So Emmy Evald, I don't know what she knew, not rolled in her grave from all of that. Then each, before that, you see, each society would, the Michuns for Annie would gather money, and the minister never saw a penny of that cash. And many times they had a lot of money, and the ministers in general didn't exactly like that because they had a hard time raising enough money to meet their, the sum allotted to them. And the, well, I don't know what to call it. Anyway. The ruling body then found out. The ruling body decided that every woman should be involved, and so therefore they organized, or they planned the setup of having different units in the church, and the one unit would take care of the altar, and another unit would take care of this and that and the other. And so in organizing these various units, why they hoped the plan was that every woman would get involved, so she'd be a member in one of these units. Well, it so happened, at least in our church, and I think in all of them, it was the same old ones that were active before were active again, and the rest of them were not. We have the LCW, which...