 We have 7th of August 1987 and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Hazel Johnson, Lapeer, Michigan and she was born in Detroit, Michigan, 5th of July 1927. Your parents now, Simon and Anna Berg, they came from Sweden. Yes. Do you know the reason why they left? I think they had hoped for a better future economically in this country. Your father, what was he doing in Sweden? He worked in the lumber mill, lumber mills, and he came here and he became an iron worker. He changed completely then. Yes. When they came, did they come to somebody like an uncle or aunt or cousin or? My father came to a sister. In Detroit? At that time he was in La Porte, Indiana was where she first came and then to Detroit later. And my father came to a sister in New Jersey and he went to Chicago for a time and then he came to Detroit. Oh, I see. So they were not married in Sweden then? No, they were married here in Detroit. Oh, so your mother she came to La Porte? La Porte, Indiana. And your father came to New Jersey? Mm-hmm. But they didn't stay long in either place? No, not any length of time, no. They met in Detroit, Michigan. So why did they come to Detroit? My mother, the brother that she came to, he was a carpenter and he came to Detroit for work and then she followed. And actually, she met my father at the brother's home. Oh, I see. In Detroit. So it was just an occasion, they were there together or they didn't know anything about each other before? No, they met in Detroit and got married. So then they married in the Swedish church? Yes. In the manual Lutheran or? No, it was called Bethlehem Lutheran, it was on the west side of Detroit. Their marriage certificate was in Swedish. So it was the Augustana Bethlehem Lutheran? Well, Augustana, the church is the same as that, it changed its name to Augustana Bethlehem Church when it moved from a downtown section of Detroit out to northwest Detroit, it changed its name from Bethlehem to the Augustana Church. But it was actually the same congregation. Oh, I see. And the manual is on the east side? That's on the east side. So there were two Lutheran churches then in the... Mm-hmm. When did they move from downtown area? 1943, I'm not sure, it's 1943, something like that. They closed it up then? I think they sold it to a Negro congregation. And then they moved out to the west side? Mm-hmm, built a new building. And how far west is that of downtown then? Telegraph Road? Not quite that far. Not that far. But pretty close. So they were married there and he started to work for the iron... Iron workers, yeah. And your mother didn't work then? No, not at that time. When she first came to this country, she worked as a domestic like most people. But when they married, she quit working and stayed at home. And then you come along and your... Sister first and then she died at five years of age. Before my brother and I were born. My brother was born and I was born a couple of years later. And you went to school in that neighborhood where you were living. Were you living close to that church or...? No, not real... No, not... Were you living in a Swedish neighborhood? No, no. There was occasional Swedish people. But you didn't notice a big influx of Swedes though, I mean, when you were playing around with kids? No, no, no. Did you talk Swedish at any time? Well, when I belonged to that children's club, Framtiden, which was a part of the Vasa Lodge, we learned songs. I don't know if I knew what I was saying all the time, but my father would coach me in the pronunciation of the words. I see. And then... And how old were you then, about five, six? No, maybe ten to fifteen or something. From ten years old to about fifteen, sixteen years old. So you had no previous Swedish done? No. You didn't talk it in the... No, my mother thought we lived in America and we should talk, but she said later in life that that was probably a mistake, it would have been better if she had talked to us, so we would learn more. How about your father? Was he for you to learn Swedish or...? Well, in singing the songs and things like that. He played harmonica at family gatherings, and I played piano and we played together, and sometimes we performed in a church dueling or something like that, or large, large affairs. You didn't go to any Swedish Sunday school, though? You mean learning Swedish there? Yes. No. No. And the confirmation was in English? Oh, yes. And there was no Swedish summer school in the church that you remember of? No. Not at that time. How about the rest of your brother and sister? Now, did they also... Did the folk dancing and... No, they wasn't active in that. My sister died when she was five years old. Oh, I see. So you were the only one then that carried on the Swedish? Tried to, yeah. But it was not easy? Well, no, it was kind of fun. How about the rest of the kids, though? Did they reject the idea of being pushed into it more or less? I think the boys were... It was harder to get boys to be dance partners. They were more shy? Yes. So it was hard to fill the boys' shoes, then? Yes, sometimes. You had to drag them in. Yeah. And it was called Framtiden? Framtiden, uh-huh. And it belonged to Fram Lodge? Well, it was, yeah, it started from the leaders that were members of the Fram Lodge. And your father, he was one of the officers in Fram, or...? Yeah, way back he was, when it first started. And here he was a secretary for 13 years. You're here for the... At Vasa Country Club. At Vasa Country Club, yeah. So how long did you continue with the dancing and the precipitation? Several years, several years. Several years? Uh-huh. And you went on to different doings, then, performing? Yes, uh-huh. Out here, summertime, midsummer, and things like that. Christmas, and we had the spring program, and special occasions. How big of a group was it, 20? Oh, yeah, I would say maybe about 20 kids. And who was the teacher? Their name was Inge and Lilla Svensson. And they were native Swedes? Yes, uh-huh. Did you also have costumes made up? Yes, uh-huh. Which one are you? My mother happened to make mine. Some of them had real authentic Swedish costumes. Mine, my mother made mine up. And what part of Sweden were...? It was Dalkula, Dalkuna. Oh, I see. I have a picture of it. I could show you, it was black and white in the paper. So it was not from your mother's home? No, my father's. And she came from a large family? Twelve children. Twelve children, that's huge. Six came to America, and six stayed in Sweden. So she had a lot of correspondence with Sweden, then, over the years that you remember of? Oh, yes, uh-huh, yeah. Just do it right, uh-huh. And the ones that came to the United States, did they settle around this area, too, or...? Yeah, in Detroit area, uh-huh. And the one in La Porte, stay there? No, he came to Detroit, also. So this was the middle point, as I say, came into all of them. And... One sister who, of my mother's, was the former owner... You're going to go see Carl Johnson. She used to own that cottage where he is now. Oh, I see. My mother's sister, and there's a lady that lived here for some time, until she died. So you stay close together in the whole family? Yes, uh-huh, pretty close, uh-huh. In the Detroit area here. And they had kids that were about the same age group as you then? Yes, uh-huh. You were quite a big clan. Yes, uh-huh. Of Bergs. No, they're not Bergs. Sandahl. Sandahl, yeah. Sandahl. And then this place, Vasa Country Club, when do you remember coming up there first? Four, five years old, or...? Yeah, before we were going to school, uh-huh. I think they had it before I was born, the cottage before I was born, I believe. Or just after I was born. Yes. So I was just an infant, I guess, when I first came here. So they came up every weekend then? Summer. During the summer. During the summer. Summer months, uh-huh. And most of the time it was laying idle. There was nothing happening here. Yes. For many years, uh-huh. And at first they had, do you remember the tents they had? Yes, vaguely. Uh-huh. A lot of people had tents before they had cottages. Stayed in them until they got something built. Some people just never had a cottage and stayed in tents. So then during the war they started, or before the war, they started to build cottages? Oh yes, uh-huh. This one was built in 1930. Well, 1930. Original, it was three rooms, but then my in-laws came to live here after my father-in-law retired and he had a... Oh, your father built this one then? My father-in-law. Oh, your father-in-law. Herbert's father. Oh, I see. So this is how you met your husband then? Well, yeah, he was out here when he was a little boy and he was a friend of my brother's. And my parents were over there and we met here. So there were a lot of activities there and a lot of young people. Oh yeah, many danced. They danced every Saturday night for many years there. And the music was... Swedish, yeah. They had a talent for it? Uh-huh. They were the men that played in it were all from Sweden. So there was a shindig every weekend? Yes, uh-huh. Every weekend, yeah. And your father-in-law, he became secretary for how many years? Eighteen years? Thirteen years. Thirteen years. He was also a constructor. And there was a lot of doing, constructing a new roadway in so you could drive with the car and a new bridge. Yes, uh-huh. They used to have to leave their vehicle and cross, walk across the river there until they got a bridge. I understand. I don't remember that, of course. So there was... the size of the river was about the same then, it hasn't changed? Yes, no, it hasn't changed. And this is an island, I understand? Almost like... Almost like an island, yeah. You have a lake there and it goes all around. And only one road in and out, yeah. So you are living on some kind of fortification? You are safe. So nobody can go in from either side then? Only that road. Only that road? It's the only entrance, uh-huh. In and out. No other way to get in and out with the car, unless you could walk, hike I guess. So that's... Very private. To make it secure. And then you married Axel Herbert Johnson. And he was a carpenter. And he worked with construction companies then in Detroit? Yes, in Detroit. Or was he on his own? No, no. He worked for a company. And he didn't have to worry about the depression because he was too young then? Yes. And you don't remember depression too much? No, just my parents talking about it. And when did you move out there and your parents, they sold the house and in Detroit and moved out? Yes. My mother was about 80 years old. During the 60s? Let's say she was born 1890. And if she was 80 then... 1970 was that the year? 1970. And then they sold the house and... In Detroit. And moved out permanently. Well, they, no, they lived here during... In the winter they sublet an apartment in Detroit area, in the west side. Stayed here during the summers for a few years. So there was no healing facilities then in the house? Well, yeah, but not what would be, not adequate for winter. It was too isolated too. Yes, and they didn't want to stay out here. They never had a store out here. I mean in the beginning, now it's very easy to live here, but I mean at that time it was a little distance I suppose, or... Yeah, all the roads were, into town were gravel roads. They weren't paved like they are now, with bald women that left the cobbled roads. But there was nobody that opened up a store in there for... No. Buying necessities and... No, you had to, no. Each one went to the store. Had to bring, yes, each one went to the store. So there was no talk about any co-op or any... No, no. To bring... But there weren't enough people to do that, though. Oh, I guess that could have been done, no. But they never had, they didn't do that. No? Because they had, in the 50, 60, probably about 50, 60, 70 people out there, with the kids. Oh, yeah, I suppose all of that, yeah. 52 members, I think. But it was during the winter, I suppose, and you had to close the whole thing up in the beginning. Yeah. And then more and more moved out there to stay permanently. Yeah, it came one by one. They made houses bigger and... Insulated them and had proper heating, a furnace and... And your husband, I suppose, he took care of this house then to make it better? Yes, he helped to build the addition with his... His father was still able to... Was he a carpenter also? Yes. Oh, I see. Both men were carpenters. So all the things that had to be done here, they was done by the Swedes themselves? They were either plumbers, carpenters or painters and... Most of it, most of it. Some of them hired local area people, I guess. My father-in-law built that cottage, but that was his brother's originally. So moved back to Sweden because he worked for... What is it? The auto company. Not Volvo, not Saab. And... Oh, he went back to Sweden and stayed there as a brother. Oh, there was your uncle? My husband's uncle. Oh, I see. His name was Bernard Johnson. So he moved back to Sweden? Yes, and stayed there. What about the men who went back to Sweden? Were about? From here, do you remember off that... Well, they were from Halland, but the factory was in more south of Sweden. I can't think of the name of it. I can't recall the name of it. They stayed there. How about your parents now? Did they go back for a visit? My mother went back once, and father never went. So your father never went back? Never went back, no. No. Did he get any visits from Sweden, from his side of the family? Well, there were several children, and most of them came to America too. They would come to visit. Those were in New Jersey, and I think there was one in Kansas City. So he had a connection with the family over there, then? Oh, yeah. Rather than going to Sweden. But your mother, she went back. What year? Let me see. Before she married my father. So she went back then just for a visit? One visit. There was no invitation to stay there? No, she came back. And what did they tell you about the place they came from, your mother? My mother was on a farm. Born on a farm. In Boheda? In Boheda. In Småland. And dad, his mother was a widow, left with several children. And, I can't remember. What else was said? But as I said, they came to America to find a better future, I think, for themselves, hopefully. So you went back to Sweden, and went back by way of a visit to Sweden? Yes. In 19... 1979. 1979. That's the first one, and also 1982. So what did you know about the place then, what your mother told you, or was it enough though? Well, relatives took us to see where the homes are still there, where they grew up. You have many cousins then, right, of course? Yes, quite a few. Also many aunts and uncles. One cousin works for Volvo Fleet Motor, and he comes to America every now and then. He lives in Trohetan, and he has a summer home where we were at. It's on the ocean. Where he moves then? I guess it is. I have the name of it in a little diary book that I have here. I kept a diary of every day where I went, because you meet so many people in different cities. We stayed mostly in S.O. motels, and O.K. motels, and sometimes with relatives. So were you able to communicate with them? You had enough Swedish? Not very well, no. But my husband understood. He didn't speak it very well. But he was with you then? He was living in Sweden? Oh yes. My husband just died last year. Oh, I see. So he understood everything, so he could communicate better with people than I could. He didn't speak it so much, but he could understand. Did any of those people you met know English? Oh yes, the younger people did. And the older people seemed to try very hard to... They say they start to teach the children in the third grade in Sweden. And some of the parents thought that they should learn their Swedish better first before they go into English, but that's what they did. So the children would sing for us American records and say the words very, very well. I could talk to the younger people more. And my husband's cousins write to us, and they write in English. And it's almost perfect, not perfect, but almost perfect. Makes it easy for me, for us. So you were there in about four or five weeks? Yeah, four weeks each time, four and a half weeks. What did they ask you about in Sweden? About your parents? They were both gone, and your father and mother. Let's see... My father died in... My father died in 78, my mother not till 81, but my mother was in a nursing home in Lake Orien for about three and a half years. And they both were in a home for the elderly for three and a half years together, so altogether my mother was being taken care of for about seven years. So she knew about the visit, though? Oh yes. So what did she ask about when you returned? How I found her family, of course, and where I'd been and what I'd seen. And of course we took quite a few pictures, so we had pictures to show. So she remembered? Yes, uh-huh. Her memory was quite good up until... She lived to be 91 and a half, so she was quite good up until about the last year or so. Did she talk Swedish often when she got older? No, not very much, not very much. If someone came to visit her, like you interviewed books, Mr. and Mrs. Book, they used to go visit her at the nursing home, and I'm sure they did. She is from Småland also. Svea. Svea Book, uh-huh. So you went back again in 82? 82. 82? Uh-huh. Oh. And what is the difference that you... Between this country and... You know, what you had in your head before you left and what you saw? I thought that it was very liberal in the country. My first impression there was not so good. I went to Gothenburg, and a man who had too much to drink came up and grabbed me by the high and almost pushed me over. And then we would see them sometimes in restaurants and heard about how they are given their alcohol and that. I didn't like, didn't think that was very good. There were many other good things. That was just the first day I was there. You got a bad impression. The first day, uh-huh. But after that, everything else was fine. Isn't that strange, though, the Swedes, they are shy and withdrawn usually. Just doing things like that. Yeah. And, of course, we didn't have to wear seat belts when we first went there, but we noticed that every day we wouldn't, people there were very careful about wearing their seat belts and if anybody was drinking, they would take a taxi and very careful about that. And surprised about how many bicycles there were, especially in the smaller towns. And people were very, you could leave your bicycle and your groceries outside the door, nobody would take them. I think they were very honest people, must have been. Everybody felt free to do that. We noticed that. We were in small towns. I thought you had the border, it was different. Oh, yeah, the big cities in Stockholm. There they would almost run you over. We went to a midsummer in Apelbu and Dalarna, and there was two orchestras. It was a very big affair, very nice, very colorful, of course. Enjoyed that. So you went to your father's birthplace then? Oh, yes. Were they still there, both your mothers and fathers? Yes, uh-huh. I took pictures of their houses that they grew up in. Were they still in relation? No. None of their own family was there, different people there, living in those homes. But I was quite impressed with how well they take care of their buildings and keep them up there. They were very nice. So none of the twelve children then stayed behind to take the fathers or mothers? One son took care of the farm until he was not able to any longer. He had strokes and was not able to take care of it anymore, and then he died. And there were no children left there? Yes, a son, and he lives in Nynäshamn, and the daughter lives in Växjö. She was a secretary, but she decided she was single, never married, and decided to change her occupation and was going to school to be a teacher. Because she loved children. So that's what she was doing. And her mother still lives in there, but she moved from the farm to an apartment. So then back to the United States and Vasa Country Club again. So this club now has prospered over the years. You always have full occupation, every house is occupied. Yes, at least in the summer. But in the wintertime then how do you... I think there are seventeen families living here year-round now. All year-round? Mm-hmm. Oh. But they also come out in the wintertime, some of the families I suppose? Occasionally, yeah, some of them do. When it's not too cold so they can... Yes. Fire up the fireplace. Yes, manage to get along. And you heat with a lot of wood out there? Well, next door they do, but this is oil heat here. You use oil? Uh-huh. Oh. Some of them have gas, some have electric heat, different kinds. But I see a lot of woodpiles, they also have... Well, so many have fireplaces, so they use... Oh. It's additional heat, you know. So you are a little city by yourself? Yes. You have your own council and city government? Yeah, board of directors, uh-huh. Yeah. And the chief, he's called the president. He's not called the mayor or anything? No, he's the president, uh-huh. The board of directors, president, vice president, treasurer, and recording secretary, and corresponding secretary, and two additional members, seven altogether. How long-term do they serve now? Well, they're voted on every year. Every year? Every year is their annual meeting. So it means they can be voted out after one year? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. But if they are good enough to keep, do you stay on? Yes, if they're willing to serve, uh-huh. So is this the question of willing to serve? Was it easy to get the officers years ago? Well... There was nobody actually running for office? Well, some of them who ran were for many years the same president and same officers, like my father was 13 years the secretary, some of the presidents were even longer than that, I think. So Florence Johnson, she took... She's a secretary. After your father, then? Um... I have a record in a book of it, I can't remember just exactly, but shortly after. Maybe there was somebody in between. She's been now for quite a while. Many years, she said, yes. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Did you talk to her last evening, then? Yes. Uh-huh. And the young people now, do they hook on after their parents get too old to keep the houses? Some of them do. It depends on where you're living. Yes. If they have the desire, yeah, if they have the desire to keep it. Uh-huh. And... Some construction going on, they're making them bigger. Yeah, remodeling, uh-huh. And probably thinking about retiring here. Yes, uh-huh. Looking to the future. Stay here. Do they sell their homes in the city? Or some of them live in... Most of them live in the suburbs of Detroit nowadays. So it's much, much more economical to live here than in the suburbs, of course. Oh, yes. Taxes are much... Because the taxes are much less. Much less. Uh-huh. Much less. And here you are... have better protection maybe than for the police force. Yeah, you feel more secure, I think. Do you never have police coming in here to... Oh, they have come down occasionally, but very, very seldom. They never called upon? Never have, no. No? Not that I know of. No. But they're supposed to serve this area, huh? Oh, yeah, if you need them. If you need them, uh-huh. Oh, yes. Yeah. Your daughter now, is she interested in the Swedish background? Have you taught her any Swedish songs or...? Mm, no, not really, no. She never asked for it either? No, not really, no. She likes Swedish food. She knows how to make patatas korv. Different things like that that she learned when she grew up and keeps as still as Christmas makes patatas korv. To bake, too? Yeah, but she works full-time, so now she's not so... When her children were little, she was more into baking Swedish coffee bread and stuff like that. Not so much anymore. Kind of got away from it. She's a full-time working person? Yeah, she's a secretary. In Detroit or...? Yeah, in Detroit. She lives in Plymouth, Michigan. Works there. Got ten minutes to her work from her home. So, after high school, did you go to college or...? No, I never did. You got a job? I worked as a secretary. Oh, I see. Downtown Detroit for Blue Cross. Say, too, your daughter went to college, too, after high school? No, she also took a shorthand in Taipei. Same law? Went to work, and then she stayed home and had her two children, and then she went back to work when they were in school. And she married an American, and there was no Swedish? He has a little Swedish in him. His grandmother came from parents of Swedish, one side of the family, her father's side. Her maiden name was Anderson. But his father is of Greek heritage, so it's quite... The Swedish is distant. Yes. Grandmother grew up in a quite Swedish area, south Bend, Indiana. So he liked Swedish food, too. He was used to patatas corvina, Swedish food. He liked that. Because he grew up, his grandmother always prepared those foods when he was a youngster, and he likes that. So grandpa and grandma means quite a bit. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. That's for sure. When they are older, they are hard to get used to, nutritious. Oh, some of them aren't interested in lutefish. They don't like the smell or the taste. My husband loved it. He loved lutefish. We always had to have lutefish as soon as we could find out that it was in the area, or they were sending for it to Minnesota or someplace. We had to have lutefish and cream sauce. But you were able to buy it in Detroit or in the stores? Yes, there used to be a Scandinavian market. A Danish lady, Mrs. Rasmussen, had a store on Plymouth Road, I believe it was, until she died several years ago. So we used to go there for Swedish foods. And there is nothing anymore than a Swedish island? No, I don't think so. Not that I know of. They had to send for it from Minneapolis or Chicago? Someplace, yes, someplace. So it dies out? Mm-hmm. It fades out? Fades, yes. For every generation, when they marry somebody else, it gets less important? Yes, I suppose, yes. Are you still a member of the Framlöds? No, I never belonged to that. My mother and father did all their lives, but I never did. But they still have a large stage going. Mm-hmm. But the numbers are very few. Mostly old-timers, I suppose. So it's hard to get people to attend meetings. Yes, mm-hmm. So I understand. They paid $5,000 for this in 1925 or 1927, or it was? I don't know. There was a lot of money at that time. I guess at that time, there sure was. So a lot of pancakes had to be flipped. Yeah. And meatballs rolled. Yeah, that's for sure. So both husband and wife had to really work hard. Mm-hmm. So they took their turns then. Everybody had to help, yeah. Everybody had to help. Mm-hmm. To serve on the... Committee, yeah. Entertainment. Mm-hmm. Different committees. But there were only a few, and they could buy a lot there. In other words, there were so many lots, a lot of it was held at Bildon. Mm-hmm. But you got in additional people outside from Detroit also. They came here for entertainment and dancing. Oh, yeah. And they were sort of standing in line, and if somebody died, they could buy in. Yeah. Buy themselves in. Mm-hmm. That's right. So... And you are not allowed to build any more houses now, as it is? I don't think so. I don't think so. It's already filled the quota? I think so. Because of county regulations or whatever it is. Mm-hmm. And they can't have hospitals. It's a big lake. No, no motors on the lake. No motors. No motors, only canoes and rowboats and sailboats, because it's a small lake, you know. They were polluted too fast then. Yeah. And it wouldn't be so safe then either, when it's such a small lake, you know. Then you need... So it's just the small boats that they can have. Mm-hmm. There's never been any churches out there, though? No. No services like that? No, no Swedish churches, no. There's never been any... Well, there was a lady who was a member, a superintendent of the Sunday School of Emanuel Church. She used to, in the summertime, when her children were little, she had a Sunday school out here in the pavilion. She was a boat, I see. And she held a Sunday school in the pavilion on Sunday mornings. But the grown-ups, they read their own Bible. Yes, I guess so. Mm-hmm. And there's never been any preacher among the group out there? No, no. Years ago, once a year, the Emanuel Church used to come out and have a picnic here, and they would hold the services outside here, usually in the June. But they cut that out some years ago. Mm-hmm. They had to rent the place then, or...? No, they... There were so many members that they wasn't... Yeah, so many people belonged there anyway, and were active in the church. Oh. Mm-hmm. This is the only place in the Detroit area where they can have picnics like this, the Swedes, or...? Mm-hmm. There's no other group or club? Well, there's a Swedish club in Detroit. You may have heard of that. Yeah, but they don't have a place like this, though. No, no, no. No lake or facilities. There's only a... A building. A building. Mm-hmm. Who belongs to that club, then? Is there more businessmen in the club, or...? Well, no. Did you talk to Arnie Lagerquist? No. He belongs there, and Mr. Carpete Benson's son is the president of that club, Detroit, the Swedish club of Detroit. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. It's in Farmington Hill, the suburb of Detroit. Mm-hmm. So, quite a few of the people here belong to that, go to their doings. So they have dinners and...? Yeah, they have things going on, midsummer and things like that. Midsummer, do they have any of the building, then, or do they...? They don't have a maypole to dance around? Yeah, they build a maypole and have this... On the grounds where they have the club? Yes, where they have some land. Uh-huh. You don't have any midsummer programs out there, now, lately? No. Years ago, you had. Yes. Uh-huh. Hasn't been any now for a few years, several years, I think it is now. Why is that? I suppose the work of it. People to... get people to make the maypole and get it organized, I suppose. And, like you say, there are people who go to many different places nowadays. They travel a lot, and there isn't so much interest in it. It's hard to get to... How about the young people? Do they show an interest in it? No, I don't think so. Not as much? No. Maybe they don't really know the background of maypole and midsummer, and it doesn't appeal to them. That could be. And, like you say, they marry into other nationalities and that, and they go to that side of the family doing some things, and they maybe conflict with what... the dates and things, or what's something else going on in the Swedish community, so... And then 4th of July is coming up right after, so maybe there is the... Do you have any celebration of that? Oh, yeah. We have a 4th of July picnic and a Labor Day picnic. So that's coming so close then, so it will be... Yes. Almost colliding with each other. Yes. But I understand you have a Lucia going around here every year. Not out here, but in the churches in Detroit they do. You don't have it here? No. Somebody said they have a Lucia. Oh, well, maybe somebody makes it for their own family or something. Mrs. Book, I think, one of her granddaughters came over, dressed up for Lucia and things like that. But not to go all around or anything. But in the churches they do. And Lucia in December. You don't have a Christmas tree for the whole community? No. On the lawn or anything like that? No. Each one put up their own? Yeah. And dressed the Christmas tree in. And put the lutefisk in order. Yeah. Do you have a newspaper, newsletter, going around here, all printed? Not in Vasa Country Club, no. There is a newspaper that some of the... The Nordic News is one I don't... He talked to Orny Lager, because he and his wife are very active in there. Nordic News. Nordic News. And that gives news of Swedish, Norwegian, Danish and Finnish. Oh, this combines the whole Scandinavia. It has nothing to do with Vasa or... Well, there's news in there from Lager and what's going on and what activities they've done or what's coming up. But it's a separate newsletter for the whole Scandinavian group then. And I think they're the reporters for that.