 So when you came then to Chicago, you stayed there with your brother? Yeah, I stayed with my brother. He was married then? Yeah, first I went to Glenwood, 5336 Glenwood. I stayed with a family. He lived there. On the south side? No, on the north side. Just off north, 5300 North. Just one block off Clark. Close to Lake. Beautiful neighborhood. So we stayed there until I went to Runkford. Then we went to Greenwich. After being there a couple of days. Did you join any Swedish organizations in Chicago? No, no. You didn't meet with the people? No, no. I didn't have time to get out. I was working and this came over and stuff. How did you manage to get over the language? Because you knew no English. I didn't know any English at all. So you went to the English and after you could talk with them, you got on with English? Yeah, I was there. One day I was going to go out and buy some cigarettes. I came over on board and I smoked a little bit of Camel. So one day I went out to the bar at the drug store, I think it was. The drug store was in the corner and I asked for, I was going to chance brands and buy a Lucky Strike. I came in and I said to the girl, one Lucky Strike. She said, what? I said, one Camel. Okay, she said. I pronounced it Lucky Strike, Lucky Strike. You know, like you do in the Swedish, you see. So I told my brother, he said, you pronounce it Lucky Strike, that's not Lucky Strike. So I smoked Camel for another month and that's good. But then I went on to get a haircut and the barber showed me something. I didn't, I didn't get a haircut, you know, I got a haircut in a barber shop. They showed me, I guess it was a clipper, I guess. They showed me, I guess he asked me if I wanted to get a clipper. I said, like this, you know, talk English, he said, you know. He cut me off, a doggone head off almost, he skinned me, you know. So I came home to my brother and I told him, I said, you know, doggone barber, can't they cut hair in America? He said, you know, he must have asked me if I wanted a clipper or not. I said, he asked me something, I said, put it in the same way he said. And he said, where do you go? I said, up there. He said, that son of a gun is Swedish, he said. He was a Swedish guy. He didn't tell you? No, he put the stuff on me. Yeah, I could have killed the guy. You never went back there, though? I would have gone back, I would have probably thrown him out at the barbershop, but I didn't dare to go back. Yeah, he was strong in them days. He was kind of lousy, though, you know. Yeah. He skinned me a little bit. Did you find the Swedes being helpful to you? I mean, your brother, probably, you could talk to. Yeah, when I came out on the jobs in Chicago, there were 10 Swedes out there. You know, in the buildings. They had big buildings, and the first day I went there, there must have been about 25, 30 people working on the building. Because the line went back and forth every day. You fired half of the crew at noon, you know, you couldn't drink water on the job. You couldn't? No, no. I said to my brother, I didn't know they had slaves in America. He said, well, there is now. He said, it's tough, you know. The boss was Irish, I heard, up on the platform, standing up there. He had a brick and mortar. The first thing I learned was brick and mortar. And you couldn't drink water, he cursed. I remember that I learned that, you know, get the hell away from the water hose. And at noon, he laid off half of the crew and hired them. Took them away? Yeah, they locked them away like cattle go by. Barked up and knocked at the guy. He had a shovel with him and overhauled from the shoulder, you know. Oh, you had your own tools? No, no. I didn't have any tools. I was working on bricks to wheelbarrow. Oh, I see. But this, in case they had to do cement work, they carried them with them, see. And they had to overhaul for them. And some had a shovel, too, you know. And some of them had to mix mortar, some of the guys in the mortar. So then he picked up, maybe, you come here and you come here. Knocked, you know, the cattle. And the rest of them got to shake and get the hell out of the building, you know. Kicked, you know, just fired them completely. I thought, gee, man, is this America? What did I do? Come over here for, you know. But just remember now, you were a hard guy at this time. You were well-seasoned. Oh, yes, I was. You had a tremendous strength in your body. Oh, yes. How did the rest of the people do, though? I mean, a lot of them. Oh, they couldn't take it. They couldn't take it? They had big cement lots underneath the windows. The one day I picked, there was some streets on the job. Windowsills, you mean? The big windowsills. Yeah, they were heavy. Two men to lift them was supposed to be, see. I didn't know. I picked them up and put them in the wheelbarrow. Guy come and tap on the shoulder. He says, you don't lift them alone. They're not that heavy. He says, right, you've been in America one year. You're going to be surprised how heavy they are. He says, just two men's job to lift them. He says, it's not one man's job. But you could pick them up easy. Yeah, I picked them up easy, yeah. Yeah, you know, I was used to lifting. When I was in the electric company, I lifted them. Copper rings, they weighed 70 kilos. Put them on a trailer, some kind of trailer, you know. And that stone cutter, all you do there is lifting blocks and stuff. They were strong as a bird, you see. You didn't know how to do it the right way, though. I mean, you used your... Oh, yeah, but I was strong, you see, and trained, you know. But they told you not to do that? Oh, yeah. Then I didn't know that. Was it the foreman that said that? No, it was the guy that worked for the unions, too. I worked for the union, you know. Did you have to join the union? I got paid five bucks a week. Crooked that, too, you know. Then I paid a guy, some Italian guy, he was in the mafia, I suppose. Came down and gave me a receipt. So I got a receipt that cost 90 or $80 for a union card, I think it was. So... This dark black guy came around, not black. He looked like an Italian, I think, you know. He gave me $35. And he gave me a receipt. Like, I kept all my receipts. I think I owed $20 left on a card. So my brother said, Take them receipts now, and the $20 he gave me, and pay up. When he comes around, pay up and get your card. So I... Guy came around, took out my receipt and said to tell him they want to get my card, you know. I just... My brother told him what to say, something, I guess. The guy took my receipt and... Not good, threw me up in the air. And I got... I got in the air, I didn't know it. And I grabbed the guy by the... the whole of him, you know. He started howling and howling, you know. I was... I threw him down in the motor box, I think. And the boss come around, what the hell? And the boss was Swedish on that job. It was my last job I had in Chicago. So you could talk in Swedish to him then, the boss? The boss, yeah, this boss I could. It was a different job at the time, it talked about union. So you told him about... I've been on different jobs. So I said... I said, hell, this is good. Don't ever touch them guys. They threw a bomb in the building here, he said. He said, Jesus. I got a... And he said, he told me to get me off the job, the guy did. Well, the boss had to fire me, see. I got it, let you go. He said, but he gave me a slip of paper. He lied to me about to go to another job next day. That's when I told my brother what happened. And so and so, he said, crooky son of a gun, you know. So, then after that, I went to a different job. That's when I went to Rockford about, just after that. So you quit in construction? Yeah, yeah, it was hard to get jobs anyway. So there was 1929 of you? 1929, yeah. How many days? I came to Rockford in August, I've been in Chicago until August. From May to August. So they treated the workers just like animals? Yeah, just like animals, you know, just like slaves. And you couldn't, you had to run with the wheelbarrow back with it. You couldn't walk. Oh, no. And you couldn't believe it. And they were stamina carpenters and everything, you know. And after it got worse, they cut the carpenters' wages to work for almost nothing, 50 cents an hour, you know. But when I was there, they hadn't cut the union, cut about 90 cents an hour for labor. They hadn't cut that at that time. But after I left, came to Rockford, next year, my brother was a carpenter in there at that time, you know, right before he went into the tavern business. And he said, he told him, he looked for a job. The scale was 150 an hour at that time, I think, carpenter's scale, he said. It's 75 cents an hour. He said, no, I work for union scale. Ah, he laughed at him. Because all he wanted was 75 cents an hour, which they did, you see. After a while, he found it out. He had checked it, too, 75 cents an hour, you know. Union didn't mean nothing. Didn't mean anything, union, at that time. Everybody had to eat, you know, and they were starving. So it got worse and worse in Chicago. So finally, he got it. I come in there, I see him. Because I go in Chicago and run, you see. He sent me a telegram. He worked a little bit. And he had track meets in Chicago. When you came to Chicago, no, you were still running then. Yeah, but I didn't run in Chicago because I... You didn't? I didn't run in Chicago because I hadn't gotten started. See? And there was no Swedish... the Vikings was in Chicago. Yeah, they had there, but they didn't... No track meets or anything like that? They probably had, but I didn't... You didn't know them? No, I didn't know anybody. I was up on the north side there, you know. There was a guy from Iraq where I started running. I didn't run for two years then, almost. With Swedish Athletic Club? Swedish Gym Club. Gym Club. That's where I started running again, you see. There was Eric Johnson. Yeah, Eric Johnson was a gymnastic master, gym director. Was he also a runner? No, no. No, there was no running. Who else was running here at that time? There was mostly high schools, you see. Mostly high school runners. I see. They ran against the high school teams. But they... so the Swedish Gym Club, they couldn't help you with running then, in other words? No, only them they could have had. They had a... They had a... I ran an exhibition out in Camp Elmwood one time for the Goat Temple picnic. They had a relay team run against me one time. That's the only time. I see. But they... So you had to go to the high school then? No, no. I was... They had a track meet between the high schools and the Swedish Gym Club. Why? The Swedish Gym had a track team. Because high school graduates joined the Swedish Gym Club. So we had some... We had one Swedish chap from Sweden, you know, Erik Tyrell Lindén. He was really good. He won against... beat all the high school track men down in Sahlgren Park two years, I think. And we had a track meet against Rockford High School. That's when I won them there. And Harlem High School, and I think it was St. Thomas High School. And, you see, I ran the mile for the Swedish Gym Club. So I won the mile for the Swedish Gym Club against the high school three years in a row. 32, 33, and 34. What time did you have at that time? Oh, it was bad times then, you see. There was... I hadn't trained or nothing. I think there was 450 or something, 445, one year it was, I know. I just ran to win, you know. I was the one on the edge, and I didn't have to kill myself anyway. And one time, 1933, I had a 445. I was out in Camp Elmwood. First we had a herring dinner out there. We were cleaning up rake and leaf in Camp Elmwood. And we had a salt herring, spekefjell, you know what spekefjell is? And boiled potatoes. Is that a sueströmming? Yeah, and I ate, I think, five or six potatoes and a whole big herring and bread. And the guy said, Jesus, 40, don't eat so much. You're going to run 2 o'clock against the high school. I said, I don't care. I can run anyway. You're going to get cramped. They were worried to death, you know. It was 12, 30, I guess then. So I left the park, took me down to the park. I was sitting in the car. I was out there a little bit, I guess, limber up a little bit. And I had red training pants and shirt on, you know, overall. And they called me the Red Devil. Here comes that Red Devil again, they said, you know. So I ran the mile. I won the mile. It was in the newspaper, said Bob Packard. He was the Olympic guy after, in Rockport. He went to Olympics in 36, you know. He did? Went to Rockport High School, yeah. He was one of the best. You ran against him then? No, no. He was in it 102 in the yards. Oh, the short? The headline in the paper was Packard wins the sprint. Then down in the paper was Packard and so on. So then it says Gustafson copped the mile. And it says Wally Gustafson, Swedish-American, putting a dandy mile performance in 4.45. But it wasn't a good time. It was a bad track down there too, you know. It wasn't a real track. It was just park down there. Fairgrounds park. Did you have spike shoes then at that time? Oh, yeah. I had spike shoes, yeah. So then I got a ride up in the paper about so good I was doing the mile performance. I got a paper clipping in. I got in here someplace. And you had six potatoes and a stool of speakers sitting over you? Yeah. I ate a herring and a potato. I didn't get no cramp. Depression, I was hungry, you know. Jesus. The guy was scared to death, you know. Did you practice often then because you were laid off from work? Yeah, I did. How did you feel then? I mean, you didn't work during the day. You could run more then. Then I ran more. Then I did park. I ran down the park out there in Fairgrounds. And then Camp Elmwood, you know. Were you the only one or did you have somebody else? No, I was the only one. The only one. Then I go down to Fairgrounds park. I walked down there and ran down there. You were the only Swede then, actually, that... The only Swede that was running in Ranckfurt, yeah. I got some guys to talk with me going to Fairgrounds. They didn't run but to go with me for a little... like one turn around or something like that, you know. Yeah, but here were Swedes coming out during the 1920s. Yeah, oh yeah. You would think there would be somebody was running. Yeah, yeah. Soccer players, wrestlers, gym wrestlers. Yeah, yeah. No distance running through Rankfurt, no. It's kind of funny too, you know, but no. So you got no competition then? No, no. Nobody in Rankfurt can compete with me, you know. And then you went to Chicago? Yeah. I had to go to Chicago and come back in 1940. How did that happen? How did you get in contact with those people in Chicago? When I was in Chicago, before I left Chicago, I walked down to this track, this park. I saw the park. It was... Chess Park was 40... it was on Clark Street and Irving Park Boulevard, on the corner. There was a square track there, but I saw the guy train there, see, but there was no... no nerves to go in there. I couldn't talk, you know. So one day after I started training, my brother said there is a track meet up in Chess Park, a place up there you can have a meet or something. So he said, you can come in and see and talk to the guys, maybe you can run for them or something, you know, in the park there. So I went in there one time, so I talked to the... then I could talk to the English, you know, the trainer. And he said, I had to fill out... I had to join the American Amateur Athletics Union to be able to run, you know, in a meet. And then I put down who I was going to run for, you know. And I went to Chess Park, track meet that time, I guess, you know, he called it then. Then they had meet at different parks in town, with different places, you know. So I ran with them in different meets, but I never know... There was Kalamazoo Park was one, I think, and Arden Park was one track meet I ran in. But I didn't win in all that meet. They had some guys come in from the... I see it sometimes, but I got ribbons, supposed to get ribbons at night, but I never went back to collect the ribbons. And I never know some of them... When you're going to have the meet, I said, my brother, Chess Park, he called Chess Park, you know. And the guy, the trainer there, and the guy in charge there, he told him when the meets were going to be. And then he sent me a notice from Chicago, in a telegram and stuff, you know. Then on 4th July, there was a big meet in Chicago, up in Lila Stadium. It was July 4th, it was the last time I ran. They had picked a winner at meet then, see what was the winner. But then a guy from New York Athletic Club, John McCluskey, had been running. He was in the 1932 Olympics, you know. So he was a good runner. Was this a mile then? He ran a mile, he ran a two mile, he had American records in the... He won the American National A.I.U. in almost 22 times, I think. I had a clipping one time, here, and this is all torn up now. I had some of the things I had when I was running, you know. And a paper clipping. But, I'm not seeing now. He could have been refused to run because he came in, he entered the same day. Then they asked if anyone objected to let John McCluskey run. I didn't know. This guy ran, he's out in Chicago, I didn't know who the heck he was, you know. He waited and waited until someone said, what are you waiting for, some guy said. We're waiting for a national champion, he says, to come here. I tell you, we're kidding, you know. He came up and I started out. The guy had a little bit gray streaks in his hair, I'll never forget that. He was only 26 years old. So he ran and ran and after half a mile I was leading, you know. I thought I was going to have a fit pretty good. And he passed me. I told him, I told him that this guy was going to fool me, you know. I figured he was going to fool up, I figured I'd stay the closer, I'd follow him. But I was behind him maybe, oh, 12, 14 yards at the time. But he was kicking like hell, he didn't slow down. So I started, then I thought, then I'm going to try to pass him. So I tried to pass him, you know, but I passed him. He wouldn't let me go by him, he'd cut in. So then I stayed behind him a couple yards and I was behind him, I came in I guess a couple yards. He wouldn't slow. And I heard people came around me, you know, all the time. Nobody paid attention to him, thought, what's going on? Oh, gee, he's a guy from Chess Park, came around the wall, he did a beautiful race. And he said, me God, he says, you know. How is it? I said, I lost, didn't I? I didn't, I walked into the shower, you know, I took a cold shower. He came in, this guy, he said, who are you from? To me, where are you from? He says to me. I said, I'd like to hear your noise. He says, have you run in the Natal Air U, have you met in Chicago before? And I said, no. And I said, where are you from? He said, New York. I said, what's his name? He said, Joe McCluskey. I said, Joe McCluskey. I said, are you, I said, were you in the, did you ever run in Sweden? He said, yeah. And I said, were you in the 1932 Olympics? He said, yes. Oh, my God, I said. And he said, I almost let you pass me in the last curve, I thought you had me there, he says. But he said, you didn't have enough to beat me, he says, there. So I said, gee, if I'd known that, I would never have tried to follow him, even, you know. Because I didn't, I know he was much better than I was. But that time, I think the mile was 427, it was a mile, you know. Were you far ahead than you two or the rest of the team? I mean, the... Oh, yeah, we were far ahead of the rest of the team then, you know. Why, what do you think? In other words, you had no respect for him because you didn't know who he was? No, I think there was something in the rock with papers. A Swedish mechanic bought it, I think. Something like that. I mean, it was... Was it different out around here? Oh, I felt better and good when I was in Sweden, oh, yeah. You felt better then? Yeah. I can't find the stuff. I got some old paper clippings and stuff in there, you know. No. So what happened then? When they came up to you and congratulated you for second place? You wonder, you know, why they did that? Oh, in Chicago. They wanted you to run for them then? No, no, no. You see, when I was in Chicago... You ran for a Swedish gym club? Not in Chicago. I cheated in Rockwood. I see. You see, I went for Chess Park in Chicago, really. You were in Divinity? Yeah, well, the Swedish gym club only had one track meet a year here, you know. You had the high school, that's all you had. You couldn't get any other meet. There was no running in Rockwood in them days. There was nothing in Rockwood that they had. Now, it's been good for me. Now, they had all kinds of road runners and stuff, but nothing in Rockwood. So it was impossible then to stay in Rockwood? Yeah, it was, yeah. So, you know, I trained anyway to go to Chicago, you know. Then, like I said, when I got sick, then I had to quit running until before. So how come you got sick then? You said you were out of work for two, three years? Yeah, after I took a cold shower and they found a spot on my lung. After, you see, I was told to quit running, but I didn't quit. So the doctors told you to quit? Yeah, we said I was exposed to... They found a spot on my lung, didn't know what it was for sure, but they said if I keep on, they could break open on me. There was no active TB or anything at the time, you see, but I didn't quit. I quit on running. But you could, maybe the diet was not too good then at the time, either. You were low on food. No, I was running down too, you see. So I don't know. But it was the end of my running anyway, that one in Chicago. So that was the last one? That was the last one, yeah. Then I started playing golf. I like golf, I play golf. How old were you then when you... Quit running? I must have been about 24, I think. When you quit? Yeah. I didn't play golf then, started playing golf when I was 28. But if you know... I'm sure you have followed the Athletic over the years. Oh, yes, I have the scrapbook. Or if you know, had the opportunity like they have today. You know, they run so many miles. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. They're different, yes. They're different. I always said break the 4,000 miles. It's easy if you've got any kind of... anyone can do that if you work hard enough. I did that for years and years and years. In Sweden I did that even, you know. It's hard work if you've got any kind of talent, you know, for running. But now I run, you know, something like 50, 60, 100 miles a week. I go out two or three times a week, run a mile, a couple of miles maybe, you know, in the summertime. I could have been a really good runner if I hadn't been... If you had the fission? Yeah, if I hadn't gotten sick and, you know, and stuff, yeah. If you'd been another five, six months, you could pace it. Yeah. But you were alone, you had nobody to run with to help you. No, no, I was not alone. So nobody was interested in you? No. I used to do what I did in training and stuff most of them days, you know. When I go out in the park in the morning, I'd be starting some park, people think you're nuts, see somebody running, you know. But then... Yeah, what did they say now? I mean, you were staying in this apartment and you were not able to pay the rent or food or anything. Did they say then that you are crazy? That you were out running and you didn't have anything to eat, for instance? No, they didn't. You didn't hear that? No, no, no, no. But all Swedes at that time, they thought it was stupid to be out running. Yeah, not so many Swedes as American people, I think. The Swedes were more sport-minded than the Americans were at that time, you know. Oh, they were? Oh, yeah. A lot of Swedes came over here, you know. They had... There were Swedes, all Swedes, they had been running in Sweden, I think, but they were too old and never kept it up, you know. Like this Karl Lind, you know, he was in track and... Karl Lind, eh? Yeah, he was a good high jumper one time. Oh, I see. But he was here at the same time then. He was in Denmark. I think he went to school in Denmark or something. Yes, he worked there. I think he jumped 180 meters in Sweden, I think. Because we had track meeting, came Elmwood one time, inside the club, you know, and I high jumped too a little bit in the gym, I brought him for high jump in Rockford too. And I was in a little bit of everything, but that was... Nine was my best thing in running. But I was scared he was going to beat me in high jump. I think I jumped five, four or something, whatever it was. But he hadn't jumped for years, you know, but he high jumped. But he was good in that, he said, you know, really good. Yeah. There was probably one......athletic in the gym club during the Depression years, but didn't have anything to work. But we lived in a gym club, really. It was the best thing that happened to us, you know. It was? Oh, yeah. You didn't belong to the Socialists when you came in 1949? No, I didn't belong to any Socialist clubs. Were they dead then, when you came, 1949? No, they had some kind of club, you call it, an arbitrary club. Arbitrary club. But I didn't belong... Did you think they met? Ten or three, I think, maybe. They didn't meet at Vegas, although? He said, well, I'm not quite sure. But they were gone then at that time? I don't think they did, no. No, they hadn't done that. They had a club, but... Some other club, it turned out to be a Communist club, too, you know, one time. Because some guy got caught, maybe I can sign up to Communism, and he didn't know what it was. It turned out to be a workers' club, and actually there was a Communist guy here, and I fooled him into signing up. But it was because of the language, they couldn't read and understand what it was. Yeah, but he didn't... He was tricky, you see, there were red lines and stuff, and he... But he didn't say it was a Communist, he said, sign here, and then he didn't... And one day he read the thing, but he went under the impression it was a workers' club, he was organizing a work for this guy. His name was Stude, I think. Maybe I'll get to know something about him, I don't know. So they... They were fooled? Yeah, they fooled some of the young guys, you know, they were starving, they had two kids and stuff. But they died out, or did they... Yeah, they disappeared, you know. But no, gym club had a... That's the only thing we did, go to Swedish gym after... You go home from work, before... Even when I was working, you know, even after... Because I worked a little bit, 33, and, you know... But Empire, another furniture factory, I went with a girl and her father got me a job up there. He called it Empire. It was furniture? It was furniture, too, yeah. But we got... $0.25 an hour or something. But... Then I... I quit that, 34, and I went back to head a piano company after I... It was the same company that I started in Rockford with, but I moved... Sawing Cabinets Division over to head a piano company. I worked for them for a while. I worked there when I got sick. And I quit running. It was 1934. Then after that, I never... You had no thinking about going home to Sweden at that time, either? No, I didn't think of going back to Sweden, no. My brother sent me home, 39. He said it could be a while. My dad was sick, had a stroke. So he said, go home to Sweden, it's going to be a while. He said, in Germany, he was smart, he was pretty well up on his tackle. He knew that before it happened? Yes, he said, I can't be in my job and go here to heaven on a Thursday, then. This is tape two, page two. Continuing with Wall Street in Rockford, Illinois. Tape two, page two. You went home in 1939, you said, in what month? I went home in... I think I left June 1st, I think. First part of June, I came back in September. And your brother already... I was in the boat when he sunk this... I left Sweden after he sunk this... Germany sunk this... What's the Polish boat? He went into Poland when I was in Sweden. And I'm back, Lusitania. Lusitania? Yeah, he sunk that... He just sunk, I think, when we were in the ocean, I think. He was scared to death, you know, on the boat. So when you went home then, did you have a return ticket? Oh yeah, we were stuck in Sweden otherwise. My brother said, you better have a return ticket, because you'll be stuck in Sweden, it's going to be a while before you get back. So he said, Germany are going to go into Poland, he said. He was right. What did they say in your home, in Fjällbakkar, when you came home? Did they explain any war? They cried all over, they went, you know, they drafted the Swedes, you know, they had a draft in Sweden, started that, you know. The rest went, the girls were crying, the boys and the husbands went, you know, called out, and they were worried like dick. And they told me to stay in Sweden, not go back, because America's going to be in, you know. I didn't think that then, you know. You just think if you had gotten a letter from Boden. Yeah, but if I hadn't been, if I hadn't gotten sick, I would have been in the army. I was 1A, 2 and after they took the eggs, I didn't play the physical, you see. You've been after the border of Finland then? No, I would have been in the American army. Oh, I see, yeah, I see. But here, I was 1A here, you see. I was 1A in the army, drafted my brother, about 35, when they took him in. He was in the Pacific, he fought in the 33rd Division from Iraq. But you got the ferment then, because of your sickness? Yeah, I was 1A first, then I went into my final physical. They found that thing on the bottom of my lung. Then they put me in 4F. So you were never called then? No, I never called, you see. So how did you find Fjällbackarna when you came home in 1939? Well, it was a little bit different than it was when I left, you know. Did you meet some of your friends that you left? Yeah, there was not many left, but I saw some of them. My best buddy was there. What did you say, though, about your experience over here? Did they ask you where I was? Yeah, they asked me, but they thought I was... couldn't understand why I would stay in America, because time was tough in America. In the 30s, you were in Sweden, too, but it was pretty good in Sweden, 1939, I guess, picking up, you know. But I couldn't stay in Sweden then. I said, I can't explain it. Like America, I said, no. What was it that was different, you think? In Sweden, people were different, too, you know, here. People were different in America. In Sweden. In what way? Well, in Sweden, that time when I left Fjällbackarna, there wasn't many different classes, you know. Oh, yeah, they were... Even in a little town like Fjällbackarna, there were the merchants, then there was the merchant daughters. They were the one clique, you know. The merchants' maids, you know. And then there was people that worked in the stores. They were different, you know. Of course, I got even older because I'm a connoisseur of running, you see. So then you weren't a qualified one? I was qualified. Oh, yeah, anyone. Oh, gee. Oh, sure, they wanted to date me and everything, you know. But the rest of them, like a stonecutter, if I only used to be a stonecutter, nothing else. They were never paid. Oh, they didn't look down at stonecutters much, but they had a kind of clique. What about the fishermen, though? They were kind of... Clannish? No, they were kind of on that down a little bit, too. They wasn't in the top either, the top grade either. They were in a different way themselves. But they were a little bit... They were kind of... They were who you were there in money, you know. I go in 1939, there was a woman there from... General Konselina from Stockholm. And she had two boys. His name was John, and they were nurses. They wanted to know about America, see? Girls in America, in Chicago. You know, I lived in Chicago, too, and they asked everything. They invited me out for a picnic, you know. Out to the island, go out with... They brought lunch with them. They stay out on the island from Kjellbäcka, go out to the island, and the boat takes you back and forth, you know, beautiful out there on the... And she asked me to go with them. She was alone, her husband was... I don't know where her husband was, but he was a big windstruck. She had a chauffeur, and car and chauffeur, and everything. They said, what is your title? She says to me. You could talk a little bit of English, too. She'd been in Canada. I said, in America, I said, there is no title. I said, in America, we... I put out the dollar bill. This is what comes in America. I said, if you pay your bills, money on business, and work, you are okay wherever you go. There is no class difference, like in Sweden, I said, really. So they came to Kjellbäcka in the summertime, then? Yeah, they were all summer. Really, this one, you see. But in Sweden, you couldn't say, du. You had to drink a du skål, before your time. You're not too old yet. So they... Could you do that with them, then? When I came home, I said, they said my... introduced themselves, with their name, and so on. And I used to say, well, in America, we say du, everybody. But they weren't okay with me. I've been in America, see, but otherwise, you wouldn't have said that. But then it was okay. They would say, who... nej, du och jag... nej, du och jag, du skål. They would say, you know, du skål. You had to drink du skål. They said du to each other, and you took a drink. And I remember that was years ago in Sweden, you know. Did you do that with your brother? No, no. No, when I came home, they didn't do that. But I remember they did that years ago in Sweden, you know. So that's what... So I said, that's what... That was the... Oh, she said, then, you know. But then she kind of... But I think, you know... She was interested in... I think she would like to go... She was a goer, too, I think, you know. Her husband wasn't there. I bet she stepped out in Kjellberg, I think. To, I guess, come in there, you know. Maybe she tried to get close to you instead. She wanted to, no, because I was quite young at that time. But I was 30 then, but you never know, you see. Because her guy... Her son was about 18 or 19, I guess. And they were interested in the United States? They were, oh, yes, oh, yes. No, but what... Here you have a family, you know, that are well-to-do. Classes above everybody else. If they had come to this country now, for instance, during the Depression... Yeah. What would happen then? I know. Jesus Christ. So did you talk about your experiences in the first months in Chicago, for instance, working for this contractor? Yeah, yeah. The union guy. Did you tell them stories then? No, I didn't tell them. They want to know about... All kinds about women and where they go in America, what they do and stuff, you know. Did you go to church every Sunday? Them big... Yeah, them big church. They were interested in... What do you know? Ask about certain Americans and stuff. Movie actors and stuff, you know. But, you know, talk about America. See Chicago and stuff. But here you are coming from a beautiful piece of country in Bohuslän. You're kidding, yeah, yeah. You never lost there, I mean... No, I still... You still think about... I still think about Shell Buckeye, you know. You do? Oh, yeah. Sometimes you think about... You never forget that, really, you know. And the good smell, you know, from the oil. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sometimes I like to see it again. I like to see it again, but not too long there, too long, you know. So you've never been back there since 39? No. Never been back? No. I didn't even know my own brothers when I came home. I didn't even know my own brothers when I came home in 39. You were younger then. I was... Five... But they remember you. Eight, ten, yeah. We were growing up, you see. One was a good track court in Sweden, Rolf Gustafsson. He was district track court trainer, eh? So they were also... He was my brother. He had a paper clip, and he had 40 years he was a court. He retired, he had a big red lip in the Chicago paper. I mean, the boys' postings. So you set the pace then for your younger brothers? Yeah, I was, you know... But you never talked to them or saw them? Not much until I got home in 39. Then they weren't, you know, hadn't gotten... One was 18, one was 20, I think. One was 15. A 15-year-old has got to be a good track star, too. Did they ask you about your running? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. But my youngest... One was a good track man, Edgar, youngest one. He was a track court star? Not him, there was the next one, too. The next one there. He was good. He was Smålandsmester i Femkamp. Oh, I see. He lived in... He worked in Anka's room for a while. Oh, he was in the military first then? No, he wasn't in the military. He was Kronorak. Kronorak. And he did... Kevin Buttet, Femkamp, he was good. He's Världsmester, and he's senior citizen now. He sent me... He goes to his world championship every year. In Femkamp? No. In... Over 65, he won... He set a world record in this, I think it was. He went... He been in Italy, he been in England, he been in... In Puerto Rico. He never been here? Australia, no. He never been here. On them track meets. Yes. He has senior world championship every year, you know. And this year, I think it was a go to... It was a go to... He's 70 years old now, he goes up there. He's still training. And he was Kronorak? Yes, Kronorak. So you never compared the military service with him then? No, no, no. So how do they train differently? I mean, he's a younger... A few years younger than you are. I mean, you train differently than what he did. I do what? Training, in the training... Oh, training different, yes, yes. I sent him home box from America years ago. They dealt a course on American splinters. And I guess Sweden trained probably the same they do in America now. Oh, yeah. I imagine they do now, same thing over there, I imagine. But in Sweden, you remember Gunther Hegg. You probably follow him. Yeah. Gunther Hegg, he was over here. Did you see him? Oh, yeah. I saw Gunther Hegg. You saw him here? I saw him in... Indoor in Chicago Stadium. He didn't win, though. He ran for 13 miles, I think. Did you talk to him? No, I didn't talk to him. I couldn't get close to him, you know. In Chicago Stadium, you get your feet in the air, you can't go around. And he was a small track, you know. And then they were running on boards, the varvel and stuff. Well, they was new, you know. But he was a beautiful running boy. But he ran outdoors first. I didn't see him outdoors. Then he won the mile. He ran over here. He was here a couple of times, I think. Yes. Rice was the one he won against. Yes, rice. He beat rice. And he beat his... Oh, what a runner that was. But you know the way they trained. They trained on soft conditions. In other words, off the moss. Yes, that's why Gunther Hegg got so good. He ran up on the boards. But they don't do the hair-hair run on the sidewalk. On the sidewalk, I know it. I tell the guys, I see him go by out here, you know. Go up in the park and run up here in the schoolyard. But they don't do that. Oh, no. No good. You get hard muscles. What happened to your legs, for instance, and knees? Have you had any bad experience of that? I got arthritis in my left knee. In your knee? Yes. They could come anywhere. They're not for running, you know. You think so? No, no, no. Even soccer players get that. Athletes get that, you know, too. So you tried to run on soft conditions? Oh, yes. I got to go to Black Hawk Park out here. Go run on moss, you know. I had a long stride when I was running, you know. Algo can tell you, I had a long step. I think he saw me running against the high school, I think. He was the one that too. So there was a 24, and you quit too early, though. Yeah. I had 24 at 25, let me say now. Yeah, I was in my prime then. When I'd been in my prime, you know, I would have gotten better. What would have happened if you had stayed in Sweden? I don't know. You never know. Because then you have the different training possibilities. You can't tell me for better. The people now that you left in Sweden, your schoolmates and so on, how did they fare during the Depression? Did they have work in the... There weren't just schools over there, I think. Most of them? Yeah. There weren't just schools. They could learn the trade, you see. In Sweden, they had some kind of school system then. They sent me a girl, man, sent me into school, you see. So they didn't suffer as much as you did over here? No. In Sweden, I had a head tube, and it was better than in America. They sent me to a training school, you see. So here there was no training school. You had to join the Union and pay the dues twice. Yeah, yeah. So... Well, it was a bit tough. So during the war then, what kind of work did you get then? Because you were deferred then because of your 4F status. I was in 4F, yeah. What kind of factory work... Were you working in the factories? Or were you trying to get an outside...? At that time, I worked in a furniture factory. But wasn't it bad condition, though, to work in the dust? Well, it didn't make a difference or not. Years ago, they claimed that our stuff was better for you, I guess. The doctor didn't say anything about it? No, he didn't say nothing about it. They didn't recommend an outside work for you? No, no, they didn't, no. So how long did you continue on there, during the whole war? Working in the factory, you mean? No, I got sick. I went out to San Antonio for a while. I was sick, yeah. The doctor said, come out here and stay for a few months. I worked in the laundry out there. I worked in the X-ray room. You know... So you got a job there? They were developing X-rays. Just for an employed patient, you had to be. So you could have drafted me otherwise, you see. You could have drafted me later if I, you know, too... Was the head in Rockport? Yeah, Rockport, yeah. Was that the only part you were in? The whole fellatarium. I had a good night out there, good food and stuff. Oh, Jesus. Did like a king out there. You were not married then? No, I was single. You were single, yeah. So then you met your wife... After. After the war? I got married in 1946. No, I married before the war. I married my wife in 1940, I think, or 1939. Oh. Yeah, I think so. Your wife's name is... Yeah, I went out to the sanatorium in 40... When the war... You just start drafting, you know, 41 or 42. Yeah. Your wife, she was born here in Rockport? In this country, yeah. She was born in this country, yeah. Her name is... Her name is Myrtle. Myrtle. She worked for a... She had a good job at a telephone company. She worked for a death threat commercial clerk for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company, AT&T. She went to Moline sometimes. She had a good, different set of systems, set of books. She made more money than I did when I got married. I sold shoes then, you know. I sold shoes for 37 years. So when did you start with that job? Oh, I started at 42, 43. I was a top salesman. What store here in Rockport? Oh, yeah, I was manager for Lindblad Shoes Store for 24 years. I'm probably 24 years. And I... We closed it up in a... I went to Bergener, Weiss is out there. And I was assistant manager out there for... for 13 years. I was a top... How did you get into that job? Did you know somebody? Yeah, I got into that job from Lindblad. I know him from running too, you know. He had to help me too. And I started at Lindblad. They wrote up in a paper form a text on selling shoes at Lindblad, you know. They were Lindblad? Yeah, Lindblad, yeah. So he was from Sweden also? Yeah. So they helped them? Then I had a... I was a top shoe salesman for a company, 5,000 salesmen. They had... They said, Weiss is... Bergener doesn't own a shoe company. Yeah. They had to own a shoe company in St. Louis. And... Did you get anything on me? 497 pairs in one week. In one week? In one week. 1,600... I had over $5,000 worth. I sold myself. It didn't live, but... I wish... Before I came out there, I would never have been the leader. So... You came from the head of a St. Louis... But how were you able then to sell? What year was that you sold so many pairs of shoes in one week? Just a month. Top of your green sheet. You got that stuff there? Should be here. Because there are so many shoe stores. This comes from St. Louis. This is Weiss. This is the number on that store, 495, you know. In Rockford? Yes, in Rockford, yeah. 495, Rockford. You get... $5,150. That's right, in one week. In one week. And what year was that? 59? That's a letter from... The big shop in St. Louis. See how many pairs? You see the pairs there? I see that. 497. 497 pair, right? Were they including children's shoes and... Oh, everything. Everything, yeah. Old overshoes, house slippers, everything, you know. You probably can't... You haven't got a glass of this, have you? I didn't have any of these. I used that. I could have that. So that was a record-breaking week. What did you get, some kind of promotion offer? You can see how they advertised me in Rockford. Newspaper. I had my name on the paper many times. Do you have a picture over there? That's my picture on the side there. So Floor Shine was one of the brands you sold then? Pardon? Floor Shine. Yeah, we are. According to your status, is this a good shoe or what? What? Is this one of the best shoes made? It's a good shoe, yeah. It's a high-flat shoe. They put on bodyguards and that's why... That's my picture, see? Yes. You send me a picture of your paper a lot of times. I could have a few or more. So did you get an extra promotion then or a pay raise or what? Huh? Did you get an extra pay raise then for this or...? No, I got a commission on it too, you know. That's another one. It used to happen. I had... You have me in the paper Easter and Christmas almost all the time. So this was better than to pay the union dues in Chicago? Yeah, it was rough. I worked long hours and I... Watch out, Wally. You know. You got that responsibility too, you know. See, I was assistant and I had to do a lot of the management work too, you see. So you were in charge of the housekeeping and sending down to St. Louis. Yes, when he was gone, I had to take care of his job too. It was... It wasn't just to sell the shoes. But you didn't have to be afraid to be fired or like in Chicago? Oh, no. Never fired me. But I can go any place in the country, company, person, any place in the country. Give me an apartment if I want to rent an apartment. Oh, yeah. I could put in St. Louis, I tell you. You never figured to be on your own? Well, I did years of work, but you can't compete. No, geez. No, big steps, no. They're all gone. Yeah, I won't keep you... How many shoe stores were there in Rockford during the 50s? How many shoe stores? Yes. It seems to be so many in every city. There was quite a few though. There were quite a few in Rockford, I think. So you had most of the Swedes then as your customers? No, no. I had other Swedes, but I had... It wasn't that my... I was a writer. I had all kinds of people. Doctors, send me patients in there, you know, lawyers, doctors. I had all kinds of... It's a kind of high-class store out there. You're supposed to be a writer. You know what I mean. It was higher class. Was it a high-priced shoe store? Oh, yeah. It's a high-class store. It's a big company. Yes, there were some different cities around it. Hensfield, Billow, and Sterling and Freeport. I guess they haven't got any in Moline. No, I don't think they are in there. They do probably... Out here alone, when I was there alone, it was 11 million at that time when I was working in the store. In there for the store, you know. But now it's so much more than that. There must be a tremendous margin on shoes, because there are so many stores springing up all over. It's a tough business. But everybody wears all the shoes. It's a tough business, yeah. It's not easy. Style changing and stuff. And today you have the running shoes, walking shoes, standing shoes, and everything. Oh, yeah. And when you were a track store, you only had one pair of shoes. I know. I thought, who's laying in the closet? No, no one's ever used it, aren't you, Peter? I shouldn't. I shouldn't. I should have bought more other shoes instead, you know, like careful shoes instead, because I bought the first one, cream of the crop, you know. They still use good material. Oh, yeah. These shoes are leather. Good shoes. You joined Voss and Vega when you first came here in 1930? I joined Vega in 1931, probably. Was that the only organization you joined? You didn't join Vega? Swedish Gym Club I joined, you know. Swedish Gym Club. Yeah. And Vega. We went down to Vega. But how long I belonged there? Were you an officer of the Swedish Gym Club at any time? Me? No. Secretary or chairman? No. What church did you join? What did you marry? I got married in 1946. My wife went to Calvin's, she should. Calvin Lutheran. Calvin Lutheran. But I didn't go to any church. The people I lived with went to three churches. I went with them sometimes, but that was all. So you didn't join any of them? Swedish Gym Club was our church, really, until we spent all the time. So, I've been to Daggarsport. Sieg Heiland. Sieg Heiland up there. Sieg Heiland, no. And you were in gymnastics? Yeah, I was good in gymnastics. I jumped too a little bit. Was he pretty good when he came from Sweden? Oh, yeah. So they had practice over in Sweden then? Yeah, I practiced in Sweden, I think. Both he and Erik Johnson? Yeah, he was, yeah. And he was in gymnastics in Sweden too. Like Erik Johnson, for instance, do you know if he was in the military service in Sweden? He was in the military service. Oh, he was? Yeah. In Sweden? I'm sure he was there, but they know my brother. They had to see my brother in there. So that's why he brought there with him, the knowledge of the lead. Simon was a nice guy, Simon. So Simon, he bought the first bike shoes you ever had? Yeah, he was nice. Got to gym and practiced at night. Got tired, you know. Didn't have nothing to eat, depression. Come down to the restaurant, Simon threw out a tray or a bill. He threw out a bill, he threw out a can. $20 bill he put out. He worked at a lard company there a little bit. So he shared with himself and the rest of them? Yeah, so he treated us guys, you know. So when he bought the bike shoes for you, they went a faster mile? Yeah, he and Kevin bought it. How much difference did it make? What it cost? Oh, they made difference, it helped, you know. I mean, how many seconds could you shave off then on a mile with bike shoes instead of gym shoes? Oh, I think... How fast could you run? I don't know. I don't know, it makes too much. It makes them different, of course. Oh, they must have four, five, six seconds. Yeah, but... At least. On a hard track, it's a little loose and you grip better, you know. So you still have those bike shoes? Oh, yeah, I keep them. I never throw them away. It's like a souvenir from... Yeah. From Simon Lindstrom. Yeah. He died last year. He died last year, yeah. Yeah, he died in 1978.