 Cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Reverend Vernon Sirenius, Alexandria, Minnesota. Cassette 2, side 1. Well, it's this ecumenical movement has something to do with it too. Söderblom, you remember Nathan Söderlund, he was in ecumenical. But there was not as, in that respect, like they do today. No, no, no. With different fads and... And in the liturgy that we're using now, there are some tragic mistakes. Like having that confession of sin in the beginning and absolving everybody. Whether they have repented of their sins or not, they get absolution every Sunday morning and then they can go on and live any way they want during the week and then come back and be absolved again the next Sunday morning. And in that confession, that short order of confession, there is no indication of a need of repentance. Would there be like going along with the Catholic beliefs and you just pay it off at the end of the week and then you're all right for next Monday? Well, I'm just afraid that it isn't that way with a lot of the old timers, but how about the new generation coming on? And if they get trained along that way, that all you need to do is go to church on Sunday morning, go through that short form of confession of sin, and you're all set for the next week, rest of the week. To me, that's tragic. It's playing with fire. How about communion now? The old Swedish people, of course, they went to the communion table very seldom because there was a feeling that if you go too often, people will look at you and you've done something wrong. So the fewer times you went, the better it was. That was the old belief. But now they also include younger people. They don't get the wine, of course, but they get the bread. Where is that? Didn't they introduce that in the Lutheran church? Well, I don't know. We never see that in our congregation. No? No. But they go up to the communion table in need with the parents. Oh, yes. But they don't give them anything. No. What do you think about that? Just a blessing on the head of the child. I think it's wrong because I remember in Mission Covenant Church, my mother made the bread for the communion, unleavened bread. When the stuff was left over, she brought it back home and we kids ate it. We didn't have the sense of reverence for that, and I'm just wondering if children today... You think it would be like a habit and it doesn't mean too much, then? Yes. No, I'm fearful that we're not on the right track. And even this confession of faith, when they talk about the holy Catholic church, well, I know that that means universal. But Buddhism is a universal church. Mohammedanism is a universal church. And Shintoism, they're universal, they're Catholic. Why can't we say Christian? Are we or aren't we? What's wrong with saying Christian? Why do we have to change it to Catholic? So when my wife and I go to church, of course, we never say, I believe in the holy Catholic church. But one church not long ago, you get those programs. Years ago, you didn't have them printed. Now they have them printed every Sunday in every church throughout the country. And a layman reads some of it, as you know, and the pastor reads some of it. And in this specific particular church, no. They changed the words. As soon as they said man, they said human being. They couldn't say man because that didn't include the women. What do you think the young people, we get them when the pastor can't even read what it says on there. Something's got to be changed. I mean, why can't he read what it says on there? But who told him to change the wording on it? And it came from Philadelphia, no? In the seminaries, you know, that's where they get it. Every young, we get men in our church, we have a congregation of 1,200 people. And we get a new young pastor recently ordained every two or three years, you know. And they come in, and they deliberately change the scriptures in reading. Instead of man, they say person. Well, that irritates us old people because why can't we accept the Word of God the way it's written and let it go at that? What's there to gain by it? What is the reason for the synods to send the pastor every two or three years? Don't you think it's better when he stays on so you get to know the people? Well, you know, but these young fellows, they aspire to bigger and better things, you know. Allegedly bigger and better things. So they want to kind of serve their internship, you know. Again, in the congregation, two or three, four years. Yeah, but then they're serving themselves rather than the church. Well, we've never had one in our congregation in Alexandria that stayed over three years. Because everyone that comes there has some new ideas for the theological seminary. And they are usually 10, 15 years ahead of the congregation in their thinking. And they stir up things. Yeah, that's right. That's right. Well, it all changed. I remember going to all the churches. Now you have Dr. Lorraine in Rockport. He was there for 42 years, I believe. Yeah, I know. I remember him. Yes, and people, there was like a tradition when you talked to the old people, you know. They were satisfied. They were solid. Yes. They were solid. I haven't read it. He was a giant in the earth, Lorraine. But I don't know whether it's a judgment of the Lord or we just have to keep on praying. And that's why I do what I do, write these books, you know, hoping that a little spark can be kindled somewhere. But how are you able then financially to keep going? Because it's a tremendous burden to pay for publishing today. Well, all I can say is the Lord provides. And given it shall be given unto you, pressed down, shaken together, running over. And my wife still works. She's probably 70 years of age now, but she still works as a nurse at her Bethany home. Is Mr. Malm still there? No, no, he is retired. Oh, Mr. is the pastor. Yeah, he has retired, and we've got a layman in there by the name of Clark now. But this is just, I'll put my hand over this, between you and me, her middle name is Zaccheus. That is, I use it, that isn't her name, but that's what I call her, Zaccheus. Because you know what he did? Half of my goods I give to the poor, you know, that little man that crawled up in the tree. And that's her principle. So every check that she gets... She is brought up though as a deaconess in a kind of schooling. So that helps financially. She only works two, maybe three days a week, but it helps financially. And then, I don't know, somehow the Lord provides. And of course I cast about to get the cheapest way to do it. First I used a publishing or printing outfit in Long Prairie, Minnesota. But their prices kept going higher and higher, and I just scouted around, scouted around. And now like this last one, I got it printed right in our hometown of Alexandria. It was the cheapest that I'd ever found anywhere. It cost me a little over $4,000. For $1,500? No, $3,000. And then of course the cost of mailing them out to the seminaries. But after all was said and done, it amounted to about $5,000. But in Long Prairie it would have been $10,000. Yes, and it keeps you active and you are still... The one I'm writing now is a spiritual autobiography. She wants the title to be I, Paul Anton. And I begin with my baptism in the Covenant Church, and then trace, hopefully, the progress up to this point where I am now charismatic and have received the gift of tongues. So the difference between the Covenants and the Lutherans were not that big, though. But there was still a tremendous gap to span over. When you look back now, do you think it was ridiculous for people to fight about such a little thing? Well, the Lord wants us all to be one, but we've got to be one in Christ. If you're not one in Christ, all organizational oneness doesn't mean anything. But looking back now at the immigrants, you have so many different nationalities. You have the Irish, Polish, Italians. They were usually almost 100% Catholic. They had no trouble with this split between religion or anything. It was easy for them to marry among themselves because it was the same religion. But here comes the Swedes. They are Lutherans, Covenants, Three Church, Baptists, Episcopalians, and a lot of them believe in the Community. And that's a tremendous burden, though, for two people. If they want to marry each other, they have a religion to split down their right in the life. What do you think about this? It's interesting for history, of course, to see what happened. Well, it could be for good because it ought to challenge them. They ought to ask themselves, now, what is basic truth? I ask that myself because when I see it, dealing with all those Swedes now. And I know that for a fact that the Swede, when he is asked, when he leaves the congregation, for instance, he doesn't say anything. You can never get his opinion. Why did he leave? And that's what they are seeking. What mistake did we make for him? I mean, because he left. And they never do that. They just leave. Yeah, well, I suppose the Swede is kind of calm temperament sometimes and doesn't want to get into arguments. And maybe he isn't qualified to defend his position if he were asked. He just walks away. Yeah, he just walks away. And that's where now, like in our congregation in Alexandria, they have an adult Bible class on Sunday morning between the two services. And it reaches, oh, 30, 40 people out of 1,200. But Wednesday night the church is dark. Sunday night the church is dark. So we have the morning service with a 20-minute sermon, which is not a teaching. So you have that whole mass of people who are not being led into the Word of God week by week. Now, when I was in a congregation serving, I was insistent that we had to have Bible teaching. After all, that's our business. That's what we exist for. To explain the Word of God. Explain the Word of God to people so they understand what the truth is. But that's the way it is in many of our Lutheran churches nowadays, except those that have gotten involved in charismatic renewal, like North Heights in Minneapolis or in St. Paul. And those that do get involved in real spiritual things, those are the ones that are growing by leaps and bounds. Take our North Heights church in St. Paul. My goodness, they've had to build a whole new church building that seats over 3,000 people. And the people just flock there because they're being taught. They're being fed. And they even have a little Bible school in their congregation. People are yearning and longing for something more and deeper than they're getting. Do you think it's harder to preach to people when their belly is full than empty? In other words, they seem to be too lazy to take the time to listen. Well, materialism grips a lot of people. And conveniences. Yeah. Yeah. Because if we start from the beginning, in the 1850s when they came here, the church was the most important thing even before their own dwelling. Yeah. As soon as they got a little sod house, they wanted a church building. Yes. And the child should be baptized immediately in case of any death threat. And then confirmation and marriage and... Well, you know, and we've given up memorization of the catechism. But, my goodness, even at my age, what I learned in the catechism comes back to me when I... Well, when I preach or when I have a question that comes to mind. Luther was no dummy. He knew what he was doing. And gracious, you've got to put something in the mind of a child. Because if you don't, what has he got to draw from? That's it. You've got to have... You've got to prime the pump. Absolutely. And if you don't do that... And that's one thing we lost in the merger, you know. They were swept away. Yeah, yeah. Memorization got to be taboo. It... Because I haven't taught anything but catechism in the Bible and confirmation for years now, so I really don't know. But I know in the beginning there was much dissatisfaction with the material that came out of Philadelphia. The old teachers who had been taught, didn't teach, were dissatisfied. With that merger in 1962, they were very clever, the Germans, to get rid of the Augustana book. Oh, my, no. It was a clever move. Burgess Winston really was hurt, you know. Did you meet Burgess? Oh, yes, I know him very well. He isn't in good shape now. No, he has fever. Physically. Burgendorff, though, is remarkable. Well, he isn't so good either now. My sister-in-law lives in the same complex. Oh, in the French-Chipman? Yeah, in Rock Island. So she writes and tells us about how Burgendorff is getting along, and we called him Burglar Swinson when he was at the book, you know. Book concern. Me and I were fraternity brothers at Augustana. Then you were also schoolmates with Elmer Lindholm? Elmer Jeremiah. Yeah. Oh, yes. He was still there in 1931. Yeah, I saw him in Rock Island a year ago, but he just shuffles along now. Yeah, he's pretty people. Yeah, he lives in Davenport, Iowa. He lives in Iowa. How did you know him? I lived next door neighbor to him for many years. Where? In Eastwood Inn. Oh, is that so? Yes. Well, what do you know? But then his wife died, and he went into the home. Yeah, I was kind of shocked the way he looked. He was a little older than the rest of us in that class. Yes, he started late to go to school. Yeah. But he had some churches in Big Bear Lake, I think was the last one he had up in Minnesota. Yeah. And also Elmer Jeremiah. Yeah. He had a lot of fun. So you met some of the old-timers? Oh, yes. At Augustana Synod meetings. Oh, yes, I was deeply involved. So it's too much complicated religion today. Don't you think it's hard for people to understand? They really don't know what to think or believe. There's too many changes too often. Yeah, that's unfortunately true. So religion was the same from the beginning when they came out, as it should be today. But there's a technique then to get the members that have changed over the years. Is that what they're working on, or where is it? They talk about evangelism, but what do they mean by evangelism? Do they mean leading people to a personal knowledge of Christ as Lord and Savior, or do they mean gathering people into a congregation, whether they know the Lord personally or not? Now, Chilstrom, he's talking about evangelism should be our main emphasis. Well, fine if it means winning souls, but if it means gathering together in churches and forming new congregations, sometimes of unregenerate people, that's something else again. De som svenskarna, de andra bulla, de. So now evangelism seems to be a merger, I suppose, is one kind of evangelism. So the next step will be Episcopalians coming in. Yeah, that's right. And of course the Lord wants us to be one body, but are we one body in Christ? If we're not one body in Christ, then one great big organization doesn't mean much. What do you think about those Assemblies of God now, those preachers? Do they have the right approach? People seem to flock to them. Are they more scared of those tactics than really believing in it? The Assemblies of God is the fastest growing church body in the United States. Why is that? Do you think people like to have preachers like Jimmy Swaggart? Well, I don't say that they are typical of the Assemblies of God overall. We have an Assemblies congregation in Alexandria, and we go there occasionally. And those men, though they are spirit-filled men, are wise men. They don't go off on tangents. They have their evangelistic meetings, of course, but I've never seen anything objectionable in their evangelistic meetings, and their Sunday morning worship services are fine, and Sunday evening they're fine. Of course, they have peppy music, you know. Do you think the music makes a lot of difference to... Well, it does. It stimulates....the young people? Yeah, it stimulates. But it's the fact that they stick to basic truth. And, of course, the Lord blesses it, and when you do what he wants you to do, he'll bless it. They are able to open the checkbooks among people who are really supporting them. Oh, well, they stress tithing, you know. Last Sunday we were asked in our church to experiment with, what was it, one week of tithing to see whether or not it works. I suppose there's some value in doing that, but isn't that trying to put God on the spot? If you show me now, God, that this works, if you'll really bless me, then I'll keep it up, but if you don't, I'm done with it. No, don't take it. What kind of thinking is that, anyway? Isn't that a little bit too much gimmickry that you avoided? Yeah, absolutely. Well, we're being shaken to the roots now by that baker. You know the scandal there. They hurt so many churches. Oh, yes. But maybe that's good. Maybe the Lord is trying to wake us up. Before we didn't know what happened. Yeah, yeah. So he went too far, and that was probably a blessing to... He probably didn't do anything worse than a lot of others have done, but it's because, well, I read in the paper the other day, it said Jesus drove the money changers out of the temple, but baker has invited them back in. And there's a lot to that. Yeah, and then all those bingo games, they seem to be blessed. Yeah, yeah. So it's a different... What do you think about politics now? I'm thinking about Carl Svensson in Lindsborg. He was a staunch Republican. Dr. Andreen at Augustana, he was chairman for the John E. Ericson Republican Party, and they were stuck the neck out immediately, and the press. Him, London, was for them. Do you think they should be mixed in from the pulpit? Well, you heard the statement years ago that to be a Christian, you've got to be a Swede and a Lutheran and a Republican. Or to get to heaven, you've got to be a Swede, a Lutheran, and a Republican. Well, in some cities you didn't even get a job if you were not a Republican and a Lutheran. But on that point, my only reaction is, whether you're Democrat or Republican, speak the truth and be the truth. Like on this Bork business, if there ever was hypocrisy... They're going overboard in either direction, if it's wrong or bad or right. It's just a big joke. Oh, it's just terrible. How long the Lord is going to wait before he spews us out of his mouth, I don't know. But it's got to come if we don't have repentance. We read every day, reading the book of Proverbs. In the sixth chapter, he points out seven things which God hates. One of the seven is the shedding of innocent blood. What blood is more innocent than that of the blood of an unborn child? And still we kill a million and a half of unborn children every year in this country. And then we point our fingers at Hitler. We better turn our fingers on ourselves in this country before the Lord has to strike. Do you think that a pastor has to be careful from the pulpit to underwrite a certain candidate? Because if he is wrong... Because nowadays you can't even trust the politicians. They are going all kinds of different directions. And then he will take the whole congregation with him. Yeah, well... Would that be too much? I never did involve myself in that, but I... You never said from the pulpit? No. Any kind of politics? But everybody knew my personal contacts, where I stood politically. So I didn't need to say anything about that. You never endorsed anybody? No. Why should I prejudice half of my congregation against what I say from the pulpit about the Word of God? So I kept my mouth shut about that. But as an individual, of course, I talked to people, sure. Yeah, you had a full right to. As an American citizen. And I'm sure everybody knows that I'm a Republican, because I want to be saved. Why was it that so many Swedes became Republicans? Well, was it a reaction against the dominance of the state church and the king and the government in Sweden? No, but they were more the Democrats, though. They wanted to have a rebellion against the royal house. Yeah. But there was a reaction against too much authority, I suppose. But Lincoln was probably one of the... against the slavery. Yeah, yeah. Well... And then in Himlandet, there was a newspaper that was pro-Hasegwitz, was pro-Republican, of course. Well, I believe every pastor should speak out against sin. And if it's a sin to kill an unborn child, we should speak out. And if it's a sin to be a homosexual, we should speak out. Because if we don't... like I wrote to Cromley, you know who he was, the head of... The head LCA. Yeah. I wrote to him about the fact that we should speak out. And I quoted the scripture that if you see your brother in sin and warn him, he will die but you will be free. But if you do not warn him, he will die but his blood will be on you. And I told Cromley, it's time that we wake up. I realize that I've got enough blood on me as it is for not warning clearly against sin. And then I'm writing to Chilstrom now. Just think of the responsibility for five million souls. If he doesn't speak the truth, think of the blood that's going to be on that poor guy. Any reply from you to one of them? Well, I have... yeah, from Cromley, yeah. I got a reply from him when they spent that $127,000 studying homosexuality, you know. I wrote to him and protested and I made a study from the scripture about it. And I said, here is your study. You don't need to spend $127,000 for that because I'll give it to you free. Then we have in Minneapolis called the Berean Society. Have you heard of them? I've heard about it. I have no idea what it is but I heard the name. And they made a very thorough study. They have a booklet about that thick on the subject. And I sent that to him and I told him, well, now if you're not satisfied for my study out of the scripture, here's one that's better because it goes into more areas, you know, of the problem. But his answer was, oh, well, that money was in a fund, a discretionary fund. Well, I wrote back and I said, brother, $127,000 would support X number of missionaries in a foreign field for a whole year. And you want to know the truth, all you need to do is read the Bible. But he said, well, it's too late now. The study is in progress. We have to see it through. Well, then when it was all done, then I wrote to him again and then he said, well, this study is not the position of the Lutheran Church in America. The interview continues, next site. Next site. It's a two-sided. You probably are getting... Yeah, but don't you have the feeling that we are living under a burden of consultants? They don't seem to take a stand. Then they always call in a consultant or consultation firm. And then they blame it on them, you know, there was a study made by them. Why can't they have common sense? All those people, I mean, you have bishops here, you have doctors and you have philosophers and pastors, but they always call in a consultant. Why is that? Like you say, you know, I mean, you gave this advice for free. No cost. I'll tell you what I think of it is. It's a passing of the buck. They don't want to take a stand. Pass the buck. Elect a committee and let them study. And I don't need to commit myself. Well, that isn't the way it was in old Augustana. There it was, Herrskaskopetstol. Old Dr. Petrie at Augustana, Minneapolis. You remember that name? Petrie? Oh, yes, yes. He was pastor of Augustana Church, one of my predecessors. He was pastor there for 38 years. And he ruled the roost. And when anything came up, he'd say, Herrskaskopetstol. And that settled it. And boy, they were a pious lot. I can... you know, we used to have Sunday afternoon fastlachsmerten. And he had prepared a little song, but in Lilla Röde Buchen, it was about that tall. And old-fashioned evangelical songs. And boy, that basement chapel was just crowded on Sunday afternoon. And they sang, and they got up and witnessed, you know. I can still hear old Eastman. He'd get up and preach a sermon. You've got to repent. And Oscar Olsen and some of those old-timers, they knew what the score was. But they wore something like what they are now, those assembly of God preachers, though. Yeah. Not as aggressive, of course, but they really pushed it in there. Yeah, absolutely. Some people resented, of course, but when you talk to people, they still remember it. Well, I was so blessed, you know, to be privileged to be the pastor of the Augustana Church back in the days when that old tradition was strong. And though Augustana Church gave itself away, we had seven children congregations, you know, that came out of Augustana. The Sunday morning, like the last one, was Messiah Church. It was a group of more English-speaking, younger couples. They left one Sunday morning with 150 of our younger members. That was before I came there, and formed the Messiah Church. Augustana gave itself away. But, on the other hand, they went down to the depot and brought the Swedes in, you know, as they came. And even after giving itself away, when I left there, they still had 1,300 communicants. But now it's down to 575. Did they still use Swedish in some of their lessons? Like, confirmation was all in English, of course, when you came there. Yes, oh, yes. How about preaching? Well, we had Swedish every Sunday morning. Every Sunday morning? Yeah. In the forties? Yeah. Yeah, every Sunday morning. One Sunday it would be upstairs, the next Sunday it would be downstairs in the basement. And so there was both an English service and a Swedish service every Sunday morning. And Sunday evening services, when I came there, were in Swedish. How about the singing? Did they use Swedish hymns then? They were all Bukken. They were all Bukken. Yeah, we had them in the pews. Yeah, that was solid. That was solid. They didn't tolerate any foolishness. And naturally, the people who were sincere, they gravitated toward that congregation, you know. But then came Mount Olivet and things changed. There was the Youngdahl church there. Yeah, and that's still going like a house of fire there. Seven pastors. Seven pastors? Yeah. What kind of program do they have now? Is it that money that makes a difference there, or how can they get going with that spirit? Well, you see, it's located in Edina, and that's a wealthier part of the city. And they're very aggressive about bringing in members from the area. I used to get in the hair of Youngdahl because he would go from house to house, you know, and invite people to leave other congregations and join his. He was aggressive. Oh, very aggressive. Oh, yes, very aggressive. And he'd get a few of our members too, and I used to challenge him on it. Yeah, but how could he do that? That was not the Christian way to do it, though. It was like brainwashing people to believe that they should follow his advice. Well, it was a growing area too, you know. The building was going like a house of fire out there in those days. His son is the chief pastor there now. He was at Gustavus Adolphus with our son. Yeah. Well, Augustana Church has gone down numerically. It wouldn't be for the Augustana home. It would be less yet. Were you ever in that building? Yes. The big balcony around? That used to be full when I was there. Now there isn't a soul up there. There's something like the old covenant churches with the tabernacle. Well, the tabernacle is worse off than Augustana because they're closer to the Metrodome, you know. And that is, there's no... Well, there are a few residential apartments, old apartments around there. The old people are dying off and the young ones are moving to the suburbs. Yeah. For the sake of their kids, they want to get them out of that dangerous area. But where Augustana Church is located now with these new high-rises that they're building and the Augustana home, that neighborhood is changing for the better. It's... But they got a woman preacher after... after... whatchamacallim, left, and that, of course, didn't work. She's now on the staff at Mount Olivet. That didn't work. So... but now they have quite a few women pastors, though. Forty percent of the students at Luther Northwestern are women. This year? Yep. Fifty percent at the Chicago Seminary are women. That means that the boys are not interested in the winter ministry or... Well, I don't know. It's on the basis of a wrong interpretation of the Scripture. We have a... And this probably sounds like gossip to you, but... We have a church in Alexandria, Bethesda Lutheran Church, and they have a woman pastor. And she's a... they have two pastors. One is a woman. And she's a very ambitious person. And somehow there were two articles in the Alexandria paper about her as being a potential candidate to be bishop of the Michigan Synod. So I wrote a little article in Editors to the Editor, and I said, after she had not been elected bishop, I said, I am so thankful that the delegates to the Michigan Synod refused to ask this dear lady to do the impossible of being the husband of one wife and ruling her household well. That's what Paul says, you know. A bishop is to be the husband of one wife. How can a woman be the husband of one wife? Well, that stirred up a hornet's nest. One of the pastors wrote an article criticizing me and said I was old-fashioned. I was living in the first century and wasn't hip to modern conditions and so forth. So I wrote another article, and I said, I want to thank this dear brother for assigning me to the first century because that's one of the greatest privileges that a man could ever have, to live in the days of Peter and James and John and of the Lord himself. Was this in the local paper, Alexandria? Yeah. But that quietened the whole thing down. They complain now at the last election of bishops, there was a few women, minority of course. I know it. All that minority's business, that's... But they got to go with the democratic elections, of course. The argument that they have in favor of it is Paul's statement to the Galatians that in Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile, male or female. But the dumb clucks, they don't know what he's talking about. He isn't talking about organization of the church. He's talking about being one in Christ. Whether you're a man or a woman, you are one in Christ. That's what he's talking about there. But they use that to excuse themselves, you know. It's a wrong interpretation. Yeah, a wrong interpretation. Yeah, it's not an easy subject, religion, but it's interesting to keep people on the toe. Yeah, I should say. All the time. Well, we're getting off on tangents here. You remember in the 40s and 50s when the churches started to install kitchens and downstairs recreation rooms and they have a lot of baking ovens and ranges and pies and suppers and people came together. You don't see that too much today. Is it because that generation has gone and the new one is not ready to serve people like the previous one did? You know, they bake pies in the ovens there and they serve. Nowadays you can do that. Well, we still have a men's organization in our congregation and the one thing they do during the whole year is to put on a lutefisk supper. And that's all they do. Nothing during the year then? No, that's all they do. But 15, 20 years ago there was almost every month people came together. That was back in the Lutheran Brotherhood days. We used to have a strong Lutheran Brotherhood, but now we have a men's club. Truntumiskföreningen existerar inte idag. Well, there is a phone. They'll get it out there. But that, of course, is another thing that has grieved us old timers so much is the loss of a strong missionary emphasis. We used to have the Women's Missionary Society, Young Women's Missionary, and Junior Mission Band. The kids were running around with their dime cards, gathering money for missions. In addition to the ladies' aide who did all these other things, you know, baking the pies and so forth, these women were just on fire for missions. That was their primary concern. Well, we lost that in the merger. Like we lost our Lutheran League, we lost our Lutheran Brotherhood, we lost our missionary societies. How about the LCW? Is that gone too? Lutheran Church Women? Well, no, they're still, but the... But the Brotherhood is gone and the Lutheran League? Yep. Now we have youth groups and men's clubs and so forth. But if all men's organizations are like ours at Calvary, well, it's a lute-fisk supper and that's it. Then I think there are 10 or 11 men who meet at 7 o'clock in the morning for a breakfast meeting and study the Bible. But what's 10 out of 600? So the big family of churchgoers are not there to support after the sermons? No, no, no. Do you remember the Lenardsons? You remember Otto Lenardson? I met him in Lansing, Michigan, I believe. And you remember his nephew, Oscar Lenardson? I don't know him, but I know the name. Yeah. Well, he was the head of the Lutheran Brotherhood. Yes. But we lost the Lutheran Brotherhood because there was much to be desired, but it was a lot better than a men's club that put on a lute-fisk supper. They were like a booster club then to get things together. How about non-church organizations? Did you belong to Kiwanis, Vasa Order, Vikings, etc., when you were in Minneapolis? I never did because I didn't have time. Because we had the Augustan Mission Colony, too, and I was a superintendent of that. In addition to a 1,200-member congregation, we had an old people's home, we had a children's home, we had a home for young women, and of course we used deaconesses there as heads of this. But that was a—now that's a full-time job, but I supervised that, too. So I had no time for these other things. I would have had to take it away from the Lord's work, and I just wasn't doing that. But you can waste a lot of time. They have lunches and dinners and banquets. Yes. It was too much. I signed the regular work. But now you are retired and writing books and lessons to the— Yes, I've written five so far. The first one was That They May Be One, a study of the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians. Then the second one was entitled Think It Not Strange. That was a study of the charismatic renewal. Then the third one was On the Making of a Prophet, a study of the Book of Ezekiel. And the fourth one was How Far Can I Go and Still Be a Christian? Can I do this? Can I do that? I went through all that. And then the last one was this Love and Justice, the Two Faces of God. Now all five of those have gone to our 3,000 Lutheran students, with the exception of Missouri Synod, kind of kicked up once. You don't send any to the theological school at North Park? I did once. You did once? Yeah. Have you visited them? At North Park? No, I haven't. Have you made any visits to Sweden to find your ancestors' birthplaces? Yeah. What happened in Augustana, Minneapolis for six years, the question of my having a sabbatical leave, you know, the seventh year came up for discussion in the Board of Deacons. And they asked me if I would like to have a sabbatical leave, because I had been working so hard. And I said, yes, that would be fine. Well, one of the old deacons says, what would you like to do? I said, well, to tell the truth, I'd like to take a trip to Europe. Well, he said, why don't you? I said, well, it's a matter of dollars and cents. I can't afford it. Well, one of the old Swedes, Andrø Pohvaget, you know, I think we can take care of that, all right. So they went out and raised $1,400, and they said, here it is, goodbye, go. So I bought a trip, and I was interested in the diaconate at that time, too. So I wanted to visit Dyrknesanstaltet in Sweden, you know, in Stockholm, and Stora Fryndalen, yeah. So I bought a tour of seven countries, starting in France and then down through Switzerland, and then just principally in Sweden, Norway, Denmark. And I visited Dyrknesanstaltet in those three places. Your wife was with you then at that time? No, I went alone. Were you alone? I went alone. And then I was gone for, oh, seven weeks, I guess, whatever it was. And I wrote a little history of that. Did you visit Bakson, your mother's birthplace? No, I just got off the train there. They stopped. I just got off the train. My brother went there and visited. But I was headed for Stockholm on the train, and I just didn't stop. But so I was there, saw Stora Fryndalen, and the diaconate in Stortet in Stockholm, and in Oslo and in Schopenhagen, Copenhagen. Do you have any contact with Sweden nowadays? No. No relation that you can write to cousins or second cousins? No, no. My sister-in-law has been there, and she has looked up some. She lives in Rock Island at Friendship Manor. My brother was there. He checked out on those things, but I don't. I've been too busy writing books. And the book I'm writing now is in that spiritual autobiography. Do you fill in for pastors sometimes, too, up in Minnesota? Yeah, I've been helping on the chaplaincy work at our Bethany home. And wherever I'm called, when I get back home, I have to go to the Norwegians a couple Sundays and preach. But I'm getting weaker all the time, so I can't do what I used to do. But whenever the Lord gives me a chance, I'm going to do it. If I have to drop dead, I'm going to do it. You're going to do it with the boots on? Yeah. You did serve on many boards though, during your ministry? Yeah, but principally on the Lutheran Bible Institute board. For how many years? About 20. But that was back in the days of Samuel Martin Miller, you know, and Gornitschka and Knack and all those old veterans. So your work on that board was that to give your input? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I enjoyed that so thoroughly, because they stood firmly on the word of God, you know. Who else were on there? What kind of...? Well, we had ELC men and Augustana men principally. Good, solid Christian laymen and pastors. And it was a faith mission, you know. We were not on any church budget or anything. But God used it in a marvelous way. Where did you meet them for meetings? We met at the Bible School in Minneapolis. At the Bible School, yeah. And then we owned Mount Carmel Bible Camp up on Lake Carlos. We lived just a few... Well, it's a block or two away from Mount Carmel. So there's old family grounds that you were located at? Oh, yes. And Dr. Samuel Miller, you know, he was one of the founders of that. God used it in a marvelous way. I used to so rejoice, you know. I'd go in there, and on the wall they had pictures of all the young people who had gone into missionary service, you know. But that, of course, is a thing of the past. When you change leadership, you know what the dangers are involved in a change of leadership. And that's a long story. But the new leadership wanted to make a college out of it, so we got Golden Valley Lutheran College. Sonny! Chains into Golden Valley Lutheran College, and they had no official connection with any church body. So they lived from financial campaign to financial campaign. And finally the whole thing collapsed. And that big campus is standing there now, unused. And Mount Carmel is in trouble financially, too, because it was mortgaged to try to save the college campus. But that was a whole question of getting away from the original basic purpose for which the school was established, and trying to branch out and doing something that man thinks ought to be done. If in the same context now with the Immanuel Deaconess Hospital here, and you see the fruit of the game, do you think it was the Deaconesses that was the foundation for it to all grow like this? Absolutely. Absolutely. Sonny! Absolutely. They took a lot of beating over the years to keep it going. And they gave themselves. That was their purpose and mission. And then they moved to a new location. Yeah. And they blossomed out to the world. Yeah. And what they're doing is wonderful. But of course the Deaconess is not the heart of it anymore. Now it's all professionals and union. The Deaconess was moved out to the east, you know, at the time of the merger. That was another loss that came out of the merger. And then of course the Deaconesses went on salary. So there was really no point in being a Deaconess anymore because you got a salary the same as any other employee. You lost some of that sense of complete devotion. That was the end of interview with Dr. Vernon Serenius, Alexandria, Minnesota. And it is 10th of October, 1987. End of interview.