 Well, we have 15th of October, 1987. I'm sitting together with Norma Sundberg in Omaha, Nebraska. Your parents know. Isaac Martin Carlson and his wife, Bertha Augusta, they came from Sweden. That's right. Separately. Separately, yes. And your father came from Bethesda in Småland. That's right. And do you know the reason why he came over? I think because of the fact that he wanted something to do. He had nothing to do there in Småland. They lived in the farming area, and there was nothing but big rocks and lots of things like that. Then it was a bad time at that when he left over there. And so he came to this country and joined a cousin up in Minneapolis, up in St. Paul, Minnesota. And he was in the construction business, so he was doing some labor for him for a time. Then he went over to North Dakota and worked in wheat fields for a while. Then after a while, he, I think, went back to St. Paul and worked a little short time. Then he was drafted into the service. So he was in World War I. He spent, I think, two years in the service, was overseas all that time, up to the front lines to the very last, and then came home in 1919. And I was born– He met my mother then when he came back from the service. His mother had come over during the war in 1916. She came over right in the middle of the war. Then she had gone directly to Omaha because she had an uncle here in Omaha. So he was the one that was her sponsor when she came to this country. So then my mother and father met then when they were both in Omaha shortly after the war. Why did he go to Omaha at that time? I think– He went to St. Paul to– I think because when he came back, there was some job openings in the Omaha area, and he went to work for a mill company, a milling company where they made all kinds of wood products, windows and things like that. And so then he was in a carpentry work in that mill for a while. And then after that, he went and got a job, a good job at the telephone company, Northwestern Bell here in Omaha, where he worked for the next 36 years. Once, is it? He was in charge of the building. He was the building superintendent in charge of maintenance and all the employees in the building who ran elevators, did cleaning and other things like that, outside work for the telephone company in Omaha. And then he retired in 1955. From that job, yeah. Right. And how many were there in his family, sweetie? In his family, there were nine. There were five boys and four sisters. Was he one of the younger ones? He was, I think, the third from the bottom. He was the next– There were two children younger than he. So there was no way that the farm came from– No, they couldn't do any farming. No, that's right. It was very bad. Was he the only one that emigrated? He was the only one that ever came to the United States. And the rest of them all stayed over there. And in fact, my father was next to the last to leave. The rest of them all passed away. And he was the last one. Then a sister passed away, and that family now is all gone. So he was– And his parents hadn't been in the United States? Never. No, none of the other families even came to visit with the family here. So you had no connection with your grandparents? No, I never had grandparents. Never had aunts and uncles, except over there. And your mother, now, she came from Hardemå in Örebro. In Nærke. Right. And the reason she came– Well, I guess she just wanted to go and have a more glamorous life. She just thought it was hard work. She started working. She was about 14 years old. She worked in a cadeterie in a bakery over there and learned the trade. She was a beautiful baker and a beautiful cook. And everybody told her, you should go to the United States because it's nicer there. You wouldn't have to work so hard. So when she was 19, why, she came to this country. And then she went to work in Omaha. Shortly after she got here, she went to night school. She could not talk English. And when she came aboard the ship over, why, all she knew was Swedish. And so she went to school and learned English and got a job as a housekeeper, cook, helper in a home in a Dundee area in Omaha, where the wealthy folks were living at that time. And worked there for several years, even after she got married. And she did a lot of their cooking and they're taking care of their homes when they were on trips to Europe and things like that. So it was a really nice life for her. She enjoyed that. And how did they meet, then, your parents? I think they met at some Swedish function because my mother was running around with a lot of the people that belonged to Swedish lodges in Omaha. And I'm pretty sure that's where they met because there used to be a lot of programs and dances and things at the Swedish Auditorium. And I'm pretty sure that's how they met each other. So the Swedish Auditorium, that was done on– 16th and Chicago Street, right. Was it owned by Swedes? It was a group of Swedes that combined. About nine or ten Swedes who sold stock in the building. And then eventually sold, you know, later on after the highway came through there, then they sold the building. And of course, the shares were paid off. But it was a group of Swedes that started– There was no organization then? It was the Independent Order of Vikings. Right. Well, the building itself was not. But what accumulated after that was the fact that there were Swedish lodges in Omaha that met in that Swedish Auditorium. But it was– I think most of the members in the organization were Swedish or Swedish members of the organization. But then when they had to disband or move out, the stocks– The stock was also paid off, right. And what was left went into the building fund. And I don't know if that was eventually turned over to the Vikings or what, but then they built their new building up there. Was it a big building? It was a three-story building, yes. It was a big building. Big brick building. Very nice place. And they danced on the first floor? Well, they had a big ballroom up on the third floor. And there was always Saturday night dances, always card parties, and always a lot of celebrations. And then they had meeting rooms on the second floor. And the lower floor was a few extra spare rooms for other businesses to rent. Insurance people and those that used to rent offices downstairs on the first floor. And a big stairway that went on up to the second floor. Well, we had a lot of places where they had their meetings, and then on up to the third floor, a big, big ballroom with a big stage where they had a lot of events. It was a very nice meeting place. So you think they met there? I'm pretty sure that's where they met, yes. Uh-huh, right. Where did they marry? Did they... They married here in Omaha. Lutheran Church? At Bethel Lutheran Church. Uh-huh, right. And I was baptized in that church when I was born. I was born a year later after they married. So they joined you as members? I don't know if... I think they joined. I'm not sure about the membership in that church because we went there as a child, but later on, I joined another church. My folks joined another Lutheran church in Omaha. And so we are members of Augustana Lutheran. Augustana. Right, right. So then you come along and you grew up then in... In the 20s. That's right. I was an only child and grew up in the 20s. And did they have their own house then at that time? When I... I was about two years old when they bought a home in Omaha, and we moved into that. And we lived in that until I married. They lived in that house all those years until I married when I was 22. And that house was in what you can call a Swedish section? In a Swedish area of Omaha, yeah. It was around the 42nd Maple Street area, and there were a lot of Swedes in that area from 34th and Maple, Corby, Binney, on up to about 45th and Maple. So it was quite a Swedish area. A lot of Swedes. And that's not too far from where Augustana is? Not too far. Augustana's on 38th and Lafayette, right. And a lot of those Swedes went to that church. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And... So you went to grammar school then nearby? Yes. Grammar school was just up the street, about three blocks from where I lived. And an interesting thing was that my folks always talked Swedish to me when I was growing up. So when I was five years old and went to school, I had to learn to talk English. And it was quite a... I think the teachers and the other children in the school thought it was kind of funny because I couldn't talk their language. I talked a foreign language. So I finally and eventually learned English. And by the time I was nine or ten years old, I came home to my folks and said, I don't want you to talk Swedish to me anymore because that's a foreign language. So from then on, we talked English at home. All the mother and father still talked back and forth to each other, always in Swedish or a lot in Swedish. And I could always understand it. To this day, I can still understand Swedish. And there were no other Swedish kids in the neighborhood that went to the same school as you did? Yes, but a lot of them talk English. You know, right? The folks didn't talk Swedish to them like my folks did. But there were some of them that still talked Swedish. Did you have problems then in school? No, no problems whatsoever after I learned English. I was an honor student after when I graduated from grade school and high school. So I had no problems with learning American English or American language and learning English. Did you go to the Swedish Sunday school at church? Yes, uh-huh. Right. We occasionally would go. Well, I remember when we first went to church at the old Emmanuel Lutheran Church, that was always in Swedish. And then we occasionally would go to the Salvation Army for the Christmas services. What was Salvation Army located at? That was down on Leavenworth Street. I think it was about 26th or 27th and Leavenworth in those days. A long way down. Yes, a long way. Yeah. But that was a lot– They had a lot of Swedish services at the Salvation Army in those days, too. So you went with your parents then? Went with my folks. Early in the morning, it was always around five o'clock in the morning when we went to those services. And then we would come home and have our Christmas breakfast and our celebrations after that. So when we are on Christmas now, do you remember when your dad brought home the Christmas tree? Oh, yes. How far ahead of Christmas Eve? Oh, we always– It had to be about the 10th of December, 10th to 12th of December, because we always had those Christmas holidays celebrated way before Christmas. We started in early. Mother was always baking and cooking and getting ready for it. We were putting up the tree, and there was a lot of family activities going on clear up to Christmas. I remember about– Oh, probably the middle of December we started celebrating. So people were invited? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah, a lot of things were going on. Yeah, right. They would come to the house, and even my mother and some of her friends, the ladies, would always get together and make cookies or do things in a group, you know, and get things ready for the holidays. And they made their own sausage in those days and a lot of the food for the smorgasbords. So that had to be prepared ahead of time. And she wanted a Christmas tree to be decorated. Oh, yes, right, yeah. And up there. Right. And my father always spent a lot of time getting that Christmas tree and putting it in a big bucket of sand so they could keep it wet and it was green and all through the holidays. And live candles. Yes, always with candles. Were they lit more than once, you remember? No, I think that was– We waited to light those until Christmas. Mm-hmm. And I remember that finally when Christmas came, we didn't have, of course, the gifts and things that they have today. We were lucky to get one little gift. We would want– that we had asked for, you know. Did Santa Claus come with it? Santa Claus was not around when I was a girl. It was somebody that came during the night when you were sleeping. And we didn't get to see Santa Claus. But we always got to write a letter to Santa Claus if we wanted things. But we were always waking up in the morning and seeing the things that Santa Claus brought during the night. So did you receive those gifts from Santa Claus on Christmas Eve or Christmas morning? Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve? Yes. We opened our packages on Christmas Eve and then we'd go to church on Christmas morning and then we'd come home– Yes, uh-huh, on Christmas Eve dinner. And then after that, we would open packages. And then on Christmas morning, we would go to church and then we'd come home from church and have our breakfast and then a big meal on Christmas Day at noon. And a lot of times that would be a lot of people come in, you know, to be with us for that, right? If there wasn't family on Christmas Eve and the next day it was friends and family. Do you remember if they– Döpa grytan, how do you say? Yeah, we döpa grytan. Uh-huh, we did that. I remember that was my fun part. About that time. About that time, yes. Uh-huh, right, Christmas Eve. And I remember one Christmas Eve that stays in my memory. We pulled the Christmas tree out into the middle of the room and some friends started dancing and singing. And we were dancing around the Christmas tree. All of a sudden, all the needles started to fall off the Christmas tree and all we had left on it were candles. So my father said, looks like it's time for the tree to go. It was end of Christmas that day. That was right. Did you have a Christmas stocking on the– We didn't have a fireplace in our house, so I hung my Christmas stocking on the door. And I had a Christmas stocking Mother had made for me out of some material and put a design on it. I can't remember what the design was, but I remember it was a sparkly thing. And I hung it on the front door because I thought that's the way Santa Claus would come in, was on the front door. And there was a little gift on Sunday morning? Yes, there was a little gift in there on Sunday morning. Yeah, I usually had some little thing in there, a package of gum or an orange or something like that. Oranges were rare when I was a child and very expensive. So we had an orange that was quite a treat. So where do you think your mother got the idea from? I don't know. I don't know except that she read a lot and she followed a lot of traditions. And maybe it was something that they did in their childhood. I don't know. But Mother was very clever, a beautiful seamstress and a fantastic cook. And she baked all kinds of different cookies and all kinds of breads. And we always had plenty to eat at our house even though the money wasn't that free and easy to come by. Well, there was always good food. And she always made my clothes. I didn't have anything that was bought in the store until I was in my last year in grade school. And then I got to buy a new dress when I was graduating. And outside of that, Mother always made my clothes. So she was good at that. Very good seamstress, right. With the needle and– Yes, the needle and thread. Yes, she had an old sewing machine. We still have that. My son has that machine that they bought back in the 20s. And it still works. Right. And you went through high school. And did you continue your education then? No. After I graduated from high school– I took a secretarial course more or less in high school. I took typing and I took shorthand and things like that. And after I graduated with my father working at the telephone company, I was able to get a job at the telephone company in the typing pool. So I worked there for about six to eight months. And then I was taken upstairs to the accounting department. And I had a job in the accounting department for a while, mostly typing records. And then not too long after that, I was sent upstairs to the executive department and worked for the president and the vice president of the telephone company until I married and quit my job to go with my husband, who was in the service. So I worked about four years at the telephone company. So when you were ready to go out to work, there was the height of the Depression, so to speak. There was a lot of worry. It was– Yes, uh-huh. I graduated in 1939. 1939. But the Depression years were the things that I remember when I was in grade school. Yeah, what do you remember of those years? Because you didn't have to work then. No, I didn't have to work. But I can remember– My folks bought a house that– I think they bought a house when I was about three years old. But I can remember shortly after that– You see, that would be in about 1924. And shortly after that, I can remember that everybody was out of work. A lot of the neighbors would come home and they'd say, well, it was the last day of their job. They had been fired or there was no more work to be done. And I can remember that in those days, my father was very fortunate to have a job, which was a good job and a lasting job, although it didn't pay great, but it was a secure job. And he had some good benefits that my folks were often taking things to other families in the neighborhood who didn't have anything because they were out of work. So Mother would bake things or cook things and make things in the way of clothing for other families that didn't have anything. And then I can remember that when my father was to have a bonus– The service– Government issued a bonus to all the World War I soldiers. And we sat out in the front yard and waited for that big bonus. It was a big, big day. And I don't remember what year that was. I cannot remember what year the bonus was given out by the government. But I think my father got something like $60, and that was really something. They thought that was a real great big bonus. Was he wounded? He was wounded in the service, but not enough to keep him from– He was gassed, mostly from the mustard gas. But he had just one wound, I think. It was a nick in one of his legs from shrapnel, but it didn't cause him any problems. He didn't have any handicap of any kind, no monthly disability. But he did have the job. It was a good job. But considering in those days, it was a good job. And so we were very fortunate. But I do remember how hard it was for everybody in the neighborhood, you know, because things were bad. And they were talking about how terrible prices were, how expensive everything was. Although bread was only, what, ten cents a loaf, I think, in those days. And butter was probably 50 cents a pound. And things– Compared to the earnings, it was high. Right, right. Did they have any money in the bank that they lost? Oh, they were saving. No, no. They were lucky that they didn't lose anything. But they were saving people. They had a lot of little bank accounts, you know. And my mother and father always had plenty of insurance. You know, Mother would get this 25-cent insurance. The man would come to the door every other week or so to collect the 25 cents for the insurance. And that was always something my father said– Was there some kind of hospital insurance? We had to pay for. I think it was health insurance or probably it was life insurance in those days, I think. But I know my father said we'd always have that quarter for that insurance premium because we needed that. We had to have insurance. So they were saving people, but they were also very lucky and fortunate that my mother was working and so was my father. So that they did have the money to afford to buy the house and make the payments on it. As I remember, that house at that time only cost them about $4,800. And it was a beautiful big bungalow. It had two big bedrooms in it and a big living room and a dining room and a kitchen. And then there was an upstairs attic, which my father, being a carpenter, made into a big, big room later on. So they had a very nice home there. So they could keep up the payments. Right, right. They were able to do that. But there were people that were foreclosed on it. Oh, yes. There were a lot of people in the neighborhood that had to move out. A lot of people were renting houses in the neighborhood because they couldn't afford to buy them. So it was bad. I remember how bad the times were. So they rented them out and let somebody else then pay the sort of pay the mortgage debt. Right, right. They moved in with somebody else. They would move in with someone else, right. We didn't have a car. In fact, we didn't have a radio until I was nine years old. My father made a crystal set when I was a real small youngster. And I remember we had two sets of earphones so two of us could sit at one time and listen to that set. And that was exciting. I thought this was wonderful. There's a little box there with these little things and you could hear music and all kinds of things. When I was nine years old, we finally got a radio. And that was rough. The big time of our life was to have a radio. And everybody could sit around and listen to the news. Then when I was about ten years old, we got our car. We had the first car we've ever had. And my father bought an old Model T. And it didn't last very long. So then he bought what was called an Overland in those days. And we used to take Sunday drives and go out to the parks and things in our car. And it was quite an accomplishment for them to feel that they had a car. So he learned to drive then? He learned to drive. He knew how to drive. I don't know how he learned, but he must have learned when he first came to this country, probably when he was with his cousin up in St. Paul, Minnesota, because they had trucks and things in their business. So my father drove, and he was a good mechanic even. He learned all things about the car and became a good mechanic too. And during that time, were they for Roosevelt or for Hoover? No, I think they– Of course, I was born when Hoover was president, but I think they were kind of disappointed in Hoover. And I think they were kind of looking forward to Roosevelt's coming in as president. And all the things it said were going to be and all the changes that did happen. And I think were for the best. I think they were in favor of that. So they were democratic? Yeah, I think they turned democratic at that time. Although my father was not a kind that would push his political ideas or his religion on anybody. My father was a very quiet man, but he had a lot of good, smart ideas and thoughts. And he would talk a lot about them when we were together. My father was a great man. He was a very loving person, but he wasn't emotionally outgoing. But he was a very, very loving person. And he wasn't the kind to do a lot of swearing in the house. And my mother was always singing. Mother had a beautiful voice, and she was always singing Swedish songs. So I can remember as a child growing up with her singing lullabies to me in Swedish. And I sort of remember all those things. When I hear a tune now, it reminds me of some of those lullabies my mother used to sing to me. But, no, they were two great people, both my folks. Do you remember sitting and listening to the Feierschat speeches in Los Alamos? Yes. What did they say then? Did they approve of it? Both of my folks, they look forward to the Sunday evenings when sitting there and listening to it. Because it sounded like a tremendous promise. Because it did, right. Yeah, they thought, well, we now finally have what we came to this country for. You know, this is the way it should have been, and this is the way it should be. But if you think back to the promises he made, they were outstanding because the country was in bad shape. That's right. The banks closed, people had to work. Right, right. But it meant only that– But his promises were kept. That's right, right. And, of course, the rich got richer, but that didn't make any difference because even the poor were able to get work and get back to getting money, too. So that worked out fine. Do you remember the soup kitchens? Yeah, I don't remember except when my father talked about them. You know, being downtown at the telephone company, he would talk about the long lines at the soup kitchen. And so one Saturday we went shopping, and my father drove by so I could see what it looked like. You know, there was this long line at the Salvation Army, and I wondered what they were doing. And he said they're getting food, getting handouts of clothing and food for those that need it. So, but I didn't– I was shielded from a lot of that because, you know, my folks were able to do things and didn't have the problem at home. But at the same time, they were understanding of the people's problems. You know, they didn't flaunt the fact that they had it and others didn't. Did you serve the community in the same way? I can't remember that. I can't remember. It was always the Salvation Army. I don't remember that our church going out and doing anything like that. But I'm sure that they probably did. If they knew of a needy family, I'm sure they would go out. But they didn't have any long lines, though. No, no, they sure didn't. But the Viking Order– the Swedish organizations were good about helping their members, too. And I remember lots of times that they'd have a party and say, well, there's a basket over there. We're going to put food in for John Johnson and his family because John is out of a job right now or something like that. So they were good and helpful, too, during those days. Did you attend the Viking meetings often with the parents? Always. The folks always took us with them to all the activities. There was no babysitters in those days. My folks or any of the families that we knew had. And we children would all get together in one little corner of the place and play together. And if we got tired, our folks would lay us out on a chair or a couple of chairs and put their overcoats over us so we could sleep while they had their meetings or their parties. So we were always taken to all those things. Did you participate in the dancing too, to learn– Yes, uh-huh. I was in a group of folk dancers. They started the young people's. And we had maypole dances on midsummers out in the parks and things like that. So there was quite a few of us youngsters in those days. You had a maypole then in the park? Uh-huh, in the park. And then we had maypole dances for midsummer. And there was a lot of Swedish organizations that got together to promote that. And then we'd select a queen, a Swedish queen, or something like that, for the day. And everybody would bring a basket. And sometimes they would serve the coffee and ice cream. And then everybody else would bring their basket for their dinner instead of the picnic tables, you know, afterwards. So it was a nice big event always in those years. So this was the Viking? That was the Viking order, yeah, right. They did not belong to the Vasa? At that time, they didn't. But Mother later joined the Vasa. Uh-huh. Do you remember the church doing something about the Swedish culture for the Lucia program, for instance? No, not in those early years. They did, though, in these later years. Now we do have the Lucia festival. But not at that time. But at that time, no, they didn't. And I don't know why. There wasn't too much of that. I think, it seemed to me, the Emanuel Hospital used to, at one time, had some of the Lucia festival programs at their church services. But I don't remember anything else that our church did in that way. Uh-huh. And during that time, there was Pastor Hansen. Pastor Hansen, right. Uh-huh. Pastor Hansen was- You were confirmed then? I was confirmed. I had Nels Lundgren for my minister when I was confirmed. And then shortly after that, Pastor Hansen came when we had our new church. And my son and daughter both had- no, my daughter had Pastor Hansen when she was confirmed. And my son had Ruben Swanson when he was confirmed. So- Hansen was there for many years. Yes, he was. Uh-huh. Was he a strict, orderly man? Well, yeah, he was strict. Reverend Lundgren was more strict. But Pastor Hansen was also strict. He made sure that you learned things and that you did things properly. Right. Did most of the kids in your age group, then, of being of Swedish background, went to the confirmation class? Yes, yes. In those days, we all went to church and went through confirmation. Boys and girls together? Yes. Right. And now it seems to be up to the parents and the children if they want to be confirmed or not. But in those days, it seemed like it was expected of you to go to church and take that two years and learn the church rules. Two years? Yes. And at our church, it was two years. And learn all those things and to be confirmed, and then thereby becoming a member of the church. So that was the highlight of- I think so, right. Being administered into the- Yes, into that religion. Into our church. Yeah. Right. So, and did your mother belong to any other societies like Ladies Aid and- Mother belonged to the Independent Order of Vikings, and so did my father. But she didn't join any other church. Mother joined church groups, but not any other organizations. Mother belonged to circles at church and those things and did a lot of work at the church in her early days. Did you join the Luther League after you finished your confirmation? Yes, I belonged to all those things at church. And you were active in the church? Very active. I taught Sunday school, and I played piano in Sunday school for a while and did a lot of things like that when I was in church. And then when it came to dating, what did your mother say then when you- Well, it was pretty hard in my generation. Because you had a lot of non-Swedes in your high school days. My folks didn't want me to start dating too early. And of course, my mother was the one that held a hand over me in that respect. My father was just sort of overseer, and he was never the one to discipline me. My mother was always the one that was the disciplinarian. She was the first date. Right. But I think I had my first date when I was 16, and it was at a hayride at church. And that boy was allowed to take me home after the hayride, you know, and that was it. But I was 16. What's the other Swedish background? And he was a Swedish boy. Right, right. His name was Johnson. And so then when I got into school, I didn't date my first two years in high school. I didn't start dating until my junior year in high school. And that was just some school activities only. I couldn't go out to anything else but a school activity with a date, like a prom or a school program, you know, like something in the auditorium or something. So mother was very strict about that. And a football game or something. Yes, mother was very strict. So then finally, when I was a senior in high school, the end of that senior year in high school, I met my ex-husband and we started dating. So you didn't come home with any Italians or Irish? No, no. Although I did, while I was in high school, my senior year, I did date a Jewish boy. And they thought he was pretty nice, you know. But they were hoping I wouldn't marry him. But he turned out to be a wonderful friend. And he's passed away since. But he turned out to be a wonderful friend and was always calling to see how we were and everything. So he's a very nice boy. But most of the young men that I dated were those in school that I met in my high school in my senior year or met at church. And most of the church boys were Swedish. But in school, it was a different story, because your parents couldn't... They had no knowledge of the parents. That's right. They didn't know where they came from. That's right. But they were serious thinking. A lot of difference in those days than there is today. Did your classmates not respect the parents' wish? I think the majority of us did, yeah. The majority of the girls were like I. Their parents were rather strict as to what they could do and what they couldn't do. But after that, of course, it got to be more lenient. But I'm sure that most of our class were the same way, boys and girls. I think some of the boys were free to do a lot more things, but with other boys more than with the girls. I think they were allowed to go out and do things at night more so than the girls were. But other than that, I think when it came to dating, I think they were pretty particular about who the boys were going out with. You were being the only child, so it was easy for them to control. That's true. That's very true. If you had six more, I think– I remember at that time thinking, oh, my, look at all these other kids that get to date when they're 16, 17, but I have to wait until I'm older and have to be under the rule of my parents. Let them know– The boy always had to come to the door. He was not allowed to honk the horn out in front or to come on his bicycle and wait for me out at the curb. You told your dad that? Oh, yeah. They always had to come to the door and to come in and be introduced. Right, right. Fortunately, my– The interview with Norma Sundberg continues next night. Next night. This is side two, the continuation with Norma Sundberg, from Nebraska. Side two. You were talking about your mother. Right. I was talking about– Fortunately for my mother, I guess, more than my father, but fortunately for my folks, my husband's mother and father were both from Swedish backgrounds. My father-in-law had been born– He's from Poland in Sweden. Was born in Andalina. So they had something between them. They were able to talk Swedish, and they also had a lot of mutual friends. My mother-in-law was also from Swedish background. And also, though she was born in Omaha herself, but her mother and father had both come from Sweden. And so she could also talk Swedish. She was raised in a Swedish environment and was able to talk Swedish. And they also belonged to the Swedish lodges. They did not belong to a church. They never did join a church, but they knew most of the people that went to our church. And so there was always a connection that way for them, you know, to visit. And it was kind of nice that they were both in-laws and had more in common. At that time, when we first married, no, but later in years, when we came home from– My husband was in the service, and after World War II, we came home to Omaha. My father-in-law was in the construction business here in Omaha, and my husband had been when he left Omaha to go into the service also. So when he came home, while we were back in the construction business again, and we bought some property in Omaha and built houses for ourselves, our family. We by then was one daughter. I had had a daughter while we were gone into the service. We were stationed in the state of Washington, in Spokane. And so when we came home with the daughter, we wanted to build a house. So we built a house for ourselves, and shortly after that, my son was born. But at the same time, we had this extra property, and across the street, my father-in-law had a piece of property, so he decided he wanted to build a house on that. So they lived across the street. So then we had some other property next door to our house, and we built a house there for my folks. So we all three lived right there, right close to each other, which was very nice because, for instance, my son, at the age of about five or six, would come home and say, Mom, what are we having for dinner tonight? I'd say, Well, I think I'm going to have some liver and onions. And he'd say, Oh. A few minutes, he'd come back, and he says, I think I'm going to go over to Grandma Sundberg's for dinner tonight. And I says, Oh, what's she having? He said, Hamburgers. I said, That's probably why he had dinner at Grandmother's, because he didn't want to eat liver at home. So it was convenient for us, not only that fashion, but also the fact that when we wanted to go someplace, we had babysitters right close by, too, and they loved to go to Grandma's and Grandpa's. So they were able then to grow up with grandparents on both sides. On both sides of us, right. So it was kind of nice that way for a long time, when they were up to the time that they were going through grade school and almost into high school. So it worked out very fine. So it was very easy for you, then. All the in-laws knew each other? That's it. No, no, there was no questioning or anything. Do you think it's much easier then for two people when they go to work? Well, I think it was for us, both being Swedish, you know, and both having Swedish parents. And I think that it was very unusual, very rare, because it's not done, even in my generation, too many of the girls marry Swedes. But in my generation, that wasn't very common. But now it is. And, you know, there's very few Swedes that marry Swedes nowadays. So anyway, I think it was not only that, but traditional things that we did and the cultural things that we were able to attend were the same things that we liked and had at home. That's right. And we were used to it and we appreciated it. So it was nothing new to us. We knew that that was something we wanted to do. Do you think there will be a distance between if the in-laws don't know each other? There will be a hesitation? Well, I don't think not necessarily distance, but I think there's a lot of saying, well, you know, they do this on one occasion and the other side does something different. So there's always this, you know, what are we going to do now? And you have to either join into it or else you stay away from it. And I think that it is nice to have the same background in that respect. How about your religion? You said that your father-in-law, he didn't attend church. My husband's parents did not join any church. My husband joined the church when we got married. Your church? He joined Augustana. And then we had our children both confirmed– or baptized and confirmed from Augustana. So it was kind of nice in that respect, too. But my mother and father belonged to Augustana. So they– Like I say, my father was not outwardly religious, but he was inwardly a very religious man. And so he thought a great deal of the church. And he would attend church regularly, but not as often as we, of course, did every Sunday or every Sunday that we could. So it was nice to have that on our side, too. And during that time, Lundgren and Hanson– And Swanson, right. They were the old Augustana– Old preachers. Right, and the old Swedish hymns. So you were brought up in that– Brought in that atmosphere. –from the beginning. –That's right. So what happened then after a while, up in the 60s and 70s, when it started to– Outside world turned around a little bit? Well, of course, things happened in the 60s to everybody, I guess. But my husband and I eventually had our own construction business in Omaha. We built houses, and I guess things got too good. We were doing so well that I think it almost went to his head or something, but he got to the point where he wasn't satisfied with what he had at home. So he was out constantly with other circles of friends and other people. And one day just all of a sudden decided he'd had enough, and he walked out. So that meant that I had to go to work to raise my two children. And I don't know. My children were always raised in that same Swedish atmosphere. They enjoy– They both belong to the Viking Order, too, and both being belonged to church, a Swedish church. And they're both very Swedish. In fact, my daughter has married a fellow whose mother is Swedish. I didn't know that at the time they got married. So there's some Swedish background there, too. So as far as the two children are concerned, it worked out beautifully because they were raised in that atmosphere, and they still appreciate their Swedish heritage and their background. Could you activate the same concern as your mother did when you were dating to your daughter? Well, my daughter was really good. It's surprising. She always– We always had certain rules. And I always said that, well, you know, youngsters nowadays– When she was growing up, I said that this dating at 13, 14, that's not going to be done in our house. But there was a time when she thought this one boy was pretty nice and she wanted to go study with him. I said, why don't you sit down and think about it for a while? I said, think it over real hard because, I said, you're only 13. And I said, you might regret not being able to go out with some other boy that might come along. And I said, because you're going steady with this young man. So she finally decided that that was the best, that she shouldn't be going steady at that age. So by the time she was 16, she was dating. But nothing serious. And she was enjoying her life and the friends that she had. And I think she was glad that she did that. We had a curfew in our house when she was growing up. And she was really very good about it. She was always calling if there was some little problem. If she couldn't get home in the next five or ten minutes, she would always call and let us know where she was. My son was that way, too. But I don't think that– We didn't have that horrible discipline over our children that they did in my day because it was not that strong. But it was a feeling that, you know, well, mother wouldn't like that or father wouldn't like it if we did this. And they adhered to it. We had no drug problems, no alcohol problems with either one of the two children. It was their father who became an alcoholic. But the children have never, to this day– Neither one of them smoke and neither one of them have anything but an occasional glass of wine with dinner or something like that. So we've had no problems. And growing up in the 60s was difficult enough with all the drugs that were available, but we escaped all of that. So we didn't have any of those problems. For that I was grateful. But I do think it was our upbringing, both mine and the upbringing that we taught our children. So we were very lucky. So it was something that was paying off. I'm sure it was inbred and from very far back. Were they close to your parents, your children and your father? Very close. Very close. Yes. Yeah, they were very close. We were a good family, a close family. We did a lot of things together. We, of course, always together during the holidays. We even took a lot of vacations together. And we enjoyed that. So we had a good family relationship. So your parents then lived very close until they died then? Yes. My father passed away in that same house that they lived in when we lived next door. And my mother to this day now, at 92, is in a nursing home and doing real well. My in-laws, my father-in-law and mother-in-law, both passed away. And my husband has since passed away also. So that part of the family is gone. Did they have a chance to go back to visit Sweden? In 1955, when my father retired from the telephone company, he and mother took a trip over. My in-laws went along at the same time. So it was good. They went over on the ship. It took the time to enjoy sailing over and having lots of company and meeting new friends and everything aboard ships. So that was a real good time for them. My folks had intended to be gone about six months. So they took a great big trunk with them, full of clothing and full of all the necessities that they would have to have. After they got to Gothenburg, they split up. My father-in-law went to his home country, Rondalena, with his wife, my mother-in-law. And my folks went, first of all, to my mother's home at Örebro– the family there in Örebro. From there, they went down to Småland and spent probably three months down in Småland with my father. Then they got together when it was about time to come home. They were planning their return home. And their trip was supposed to have been on the– Which was it? The ship, the Gripsholm, that was struck by the Andrea–Dora– –Oh, Stockholm. –Stockholm. They were due to come back on the Stockholm. And, of course, that had to be changed. They couldn't come back on a ship because that was put up– Had been badly damaged, so that was not necessary– not possible for them to travel. So my mother and father said, well, they thought it was time they go home. They were getting kind of homesick. My mother had always, all her life, been scared to death of airplanes. She said she would never go up in an airplane unless she could keep one foot on the ground. She says, oh, no, no, not me. I ain't– I was going in no airplane. And so this meant now that she had to go home in an airplane or else wait until some ship was being built to take them home. So they finally decided that they'd all get together. So my in-laws, the Sundbergs, and my folks got together and decided they would both fly home together. So they met in Stockholm and flew home by air. And they had– My mother said that was the best trip she ever had. So it just shows, you know, if you do have those fears, what you have to do is go out and do it and overcome that fear. But– So that was the highlight of that trip to Sweden. But they enjoyed their visit back. That was the first time my mother and father had been over since they came to this country. So their parents were dead then, of course. Yeah, at that time, but they were gone. But they had sisters and brothers that were still alive and lots of nieces and nephews over there. So they had a wonderful trip. What did they say? Did they see the changes in Sweden? A lot of changes. A lot of changes, of course. It had modernized and there was a lot of things. My mother's– One niece lived in Farsta, which was at– What do they call that? Not constellation cities, but those kind that are built cities within cities at Farsta. It's a very modern– The central heating. Yes, right. So my mother thought that was quite a thing for Sweden. And one thing Mother said was about Småland. She had never been to Småland when she was in Sweden. She had been up in the northern country of Sweden and then down into about maybe Lindköping, but had never been in Småland. So she was really surprised when she came home. She said to me, I don't know why your father ever left Småland. That's the most beautiful thing I've ever seen in my life. So she really enjoyed her time while she was over there. She even was able to get in contact with some of the boys that she dated while she was growing up and children she played with while she was over there. So their contacts were unbelievable while they were over there. They had lots of parties and lots of get-togethers. And they loved it. One outstanding thing was that when my mother was growing up in Sweden before she came to this country, she was a governess for a while for a professor who was a teacher in one of the schools there outside of Stockholm. And they had a summer home up near Borlänge. So my mother was allowed to travel with them that summer to take care of the two boys while the professor and his wife were up there and just to oversee things as a governess. And while she was there, she met Jesse Björling and his family. So Jesse Björling was a mere little child about that time. I think he was about four years old or so. And she said she'll never forget Jesse. When Mother was making cookies in the kitchen at Professor Olsen's, why, Jesse Björling would always come over and want a cookie. So she said that when Jesse Björling was a boy, his father was a beautiful singer, I guess, and all the family was doing a lot of singing. The hills were just full of music up there in Borlänge when they were up there to spend the summers. So that was a highlight of Mother's trip to go back again to see that part of the country. Then when Jesse Björling came to Omaha one year for a concert, she went down to see him. And I guess that was another exciting part of her life, was to think that she could see him after all those years. And she did? And she did, and he was so proud to see her, too. He remembered her. Right. But yes, good cookies. But no, they had a wonderful trip. And that was the– My father-in-law had been back on one trip. I think he flew over for just about three or four weeks one time all by himself because of a death in the family in Fallen. And so he had gone back but didn't stay very long. He didn't do any traveling in any other part of the country. That was his second time back. But other than that, it was the first time my folks had returned. Have you visited Sweden? I just went back now this last summer. I went back in May and spent four weeks on a tour first of Norway, Denmark and Sweden. Then I went back to Stockholm for two weeks and looked up some of the relations that I had left over their cousins. So you had cousins on Norway? Yes, I have just a few. And there was only a few of them I could get a hold of. A lot of the older ones of my mother's– Mother's cousins were either in pension huts or in nursing homes and were not able to visit. But I did get to see a few of them or talk to them over the telephone. And it was nice. I got to see a lot of the country. I got to see my mother's birthplace and my father's birthplace. So you had contact with them by then? Yes. Often on during the year we had contacted small notes back and forth. Mother did keep up a good contact all those years. And then I tried later to let the people know about what was going on. There's been a steady flow then of– Yes, right. So it's been nice to hear from them. It really has. You mentioned that when your husband left you, you had to go out and work yourself. Right. How old were the kids then? My son was 10 and my daughter was 15. So you went out and– And so I went out to the business world. I went out and looked for a job. I ended up getting a job with a law firm. And became a legal secretary. I had never done legal secretary work before. And it was very interesting. And I ended up– Just now last December I retired after– I had been working 31 years as a legal secretary. Here in Omaha? Here in Omaha. Never outside Omaha? Never. Uh-uh. Not outside. Always in Omaha. And it was a delightful career. I enjoyed it. It was a very good education. So– And that trip to Sweden in May was a partial gift from my lawyers when I retired. They gave me a big check and an airplane ticket to Stockholm. So I could enjoy that trip even more. They say that legal secretaries never retire because they don't want to let them finish their work. That's right. Is there any truth to that? That's what they say. Right, right. And then there's a big joke in our office about the fact that they had to hire two girls to take my place when I left. Well, there must be a tremendous break in here. Oh, it is. And it's a field that not too many girls are going into today. They don't want to be legal secretaries. It's a lot of work. It really is a lot of work. And it's a pressure job. There's a lot of pressure involved because attorneys never quite know what they're going to do tomorrow. It might be a big law case and there may be a settlement. So you just never know. But you still have to prepare a 50-page brief just in case. But it's a real exciting world, though, because there's always something different every day. It's not a monotonous job by any means. And you get to meet a lot of wonderful people. So you should be able to pass the bar exam now, are you? Oh, I should think so. There's also another saying– That's another saying, yes. That's right. In fact, I've had calls at the office wanting to speak to the attorneys. And if they're not in, well, I can talk to you. You know as much as they do. You're not supposed to say anything. That's right. That's right. I says, I haven't been able to pass the bar. So at– There's another– You didn't work for any Swedish lawyers, though. I mean, Swedish technical lawyers. No, no. This law firm I worked for, we're not. But I have become involved with a law firm of Swedish lawyers because of my work now with the vice counsel, the Swedish counsel of Omaha. Don Erickson. Don Erickson, right. He's called on me for a lot of things during the past few years as far as Swedish cultural activities and things are concerned. And he keeps in touch with me. So I know most of the lawyers in his firm by now. I had an interesting talk with Cecil Johnson. You know him? Yes. He's also a lawyer. Yes, he is. A very good lawyer. Virgil Johnson and Cecil and Charles Sederström. He worked for the chickens once in the college. Yes, right. But it's interesting because now with all the activities coming up– In Sweden. In Sweden, 88, right. We are involved in the Swedish Cultural Committee group now that we have big plans for next year. And I'm glad to be a part of it. House of Banquets. Yes, right. A lot of activities. Right. We won't get to have the king and queen here, I guess, but we're going to do the celebrating anyway. You are a Jubilee city. We are a Jubilee city, right. Going back now to a few names I scribbled on there. Okay. Arvid Karlsson, he was a carpenter. And a very good friend of my mother and father's. He and his wife were very, very close friends. And they were also active down there at the auditorium. At the Lodge, right. Chicago. And Walter Anderson, P.A.– And Gus Anderson. They lived across the street from my in-laws when my husband was growing up. So he and Walter Anderson grew up together. So they were longtime friends. And then there was a couple of dancers. Charlie Holm and Maria Holmson. Marie Holm, right. Now, my mother and Charlie Holm came from the same part of Sweden. Both come around from Örebro. So when my mother came to Omaha, she ran into Charlie, and they became good friends because they were from the same part of the country. And when my mother and father first married, they lived in what they call a– Well, it's like a tenement. A flat. They called them flat in those days. Down in the 24th and Rees Street area. That was what they used to call the Italian area in the city. But Charlie Holm and Marie Holm, when they married, they also moved down there and lived down there. So my mother and father, I think, lived either above or down below them. I can't remember which, in the same flat. They was in the beginning, though. In the beginning, when they first came to Omaha in 1919, 1920. So your mother was also a dancing– She was in the group, yeah. But she wasn't in the dancing group. But she was one of those that always was at the activities at the Swedish Auditorium. Did they have folk dancers? Yes, they had a real beautiful Swedish group of dancers. And we also had a group of singers. A men's chorus. And they were great, yes. Was there a special name of that group? I can't remember what they were called. The Swiftfield Singers was a part of the Swiftfields, I think. I think they were a part of that Swiftfield group out of Chicago. That's where they got their name or something. But anyway, they were a wonderful group of singers, and the dancers. It was a big group, and there was a lot of those that were real good friends of our families. And businesses now, they were owned by Swedes. You had the Golden Swanson funeral. Right, right. Did they take care of most of the funerals? Most of– Yeah, right. Golden, was he– Kenneth Golden, no. I don't know what his background is, but Kenneth Golden went to work for the mortuary, and he eventually became part owner of it. Swanson. So that goes back a long ways, and I don't know. I know his wife Mildred now, today is a real good friend of mine. And I see her quite often. I'm not too sure about Kenneth's background. He had a beautiful voice. He did a lot of singing in Omaha also. Right, but I know there was a– In those days, there were a lot of Swedish people in the Swedish group. They were very active. We had a big group. Did they patronize the Swedish stores? Yes, always. Oh, yes, right. In fact, you mentioned Charlie Holm, and he had a grocery store, and everybody bought their food at Charlie Holm's, especially at Christmas time, because Charlie and Marie used to make all the sausage and all the different lunch meats and had cheeses and stuff that were always part of the smorgasbords. So they always went– Lutfisk– They always went to Charlie Holm's to buy their food. And he was located where in– On 52nd and Leavenworth. Oh, I see. Right, right. In fact, my husband, when he was– It's right in the corner with the Masonic Village. Down below the Masonic Home, right. It's down about two blocks down the street. My husband, when he was in high school, went to work for Charlie Holm driving a truck, delivery truck, on Saturdays. So a lot of the young men, too, that knew of Swedish backgrounds that knew Charlie Holm were able to work sacking groceries or delivering groceries or packing things and helping out at the Christmas time with all the sausage and stuff. Became quite a well-known thing. And they had all the things necessary for you to go to Sweden? Oh, yes, absolutely. Was he the only store? There was several others. I don't remember. There was another. I think it was the Rasmussen's. I can't remember if that was the name or not. There was a store on Ames Avenue. But I can't remember what that family's name was. Is this north of Dodge or south of Dodge, what you're talking about this area, 52nd and Leavenworth? 52nd and Leavenworth is south of Dodge. South on 52nd. Okay. So how about further south? Were there any Swedish... Further south, well, that would be down in the south Omaha area. There were some Swedes down in there because at one time... Most of the packing house houses? Yes. Oh, yeah, a lot of Swedes came to Omaha, went to work in the packing houses. And they also lived on there? And a lot of them lived in the south Omaha areas. And in fact, the Viking Lodge had a... Their first lodge was in south Omaha at one time. And then it broke up and merged with the Over Odd Lodge in Omaha, which is the one that's going now. And there was a big bunch in south Omaha. Do you remember going down there into south Omaha? No, I can't remember going down there. My aunt, when I was born, I was– My mother and father were living at the time with my aunt in south Omaha, and she lived on 38th and Gold Street. And there were a lot of Swedish people in that area. And they, of course, all went to Bethel Lutheran Church because that was close for them. But I don't remember going to any activities down south Omaha. But most of ours were down on 16th and Chicago at the Swedish Auditorium. Right. And then the freeway took care of that. The freeway wiped that building out, right. And there was a lot of antiques in that building, and everything was sold on the inside, and then the building was demolished. Uh-huh. Only memories left of it. Right, right. There was also Anton Nelson. You know him? Anton Nelson. Later in World War II, he was– Anton Nelson. That doesn't ring a bell. Anton Johnsons, but I don't know any Anton Nelson. I don't think. I can't remember. How about the Emanuel Hospital? That's where my son was born, was Emanuel Hospital. Did Augustana– They had a lot of auxiliary working for Emanuel Hospital. Oh, yes. Of course, Emanuel Hospital was founded– Yeah, by the– Yeah, Mr. Folgestrom, who eventually– And they always had a tie– Always was a tie with it, yes. With the Deaconess Institute and with Emanuel Hospital, yes. Right, even today. We have a group that are on the board at Emanuel and do a lot of work with the Emanuel group. So that's– But it's always been part of the Lutheran Church here in Omaha, Emanuel Lutheran. Is it still called the Swedish Hospital? No, it's called Emanuel Lutheran now. So it's never referred to as the Swedish Hospital. Not anymore. Was it years ago? I think so, although there was– As I remember, this is– I probably shouldn't even mention it because I don't even know if it's right or not, but it seemed to me at one time down on 13th Street, there was a hospital. It was called the Swedish Hospital. Because I think that's– I don't know, but that's where I had my tonsils removed, and I thought that was called the Swedish Covenant Hospital. Would that have been it? Okay, well, then that's it. But that's the only Swedish hospital I ever heard of because Emanuel has always been Emanuel. They fell through in nine theories. Yeah, right, because I went down to that hospital down there on 13th Street. I think it was 13th or 10th or 11th, and had my tonsils taken out. That was the only time I'd ever been to hospital. So I remember that very vividly. It was down in that area. 13th and what street? 13th and– I don't know. Where are you? I can't even think what street that would be down in there. It had to be maybe Woolworth or somewhere down in there. 13th and Woolworth or Pacific or something like that. Way on South 13th. Uh-huh. So that was called the Swedish and Emanuel didn't want to have that– So I don't remember. Like I say, as a child, I don't remember it being called Swedish, but before that, it could have been, but I don't really know about that. Uh-huh. You started out early with the Vikings going down to the Swedish Auditorium with your parents. Right. Did you continue on being engaged in their activities later on? Yes. After, when we came back, especially when we came back from World War II, my husband was already a member. He had joined before the war. But when we came back, then I joined the Viking Order when I came back in 1946. There was the ladies– And that time was Linnea Lodge, right. And Linnea Lodge had been formed in 1941. So I joined the women's lodge, and I've been active in the lodge ever since. We merged with Orvar Odd. Linnea and Orvar Odd merged in 1986. 85. 85. So you've been active as an officer? Officer all the way through. I had all the offices in that. I've been chief twice, and all the other offices I've taken care of also. I am now on the national council, the executive council of the Independent Order of Vikings. So you go to Chicago– I go to Chicago every other month. Every other month. Six times a year we meet in Chicago. So I'm still very active after 45 years with the lodge. Vikings, they have seemed to– been thriving over the years because they had an office downtown Chicago. Right, right. Office help, three, four people working all the time. Right, right, right. And we have our nice new offices now out in Des Plaines. Right. And we've gone down in membership, but we're up above 10,000 again now, so we feel like we've been doing pretty well to hold steady. And the insurance program is working– Insurance program. We're going into a new insurance program, hopefully sometime next year or maybe the following year, to get a little bit better insurance than what we got. But it's terrific. We are about 130 percent solvent on our insurance, and it's really good. So we're doing real well on that score. And you're also giving out quite a few scholarships. Scholarships. We gave out 16 scholarships this last year. Right. We've done a lot of good work with our– And then we have a lot of benefits. Our members are all entitled to aged and needy benefits if there's any need for it while they get it. And then also there is sick benefit for our lodge members. So this seems to work all right. It does, yes. And you're able to keep the whole nation together from Braintree to– All the way to Seattle, Washington. Seattle, Washington. The one in Seattle is still the week, I suppose, isn't it? For lodge? For lodge. It's not very large, but they've been very active lately. Still? Yeah, they didn't come to our convention this year, but they did two years ago. And so they've been real active out there. It's a long trip for them when they come– if they have to come clear to the East Coast. So it's awful difficult to plan on anybody being there for the convention. But we've lost our lodge in Denver, Colorado, and we've lost– I'm not sure about Utah. I think it's still going. But we do have a few lodges in the West, but not too many. Most of ours are on the East Coast. Lindbergh, what's the name in Salt Lake City? Oh, I can't remember. Sounds familiar. Right, right, right. So that's still hanging in there by this week. Right. It's not the membership that we used to have, but like I say, we feel like we're holding our own. And like I say, we are a very solvent organization, fraternal insurance organization. So we're allowed to get the young people in. That's what we're trying to do now. And we've been lucky lately. We got a new lodge started in the Fox River Valley, and it's a lot of young people.