 19th of March, 1987, I was sitting together with Mr. Rainer Klimt in Rockford, Illinois. And he was born 1916, 2nd of August, in Rockford. Your parents, now, Gustav and Lieber Klimt, they both came from Sweden. That's right. And your mother first came to Pennsylvania, to Arnett. To Arnett, Pennsylvania, right. She came alone, or with her parents? No, she came alone. Borrowed money, came alone. Through some relation, or... No. Well, wait a minute, some distant relatives. And then they got her a job, so she worked as a helper, or a maid in homes that could afford it. And she stayed there not too long, though. Not too long, and then she went to Rockford, where she had friends. And through the evangelical church, it's now the Norwegian church in Rockford, on 4th Avenue, they met one another. And my dad came directly from Sweden to Rockford. Did he have any relation to come to Uncle Rance? No, no, he didn't. He had distant relatives. That's all they had. So they guaranteed from them, more or less? I'm sure that somebody had to. I don't recall the details on that. And that was in 1905. Right. They both came in the same year. That's right. But they didn't know of each other in Sweden? No, no. The distance was too far, so... They met one another in church. And they were young people, of course, and... My mother got married when she was 23, and my dad was 26. And what kind of work did he get done when he came here? Well, I think when he first started, he sold coffee. Oh, safe, then. He sold coffee from house to house with a horse and buggy. I see. That was for a grocery store, though, wasn't it? Well, he had a grocery store for Columbia Coffee, who he sold for. And he finally went into the grocery business. Oh. In 1928 or 29, he sold his grocery store that he had. And with the money that he got from that, he bought two families and a little house in the back. And we lived in that little house in the back. And the people in the front who were renting from my dad, they lost their jobs, so they couldn't pay the rent, and my dad couldn't put them out. He didn't have the heart to put them out. And the man that my dad was buying the house and the apartment from said, well, you agreed to pay the principal and the interest, so we lost everything we had. And they lost everything they had. My parents did. Then we rented houses. Why did he sell his grocery store? The chains were just coming into the picture. This is my observation. The chain stores were just becoming popular at that time. Already before 1930? Yes. And Dad was sick a lot. And I think it's a combination of things. I know for years we couldn't go to any chain store to buy any groceries because he just felt that the chain stores were unfair to the small merchant. It was impossible to make a profit. Yes, and then the Depression set in, and Dad then got a job working at Sunstrand as a planer hand. And he worked for, I think, 30 years as a planer hand until he had to retire at the age of 65. He never tried the grocery business? No, no, he didn't. It was all in the picture then. Right. And my mother and father were instrumental in bringing my uncle and aunt over here. Nybergs. That's where the Nybergs came in. There was David? David Nyberg and Emma. She was Emma Clint. But then she married David Nyberg. Oh. And they came over as fresh immigrants then. What did they occupy with? Well, my uncle was a great big man, and he worked in the coal business, Perskandia Lumber Company. And Honk was lumber. Somebody else there on 7th Street. One of the switchmen lost his leg in an accident, a fellow by the name of Holmberg. And he took a real liking to my uncle, and he gave them an opportunity to buy into part of the business, and they started the Highland Lumber and Fuel Company. That's how Highland Lumber and Fuel started. When this man, who was a locomotive engineer, lost his leg, and he was there until he retired. So when you got old enough, you went through high school in Rockford? Yes, I went through high school in Rockford. My brothers all went to high school, and my sister went to high school. You had three brothers and one sister? Right, and my older brother, Carl Bernard, who is two years older than I am, he's had a stroke, so he can't talk, can't control his water or the bowels, but a real nice fellow. And I worked with him for 40 years until I retired back in 1981. I see. I'm living off the fat of the land now. But before that, you had some rough goings-on, I suppose, during the Depression. Yes, yes. Did you start to work right after high school? Yes, I did. I got a job. Well, first of all, I got a scholarship to go away to college, and I got a job working as a stock supplier for a crane company. They made plumbing supplies here in the United States. At that time, they were one of the leaders in the plumbing business. And when I told the boss in August that I was going to go away to school, he said, well, you didn't tell me you were going to go away to school. I said, well, you didn't ask me. And the next day, they had a man out from Chicago who told me the story about Mr. R.T. Crane, who started making brass. Well, he made brass bells in his backyard in the little shed that he had. And from brass bells, he started making brass valves, and he made fittings. A pipe company he bought. And they put me on the road right away. To be a salesman? To be a salesman. They put me on the road right away, and I gave up a college education. And I never regretted that. A wonderful experience. And I was there with them for seven years, and I left to go with my brother and my uncle. And you probably want the story as to how Nyland was born. Your brother, now, did he? Well, my brother, I stayed out of high school one year to help my family, and I worked nights in an industry called J.L. Clark's here in town. My brother, who was never interested in athletics, the one who's got the stroke now, was working at J.L. Clark's as a tool and die maker, as an apprentice. And somebody died that was connected with J.L. Clark, and the widow wanted $500 for the patent rights for the kitchen gadgets. It was flour sifters and pot holders and cheese slicers. And my brother didn't have the $500, but he thought it was a good deal. So he went to my uncle, Mr. Nyberg, and they took the Berg off of Nyberg, and they took the K off of Clint, and they called it Nyland Tool and Manufacturing Company back in 1938. So he was a silent investor? He was a silent investor, yes, never active in the company at all, but a wonderful man. So after school, my younger brother would help. They would make these cheese slicers and flour sifters, and this is in 1939. And they would set up pup tents one there, and then they'd set up little tents with, they'd slice cheese off for the farmers to come by at the various county fairs. And they sold them, I think the highest one was 89 cents or 79 cents retail. And they started their first little factory in 1940. And on top of it, it was a, what would I call it, junkyard, I guess. It was a junkyard, and I think it was 40 by 30, very small. And for one year, my brother quit his job at J.L. Clark's. I'm sure he took a lot of ridicule for that. And in 1941, I left Crane Company and come with at the insistence of my brother and my uncle, and they would give me an opportunity to buy part of the business, which I did. So you said ridicule, was that from your parents perhaps or your relations? No, I don't think so. No, not from the parents, not from the relation. But it was not giving up a secure position, though. Yes, it was. He gave up everything at J.L. Clark's to start this business. But, you know, the war was just starting then, too, and anybody that had a back alley and garage or a shop of any kind, and if you had the faculties to do anything with your hands, you know, you could make a go of it. And I joined them in 1941, and we were involved with the war. I mean, we were helping with the war effort from, I guess, 39 and on. But it was 1941 in December when the bomb was dropped on us over in Pearl Harbor. So in the meantime, what you call, since 1946 we went into toys. Do you want to hear the story about Nyland? Yes, definitely. And up until that time we were on war work. We did all kinds of war work. We were capable of, oh, we made gap gauge grinders when Coventry, England, was bombed and it was leveled. We made gap gauge grinders for two-tenths of a thousand. You know, that strand of hair on your head is 5,000 in thickness, and this is two-tenths of a thousand. This is for grinding gap gauge grinders. And the town was leveled, and we said we'd take it on. And we did that. We made parts for the bomber, the B-26 J.I. Case, which is no longer here in this town. And we made parts for various—we worked as a subcontractor. Then in 1945 we realized we needed to have a product of our own of some kind. And my brother asked various salesmen that called on us of anything that we could do that would— with the facilities we had and the manpower that we had. And one man knew of a toy inventor, and we hired him from somebody here in Rock— his name is Carl Swenson, since his pass down. He was with Ekstrom and Carlson's, and we hired him. And he—the first little car that we made was—the first little toy that we made was a car in 1946, and it had a wind-up spring to it, and it would go around the block, you know, three feet down, and it would go forward and back up and park, or it would go forward, back up, turn around. I think in 1946 I had charge of the sales of the company. We didn't know how to buy stuff. We didn't know how to make stuff. We weren't on any allotment for steel. We bought punched-out windows from the automobile industry, and they'd come down with a truckload that was full of skids, you know, and they'd be banded together, and they'd be all broken. The skids would be laying all over the place, and we'd lay it in the press, make a blank, and then we'd throw the scrap away. And we did subcontract work. We did a lot of machine work for various firms, mostly locally, up until 1962, to help us along the way with that and our toy business. So you didn't rely entirely on the toy industry? No, no, until 1962. And in 1963 our toy business got so big that we just couldn't handle subcontract work, too, so we went on toys only. And the company today is still on toys only. And that's all steel? All steel toys, yes. There's never been anything else? No, no, that's right. How could you compete, though, on the plastic? Well, the thickness, the size, the scale of the... We did quite well. The company did quite well. Did you consult anybody to make a study of what kids really like compared to the plastic and steel? No, and that's what you have to do today, I think, because today kids today don't want the standard stuff. They want the way out stuff, and you've got to make a study of it. I think today that's true. Back in the days when I was still with the company, what you called, the standard toys had a place, and our business was constantly increasing. So they liked the... And we did a lot of it. We sold to Sweden, to Mom of Sweden, a fellow by the name of Olsen. I remember Olsen, when he came, he came to Rockford. I remember him, and I went to Mom of Sweden to see him. Been to England many times to put together. We had 16 European countries, and we had in Australia, we had in Africa. We sold a little bit all over. What was the design of the... Well, most of the items that we made were scale models of the cut down the size of something that was normally in big size, big scale. Like a Jeep or a Blazer, we'd cut it down a scale. And the man across the street did the design work. The ideas of the feel of the thing, I think my brother, he had a marvelous feel for what would go, what wouldn't go, and it's just unfortunate that he's in the physical condition that he is today because what they're going to do, I don't know. They had a good toy fair. You know, a toy fair, it gives you a pretty good barometer as to how you're going to do for the whole year, and this year they did quite well, and that was in February out in New York. But I have to say that, you know, when you get to be 65, life is meant to be something more than just work. And I'm a firm believer in sharing with the others and give whatever you can. Of yourself, you know, some people can only give help. You know, they can't give money. They're financially not able to give money, but there's so much help out there that's needed. So I'm enjoying retirement, and my brother wished that he was capable, but he's not, and he can't help it. He's got his son that's, I don't know, 37 or 38. Ted Clint is running the company now, and the designer used to go over there every morning to the Nylent and they'd draw up drawings they could make, and the one thing about the designer that could design, he knew something about what you could and what you couldn't do. So they're running a very successful company, Nylent is. So your brother, now, he was a dye and tool maker? He was a dye and tool maker, right. And my younger brother is a dye and tool maker by trade, and he's still with the company, and he's got charge of the new packaging, and he's got charge of the safety in the plant. The plant's well organized, it's no union to contend with, nobody tell them what to do, what not to do. They need a lot of outside ideas because times are changing. You know, it's like somebody can have a real successful restaurant, all of a sudden they move the highway five miles one direction or the other, and they don't change their prices, they don't change their cooks or anything, but their business goes downhill, and not because of anything they've done. It's just a change of times. Just unfortunate. Or you could have a good horse and buggy shop, you know, and all of a sudden the automobiles came in the picture. I don't care how good you made your horse and buggy. But you have kept an amazing pace, though, with what people want. Yes, yes, yes, we have. So you must have had some feelers out there, too. We have, and we've got a lot of sales reps that feed in, they say, well, that's good, that's bad, and we run it through them, you know, and we make a lot of models that we never make, you know, because they say, well, so-and-so made that 20 years ago, or so-and-so made that, you know, and it didn't click. And everything that we've made has not clicked either. The important thing to do is to get out of it, you know. Your first licking is the best licking. You have to feel it enough to understand it. And we've had a lot of loyal people, like Einer Wall was just superman. And we've had that throughout. So it's been a family business then? Super people. It's been a family business, right. It has been. So when you came in in 1941, you came in on the sales division. And I had charge of the sales and the sales people, the sales personnel and so forth, and got the work when we had to get work, and also the toy business. And I retired in December of 81. And I have nothing to do with the company anymore. And Einer probably told you that, that I have nothing to say, but they're paying me off, you know, as best they can, as per agreement. So you enjoy your retirement? Yes, very much so. I went to the blind center today, we had a meeting, you know. I'm in growth enterprise, which is handicapped kids. So you are civic-minded and so forth? Very much so. I play a lot of golf, and we have a place up the lake, and we go fishing a lot. The wife and I both love to fish, and I love to clean fish. She likes that part, I suppose. Yes, yes, you know, she likes it, that I like to clean the fish. My one uncle, I think it's in here, Steena and Carl, and there were seven brothers, and they fished for a living over in the old country before they had motors, you know, they used to row out. The sad part was that every time they caught fish, everybody caught fish, so the price wasn't any good. Of course, when they didn't catch any fish, well, the prices would be high, but they wouldn't have anything. And that's about the way life goes. So you have the fishing instinct in you then? Oh, yes. I've been fishing since I was a little tyke. They always took me along, you know. So your parents, now, when they came here, were you brought up in the Swedish language as much as the English, I suppose? Yes. In fact, when I was brought to school, I turned around and I ran home because I couldn't understand what the teacher was saying. We had never talked in English. Because we're a foreign country. Yes, right. And that isn't right either. You know, we see that the Mexican people want us to put a Spanish language in. In a lot of places, a lot of states have got Spanish, and I think that's wrong. I think they should learn the language of the country. I am grateful, however, now that I can understand Swedish, I can write Swedish, and I can read Swedish. Is that through your parents then? Through my parents, yes. So they set it up? Oh, sure. The sad part is, you know, we don't use it enough. If you don't use it. But maybe they did the right thing, though, because they didn't know too much English. They could have mixed it up. No, no. I understand that. And, of course, after I started sixth grade, they took me back to school right away. And they said, well, you've got to learn the language. Of course, you know, when you're young, you can learn things very fast. Did the teacher tell you not to speak Swedish at home? No, I don't recall that. I don't recall that at all. But I think what changed the thing, I married a girl that wasn't Swedish. Oh, they'd say, Catherine, you can't understand what we're saying. And we got together prior to that time. We always talked Swedish, and we'd answer in English. If they talked Swedish, we'd answer in English, you know. So your wife picked up some Swedish, too, then? Oh, yes. Yes, she's understanding. Is she born in Rockford? Yes, she was born in Rockford, too. And Colvin, is he English or Scottish? English, no, he was English and German, and I don't know what all. But she was born here? Yes. Yes, she was. Comes from a large family, nine children. What did your mother say then when you had a non-Swedish date? My mother, my father, my brother, and my sister lived with us for a year and a half. I bought ten lots when I was a kid. You bought ten lots? Yes, for $40 apiece. That's $400. Well, you know, I worked since I was nine years old, peddled newspapers and so forth. And my uncle knew a fellow that liked to drink at Christmas time. And he says, Have you got any money? My uncle said, Well, I got a little over $400. In those days, you used to give people a calendar. You'd get a dollar, you know, for various people, give you a dollar. And with that money, I put it in the bank. Well, I bought the ten lots. Then I found out they all had tax judgments against them, and I didn't even know what a tax judgment was. There were no house buildings on them? No, no, no, no, no buildings. So I went to the fellow that had the tax judgments, and he was an old preacher. And when he found out that I was just a young kid, and I didn't even know what a tax judgment was, he said, Well, I'll sell them back to you for what I paid for them. And I don't know, $10, $12, $15 a piece, you know. So I paid for the tax judgments so that I had them cleared. But I built the house where my wife-to-be, so we never paid rent. We've always had something. So built the house and did the plumbing and the wiring and so forth in the house. Then I shoved a pipe through and gave my dad the lot next door. And they finally got a house. And my sister still lives there. My mother and dad are gone. My sister is still alive. I saw her yesterday. And she's up in years, I don't know, 69 years of age and can't get around too well. And that was after the Depression you did this? Oh, yes, yes. I did this. I built the house in 1930. I was married in 1939. I built the house in 1938 before I was married. So you had good planning structure. Well, in a way, I've been lucky. Was this your father that brought it in to you or did you? No, I think it was my uncle that gave me the insight. And Dave Nyberg, the Nylint, he was the one that said, well, have you got any money? So I said, well, I've got $400. That's when I bought the lots. Oh, my golly, the dog is gone. Ah! Wait, wait, wait. I think. Excuse me. Let me see. The dog never does this. There was a church camp right behind and the people would come up and talk to him. He wouldn't recognize who he talked to. So he bought a place on the other side of the lake. He bought two lots. And after he bought the lots, he built a house on it. And just when he built the house, he called me over and he says, you know, you're going to buy the lot next to me. I said, okay. He said, I'll sell it to you for the same price I paid for it. So I've had the lot since 1952. And I built a house on it a couple of years before I got retired. So we go up there. My wife and I still play golf. We go up there after Thursdays. Thursday through Monday we go up there fishing. So that's your schedule. Yeah, well, it's only 50 miles away so it doesn't take very long to go up there. Your parents now, you're dead when did he die? In 1960. So he sold your company and prospered. Yes, yes. Did he help you out too? No, he couldn't. He couldn't. He had a large family and, you know. I mean in the plant. No, no, no, he didn't. He had his hands full at Sunstrance running the planter. You know, in those days, on 7 o'clock meant you'd be to work at 6.30, oil your machine up and you get all those things strapped down and you push the button. That isn't the way they do things today. Can you be precise? Well. And on the time? In those days I think they did things differently than they do today. So he was a union man then being at Sunstrance? No, they didn't have a union at that time. The union came in after Dad was there. Because they was one of the strongest. Yes, right. They still are. Yes, yes, they still are. That came in when they bought Sunstrance adding machine and they added a lot of other operations to their. How have they affected the rest of the industry in Rockford? There are so many non-union. How have they been able to keep a union? Well, my feeling, you know, we had a union at the shop from 1941 until 1949. And they said they were going to give everybody a dollar more in pay if they joined the union. So we said, well, we can't afford that. And we petitioned the government because we'd have a, this is 1949, and we'd been in toys since 1946. We'd have a production worker run a machine for a couple of hours and then maybe a tool and die maker would run that same machine and only do some different type of work on it for the balance of the day. And they said that you either got to represent all of our people or none of our people. And the government threw the union out. The union tried to get back in 1954, and I think they only got 18 votes at that time. And, of course, my feeling of the thing is that management years ago swung the pendulum too far. It wasn't fair to the workers in many cases. Now the union swung the pendulum too far. They've got wage structures way too high, and I think unions are losing out right now. This is my feeling. I don't know how they're going to resolve the thing. Unions are a good thing for certain type of management that aren't fair to the people. I just feel that a lot of places they'd be better off with a union and there are a lot of places they'd be better off without a union. Like Rockford Products, now, is that the old Swan Hillman's place? Yes, yes. Didn't the worker take the over? Did you know Swan Hillman, by the way? No, I never met him, but I know who he was. I know him very well. And Warren Lidbetter, the fellow that became the president after Swan died, is a very good friend of mine. He's helping them find another president now. He was fired, I understand, the one that was there last week. That's right. Since the members took it over. They took over the whole plant? They took over the whole plant. Some years back. Yeah. I had a brother-in-law that was an assistant sales manager there until he died. He's got a son that works there, and he's still working there. There's been a change in Rockford. When we saw the woodworking, pattern-making go, and we saw the furniture all go, we said, well, geez, what's going to take its place? Well, metalworking came in. The unfortunate part of war came on, and we've been in the metalworking industry, but we relied too heavily upon machine tool. We thought they'd go on forever. Some of the biggest industries in our town are no longer here. Like National Lock, they say. No longer here. Devastating buildings. They had 5,000 people working there. I knew all the people there, including the old guy that started it and all the way through, Strangquist. I knew all the presidents. We did a lot of work for National Lock. I see. Like subcontractors. Yes, yes. And I saw the Rockford products. They went on strike here last week. No, they didn't go on a strike. But didn't they go and make a size outside? Well, they did for one day. Wasn't that the same thing as going against themselves? Well, they were, and they realized it. They went back to work on Mondays. They were working all week this week. I saw Ward in one of the places I was at at noon on Tuesday. He was with a couple of people. He's trying to find another president for the firm. The worst thing they can do now is join a union. They'd break that company because none of the people on the buyout from Rexnord, they didn't have enough money. They just borrowed money, little money put up. They borrowed from this person, that person, and maybe they had $500,000, and the rest is all borrowed money for the buyout, in my opinion. So there was going down, I suppose, the order to sell these things. Well, yes, I think so. High interest. But I think there's always a demand for that type of product. My camcorder is doing real well. Alcatool is doing real well. Their statements are good. One of the fellows that was the president of Alcatool used to live right over here, third house, right straight through, Roy Jacobson. It's now run by a fellow by the name of Packard. Jack Packard do I know quite well. But everything comes with time. Timing sometimes is wrong. So when the furniture industry buckled under, was that because you think they didn't have a tool fast enough, or were they too outmoded? No, I think they moved to cheaper labor, and where the trees were at, down south, they moved south. Grand Rapids and Rockford were number one and two in making furniture, and they moved south, yes. So they never came back again? No, never came back again. Pattern makers who used to work in woodworking, when the war came on, they went to metalworking patterns, but they relied too long on machine tools alone. And unions have driven a lot of companies out, I'm sure of that. Ropers moved out of town. They're down in Georgia, down there. J.I. Case is no longer here, National Lock is no longer here, and it's the union situation. And you take and add up all the Rockford product, when you add up all the fringe benefits and the direct labor, what they're paying, they weren't competitive. You've got to be competitive today. You would think the union would understand it when they put them down? You would think so. You would think so. So that's a... But like your company, you had a workforce that you could handle. In other words, you knew them personally, of course. I knew all of them personally. You could talk to them. Yeah, but you see, there's a certain element of when you get too big, there's no way you can stay on top of it. You've got to let somebody do it who's really got his heart in it, you know. And that makes a difference. We ran about, well, at the height, we were running about 400 people. 400? Mm-hmm. At the height, yeah. And you could keep the union up? Yeah, yeah. Yes. Well, we try to treat the people the way we like to be treated ourselves, you know. When we die, we're all equal. You can't take anything with you. But to run the company, you need pretty good leverage. I mean, you've got to have some reserves. The union will look at the money laying, hanging around there. Why don't you give it to us? I mean... Oh, sure, sure. They don't see the necessity to be... But you see that what companies have to do in order to stay abreast with what's going on is you've got to modernize. You've got to constantly modernize, get new equipment. Remember, we used to run, get a blank from Detroit and a window, a punched-out window, put it in there, we'd make a blank, and then you'd punch it out. Today, the dies are 92, 96 inches long, and there are eight or nine stations on them, and a completed part comes out. When we first started out, we'd probably punch that in the blanker, and it'd go into a basket, and the basket gets pushed over here, and we'd have as much indirect labor as we had in direct labor. Indirect would be as great as direct labor, pushing these baskets around and feeding the girls to work for the secondary. Now, you've got to update, update constantly. And that's why a lot of plants... We've got one plant here in town that's going to close up, Quaker Oats. And there's dogs, you know, who ever thought a dog would want dry food? They'd want the wet food, you know. It's a big plant out there. Oh, it's a big plant, and it's well-run, and it's well-organized, nothing wrong with the plant at all. But there's no demand. There's no demand. Times change. And somehow they didn't see it. Their marketing people didn't see it. And they can handle what dry stuff they have from some other plant, and they're going to close this plant up. A lot of plants are for sale here in town, in every town. So it seems people are reluctant to keep on going the tradition, and they like to change often. I think younger generation is more apt to change more rapidly. You know, older people, they'll stay together, and younger people, they get divorced, and they go a different pace. The older people, they said, well, how much can I pay down on it, and how fast can I pay for it? The younger people today, they say, how little can I pay down, and how long can I pay, you know? It's just the opposite. You're just pushing it. Yeah. It's a different philosophy. Well, you can see in the record business, they have been changing drastically the last few years. Yes. And you're in the air. You have ideas all the time. Yeah. When you talk about that, I was listening on the radio this morning. I go walking, and I get up at 530 every morning, and I walk out of Cherryville, and I listen to WGN. A woman was saying, I just bought a Betamax for my husband's birthday. And she says, now I can't find anything that I can put in there. And the fellow says, well, what do you mean? Well, I can't find any pictures to go. They all want a VCR. Betamax and VCR, what do you call it? They're fighting one another, and certain areas you can't get the Betamax. You've got to get VCR, you know? So that's a... You know, it's a case of just being on top of it. Well, changing all the time. Your mother and father, they joined the church when they came here, of course. Yes, right. Which one then? The Evangelical Free Church. Free Church. And we were all brought up in that church. My sister and my oldest brother still belong there. When I got married, my wife belonged to a church on the west side of the river, and I belonged to the Evangelical Free Church, so we joined Bethesda Covenant Church. Oh, back in 1940, I guess 1940 or 1941. Just the one on Washington? On Washington Street, right. So your parents, were they missionsvender from Sweden then? Yes, yes, yes. Yeah, right. And my aunt and uncle, you know, they were devout. They were the Free Church too. So they were active. Yeah, right. Every week then, belonging to different societies. Right, right. They didn't join any other groups or Swedish organizations, like temperance or? No, no, they weren't joiners. I don't know. They didn't belong to anything. I remember I joined the Welles Shriners, and I remember I became a Mason first. And the one that recommended I become a Mason was the owner of the Woodrow Governor, Earl Martin. He says, you're going to become a Mason. He said, I'm going to get a poster for you. This is, you know, and we were doing a lot of work for them at that time, so I joined. Well, it's a secretive order, but, you know, if you lived up to all the principles that they believe in, you'd be a real, real good fellow. You'd live a good life if you could live up to all those things. But I'm sure that my mother and my father always felt badly about the fact that I joined that operation. I was never active in it until I retired, and then I just became a clown. All I'm interested in is making kids happy, that's all. This tends to, you know, all the churches are against that organization because it's secret, I suppose. Well, it's secretive. Did you have a lot of Samaritan jobs to work, though, to cripple children? I drive kids into the hospital. They've got a hospital in Oak Park, and I take kids in twice a month. It's the kids that can't afford it, and they need the operations. Some of those people, you know, they've got real problems and real heartaches, and how lucky we are to, you know, and we're looking for people who need their help. And the Shriners, there are many people who have passed on that didn't have any children and they left everything they had to the Shrine operation, and their headquarters is down in Tampa. So I asked Al Monquist, who is the big egg and butter man here in town, you know, I know him very well. I said, I'm concerned. I said, do we have enough to, what happens 50 years from now? Hospitals and nurses and all that. He says, we've got enough from now until kingdom come. We've invested the money very wisely to perpetuate these hospitals from now until kingdom come. And I said, I'm glad to hear that. I'm on a drive to raise money for the blind center. I'm on a drive to a growth enterprise that's handicapped kids too. And, you know, you're sort of good feeling that, well, that's one that we don't have to worry about. There seems to be a very industrial group that came from Sweden, like Al Monquist and Swan Hillman and Ernie Swenson. I knew Ernie. Also he came from Västergötland. And they all made it big. And they started their business like the old deans. They started the business and they started in the depression. Yes, right in the depression. Yeah. And Ruben. Ruben, did you talk to him? Yes. Yes. But he was lucky. He said, if they had been given a loan of 50,000, it was rejected. And it was the best rejection they had in all history. Because they could never have paid it back. Yeah. Well, Ruben's a fine fellow. You know, he gave all the land to the church where the church is built now, the Evangelical church is built. I was a director of the bank, Colonial Bank, where Ruben was instrumental in starting the bank in 1964, Colonial Bank. A long time ago. It's strange though, because it was like gambling. I mean, here he had big national luck to compete with. Yeah. And not big enough, of course. Well, yes, you don't know what goes through their minds, you know. Yeah, you really don't. Sci-2, continuation with Ragnar Klint, Rockford, Illinois. Sci-2. What goes through their minds, you know. Yeah, you really don't. And I remember when they were down on Main Street, they had tough going, but they made it. By national luck, they were in a bad situation, or they were in the depression they were after. Well, yes, they, Keystone bought them, which is a lot of money behind them. And this is after, oh, the Petersons left and so forth. But Keystone bought them, and they had all kinds of money. But during the war years, you know, they were going great guns, national luck wise. But it no longer exists. They're all metal crafters now. Yeah. A floor cleaner business, and moving and storage, and they winded up the whole building. That's right. Maybe it was too big to take the, like a cushion, you know, before going over to production. Well, I don't know. They had a strong union there, too. I suppose the Japanese were starting to make inroads during the 70s and 80s. Well, they were. The toy business became the chip business, you know, anything connected with the chips. The computers, you mean? Well, yeah, the computers and toys with a little chip in it. A lot of companies in the toy business that are no longer around, good companies, good people, you know, but they just weren't, they didn't stay abreast with the times. Times change, and you just can't be the same all the time. You can't live in Florida and tend to your business, too. You've got to be with it. You've got to be with it. That's right. So you are figuring to be in demand, I mean, your products? I think so. Yeah, I think so. They'll always be in there, I think. Their biggest competitor was Tonka up in Mountain, Minnesota, and I know the people very well. Before Tonka, it was a baker manufacturing company, and Lynn Baker used to come by through Rockford, and we'd put them up overnight, you know, on his way to Florida. And we were very friendly with Tonka, and they just recently bought out Ertle. Ertle is owned by Kitty Company, and why they bought them, I don't know. I was surprised that their volume was, I don't know, $87 million, and they bought them for $87 million. Tonka did. But Tonka's gone down to Mexico to make all their plastic, and they brought their stamping plant down there. They've got their headquarters up in Mount, Minnesota yet, but they're down in Mexico. So they moved out then? They moved out everything. And we have our smaller toys made over in Korea. We have a plant over in Korea. The metal plant also? Yeah, yeah. Make the complete toy over in Korea, and the small stuff, because we just couldn't compete against it. The man hours are too expensive to put the assembly in. Well, here again, you know, you take, like Rockford Products were doing a strike because they were going to take 20 minutes to lunchtime. Well, I don't know who pays for lunchtime anymore. They were wrong in setting up that way. You take all the paid holidays. Well, you know, when you figure out what your fringe benefits run and what your direct labor runs, that's part of your overhead. And if you're not competitive, you know, and if they can make the stuff over there and ship it across, the smaller stuff at least, the big bulky stuff, you know, you've got to pay by the bulk, the big bulky stuff they can make. But, you know, you've got the overhead over there, you've got the overhead here, you've got to be on the ball, you've got to know what you're doing. Somebody's got to pay it. That's right, that's right. But the parents today, you know, they're not reluctant to pay $40, $50 for a toy. It's a strange dollar. I just wonder if parents today don't want to give their kids the things they didn't have themselves. It's probably a good philosophy. I don't say they're right in doing that. They spoil the kids. But that's true with most of us is that the things that we did, I can remember as a youngster we didn't have much. We didn't have a big fire truck with letters. No, no, no way, no way. Well, it's interesting also for an adult to play with them. Yes, yes, very much so. But youngsters today, because of the television I think, they want this way out stuff. With guns and everything. Oh, yeah, sure, sure, you know, the stuff that don't make any sense at all. But there seems to be a fading pleasure though. If you have a fire truck, not as dirty built as Steve's, it will last for two or three generations. You're going to hand it down, right. But the important thing is you've got to weather the storm when this stuff is hot, when they go on this other route. There will be some lean air standing between them. Yes, right. Because you can see, I think, the garage chairs. There you can see the next year what they discard for 25 cents. That's right. And that's usually the plastic toys. That's right. Because they're tired of them. That's right, that's right. When they sit on the counter, you know, they look good, you know. So they're half price for one-third the cost, you know. So they'll go that route. So your parents, did they go back to Sweden? They went back to Sweden once when I was four years old. So my brother was six years old. My sister was just a baby, and my younger brother wasn't born. They went back once, and my mother was going to go after Dad died, and she took sick and died the next year. So she never got to Sweden. No, the one sister, Hedvig, Dave's sister, my mother's sister, she was in this country for quite some time, and her husband died in this country, and she went back to Sweden. And really she's the only one, and then her children live in Sweden. So, you know, we hired a driver. We went to Gothenburg, and we were only about an hour and a half away from Gothenburg to where she lived, and she lived in a typical small farm. And that driver, who was a college boy, he knew the English language, and I didn't need any help, and he sat alongside of me, and we sat for six hours at the table eating. My poor wife, she didn't understand what the women were trying to say to her. They tried to talk. It just doesn't go together when you don't understand. It was a hard introduction to Sweden. Yeah, you better believe it. And your first time to Sweden, did you go back? I went back, yes. Four years old. I was four years old, and the next time I was back I had been married 25 years. Yes. You went back to both places where your mother was born and... Yes, right. And four widows. But I saw my aunt, Hedvig, so memories. What did she say? You were asking about your mother. Well, not much, not much. Her children, you know, they knew the English language and all that, and the interpreter was a college boy who sat next to me, you know, and they bring on the food and the food and the food, and the toilets were, you know, you had to go outside. It was all paper and all that, but it was the old outhouse, you know, and the old two-seater. Oh, golly. It was a long time. She lived to be 92. Wonderful, wonderful age. Do you have any contact with Sweden now? No, my sister does, but I don't. You have no one that... No, my sister writes. Oh, yes, I got cousins over there, but I don't write. How about your children? Are they interested in the background? Not really. My son's a doctor at the Swedish American Hospital. Here in Rockford? In Rockford, yes. And my daughter just recently got married a year ago, and she lives in Northfield, and she's a psychiatrist. So they could care less about, you know, Sweden. I tell the stories about when Dad and I, during the Depression, we used to run a set line in the rivers. There were three set lines we had, and I carried a carpool and a gunny sack, and we walked because we didn't have a car. In Rock River? In Rock River, right. And the kids, they get the violin out, you know. There's Dad again, had it again. So I don't tell that story anymore. So there was plenty of fish in Rock River years ago. You better believe it. And we used to, I remember we used to go crabbing up by the old poor farm. We used to seine for crabs. Kräfter. Kräfter, yeah. Yeah, and we had a place. We borrowed some land. We had dill planted. I remember every Saturday and Sunday, we'd catch a lot of crabs. We'd have the whole relation over, you know. All we'd do, all Sunday long, we'd eat those crabs. How often did you do it? Just in August? Well, we did it when the season was on, you know. Oh, there was a season for them? Yeah, well, yes, right. It was in the fall, though, in August. Right, right, yeah. So there was a big feast then. Yes, right. The Swedish customs coming. You better believe it. Did your parents talk much about Sweden? Yes, they did. And I suppose we as youngsters, we're typical youngsters. The parents failed to realize, I think, that Sweden is the size of the state of Illinois in size and in population at that time. And most of the people had the same ideas, the same customs and all that, you know. And here in the United States, we're a melting pot. They would always say that would never happen to Sweden. Well, maybe it's true, maybe it's correct, you know. We never spoke up against our parents, however, never. You couldn't discuss anything in Wisconsin? Well, we would, out of respect to the parents. Both mother and dad, what do you call it, they had a hard life, but I think they had a good life. And they were religious people, so you didn't question anything? No, no, no. And, you know, it's like we'd walk to early Yurlita church, you know. We'd walk down from where we were, even when we were renting a house. This was during the Depression. I was maybe 14 years of age. We'd walk to Yurlita, you know, that'd be 6 o'clock in the morning, through the snow and everything else, you know, kids. And you'd see somebody there in church with little ones there. But they made it, not the day the kids, what do you call it, they laugh at you, you talk about that. So it was a tradition, they liked to have implants in the children. Right. So you remember Gustav Jansson then? Oh yes, yes, he was a preacher. He was here preaching sometime? He was just coming to his end at that time. Reverend Elmer Johnson was the preacher that I know quite well. My aunt cooked out of Camp Epworth. I studied, I thought I was going to become a minister at one time. And I went to prayer meetings, even in high school, I went to prayer meetings every Monday night. So you were active then in the movement for the church? Yes, right, yes. But you didn't meet your wife there? No, no. That was strange, you didn't meet any girls? No, I met her at work, at a crane company. I see. Yeah, yeah. So now you've got an American wife. Yeah, yeah. But your parents, they adjusted to her? Oh yeah, they loved her, you know. Got along real well. And we'll soon have 50 years behind us. And now you can enjoy the fruits of life. That's right, that's right, you know. Every day is a good day, just look at it right. You had an open heart surgery, you said, 80 years ago? Fifteen. Fifteen years ago. It'll be 16 years ago this November 18th. I went to Cleveland Clinic, they have it done. They didn't have any specialists in the towns like they have them today. They've got cardiologists and they've got heart specialists that do the work. They probably would do just as good a work as they did in Cleveland. And they were successful from the beginning? I think so, I've had some trouble, you know. I take pills and so forth, but no, I'm still here. Travel and fish? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And do a lot of civic work? Yes, that I do, you know. I can't ask for any better. No, no, I've got no complaints. And that's the end of the interview.