 This is cassette two, this continuation with David Valentine, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So they put you down for twelve then? They put you down for some stocks too then, or notes? Well, I paid for six of them. Cash. John sent over, I started a furniture store then on 7th Street in that old building there. With an uncle of mine, he was after me for a year to do that. And he come over, John sent this guy come over from John to collect for the other six you know. And I'd sell him something. And he came over again, I sold him six lambs. He said I wouldn't go back to that guy again to collect. He said because every time I go there he sells me something, and he never pays me. And I found out afterwards that that stock I was buying was some of the stock that John had bought, see? So I only paid six shares. So what happened with him? So what happened then? Well, that's all there was to it. He didn't come back anymore. He didn't come back. And John had to keep that, I guess. And what happened during the Depression with them? They were still good? False. Yeah? Well, they went on? Oh yeah, went back. They didn't take enough money. I told them that was what they kept saying it was a civic affair, you know. Well, you've been an experienced traveler, you know, you've been in a lot of hotels. Was there really a call for a big hotel in Rockford at that time? Oh, there was no. They didn't have enough room. They were too big? Yeah. Too. Who had the idea? See, Roy, or this fellow Hall, was a county up, or a, wait a minute, architect for a hotel. For all of the county of Chicago. He made millions. And he did all these homes for Belgium, you know, these collapsible homes. He was a Cook County architect. He had about 20 guys working for him. I was in the Swedish club one time. In Chicago? Yeah. And he was entertaining 20 of the E-Lite from Sweden for a month. It was costing them at least a thousand dollars a day. And he come over to me, you see, I didn't drink. And they had beer and everything. It was dry then. And Canadian whiskey. And he come over. And this guy had bought the streetcar company, this other guy, in town. And he got drunk and threw his checks on the table. I picked up a couple of checks. One of them was worth 50, 60 thousand dollars. I told him, put those in your pocket for heaven's sake. Well Hall came over to me. And he said, come on, Valley. He says, have a drink. I said, I don't drink. He said, have a drink and be married for tomorrow you may die. I said, I don't want to die tomorrow. I don't drink. And I said another thing. I drove Wilson and John into the market. I had a brand new Oldsmobile. And I said, I don't drink. Well he said, he drank himself to death, you know. Here he was making about a million dollars a year in those days. He was a Cook County architect. Just think of that. So they had a rough living. Huh? They had a rough living. Yeah. He had these 20 people from Sweden. It was entertaining. What, did he have anything to do with Farr's Hotel? Oh yeah. He was the architect. He was the one. He put it out. He took it out on stock. Was he a Swede? Oh, sure. Hall? Yeah. He was a Swede. Oh. Oh. Oh, what was his first name again? I don't remember. But they expected Rockford to grow then during the 30s, I suppose. Oh yeah. See, but, but, they had, I don't know, I forget what the, it cost over a million. I think it was a million six hundred thousand. At that time? Yeah. And that was too much money to invest. And I don't know, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah, and that was too much money to invest. So what happened with Levin Faust now? Did he go under completely or what? Yeah, he. Faust. Just went above it. I think he put all the money he had in there. See that was, at that time, he was at the mechanics universal joint. He was a wealthy man, Faust. Huh? Faust was a wealthy man. Oh, yeah. But I think he didn't have any money when he passed out. I think that, what's this guy that had the airplane? Lockford. Haskell. Huh? Yeah. He married Faust's daughter, I think. That's right. Yeah. Uh-huh, I see. So when those people met now, like P.A. Peterson, Brolin, Faust, John Wester, what did they do then? Did they talk business all the time? I don't know. They didn't play golf, for instance? No. They were not golf players? No, no. It was all business? Business, yeah. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. So you witnessed some of those business meetings. You were there. Well, I never went to one of their business. Only when I had their furniture store. But I'm amazed over the kind of money they were handling. You know, $50,000 to under $50,000. Yeah. Well, I never went to the, I, I, I, that meeting I went out there. I sat in the car while they went in. But he was happy when he came back. Yeah. He took cats with me. They even smiled at us. And John says he always gets happy when he cites a newt. He called it a newt, newt, instead of a newt. Did those people talk mostly Swedish between themselves? Or did they talk English? No, they talked English. They did? Yeah. Well, like Brulino, for instance, he was born here. I don't know. He was born, he was fluent in English. Yeah. And Swedish. The Swedish I talk is that cheap, seven street cheap. You learned Swedish in your home, though? Huh? Did your parents talk Swedish in your home? The only place I learned Swedish, Swedish was in a clothing store. I worked in a clothing store for a while. So your parents never spoke it? Oh, occasionally they'd say something in Swedish. But generally, they didn't. No, they spoke English. My grandmother, you know, I've got a picture of her upstairs. I used to read the obituaries to her. And she'd say, what's this Swedish? I said, no. She said, ah, let him go. And they'd run up on the door, you know. We had a lot of people going from door to door, so. And she'd go to the door and say, knife and fork and table and chair, and I don't care. And I'd say, what's there? For grandma, that thing is just some of it, she said. That's the only English I know. She'd just say, knife and fork and table and chair, and I don't care. And then she'd shut the door. Oh, God. So you had to talk in Swedish to her then? Yeah. So she lived with your grandma? Your grandma? Yeah. Was they on your father's side or your mother's? My mother's. Mother's. So but down on 7th Street now, that was all Swedish, though, in stores and? Oh, yeah. You had to talk Swedish there? Yeah. You know, I sold 17 suits one day. In one day? Yeah. The Swedes had come over here on car loads, you know. And I'd say, if they didn't know the cost of some of these guys, know how they were in the cost of some of these. And I'd take them over and show them a blue surge suit. Wool, you know, wool. They'd buy it right away. So you got to be heavy. Yeah. Well, they wanted wool. They were trying to sell some, you know, that they'd have racked for a long time and maybe gray or something. And the cotton or something. They didn't take that? Yeah. And I'd take them back and show them a blue wool suit. Boot, they'd buy it right away. So Pete says to me, I said, from now on, I want a dollar skiff on every suit that I sell. He was paying me $5 a day on Saturday. I was working there when I'd be on the road, you know, and I'd come home. You worked extra in the toy store? Yeah, on the Saturday. And he said, no, he wouldn't do that. So I quit. Well, a few weeks, he called me up, said, come on back. He said, I'll give you a dollar. So you were a good salesman then. Yeah. You knew how to take the Swedes, huh? I knew how to take everybody, I guess. They say I was a good salesman. I thought I was a terrible one. This clothing store, was they owned by a Swede? Oh, yeah, Peterson. Peterson. Yeah. So you didn't have in your mind to start your own business, I mean, on 7th Street when you were such a good salesman? No, no. You didn't like that? No. Well, I have so many faults that I didn't have any patience much. I like to work in a store, though, waiting on people. But to work in a factory, it just about killed me. 10 hours a day was like a- Closed in. Yeah. Like putting six months in jail. Yeah, by selling 17 suits in a day, you would make a killing there. $5 a day, and that's $17 in commission. Yeah. Well- But he wouldn't let you have it? Huh? He wouldn't let you have that? No. A dollar a suit, no? Until I left, then he called me and said he would. But I always made about $7 or $8 extra. And I made it on the Swedes that came in, blue shirt suits. So when they came from Sweden, they had clothing that was not up to snuff here in this country. In other words, they want to get American immediately. Did you sell Spat? Yeah. Were they popular then when you were- Yeah, they were quite good. In the 20s? Yeah. Was they- they were just for styling, or was to keep the- Styling. Styling. Yeah. And they were different colors? Yeah. White and red and- Green. But the immigrants from Sweden, did they really buy those when they came into the store? If they had any money, yeah, but you see, they all wanted to- PA used to meet them at the furniture factories. See, when my wife's dad and their people came over, the Swedes, they got into Philadelphia, all they had between five or six or seven of them was $0.10. And they bought ginger slaps and gave it to Rockford. And PA met them and gave them a job at a house they lived in. So he took care of that? Yeah, he took care of it. But I remember, you see, me and his dad, he was a cigar maker to start with. Here in Rockford? Then he got to be a machine carver. And they lived at 114 South Rockford Avenue. He was a nice man, real nice man. Your parents, they belonged to a church here in Rockford? Oh, yeah, the Zion Lutheran. The Zion Lutheran. That's a picture of them right there when they were married. Oh, I see. See those two little ones? They married there. And you went to Sunday school there, and you were confirmed there too then? No, I was confirmed at the Trinity Lutheran. Trinity Lutheran? Yeah. Why did you change over? Because of the language? I don't know why. Well, they had all Swedish sermons, and I guess in the Zion Lutheran. So you went over to the? I can't understand. Good Swedish. I can't understand that. I could. You know, the good Swedish, the kind of Swedish I talked was just a little bit. They learned, you know, from the people visiting the store. Yeah. How long did you continue in the clothing store to sell? Oh, off and on. I worked at C.F. Henry when I was about 15. I worked at a drug store when I was about 14 for $2 a week for 11 months. And then a guy offered me $4 a week at the Rockford Illustrated Company. See, my brother was a full engraver. He was a good one too. He did color photography towards the last. He was one of the best. Well, he did. Was he a photographer then here in Rockford? Yeah. He was? He worked for the Rockford Illustrated Company for years. That's what Knudsen had. He owned my cabinet. Yeah. Did you join any other organizations there, like Lyron, Svea Sönders, the Swedish? No, I never belonged. I joined the Moose Club one time for six weeks and I dropped the key in the river walking home. I never went back there. But you were traveling so much, though. You didn't belong to the Elks and the Moose. See, right now, I quit the Lutheran Church too. I went into Christian Science. Oh, you did? Yeah. There's more spiritual understanding there. And you were not any drinker. What? You didn't join the Temperance Movement. I didn't join anything. No? Nothing at all? I joined the Moose Club. Six months? Yeah. Or about six weeks. Six weeks? And they took an oath there, you know. I wore all this nice oath that I had. Gee, I think this was a... I went downstairs, they slot machines, they were playing poker and drinking. Was there more drinking during the Prohibition, you think? Huh? Was there more drinking during the Prohibition, you think? Oh, no. The government says there was... Even with all the whiskey they made in the United States during Prohibition, they made more in Peoria alone. That was a lot of bologna. It was? Oh, sure. It was Prohibition. But it was poison, half of it. It was bad? I went to the market. There'd be about four or five salesmen together and they'd buy a case of whiskey. Well, it'd be $12, $15 a quart, you know. Would they pay that much for it? Yeah. They'd ship in, you know, and buy a whole case, 12 bottles, for $150. I remember one night I went to a party there and this bootlegger, this Italian was there. Everybody admired the guy. They introduced me. I refused to shake hands with him. I mean, after all, he was breaking the law. Oh, he's a wonderful man. He's got 22 suits at the... Such and such a hotel. He's got another 40 suits at the Palmer House. I said, that don't mean anything to me. So he was regarded as a good guy? Yeah, because he had everything. So there was a bad law that they put in? Oh, I don't know. I was the only one. There was one in Prohibition in our whole family. You were the only one? Yeah. That's how it got to be, much better. How about politics now here in Rockford? How about politics here in Rockford now? I don't know. Well, I mean, you went into the service, the First World War. Yeah. But there were some Swedes that didn't want to go. Oh. They were sent to Bridewell Prison in Chicago. Oh, that's... Did you remember anything about that? No, I don't. It was 1917. No. You remember anything about that? Were you a Republican or a Democrat? Huh? Were you a Republican or a Democrat? I voted an unpartisan ticket all my life. All your life? Yeah. I never met a Democrat or Republican or a Socialist. But I vote for the man. If I think he's a good man, I don't care where he comes from. Did you vote for Hallström? Oh, yeah. What was he as a mayor? I don't know. Some people say he was a good one. He gave Rockford a sidewalk and everything. Yeah. I think he was as good as any of them. But he was a Socialist, though. Oh, yeah. Well, I don't know. With all the people starving to death here and everything, I don't know if Sweden has the best rule after all. See, I said that the other day to a man. Well, he said there's more suicides in Sweden than there is anyplace in the world. And Norway, I think it is. I said, I can't have suicide. God is life. You see, the beauty of Christian science is that it explains it so beautifully. God is life. God is all in all. It says that in the Scripture. You see, there's nothing more than all, is there? God is love. And in Revelation, God is love. And he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. You see, the kingdom of God cometh not on observation. Neither shall ye say, Lo here, or Lo there. The kingdom of God is within you. See? And that's what we believe. We are the children of God. The Spirit itself, bear witness with our spirit, Paul says, that we are the children of God. And if children of God, heirs of God. And if heirs of God, we're joint heirs with Christ. And Christ is the truth. We are the children of God. Behold, what a matter of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God. The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, thou are we the sons of God. And it doth not yet appear what we shall be. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall purify ourselves, even as he is pure. Now that's the third chapter of John. You see, it explains the Bible so beautifully. This is the new church you joined in? Yeah, I joined the Christian side. How many years ago did you... I joined when I was about 33 years old. The science church? Yeah. Oh, I see, that many years ago. You didn't like the Lutherans? You didn't like the Lutheran teaching? I liked the Lutheran, and I said, Luther said, you know, I'm weary of the world, and the world is weary of me. The parting will be easy. And Melanchthon is, you know, muddy, he said, old Adam is too strong for young Melanchthon. I think there's a lot to Luther, but I think that Christian science explains the scripture better. It's a higher, more, you know... So your family joined that church, the whole family then? Oh, no, I'm the... You're the only one? Yeah, and my sister Vera. But not your wife? I only got one sister left, that's Doris in San Francisco. But how about your children and wife then? Did they stay with the Lutheran church? No, no, she was a reader of the Christian science church. Your wife? Yeah. Yeah, you see, when I married Mae, she had heart trouble. Everybody said, you're crazy to marry a girl with heart trouble. Well, she was healed of that. Yeah. So when did she die? Well, she was 76. 76. So you bought this house, though. She died. You don't die. God is life. Yeah, but then what they said... Now listen to the scripture. Paul says, for the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death. Yeah. See, there's no such thing as death. No, but they what they say. God is life. Yeah. God is life. You remember what Grandma said, if it's not Swedish, skip it. That's all immortal sense that says that. What did your grandma say about the scripture? Did you read the... Did she read it? She was very religious. She was? She and I got along together just beautiful. There was some, and there's some. Did you ever realize how many times the word truth is in the Bible? No. You shall know the truth. If you continue in my word, then are you my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Now what is truth? Pilate said to Jesus, what is truth? But he didn't wait long enough for him. The truth is the Christ that comes from God to destroy incarnate error. Yeah. See, let this mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus. That's the scripture. But the... Huh? If you had discussed it with the white men, they would not believe you. Oh, no. We are all different. Yeah, but you see, this fellow, this one fellow Irving, had been over in Jerusalem. I said when he came back to believe there was a man like Jesus, there's no doubt about it. He said that. He said that. Oh, sure. There's no doubt about it. He raised the dead even. Says, go ye into all the world. Do likewise. Heal the sick. Raise the dead. Freely you have received. Freely give. See, we're all supposed to be healers. Well, you are over 90 years of age now. You were born 1895. Yeah, 91 I am. 91 now. What do you think about the world? Is it getting better or worse? Something. You are still pretty sharp. Right now, it's in a terrible state of thought, I think. You think so? Oh, yeah. They don't have any idea of the truth. They just, their living material needs are fake money, money, money, money, money. Oh, and the lesson today, it's right in the lesson today. I was just reading in the Bible, it says that this man says, he asked Jesus, he said, know the truth, he said, that this brother will divide the inheritance with me. And Jesus said, it isn't the money or anything that counts, it's what you think, the truth. Yes. But if we go back now to John Wester's time, if you had said that you'd divide the money with me, what would he have said? Oh, they were all money, money, money. You see what happened to them? They were the same back in the 20s. That broil they had in the north, that stuff that they owned, house of salt and everything, Arkansas. It was most of it worth eight million. Eight million. Yeah. The last time I saw broil then, he was uncrating oranges at the Highland. And they were paying him a dollar a day. Yeah. How did he take a break like that? I mean, there was a tremendous, devastating blow to him. How did he take it? I don't know. Bob comes over and we go to, Saturdays we go out to have Swedish pancakes every morning. I don't criticize him or anything. I'm no judge of people. I feel sorry for him. It was just too much. Yeah. Don't you think he was... I remember when Ed Brolin came out to the factory one day, and I think it was $240,000. That's when Elliot Fisher bought Sunstrand. And Brolin got 240 grand. Today that was like two million today. And Ed was showing it to the... But he was putting it right into something else. He bought a piano. An organ factory in Rock Island, and he started the ornamental brass company. So he was not afraid to put the money in. So what he actually did, he put a lot of people to work. Yeah. But Oakland, Hoagland I mean, he owned a lock company. At that time, that was the greatest supplier, it's the biggest factory in the United States. He fired all those guys that went in business. They were poor. You know. So there was a lot of competition. I told him that one day. I said, you're just creating competition for yourself. He fired Swan Hillman. Swan, you know. He was the one with the... We were quite friendly together. When Swan first came out of here, he lived on Rural Street, and an upstairs flat. I got him a dining room suited to wholesale. I got him a clock afterwards. I got him a cocktail table. He lived in that big house there. On State Street? Yeah. I got him a cocktail table for buying. It was a cherub in the center and all carved. It was an abortion. It had no period or anything, just a lot of carving. And this ventriloquist, what was his name? He was a... He and his daughter came out to visit. Bergen came out to visit him. Edgar Bergen? Yeah. Was that Swan Hillman? Yeah. When Swan was living there, he came to visit Swan. How were they... They were not related. Huh? How were they friends? I don't know. I don't know. Clocked them for him, or a table. No, I didn't. I picked out that one, the one that was carved. Did he gave it to Edgar Bergen? No, he didn't give it. He just bragged about it. Bragged about it. I wonder how they were... their friendship. I don't know. But Swan used to go to General Motors, you know. He'd rent a boat for the weekend, cost him thousands of dollars. He got a lot of business from General Motors. General Motors. Yeah. He was a wealthy man. Yeah. He'd go to see the Detroit... I don't know what they called it, Detroit Motor Club, or... I mean, where they have all those boats and sailboats. He'd rent a boat out there. This customer happened to have my name in Detroit. He invited me out there. But Swan used to rent a boat. They called the General Motors guys out, you know. Oh, I see. Everything was tax exempt. You can take it off the tax, you know. Like a business. Yeah, that's right. So, and he didn't have anything when he came here, Swan Hillman? No. He just came... He was a wrestler, you know. He was? Yeah. Oh, you remember that? No, I don't remember, but somebody told me that. He was strong, you know. He was a very powerful man. So he bought that big house down on State Street? Yeah. Well, the undertaker built it first. Olsen. Oh, he built it? Yeah, then Swan bought it. And Swan put in. That house cost over... When he built it, Olsen, it cost over a hundred grand. At that time? Yeah. And Swan spent another 50, 60,000 on swimming, boogling, all that stuff he put in. So he... So he got his money after the Depression, then? Oh, yeah. I went out there one day. You see, during the... During the Second World War, Wyman went into... Was that the... Or was... Yeah. Wyman went into making cargo, and they couldn't make tables. And I was selling advertising. And I went out to Swan, and he bought a hundred billfolds from me right off the bat. And he showed me a check. He had an old billfold there that was all chopped and ripped. So I gave him a new one. And he showed me a check then for a million dollars. He said, Valerie, he said, you know, I thought when I was a millionaire, I had a check for that million. It was a canceled check, but he showed it to me. He said, I thought I'd be happy. He said, the best time I ever had in my life was when I was making it. Is that what he said? Yeah. Oh. So he was... And he had only one daughter. Yeah, he had a son also. He had a son and a daughter. But they didn't continue with the business, though? No. So he sold out. Huh? Did he sell out then, or what happened? I don't know what happened. I think he just passed out. His factory's shut today. Yeah. How come it's going along good? It's going good. So what did put Rockford on the feet then? Was it Roosevelt, or was it a Second World War? Well, I think it was a Second World War. They made it prosper. Yeah. All the factories were working. Yeah. So you were in the war now, Second World War. What kind of work were you doing then? What line were you working in? I was in the furniture business. You were still on the road? Yeah, but I quit, you see. Weiman went in to make cargo butter. They got a government contract, and I started selling advertising for about a year. I see. So you didn't work for them? You know, I had about, oh, I must have had about 25 grand I had saved up then. And when that period come along when they quit making furniture, I started selling this advertising. I was making about $8,000, $9,000 a year, but I was spending about $15,000. And when they went back in the furniture business, I think I had $1,500 left. So I was glad when they went back. Well, during the war, this Italian and home of Grossman, Scabooch, we called him, he came out with that hand-headed leather, and we went out and we sold them beat the bad man. See, then we were on allotments where you could sell all you could get. A guy would come in the factory and say, how many can I get of that? So it was easy then? Yeah. For two years, that one. Two years. I remember this Chicago man said, oh, when we get off the allotments, he said, I'll do a million dollars a year. I said, when you get off the allotments, your business will drop at least 25 to 50 percent. That was to Marty Schaefer. And he said, why do you say that? I said, I've been through this before. And his business dropped off 50 percent. It did? Yeah. So when Weiman went into this line of cargo? Oh, they made their cargo. There was nothing to it. They could have made tables, too. What did you call it? Cargo? Bodies, yeah. Oh, cargo bodies. They made truck bodies. Oh, I see. And they shipped all the stuff in, all the headwaters guys putting it together. Nothing to it. They made millions of them. They got a good government. They governed. There was a factory in Sacramento, Michigan, a French factory. They went over the price twice and lowered it. They made so much money. So there's got to be a volume. Huh? Big volume is the money. Oh, yeah. They governed. They didn't care what they spent. So if you see it, is it harder for a person to live today than it was 50 years ago, you think, for a working man now that's working in the factories? They have it much better now, of course. Yeah. And is that because of the Union, you think? Huh? Is that because of the Union, you think? I suppose so. The average guy in the factory today, he'll make $8 to $10 an hour. Boy, they used to get 30 cents or 40 cents. So they can afford to buy much more now then? Well, yeah, they could buy more if they want to, but they could save money. I got a, my wife's brother's son lives right up here. Well, he makes about, I think it's about $10 an hour, $8 a day, that's $80 a day. Jimmy, Jimmy gets three grand a week and $600, you know, that you don't pay taxes on. How much you think that, they take out $1,000 a week for taxes alone. And then the agent gets $300, that's $1,300 right there. Of course, he does get a little. In Florida, he called this morning from Miami for the sleeping alone $100 a night. Just think of that. I used to travel by train and pay railroad fare and hotel and meals for $50 a week. A week! Now I pay $100 a night to sleep. So you had pretty good accommodations then when you were traveling. You had good food and good sleeping quarters. I always ate good. Did you stay at the YMCA? No, I stayed at the hotels. At the hotels? Dollar and a half a night, maybe. And you never had any reservations, you just went in there? Yeah. So you were on the road for many years. Oh, gosh. How many years did you travel? About 45 years. 45 years. And your health was good? Huh? Your health was good? Oh, yeah. I'd never been sick in my life until I got this crazy thing. I was coming home from Rockford College, I went out there to see a play. And on the way home, this thing came at me. You were driving then? Huh? You were driving then? Yeah. But you look pretty good now, though. Well, I'll be all right. Sure. You had a lot of years of experience with Swedes. Yeah. How were the Irish people here in Rockford? They always were at odds with the Swedes, and I tell you. Yes, sir. Yeah? Well, we fought, you know. You did? Oh, you remember that? Oh, yeah. I played football, you know, for a while with the AACs. Uh-huh. We used to play the Badgers every year. The Badgers. There'd be a regular riot after. They gave us. Yeah. You have, there were 11 children in your family where you came from. Did they all marry Swedes? No. Let's see. Well, Vera, they married an English boy, Roy Hansen, and Vera married Ernie Fosberg. He was a pitcher in the three-yard league at one time, and he went to the American Association. And Laura married a Swede, too, Bjorklund. He had a dry goods store on Broadway. And Stella, I don't know what he was. I think it was German. Cohen, his name was. And he passed on, and she married Perry Anderson, the doctor. Now they're both gone. Stella and Perry and Laura. And Dora, she got married twice. She married Salman, his father was a minister in Rockford. He was, there's three of them married a Swedish, and two of them not. And the boys now, how did they, you had? They're both gone, except me. Roy married a divorcee, and they got a divorce. My mother told him not to marry that girl. I had a wonderful wife, she, but she was. When you started to date girls now, did your mother tell you, or your grandma? Did she tell you that you should marry a Swede? Yeah. Did they do that? No. Well, they mentioned it, but. They mentioned it? Yeah, they. What would have happened if you had come home with an Italian girl? Huh? What would happen now if you had come home with an Italian girl? I don't know. What would your grandma have said? I don't know. It was not common in those days to bring home an Italian and an Irish. Yeah. It was not common to do that back in your time, in the 1900s. You didn't associate too much with the Irish and Italian. No, no. You lived apart. Yeah. Everybody thought that the Swedes were the best. Well, everybody, every nationality probably had their thought, you know. Yeah, that's right. It was favoritism for our own. Huh? Like your grandma, now, did she go back to Sweden for a visit at any time? No, no. Not your parents either? No. She was 94 and her sister was 96. They passed out at the same time, in one week. They had a double funeral. Oh, I see. Yeah. Oh, so they were old. They were both. Grandma was just as good at 94, but they took her out. Jo Wallen was one of her sons. They took her out of there and sent her out to a daughter at Charlotte. I remember Mae and I went out to see her, and she said there's no use going up to see her because I had a plant in a box of candy for her. She said, because she's in a coma. Well, I walked in and Mae, and right away she says, hello, Everett. Everett, she called me. Everett. Yeah. She told me, you all are going to hang out here, unless they take me home. They lived on Fifth Avenue, right off 9th Street. They had a flat and a house. She said that unless they take her home, she'd lay there and die, which she did. But she recognized. She said, how are the boys? I said, yeah, but oh. So she wanted to talk Swedish. Yeah. She talked about half of each all the time. She went to the Zion Church then? Yeah. She walked up to 7th Street every week to buy polka grease. Polka grease, eh? I'd go over there and she'd come out with biscuits that were two weeks old, you know. I said, I'll eat the coffee. Yeah. She'd come out with those biscuits. And she drank the coffee on the saucer? Yeah. Take a bite. You started to do that too? Did you start to do that too? No, no. You never did that? No, my mother did. Yeah. They'd have sugar lumps. Did they drink a lot of coffee, the old people? Oh, God. She had coffee on from morning till night. She must have drank 10, 12 cups a day. I remember when my father passed on, he was only about 47 or 48. And two of the relatives, he had $1,500 worth of insurance. They borrowed the money, never paid it back. Never paid any interest on it. Here we are with nine children and they borrowed the money. And I remember Grandma used to come over to our house and my mother always had something, you know. She'd make all kinds of, she made her own, made bread, you know. She'd make donuts and cheese. I always liked cheese. And Grandma would say, they're vaccination, because it grows in the pantry, see. It must be, because we didn't have anything. It's amazing, though, that they could keep a family like the 11 kids, you know, to feed them every day. Yeah. If you think about it. Yeah. It's amazing. My father used to say that he had scars on his hand all the way up to his elbow trying to get one meatball. Yeah. Yeah, it was the old time. Yeah. It was probably tough many, many times. Well. How about your habits of eating now? You eat salty foods and fat and meat? Oh, yeah, anything. Yeah, it's a sale, you know. I've got some sale now. You smoke, too? No, I don't. You never smoke? Oh, yes, I smoked a lot. You did? Yeah. When did you stop? Oh, about 10 years ago. 10 years ago. You stopped right off? Yep. Just quit. That's why I quit. I just lost all desire. And I think back now how silly a man can be is to smoke. It's so silly, isn't it? See, it is the spirit that quickens it. The flesh profits nothing. In Him we live and move and have our being. In God. That's scripture. You've always been interested in religious things? Oh, yeah. Always? Yeah. Even when you traveled? Yeah. I tried to know that I would be in the right place at the right time. And that I wouldn't have to wait a lot. I remember Hudson's, I remember jail Hudson's in Detroit. And I tried to know the truth, you know. So I said to the girl there, I said, is Mr. Soto in? No, she said there was about 20 salesmen here and they all went up to lunch. And she said he won't be back for an hour and a half. While all those 20 salesmen run, he walks in this smire. So I said, I'll wait with him. Otherwise I'd have to wait maybe a couple of days to see him. No, I tried to know the truth about it. That I would have divine guidance. And if I sold, lots of times I tried to know that if I sold something, there was somebody who would buy it. Lots of times a fella picked out a certain table, I said, we'll buy this one instead. I know this one sells. So you try to be honest. And people listened to me, generally. Me and I went to England, Jimmy went to school in London. So you were able to afford good schooling then for your children? What? You were able to afford good schooling then for your children? Yeah, I sent Jimmy to England. And Tommy, he went to the University of Colorado. But I know that when we went to England, nobody looked at our baggage or anything. Well, Helen and Jack were with us, they went all through their baggage. I never went. In France, the same way. Nobody ever went through. The only place was in Chicago. They had a bunch of carnations that Mr. Griffin had given her in London. And we were on the plane then for 26 hours. And these carnations were all faded. And this man that we, you know, what is it again? Well, anyway, this man went through every carnation he saw, maybe there was a diamond hidden. And it's the only time they looked at the rest of the baggage. So have you been in Sweden? No. Jack and Helen went there. They used to correspond with their aunt over there, she had an aunt. And she wrote Swedish to her. And Helen and Jack went there, neither one of them speak a bit of Swedish. And she had prepared everything, it had taken her two weeks. They spent about 20 minutes with her. We went to Paris, and they went to Sweden. I was sorry that we didn't go to Sweden too. But the sea pays hand. So you have no contacts with Sweden? No, no. You don't know if you have any cousins? No, I don't. I know I don't. All over here. I just got a letter in there. It wanted to know if I had any relative by the name of Ed Valentine. He was a hand carver. They're writing a book, you know, about the furniture business here. So I got a answer. Well, this brother, Ed Valentine, he was the brother of my father. He was a hand carver. How does this name Valentine come up now? I don't know where that came from. Was this your father's name in Sweden also? Yeah. Valentine? My grandmother's name was... They lived on 7th Street. And... Oh, your farmor? Yeah. Mormor. Oh, farmor. Oh, farmor, yeah. So they came over too then, your father's parents? Oh, yeah. I see. My father was only about six, and my mother was only about two, I guess. And they all joined the Zion Lutheran Church? They all joined the Zion Lutheran Church? Yeah. Zion Lutheran. Yeah. Well, that was, I guess, about the only Lutheran church here then. There was one thing I was going to ask you. You remember Berlin? They started this venture down in Arkansas with the lumber track down there. Lundell and Berlin. And they had a manager, Harold Swenson. They shot themselves down in Arkansas. You remember that? Bro-deen? Bro-leen. Bro-lin. Bro-lin. Oh, Bro-lin? Yeah, Bro-lin, yeah. Sell that land! You told them that? Yeah, I told them. I said, why don't you sell it now when you got a big price? I don't know what they were offering, a million dollars or something like that. See, Ed Lundell lives right up here. Yes, Lundell James, yes. Yeah. And his father was in the Scandinair coal. He left those kids a lot of money. So he weathered the Depression? Huh? He weathered the Depression? Yeah, he did. So some could and some couldn't. There were three boys. Ed, Paul, and Raymond, I think, were. One of them was lame, you know. Oh, I see. Oh, you went to school with them? Huh? No, you were much older than they are. Oh, yeah. I don't know how old they are. So you met a lot of people in your travel then over the years? Oh, gosh. A lot of interesting people. Yeah. They were very nice to me, everybody. I had a lot of letters after I quit the road, you know. That's it. See, in the last market I was there, I did about over 300,000. 300,000? Yeah. They all came in and bought, bought, bought, bought for a living. And they hired a woman and her son. And they couldn't sell a thing. And then this man, Levinson, put his son in there. And they had to give him $1,000 a month to keep him traveling. And I went out there one day just for the fun of it. And Ben says to me, he said, You sold so much stuff in the market that my son can't sell a thing. And he started to blame me for it. I said, When I cut some, should I turn them down? When I'm working on a commission? He said, I oversold all. I didn't oversell anybody. Do you think this is a good way to do business, to sell on commission? Huh? Is there good business to sell on commission? Do you think that makes you more eager to go out? When you can sell, if you can sell, you get a commission. This Roy Jacobson that became President of Alcoa, they were getting 10%. I asked him one week, I said, How much business did you do? He said, $39. I said, How many mail orders did you get? He said, Over 15,000. And they were paying him 10%. He made 10% of 15,000. That's $15. He made that week. Yeah. He became President of Alcoa. I don't think he finished high school. Yeah. So he was a good salesman then, or was it more luck? You think that he came into the right place? Well, I told him, Don't you take any money for lunch? He said, No. It was so easy to sell then. I remember this guy that was with the Rockford School Company, with Swan Hillman. He just took a—I know he went down to a few cities right around Kenosha and Racine. He bucked about $10 million of the business. People were just crying for stuff then. And they'd draw up what they wanted, but they couldn't take it. They were so busy. He didn't have to sell anything. He just took an order. So there was— See, in the furniture business, I used to write at least 75% in a book. You didn't have to do any collecting, though? No, no. Yourself? Yeah. I was so well-rated and done, they grabbed it straight. Well, I guess that's it.