 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Gus Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So what happened then in the three labors there? We just stayed there overnight and the next morning we went off. We asked the lady if we could find a restaurant. So we asked the lady if we could fix breakfast for you. So we went up at six o'clock and she had breakfast for us. Then we went out and went back. So you didn't want to stay there and work there? No. You would be regarded as scabs then? We just stayed there overnight and then we turned back to Rockford. Was there a union then there at the three labors? I don't know if there was a union or what. I imagine there was a union. I don't know. But there was so darn much people there that you couldn't even believe it. So you didn't even try to stay there and work there? No, no, no. We just worked overnight. Then we left. Heck, we went home. You were paid $15, you said? Yeah, they gave us. They promised he sold out here, you know. And told us to go up there. And they told us here that we should give $15 for the trip up there. But we never got that money. So when we came up there, they know about it. So they gave us the money. So we got the $15 for the trip. I think it was six or seven, I don't know which it was, six. So then we drove back. Everything went alright. They had an old Ford somewhere, they had an old Ford. So we come into Chicago. What the heck is that park in Chicago? We got in there, in the park. And we couldn't find a way to get out of there. We come in there about, oh, I would say about four o'clock in the afternoon. And we drove on and on and on and on and on until about ten o'clock at night. Before we got out of the dogwood thing. So I didn't come home till, oh, I think it was five o'clock the next morning, I go home. You didn't have a job down there? No. No? No. What year was this, 1930? That was during the Depression. Just before the Depression started. I can't remember the year of it now. So how long did you go there without a job? Or how could you survive? When I come home, I was home for a couple of weeks. But then one day I said to my wife, we were sitting drinking coffee, what the heck was that? So I went out. Anyway, I went out some place and there were all kinds of people went to look for jobs. And I got a job down there. But, oh, what time was it? No, wait a minute. Wait a minute, it wasn't that soon. It was Peppermint. Oh, yeah, so was it. So was it. And when I come home, I didn't go home for two days. And one day my wife and I, we were sitting drinking coffee, what was it, and I said, you know, and we lived on 9th Avenue, 20th Street, you know. And the public was down on 22nd Street. So I said to my wife, I don't know if there's any use to go there, but I'm going to go down. So I went down there. It was the 27th of April. And Bernie Anderson lived over on that. So I went down there and I come, I've never been in there before, so I walked in there. And I asked what a supper stand was. And they said, he upstairs. So I didn't know him either. So I walked up 2nd Floor, you know. And I come halfway on the steps. No good, and he come and went down. And I said, I didn't know him, go near anybody, I didn't know anybody there. So he stopped me and he said, are you looking for a job? Yeah, I said, I've been working down to the paper mill, I said. He sold the blame thing and we were laid off, so I figured I should go down and see if we have anything. Yeah, he said, come with me. So we turned around and we went up there and he got hold of the supper stand. There was Axel, what the heck was his name, Axel Applequist there. So they asked me what I could do, and things like that. So I said, I have my... I had to go home and get some tools. He said, you go home right now, it's about 11 o'clock. Go home and pick up some... And I said, I happen to have my tools down to Winnebago. I've been down there a couple of days or three, and then they sent us home because we didn't have anything to do. So I said, you go down there and get them. So I went home to my wife and then I walked down to Winnebago and got the toolbox. And come back, it was about three o'clock. I took the toolbox up and I didn't start until the next morning. So when I came in there, you know, I looked around. I heard the whole Dagg-Gunn-Kroa there, Magnuson and all of them out. They were all looking up there. So they asked me where the hell you come from. So I was there from that. It was the 27th of April. No, it was the... I can't remember the date, but it was in April 1927. And then I was there until I retired. Well, it was during the Depression, or you were... Yeah, and then here, I think we were about two years before the Depression. And then the Depression come and everything slowed down. So they got... So we had to send us home, the whole thing. There was only a couple or three of them who worked up there, though. You had to sell your home, too? Yeah, for about three months. And... Then I met my friend and... So then I went down to Winnebago again. And I was there for about two and a half, three months. And then one day, I come home. The telephone rang. They answered, or they wanted me to come back to Republic, again. So I went down to Winnebago, and I went on to Peterson, our vice president. And... And I went down to Winnebago. I had a little toolbox with me, and I went to walk home with it. And, oh, he come and he said, where you going? He said, where you going? Well, and I said, we don't have anything to do here for the while. He said, so I'm going to go down to Winnebago. I got a job down there. Well, and he said, now we need you, we'll let you know. And he did, too. I was there about three months. So they called me, I went down there. I told the superintendent down there, that they are calling me back to Republic, want me to come. Oh, no, he said, you're not going to leave. And I don't remember how much they paid at that time, I don't remember. But he said, I won't let you go. So he said that, so he went into the office, and he come back and he said, we give you a quarter raise if you stay here. How much did you make in Ireland at that time? I think there was about 60 cents or something like that. Okay, and there was a quarter a day then? Yeah. So he come back, and I said, no, I said I can't tell you. He said, I would like to stay here. And my friend wanted me to stay with him, but he said, I promised to Republic I should come back when they have something to do. So, and when I tell them, I said, I always stand with them, I tell them, so I can't do it. But if I said this could happen, like it did before at the Renato stuff, you know, they are going to call you, and I will come down here, and help out part-time. But they didn't. You said there now that you had to sell the horse. Did you lose money on it then, or what happened? Did you have to sell it first? What? Did the bank require payment? Why did you sell the horse? Oh, I didn't sell the horse. You didn't sell the horse? No, I had a patrol. My wife died, 55. No, 65. And I lived in the horse about nine years alone. Oh, I see. Then my brother here, and I also lived here. And then he got a stroke and died. I had to attack and died. And my grandson, he was married up in Milwaukee, so she was alone. So, after he died, I sold my horse and moved out with her. Were you able to keep the horse then during the Depression? Oh, yeah. There was a lot of people that lost their horses. Oh, yeah. I had a horse. There was a horse there, two blocks from me. And I can't remember the real estate and all. I can't remember his name. He sold that horse six times in one year. People moved in, lived there for about three weeks and a month. Then out they went, and they sold it to another, and they kept on like that. They weren't able to pay you the interest? No, no. And some five of us, his name I can't remember now. And he died. He died, and I saw in the paper that he had over 175 homes that he had bought like that, and chased people out and in and out and in and out. During the Depression. What did people move to, though, when they were in the Depression? I don't know. I don't know what they did. But it went, yeah. And their whole neighborhood up there, you know, and all around, the horses also said nobody could buy them. So you could keep your horse, and you had some savings then that you put on Don? Yeah. So you didn't lose any money in the bank? No. Because the security bank went up, Don, upside down? Oh, yeah. I had, the only thing was, I had some money, and my wife had a little bit, and we bought the horse. We put it together and bought the horse. And then I took out a box, and I donned a broadway, you know, bank. Security. Yeah. And there I had the papers and everything in there. And then one day, one day a friend of mine, Truman Johnson was president, you know. Oh, and Engstrom. No, Truman Johnson. Oh, Truman Johnson. Yeah, was president. So one day, this friend of mine, he sold his horse. And I can't remember how much of it he got for it. But anyway, the next day I was on to broadway. And I talked to, and I met him down to broadway, and he told me he, he just had been to the bank the day before. And at the same night, yeah, I talked to him the day after, so on. And he put all that money for the horse in the bank. And the same night they closed the bank, the government closed the bank. And the next morning I went down. And I know Truman Johnson, for he was a friend of my brother, oldest brother. And it was through him that I got to go to the bank, and I said, well, I'm going to Sweden, it's American. Was he a Swedish, Truman Johnson? Yeah, he was a Swede, but I don't know if, I think he was born here, though. I think so, I don't know for sure. But anyway, so I went on there the next day. And do you remember that big, big nisse we called the policeman on broadway? The big Swede? Bengtsson? No, no. Higginsquid? No, what was his name? They called him the big nisse. What the heck was his name? And anyway, I walked on there. When the bank was closed, the doors were closed, so I knocked on the door and all. And the big policeman, he was there, you know, so he come and opened the door and asked me, what do you want? The bank is closed. I know that, I said. I want to see Truman right now. No, he said, wait a minute, he said. So he went to talk to Truman. Truman said that he couldn't let me in because the government had closed it. And the big nisse come and told me, I said, I don't give a damn, I said, if the government had closed it, then who closed it? I want to see him. So he went again and finally he said, yeah, let him in. So he let me in and locked the door, you know. And the same time there come a woman, knocked on the door, so he didn't have time to close the door, the woman. He wanted to see Truman. And he didn't go ask her about it, and he let her in too. And he locked the door. And I went up to Truman, we sat at the desk, and he said, don't you know, he said, that the bank is closed? Yes, I know that, I said. I said, I have nothing to, with me to do with, I said, because I not have no money in the bank. I think I have a couple of dollars, and you can have them, I said. But I want my safety box, papers for the house and everything else. He said, I'm sorry, I can't do that. I can't give it to you. He said, give it to me now, I said, and that's that. Okay. And he said to the woman, what do you want? I want the same thing. I have a big box there, and I want that cleaned out, everything. So he said to the policeman, the big milch, what the heck was his name now? You take them over, open the door, let them in. And he did, you know. He opened the vault, and there was a little light bulb, that thing wasn't bigger than that. But in the ceiling, open the ceiling. A very small light bulb. And he let us in and locked the door, and he said, now you're ready, he said, you knock on the door, and I'm going to let you out. You know. And he locked the door, you know, for the vault. And the vault wasn't bigger than that, maybe some crossover like that. That's all there was. Ten by ten feet. Yeah. And I don't know the woman, have he said woman, I don't know who she was. So I opened my box, I had just a small one, you know, a long small one. I opened the box and took the papers out and everything. And she had down at the bottom a big box about that long and about that wide and about that high. It was a big two by five. Yeah, and he had a small suitcase with her, so they put it in. And I don't know, she had, you know, she had money and every blame thing in there, you know. He took the whole blame thing and put it in the suitcase. And that's what packed up the top. You're not supposed to have money, more than for a couple of days you can have money in the box. And I don't know how long she had them there. I don't know. Well, so we were through. They were going to use the knuckle, the hands, and I took two knuckles and they were like that, you know. Nothing, nothing. And she got tired. I was not going to sit down and show. I said, here, see I pulled out her box, put it up like that, and he sat on that. And I kept on like that on the door, right along, right along. And that blame go over double, you know, the double door. And I think we was there about an hour and a half, at least. And nobody came? No. And then finally, though, finally I said to her, stand up and give me that doggone box. And I took the box, you know, like that, and hit the door with the box two, three times. Hit the door like that with the box, you know. And it was a big solid steel box. And finally we heard that the key come in the door, she said. So we knew she said, here, come and open up. I said to her, where in the hell have you been? I said, didn't you know, doggone it, where we was here? And nobody was in the bank. You didn't have to lock the door, nothing, it was only her and me. Why in the heck did you lock the door for, in the first place? I didn't know. Couldn't say anything. So we got out. And I left. We left, both of them, and I don't know who she was. I never asked her, and I couldn't remember. But anyway, when I come outside the door. Did they check the boxes, what you took out? No. They didn't do that? No. You had the key to your box door? Oh yeah, I had the key in there. They had the key, you know. You could only get into one box? Then afterwards, yeah. Then afterwards, and then I come back with it, you know. I had an envelope in there I put it in. So I said to them, here is your key, I said. You can keep that blame thing, I said. I don't want it anymore. And the lady did that too. You know, you get, now I have a box door to the Swedish-American bank door. You get two keys, and they have one. So I took the keys, and then I threw them to the woman. I said, you can't have them, I said. And then when we come outside the door to go. One of my friends in my story's house, he was outside the door. And he said, how did you get into here, into the bank? Well, I just told him, I said, I get into the bank, and that's all I told. So he let us in. And outside, he said, outside, he said, some big nits over here, and they won't let me in. And you know, he said, last night, he said, he put the whole house in the bank, $24,000, $25,000. And he put all the money in that bank. And when he come home, he heard over the news, the government closed it. I think, I don't know how much they got, was it nine cents or a dollar, I think they got, or something like that. That's all they got back? That's what all they got. No, I wouldn't broke no, no, because my brother, he was a friend of Truman, you know, and, and he had all his money there too, my oldest brother in the bank, yeah. And he told me to put the money in there in the bank. Yeah, so I did put some in my, not much, because I put it in the house right along. So, the bank closed up, my brother had all his money there. And he couldn't get them out. I don't know how much he had there, I don't know, but he had everything there. But he had, he belonged to the Viking. When the Viking brought the pack out there, and they had a mortgage on the pack, with the bank. So I don't know how he did it, but anyway, he went up and he, and Truman let him in, I don't know how they did it, but, and that was about, the mortgage was about the same amount as my brother had in the bank. So, they turned the mortgage over to my brother. In that way, he said, this one, or else he would have lost everything, yeah. And after that, he never talked to Truman no more, no. He never bothered, they used to go out to drink together, you know, and have a good time, and no, he never talked to Truman after the Sedna. So they closed the bank then? Huh? The bank was closed then? Oh yeah. For how long? Oh, it was closed, I think, for over a year or more. The government closed it, you know. What happened then? Did they give you some bad loans, or? Yeah, they had too many doggone mortgages and stuff, you know, so they couldn't handle it. And then, oh, he was closed for, I don't know, a couple of years. And then Truman, you know, he was, he went to Yale, he was there for a year, I think. Oh, he did? Yeah. Then, after he had served his term, I think, it was a year or whatever it was. Was he the only one that went to Yale that Gustafsson took? No, there was one more, but I can't remember his name. There were two of them, I don't know who it was. Some said they went to the horse races and... Oh yeah, they did every blame thing, you know. And then, they had too many, too many mortgages on homes, you know, and that thing. So, they overloaded the bank, and... Now, then he was... come back from the penitentiary, where he was, and he died right after. Oh, he did? Yeah. He didn't go away, though? He didn't live long after that. Then, I don't know who there was, who started up the bank again. That was the corner of 7th Street and Broadway? Yeah. Well, here's where he is now. Oh, the same place? Oh yeah, same building, same... Well, now, I would have been broke, too, because I had mine to monitor the manufacturers' bank, you know, down on East Death Street. Yes. And that thing broke then, too. But... If I hadn't bought the house, I would have been going to, but... See, my wife had a few dollars there, and I had some, and we drove them out of the bank, so there was only one dollar, and they closed the bank. But I don't think that... They didn't get nothing from that bank, I don't think. I don't know. I think they got, in Broadway, they got nine cents, or a dollar. There was not much. Were people mad then? Oh, yeah. Were they afraid to go to the bank after it happened? Did you put any money in the bank then, after this happened? Oh, yeah. I went up to... Now, they had the 7th Street bank. The streets I'm making must know, you know. They had... They never folded? They had, no. And one day, I was down to 7th Street, and I didn't have nothing in the bank there. And there was a line of people. It was a couple of days after. There was a line of people so long, from here to the back end of the backyard, you know. Oh, a hundred feet? Oh, boy, there was hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of them, and they knocked on the door, and they had one policeman stood there, and one policeman stood there, you know. And... Then they had two policemen stood inside the door, the outside door, and they knocked on the door. They wanted to get into the bank. There's a two-side door. The door opened, you know, and an old man, Alden, who was the president of the bank, he came out. And they had one policeman on each side of him, stood outside, and two stood behind him. And he said, people, he said, you go home. You go home, your money is in good hands. Not the pennies lost, he said. So you can go home any time. And he said, I can't open the bank. I don't know how long it will take, he said, for you to get order from the government. So you have to wait and see what will happen. And that didn't happen very long, but a week after he opened up the bank, and they haven't been closed since. And they got the money back then? Oh, yeah, they didn't have a thing. He said, you don't have to draw out the money. The money is safe in the bank. You don't need to worry. So they did it. I didn't know anyone from Ranoa who blew out the money. My brother, I don't know how he did it, he went to the bank there, 7th Street. And I don't know how he translated his mortgage there. He got his money back. Everything was okay. So there was a hard time for many of them? There was no money in the bank. I know dozens and dozens of them who never got their money back. And I don't know who it was who opened up the bank as president afterwards. I can't remember. Who it was who was president that opened up the bank. There was one of the guys who was with Truman, but I can't remember his name, who started up the bank again. So now he's in good shape, I guess, so far as I know. But I don't do no business with my daughter. She has her account there. You don't have to worry about that anymore? No. You've done a lot of hardship. Oh, yeah, sure. So Joel, he had his whole savings in there. Oh, yeah. I know lots of people who had everything in there. And there were two or three of them who went on. There was that bank on the corner on Charlie Street and 7th Street on the corner there. I can't remember the name. That same thing went on. Manufacturers Bank went on. And there was one more. How about the unions now during the 30s? Huh? The unions. Yeah, we were. We belonged to the union, not to the public. The union? Yeah, they tried to get in there. We never voted. But then finally one time they got in. And just when they got in there, they wanted a race with the war and they tried to get a race. So they closed up the plant for, I don't know, two or three weeks. And finally they got settled, so they got a nickel race, that's all. And the boys and most of the guys, they went on. We had to go around the building. And then we took across the street. We put up a tent. So we sat in that. When I got tired, or sometimes I had to go down at midnight and sit there. But I got tired of it. So I went up in the plant and got a paper box, put some tools in it. And when I went home, got a few paint brushes put in there. And I went out to do repair work and painting and things like that. I kept out right along, you know. And they come up to me and call me, you know, say I was supposed to be on the... Ticket line. I said, the hell were you on your ticket line? So I worked there and I was busy right along. Small jobs, you know, painting and repairing and stuff like that. So I worked right through. Then they settled and we come back, you know. Then about three weeks after we come back, the Union and they got in the... Sqlable, where it was. Then we were out again. They closed up the factory. Axel Apfelquist, he was president, he just shut down the whole bloody thing. So, then we had a meeting. Union meeting. We had that down on East, Sass Street, I think it was. No, we had it on 2nd Avenue or 7th Street. There it was, where the bakery was, there, upstairs. And then we got tired of it, so we booted out the whole blame thing. And they never had a union since after that. So the Union went bust then? Yeah, we booted it out. There were some of the guys, you know, we still had voting done. One in the factory. And I know three of them or four of them, two of them was up in Wisconsin on vacation. And they told us before they leave, if there's anything that there's going to be a voting or something, you let us know. And two of them was in another place, I don't know, there was some garden somewhere. We got hold of them and they come all back. We booted out the whole blame. Did you have any outsiders coming in, the Union leaders, from Chicago? No, no. They were all the local people? No, yeah. No, they were only local people. But that Union, was there a big one like AFL-CIO or was it a local union only? Yeah. You didn't belong to a national union? No, no. Ah, there was a couple of nuts that started it then. Do you remember the socialist club here in Rockport? They had a socialist club. Oh yeah, they have that still here, but I don't know where it is. Yeah, but at that time in the 30s, they were active. Yeah. Like David Cullinan, you know him? Oh yeah. Yeah, I know him. But I don't know what they have, what they have, that meetings. Are they still active? Oh yeah, oh yeah. But I don't know what they had at meetings, I don't know for sure. And then two of them, two of them guys, they were working in the factory, you know, so one was what they call a shop steward, one of them. And I don't know, one I can't remember, but he had a job in the union too and they were still working in the factory. But as fast as we booted them out, he fired them right there. They were fired? Mm-hmm. Never come back, he said. They never did. I don't know what happened. And he got rid of them. What year was this now? Was that before Roosevelt came in? Huh? Was this before Roosevelt came in? Roosevelt came in in... Oh, that was long after that. Oh, it was after that? Oh, yeah, many, many years after that. Yeah, but could they do that or tell him to not come back to organize because... Well, he booted out the union, so he had the right to do whatever he want. If they had, if we hadn't booted out the union, he couldn't have fired them. But they belonged to the union. But now we booted the union out, we didn't have nothing to say. So he could have fired the whole blue thing if he wanted to. And I don't know where them guys went. I never saw them. They never come back anymore. Were you able to get the pay raise after this happened, though? Oh, yeah. How did you get the pay raise? Did you go out to the foreman and tell him? No, he went into... We was three of us. One of them, my partner, we made the shares, you know, like this, like them, by the thousands, by the millions. And we made organ cabinets then afterwards. We just went into the secretary and asked him, like he wanted so much more under his chair. So they got a piece for it? Yeah, they gave us. Oh, yeah. We didn't have no trouble with them. I don't know if you know the secretary. His name was Stark, Hilding Stark. No, I don't know him. He's dead too. The first gunny, he made a bag of furniture. Then when he died, your spies and the vice president took over. And he quit all the dining and furnishing and started to make organ cabinets, big, big gun things, you know. And I had a partner, me and my partner, we was the ones who put them blame things together, you know. You were an assembler then? Yeah, we were assembler. And they was made for churches and theaters and big dog and things. It was so long from here to the corner there. And so we had a pair of horses to lead them on, you know. And we got all the clamps on and we would lead them up on the horses and put in the screws and whatever we could get in there. We couldn't hardly lift the blame thing. And we kept on and we kept on. There was a company up in Indiana that they made them for. I think we made about a million of them. And then one day, and we had to do everything by hand, then one day he quit the company. The company quit no matter which. But anyway, they quit to make them big ones. So he took them small ones, I mean, bigger than so. About that high, you know, for the homes. And the blame thing went to about an electronic clamp. So my partner, he come put that little organ together and put it in there and just put the button and there he was. All alone. What were they using those for? Were they only three feet long? Huh? The boxes were only three feet long? Yeah, the big ones there. And the small ones, they were only about that. So that's about three feet. Yeah, about three feet. So he put all the cabinets together and then I had to put in all the blocks and screws and stuff like that and tie them up, you know. Oh, God only knows how many we made of them. You mentioned earlier that you had your own toolbox. Did every worker have his own? Oh, yeah. Saws and hammers and planks? Oh, yeah. Drills and... Everyone? Yeah, drills and... Actually, did you supply any tools there? No, you had to have everything. And you had to sharpen yourself on your own time? Oh, yeah. Like the saws? Oh, yeah. Man, you know... Why was it like that? You didn't use a saw very much there for the most of the... There was parts, or... They were cut in the machine room, you know. What kind of tools did you have then? Oh, we had saws and chisels and screwdriver and electric drill and... And that was your own? Yeah. So the company only had the big saws then and... Yeah, they had the machine room down there with all the machines. Why didn't they supply you with the small hand tools? No. Why didn't they do that? No, no factory did that. Did they steal them? You can go wherever you want, but you had to have your own tools. Every factory was the same? Yeah, same thing, yeah. But you had no extra pay for that? What? You had no extra pay? No, no. No, you had to supply your own tools and... Did you take them with you home every night or you left them... No, we had two boxes and we had hanged them on the wall, you know, where we had the workbench that we worked with, you know, and so we had the two boxes hanging on the wall, you know, because I had them locked. You had the lock on them? Oh, yeah. But we got... No, lately, before, that was before. But lately, they started to hire, what do you call them, hillbillies, you know, and you couldn't trust them, you know. They didn't have no tools and they didn't have nothing and they came and borrowed tools from us. And some of them came and they worked one day and they borrowed tools. Either they had a lunchbox or they had a big pocket. Now, the tools that we let them borrow, we just put them in the pocket and went home. Oh, we lost all kinds of tools like that. One day, they got an old guy, he was on hillbilly too, I don't know where he come from, saw it someplace. And I was standing put there, boxes, whatever, screw, no. So I was sounding cabinet that day. One of the subordinates come up to me and told me, asked me, said, I will help this guy out and borrow some tools. He's going to do whatever, put in some screws or something, I don't know what it was. And if I will go with him and show him, so I went with him and showed him. And then I went back to my partner and put in, and I had the toolbox open like that and I forgot to close the blame thing. When I come back, after the viscerally come back, I didn't look in it. And he said to me, the guy was there, and he said to me, oh, you have quite a bit of tools. Yeah, I have a little bit old junk I said here. And I closed it. And the day before I went on to Broadway to the hardware store, I bought an old screwdriver, because I had an old one when that broke. And I had it hanging there. And the next morning when I come and open up the toolbox, that screwdriver was gone. So I had to go down and buy another one. That guy, you know, he told me you have quite a bit of tools. I suppose, but I didn't look. He took it and put it in his pocket and he never walked away. How about other nationalities now, like the Italians and the Irish? Did you work with them at Republic? No, we didn't. So far as I know, we didn't have any. I don't know that there was, I don't think that there was a single Italian there that I know of. But down to the paper mill, there you had Italians and Polacks and Greeks and everything you could think of. Mostly, mostly, and then the women. You could see the women down there. They were good workers? Oh, yeah, they were good workers, you know. And we had, there was two. No, there was, wait a minute, there was when we made television cabinet. Yeah, that's where they had them. They had some in the paper mill too, but they worked upstairs. And on Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve, you know, we had to take some of the guys, take the elevator, take a platform where we had, where they had, you know, where that cart on, you know. We had to put that platform on there and take the elevator up, you know. And then we come up and the whole building full of those, full of them. Oh, every building one of them goes was drunk, you know. Oh, gee. So we took them. You mean on the job? Yeah, just before we should go home, you know, on Christmas Eve. So we took them to the orange. There was a crazy Polack, some work with me. Him and I worked together. And he said, we're going to, you know, he got fixed once and for all. And we started with that big platform, put three this way. So we took three, put them this way, and then three on top of that. Oh, them, them girls, you know, they were good workers, but they always had a bottle with them, or drunk like hell. Especially when it was a holiday. It was kind of unusual that women were drinking at that time. Oh, yeah. How could they get away with it on the job, though? I don't know. They closed down, you know. They closed down early that day. I think this was 10 o'clock in the morning, and they closed down the mill. Did the men drink, too? No, some of them, but not that much as the girls did. I know quite a bit. There was one thing. They had one guy upstairs. No, that wasn't me. I was in the bag, you know, repairing there. And they had a line there, the cabinets come like that, and the girls polished them, you know, and things like that. And that guy was sent over to another factory to do repairs, and they took me up there to repair, and they bent right behind me, and I stood here. And they had a sink there. And there was a girl, crushed, and we stood and worked on the cabinet where they come, and the cabinets were polished, you know. And I stood and looked at her. I think for two days, but then one day I said, I walked over. And I said, Are you a Swede? I said, No. He said, No. And I said, You look just like a Swede, girl. I said, No. I'm Italian, he said. And she said, Don't go on like a Swede, you couldn't even believe it. And he said, Yeah, the people. There was a girl? Yeah, the people believe I am a Swede, he said. There's lots of people who ask me that. And you see, them girls, well, they were nice girls, the boys, some of them, and some of them wasn't. One day, it was about 4.30, and I went over to the sink. It was next to me where I stood and fixed. I washed my hands and that. And there come the girls up here and washed their hands too, in Greenland. So they come over to me and said, Are you a singer? I said, No. And he said, They don't make no difference. He said, What are you going to do after work? I said, I'm going to go home. I said, I have a partner, and I ride with a partner. He had a car, and we ride home. Now, if you ever chance, he said to be around here, he said, after work. He said, Let me know. There was a car transfer on that day. And like I told you yesterday, they had a sub-inventor. He was Italian. A very nice guy. I liked that guy. And then one day, like I told you yesterday, and I come out to a fire point here, where there's a drug store, I looked on the door. It was the same dog gone limp. So I went in to the drug store, went over to a druggist, and I told him, I said, Are you related to Supradentum Winnebago Donnelly? Yeah, that's my brother, he said. And they looked like two. And he was an awfully nice guy. But it was hard for an Italian to be a superintendent back in those days. It was hard for the Italian to be a superintendent. Didn't they favor the Swedish foremen? No, they didn't have, I don't think there was more than about six, seven Swedes there. The whole thing was Italian and Polish. But before, when the rules were set, the first thing I could do was be a superintendent. It was all Swedish, I was born then. But then, there was a company, I think it was an Indian or a Mexican, it was the Kutton. No, I don't know, now they have that. I don't know what they had on there, no. So you continued on the straight for 27 years at the Republic? Yeah. So your job then was an assembler? 23 years. 23 years? Yeah. As an assembler? Yeah. Cabinet maker? Cabinet maker, yeah. And what's your...? We assembled up to pension what the job was. No union? No. So how about the pension then? You didn't get any pension? No, oh no. No, they never mentioned the pension. But wasn't that, if you had a union, don't you think you would have been stronger then? Yeah, they would never have got us anyway. No? There was no furnace factory in Rockport that had no pension. Not one of them. No vacation either? No. Uh-uh. No. We never had no vacation to pay, no. The only thing we got was, with Christmas we got $15 a couple of times, and then another couple of times we got, I think we got a bunch of apples out of us. And that's all. That's only four times we did. Oh, and then they had, after Christmas, they had a Christmas party on us. What did you get now after 23 years? Did they get a big party for you? No. They took the toolbox and left? They told you, they told you, you know where the door is. That's all. No, they didn't do anything. Did they say thank you for good service? No. No factory, no furnace factory did that. It's all familiar, you know, it's dog and cat. I figured out, and the boys up there, we figured out together one day we were sitting there, like Magnusson and all the rest of them, you know, we were sitting there one day, we figured out that we owned half of the factory. We called it the poor horse. Poor horse? Yeah, poor horse, yeah. We figured out that we owned half of it together. In what way? What did you figure out? We didn't get no pension, we didn't get no high wages, we didn't get anything. No hospitalization? No. No, we had to pay. Yeah, we had one, so they paid half, and we had to pay the other half. Well, here you have a guy like Bernard Magnusson, he knows how to talk. You know how to talk. Couldn't you sit down with the management and put the finger in the nose? No, we went in one time, we were six of us. I think we were six of us. We went into Hilding one time, I couldn't go into Hilding and talk to them any time. I think I was the last one to talk to Hilding after they closed up the factory. I think I was the last one. And then we went in, we were six of us one day, and sat down with them and talked about it. And we figured, asked them if they could take off ten cents a day. And the company put in ten cents without ten cents. It was like a pension plan then. It was like a pension plan.