 Before we went here, yeah. 1970? 19, well 1920 I guess, or what am I saying here? 1923. That's when we left, yeah. But I think my dad died 1920, you know. So we were there I guess about three years before we left here. And you had one sister and? One brother that died. Simultaneously with your dad or? Well, close to it, within a year or so. Influenza or whatever they called it. The Spanish Sickness? Yes, after the war, you know. The whole city was down, you know. You were not affected? Well I was sick too, but I got over it, you know. Everybody in the whole town. There was no doctors, you know, and of course when you were poor, you know, there was no doctor that could help you there at that time, you know. It isn't like what it is now in Sweden. Yeah, we have the 21st of January, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Sven Walter Roos. And he was born 1908, 24th of December in Eksjö, Sweden. And came together with your mother and your grandparents. That's right. And my sister Elsie. And your sister Elsie. She died in 1923. So can you tell me a little bit about your dad now? What was he doing in Eksjö? He was a plåtslagare, what they called it, I think. He had his own shop, you know. And what happened, he was putting on a copper roof on the lasarettet hemma, you know. And steldingen, and a storm came up and steldingen, så han faller rätt ner mot cementen i höften. Spoilers, you know, his höften, of course, turned in bad, so he died from that. He was in the hospital for a couple of months or something, I don't remember. But that's what happened, you know. And your older brother, he was not old enough to help him or anything like that? No, I was the oldest, you know. You were the oldest? Yes. Oh yes, the others were small, only a year old or so, you know. And I think my sister that died was probably three years old, four maybe, I can't remember for sure. But I was the oldest. And then my sister that died was next. And then the little boy that died, he died very young, you know. So when this happened, had you started to help your dad in the business? Yes, I just started, you know, and I used to bring his lunch and then I would go up there, you know. Because he worked on houses outside of the city too, you know, so sometimes I went out, just started to help him, but not too much, you know. I went to school, of course, and I just was able to get through the regular school, whatever they call that, you know. Folkskolan? Folkskolan, ja. Just, ja. But you hadn't started to go to the confirmation classes at that time? It was a bit too early, because you were only 12. Oh yes, you were... I have a picture, but I don't have it here. I have it in Jamestown, taken of all of us from the school, you know. And I've been, the guy that we sat together, you know, in the school there, that was for two boys to sit, you know. We've been writing to each other every year, a Christmas card. Did he stay in Sweden? He's still in Sweden. His name is Gunnar Jansson, but he changed it to Lensmo, changed his name, and he lives on Norra Storgatan, 47, Eksjö. I got a card from him this, I think I got that here. So you went through school together with him in the same village? Well, yeah, we lived together right by Target there, you know, in Eksjö. So we were real good friends, we were always together. And we went to school together and everything else. So you left in 1923, then, you had been confirmed then? Yeah. You went to the... Yeah....Department of Confirmation class. So the business then, after your father died, that was dissolved then, or...? We had to sell the whole thing. Sell the whole thing? Yeah, oh yeah. So what happened then? Did you move to your grandparents then, or...? No, we left for United States then, you know. In 1923? Yes. And also your mother's parents? Yes. They left also? Yeah. Were they living in Eksjö too, or...? No, Marne Lund, Marne Lund. Marjanne Lund? Yeah. There's where they were from, you know. But they lived closer to Eksjö when they left. I can't even remember what's their name. Arneby. Arneby? Yeah. There's where they lived when they came to Eksjö, then they went on the railroad. Arneby. Yeah. So you decided then to emigrate. What was the reason, you think? Did they have...? Your mother had... My mother had some sisters. I think three sisters and two brothers here, you know. In the United States? In the United States. In Jamestown, or...? In Jamestown. So that's the reason we came, you know. So they wrote to them, then...? Yeah. And I went through Ellis Island at the time, you know. I'll never forget that. What happened there? Oh, nothing happened, but I mean it's... Experience. Yeah, very experience that you can hardly talk enough about it, you know. People don't quite understand it. But it was a beautiful sight when they came on the boat and saw the Statue of Liberty, you know. Did you know anything about the Statue of Liberty before you saw it, or...? I had heard about it. In school? In school, yes. Yeah. So there were a lot of people there at Ellis Island. Oh, gosh, they come from all over, you know. They put you in... They had fences, you know. Just like cattle yard. That's right. And... But that went all right. And you got food there, and... Then the doctors examined you. You had a card on, you know. It was terrible for some people. There was something wrong with it. They couldn't go through, you know. They were sent back? Yeah, it was awful. Did you have any with you on the trip from Sweden that understood English, or...? Yes. We had one of my mother's brother that had been in the United States, and then he came home to Arnaby, you know. So his name was Gustav, and he helped us a little there, you know, see. But then we got through Ellis Island. They put us on Erie Railroad. They took us right to Jamestown, you know. Do you remember, now, what you packed in the America trunk back in Sweden? Did you pack anything special that you remember? No, I think most of us, if... Clothing, we couldn't take too much with, you know, see. But you had a big box door, a chest. Yes. Yeah. I believe so, yes. I think... You don't remember anything particular that you... No. There must have been... Oh, we had pictures of my dad and my mother when they got married, and stuff like that, you know, we got with, you know. And the family Bible. Yes, and my... Boutique from Skolan. I still got that in Jamestown, you know. Oh, yeah. So you went on the Danish ship, then? Yeah. We... We got on... We took the train from Gothenburg. But from Arneby to Gothenburg, and then Gothenburg to Oslo. And we got on the boat in Norway there, you know, to New York. I don't know why, but that's... So you had to stay overnight then in... Yes. It was a beautiful ride on the train from Gothenburg to Norway there, you know. It was called Christiania, then, Oslo? Christiania, that's right. Christiania, that's right. Mm-hmm. So, and you had all emigrated with the intention to stay, the whole family, even your grandparents? Oh, yeah. They stayed here till they died, you know. What kind of work were they doing? Were they farmers, or...? No, he... My grandfather, he... took care of a boiler in a shop, you know. Greenish? Yeah. And he even went to Finland before he went here to the United States and worked and took care of boilers, you know. So he was a tradesman then? Yes. Oh, yeah. What was his name then? You remember his last name? Ha, ha. I'm horrified I ever used his name, you know. No. It was just Grandpa? Grandpa, yes, that's right. Yeah. So you came then to Jamestown, and did you live there with your uncles, or...? We lived there with my mother's oldest sister. And they had a bakery, you know, in Jamestown then, you know, so they had a big house. So we stayed there for a while, and then we had to rent our own house after, you know. My mother went to work in the middle there, you know. Were there weaving? Weaving mills, yeah. They had in Jamestown. Everybody, you didn't have to look for work, you know. They needed people all the time then, at the year we came over. And my uncle, Ed Carlson, that was my mother's oldest sister. We stayed with her. He had a bakery, you know. His name was Carlson? Yeah. So they have had that for a long time in Jamestown? Yes, yes, for several years, yeah. How about you now? Were you too young to look for a job, or did you...? I had to go to school, you know. Oh, you had to continue in American school? Oh, yeah. I went to the public school a little bit, then I went to the high school, you know. Where did you live then at that time, on Swede Hill or...? No, we didn't. Forest Avenue? Forest Avenue. No. No, we didn't live on Swede Hill. I know where it was. I've been up there a hundred times. No, we didn't live in... I can't try to think of the name of the street we did live. No. I can't think right now. But... But it was on the other side of town then? Yeah. Opposite Swede Hill? Oh, yeah. And there were a lot of Swedes living there at that time? Yes. All over. How about the school you went to? Did you have any trouble with learning English? No, I didn't have any trouble because there was a teacher there that could speak a little Swedish, and she was teaching languages too, you know. I had, I think, three different teachers in that school, you know. So I spent an hour or so with this teacher that could teach you English, you know. And then I took my other subject from the other two, you know, before I went to high school. So you went to school then about two years, three years? Yeah, I think I started in the seventh grade, and I went to eighth and ninth, and then to high school, I think it was, yeah. How about arithmetic now? Was it easy for you to get into the American system? I had no problem, no. No, that went good, you know. So I got good... Good report card? Yes. Oh, yeah. And then after school, then you started to work? Yes, that's right. I got, I worked, the teachers in the school there, they liked me, so I worked for them in the gardens in the summertime, and different things I'd done for the teachers, you know, I made a little money, you know. So you could start to save a little bit. Yeah. So, but then, during the 20s, then, you started to work in a factory after a while, or what happened? I started, yeah, in a tool shop, you know, during the war I worked in a tool shop. How about during the Depression, after the 20s was over, the Depression hit? What happened then? What were you working then? The Depression, I was still working in a tool shop, yeah. And then I... Was that the Dahlströms or Art Medal? No, that was Ek Tool. Ek Tool. Yeah, on First Street in Jamestown. And there was a Swede that owned that? Yeah, yeah. Yes. So then you learned tool trade? That's right. From the beginning? Yes. And I went to night school, too, you know, to learn, too, about tooling, you know, try to get ahead that way, that worked out good, you know. And you continue at Ek Tool? I continued to Ek Tool, and then he got too old, so he wanted to sell the shop, you know. So then I went to another tool shop. What the heck was the name of that? And I worked as an engineer there for about 14 years, then I started my own tool shop. So you were an engineer then at that time? Yes. Taking evening courses? Yes. Oh. Yeah. So, but during the Depression, then, there was no hard time then for Ek Tool? Well, you're working shorter hours, you know, see, but I was able to get work, you know, see. So I done all right, nothing extra, but enough to get along anyway. To support yourself? Yeah. And your mother, she was still working? That is right, and she got remarried again, you know. But then he died too, he fell off, he worked for the city, you know, trimming trees and different stuff like that. And he fell too, I guess, and hurt himself, you know. Was he a Swedish guy? Oh yeah. When you came out to Jämstrand, did you join the church then, right away, the whole family? I did go to Sunday school there, you know. First Lutheran? It was on Chandler Street, I'm not so sure. It was first Lutheran, probably. It probably was, yeah. Or Methodist, well, they were all around there Methodist. Oh, that's right, yeah. So I went there. And then you got married in 1936? That's right, yeah. Yeah. So, what did you get married in the, in your wife's church then, or? Yeah, I can't remember for sure, no. The darn pain pills I take, they affect my mind, so I can't think clearly, you know. My wife could tell where we got married, but I... My principal at the school there, I went. In Jämstrand? Yes. Yeah, she was real nice to me, her name was Armstrong, yeah. Teachers were real nice to me. Were you the only Swedish boy in school, or were there other kids that came at the same time? There was another guy from Gothenburg, but he didn't... I don't know what I should say about him, but you can never depend on him, he was going to come every day. To school? Yeah, so he didn't go too long, you know, see. But he had a tremendous voice, singing voice, you know, so he done pretty good with that. And he... If he didn't, if he hadn't been drinking like he did, he could have done real good too, you know, he had a wonderful voice. Later on in life? Opera voice, you know, see. So you started this Reliance Mold and Dye Comp Corporation? Yes. And then you were an engineer and had good experience in the... Oh yes, yeah. So did you start alone, or did you have some guys with you? Well, my sister's husband was with, but a very short time. He didn't stay with, he didn't like it. It's tough starting a shop, you gotta work every day and Sunday, you know, and he didn't go for there, so he left, you know, sold out. So I was alone. So I was alone for several years there, you know. So you rented a place then, or did you build your own? No, I rented a place on First Street there, you know. Yeah. This down there in the lower part? Yes, yeah. Across from the mill there, you know, yes. So how were you able now to build up order stock, I mean, from companies? You made things on order then, custom made? That's right. Oh yeah, I had to go out and get the work. Did you do that too, or did you have a salesman going out to sell? No, I was alone. I used to go, I done work for Eastman Kodak, you know, and several shops in Erie. So that worked out all right. So there were small mechanical gadgets you made then? You molded them? We built molds, you know. To make the parts with? To make the parts, you know, see, and then, now of course, the stuff we make now is high tech, you know, for computers and stuff like that. But at that time it was for camera bodies and... Yes, that's right, for Kodak, yeah. So then you had to have pattern makers working for you? No, there was a pattern maker in Jamestown that done some pattern for me when I needed them, you know, see. His name was Peterson, he was real good at it. That's all he did. So then during the war, you had a company then during the war? During the war I worked for Ektor. Ektor? So that was after the war then you started up your own? Oh yes, oh yes. And you continued on then for how many years? Your son started to work with you later on when he got old enough too? That is right. Now he went to Rochester and went through that university there, you know, Rochester, can't think what you call a university there. So he went through that, so he graduated as an electric engineer, you know. So, and he worked for General Electric for a while, you know. But then I asked him if he wouldn't come after my shop got going, you know, pretty good, you know. I asked him if he wouldn't come and work with me, you know, see. Well he was married then and his wife wanted to get back to Jamestown so they had a child. So he come back and joined me, you know, and it worked out real good. And then he took it over when you retired? Yes. How many years did it take now before you could see it rolling along? How many years did it take before it took a stronghold, your corporation? It's a lot of hard work I suppose at first. Oh yes, it must have been... Five, six years? Ten years. Ten years? Oh yes. How many people did you employ then? Well at one time we had 28 people. Was it easy to get people to work? No, you had to teach them, you know, see. When I started my own shop I had to do all the designing too. I had to design the tool. I had to go out there and get the job and do everything in the office, you know, see. But I felt good then. I could work night and day if I had to. Now I'm no damn good at all. Oh yes, I had to work. I was down there Saturday afternoon and Sunday mornings, you know, on First Street there. You got to do estimating, you got to do billing, you know, and so on. So I had my hands full. Did you have to travel then to Rochester? Oh yes, I drove to Rochester to Kodak. To pick up new orders? Yes. For some reason the head guy of Kodak must have liked me because when I worked in the other shop, you know, I was calling on Kodak for that company. But they done a lousy job, you know, because Kodak work has got to be accurate, you know, see. So when I started, after I left that shop, started my own, I went down to Kodak and told them I started a shop on my own and they gave me a job right away to take back, you know. And after I'd done that job, I brought it back to Rochester and he said, Sven, he says, I like the way you build something, not the other, when you work for the other company. So we're still dealing with Kodak, you know, because they're down now a little, you know. Yeah. Do they use the same kind of basic elements in the moulds today as they did when you started? Well... What has changed most? They use a little bit different steel now because, you know, we got six of those Swiss machines where you burn everything out, you know, see. You can't hold the accuracy without, you got to heat treat your steel and then burn it with those carbon, different carbon we use, you know, in order to hold the tolerance. They're talking crazy things. I talked to my son yesterday there and he's talking 90 millions of an inch. You can't even tell what that is. You put your hand on it, it changes everything, you know. So, but it is beautiful work he's making. I don't think I got any parts there. I used to have, I could have shown you. But he is educated now for the new technology, your son. Oh yes, oh yeah, yes. So when you started the Reliance mould and die corporation, the importance of tolerances was big even then. Oh yes. I mean, it was important. It was important, but we had a lot of easy jobs too, you know. You know, there wasn't so close tolerance. But today is everything with the computer. No, yes. Oh yeah. The human eye can't do it. No, no way. And you got to have special tools to check the tolerance. You can't use, like we used to have, what you call it, that you could measure and read it. You can't do that. You got to have electronic equipment, you know. So when you started in the late 20s, or during the Depression, did it change much in the tool room when you started your own corporation? Could you use the same kind of measurements and the same kind of tools? Yes. Oh yeah, for a while. And then when I got in with Eastman Kodak, they had a tool show in Rochester at the time. So I went over there and I saw that machine that burned things out. So I went back to Kodak and told them about this machine, you know, and very expensive. But I said, to do your work, I've got to have one. He said, you go and get it, I'll back you up. He said, the president of Kodak, you know. So I bought that first machine, and now we got six or seven of them. Are they made in this country? No, Switzerland. Oh yeah. And they're special for the camera industry or optics? Anything that's tolerant is so close, you know. So they make good equipment? Oh yeah, the very best, you know. Because he bought a lot of machines after I retired. Oh yeah, but he don't have as many people either now. Because the machines are automatic, some of them, you know. You don't do anything. You put the pieces in, press the computer, you know. It takes care of the whole thing. It takes care of the whole thing, yeah. Shuts off automatically too, you know. Did you join any organizations in Jamestown? Well, I belonged to Thule and Vikings, of course. Thule and Vikings? Yeah. No temperance organization or singing clubs? No, no. I was too busy working, so I didn't have time to. But we had a lot of good time at Vikings and Thule, and I still belong to both the clubs, you know. And then I belong to an engineering club too, you know. How many engineers were there in Jamestown in the 40s, you think? Oh, I can't really remember, but we done work for that shop down in Warren. What the heck is that called? Those engineers belonged to the club. My mind is no good today. So you cooperated or joined hands with other groups from Warren? Yeah. And the Buffalo too? Oh, yes. I went to Buffalo too. We done work for different places in Buffalo. But Buffalo got so bad for a while there that you could hardly park your car anywhere and expect to be there when you come back. I dropped the contacts in Buffalo. It was not worthwhile, you know. But Rochester was always good. So Buffalo is hard to get around in. Well, yes. I don't know if it's better now or not. You know, you had to go and park your car close to a shop there, you know, a lot of troublemakers and like to puncture your tires and whatnot. Oh, I see. Yeah. They want to guard their own little piece of land for intruders. Yeah. But there were many tool shops in Jamestown. Yes. Yes, there were. After the furniture industry disappeared, a lot of tool making and mechanics? There was an awful lot of furniture factories when I came. I think there was 40 of them in Jamestown at the time. I did work for a short time in a furniture factory, but after I went to night school there and took up tool making, then I figured that would be a better job, you know. So I went to Ektool at the time, got in there. And what happened to Ektool? Did they dissolve or sell out? I don't know how many years. Thank you. And the owner of this Ektool was? He died, yeah. What was his name, Ik? Ektool, Jan Ek, I guess. Jan Ek, yeah. Yeah, well, that was a nice shop. So they produced then different? We built dies at the time, too, regular dies, you know. I'm the one that started with the molds, you know. They didn't build any mold at Ektool. It was all, but they had a nice, it was during the war, so they worked for the Navy and an airplane factory in Buffalo, you know. Were you the only mold factory in Jamestown of that kind? No. No, there was another tool shop, too, mold shop that started to make molds, you know. But they went for great big stuff. I didn't care for the… You were more for the specialized? Specialized, with close tolerance, you know. And you had different machines for that, you know, too. That shop had great big clumps of machines, you know. I had to lift everything with, couldn't lift it by hand, you had to have… Forklifts and all kinds of things? Yes, yeah. To take care of it. So were you interested in the politics over the years in Jamestown, or did you…? Not really, no. You didn't run for any office? Yeah, I had plenty to do, you know. So you didn't spend any time on that one? No. So you didn't have any problems with any unions then, because you were so small shop, so you didn't have any… Well, they got a union now, but when I had it, there was no union then. But after I retired, my union come in there, and I guess it's still there, but I don't think they caused any problem. I know he's paying awfully high wages, you know, but he's got good men, too, you know, you have to have. But most of them started with me, they stayed all these years, you know, with the shop. But they're making good money, because they always… I paid the highest wages of any tool shop in Jamestown, so I… Without being unionized? We were not unionized then. And you still pay the highest? Yes. Why did they form the union then, if they…? Crazy in the head. Yeah. No reason. There's always some troublemakers, you know. They gain nothing by it. I think they lost, you know. Oh. Yeah. I was here in Florida when my son called me and said the union had voted in, you know, see. He didn't like it at all. So I came home and I told him what I thought of him, you know, see. There was no way for him to, to say, to get rid of them? No. Before they had started the union? You can't do that, you know, really, I guess, you know. You can't do that? No. But I think if I had been there, I would never have accepted the union, that's all. Just said, no, that's all, we'll close up, you know. That would have been that better. Because they actually lost by the union, you know. Yeah. So there's a hard competition in there today. Yeah. So that's why you don't have as many people now as I had, you know, see. And in fact, when I talked to him the other day, he said, he said, I am not going to hire anymore. I'm going to keep it as small as I can and just have less trouble then, you know. So that's the way it's working out. How about the other organizations now in, not organizations, I mean factories and corporations, do they have unions in most of them or? Oh, yeah, Dahlstroms and all those, you know, and they have union, of course, you know. Yeah. And there are a few furniture shops left, two, three of them. Yeah, and Crescent Tool isn't out there anymore, you know. It's gone. That's on the corner of the union there. They had a strike and they never carried a... Art medal. Art medal. Yeah, that was a nice shop and the union ruined that. Oh. Yes. They built that new great big building there, you know, but it didn't last long in there. They went bankrupt, you know. And I'm trying to think of the company that bought it out, great big, but they built engines, you know. Oh, the Cummings? Cummings, yes. Oh, yeah. They bought the big Art Medal building there, you know. It's a tremendous building. And they are still going? Oh, yes. And they have a lot of people, you know, but when Dahlstrom, when the other company went down, you know, they gave them, I guess, free taxes for so many years so that the Cummings came in there, you know, which was a good thing for Jamestown. How do they do that now in the city like Jamestown? Like Cummings now, if they employ 2,000 people, they say we give you tax-free land for so long. Do they do that to a small employer too? No, no. Why don't they? I don't know why they don't. They figure you're not that important, you know. Yeah, but even if it's 10, 15 workers, it's enough for the city. Yeah, that's right. But you can't bargain with the city then to get a break on the taxes. No, I don't think so. I never heard of anybody else. But a small company, you know, 10, 15 workers, it's strange, though they'd like to form a union. Why don't they sit down and talk with the commissioners? I know it. I know it. They would be better off, you know, because it costs the company a lot of money. For a lawyer, you know, every time you're going to have a contract, you know, you've got to have a lawyer to draw up a contract and discharge plenty, you know that. And somebody's got to pay them. Somebody's got to pay them, that's right. Yeah. So that's dog and cat. Yeah, that's right. So at the end, your grandparents, now, what... He was a tradesman, you say, your grandpa from Sweden. Yes. What kind of work did he get then in Jamestown when he came? He was too old then, so he didn't do any work, you know. Oh, he didn't work any more? No, he had a little shop in the basement. He made things, different things, you know, by hand, you know, but he didn't work, no. Yeah, let's see. Yes, he did in a furniture factory for a short time, but I don't think it was more than a year, you know, because he was up in the years, you know. I think he worked in that furniture factory that I was in for a short time, and then I left and he continued for another year, maybe, but then his eyes went bad, you know, so he couldn't do anything. And they never went back to Sweden for a visit or anything? They stayed here? No, I took my wife and went back to Sweden, though. What year then? Well, that's ten years ago at least. Oh, I see. Yeah. But your mother and your grandparents, they never went back again? No, no, no, no. So then you saw your old stomping grounds in Eksjö? Yes. You met this buddy of yours? Yeah, we stayed at Stadshotellet, you know, there. So what was he doing now, your friend in school? He was a painter. Painter? Yeah. For some reason he never got married. I don't know why. He lived with his sister, Norra Storgatan, 47. I got a card from him just the other day. Oh. Yeah. So he chose the painting trade? Yes. So what was the most changing now in Eksjö? What has changed most during this time you've been away? Did you notice anything special that you... Well, they had a lot of new buildings, apartment buildings and so on. Even in there, in Storgatan, around the area? Yes, because... But some of the old buildings were still there, and they went back for a couple hundred years, you know. Yeah, I had a newspaper. I don't have a newspaper. I have it at home in Jomstrand. A big article about Eksjö, you know. Some of the engineers, they're looking how those old buildings were made, you know. Get some ideas from them, you know, and so on. It was a nice article about it. But we didn't stay so long in Eksjö, because I didn't have any relatives there, you know. So we did go and see a friend of my mother that was still alive, you know. And we had supper with her one day. She was real nice. Yeah. The funny thing that happened, I took my wife down to the skolan where I went, you know. It wasn't too far from Toreget, you know. So we walked, and I showed my wife where I went to school the last few years, you know. And we walked around looking. Then a couple old ladies come walking, and they said, Kan vi hjälpa dig? No. Så jag gick till skolan här. Oh, they were teachers at the time, you know, see. So I talked to them for a while, you know, see. Mm-hmm. So you met them. Yeah. If you compare now Eksjö versus Jamestown when you came, was Jamestown a bigger town than Eksjö? Oh, ja. It was? But you know, the funny thing, stationen i Eksjö, they looked just like when I left, you know, a real nice station they had there, Eksjö. So you remember that? I remember that, yeah. We lived on Nygatan 5. That was right close to Toreget, you know, so. Oh, wow. Yeah. Was Jamestown at that time... Well, there was a lot of difference in Jamestown then. There was? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. It was not like now at all. Did they still have horses downtown there, too? The farmers came in? Yes. Tying up the horses around their stores? Yes. And the railroad went right across Main Street there, you know. Now they got it built up, you know, because the station they had there was an old station, an old galley with a sidewalk leading out to the street there, you know. Yeah. Made out of wood, of course, wood sidewalk. So that was the good old time? Yeah. And then you had different fractions in the city. You had the Swedes and Italians and the... Yes. Swedes grew up on Swede Hill, of course. They were all Swedes there. Still a lot of them up there, you know. And the Italians, they were living closer to town, anyway. Down in the gully there? Yeah. So how did they treat you in school, for instance? Now, the Italian kids, were they nasty against the Swedes? No, no. No, no, no. No, I had no problem. No, I remember a girl that she was from Italy, you know, in the capital there, you know. I remember her, you know. And she was learning the English, too, you know. I was in that special teacher I had, you know. Yeah. So you had the same trouble to learn English now, the first few months? Yeah. But that went good, you know. You know, when you're young like that, you know, you're out with the other kids and you learn, pick up the words, you know. So that went okay. But there was a fight for survival, though, for both groups, for the Swedes and for the Irish and for the... Yeah, but there was... they didn't have to look for work. There was... Plenty of work. Plenty of work. Was it easy then for, like, let us say now in... Was it easy, you think, for an Irishman to get a job in Jamestown? Because he knew the language. The Swedes didn't know it, but then he had a lot of Swedish foremen to talk to. Yeah. But how about the Italian? Did he have an easy time to find a job? No, they didn't get such a good job, the Italians, you know. They had to struggle more, I think, you know. Well, there was someone who worked in that mill, you know, but they had not a weaving job. They had a, you know, dirtier job and so on. Yeah, but... But they changed over the years then when they got more influential in... Oh, yeah. In politics. And they had little stores, you know. Neighborhood stores. Yeah. Right down in Brooklyn Square, they used to call it, but that's gone now, Brooklyn Square. Brooklyn Square, now, there was gathering points for all the people. That is right. What kind of stores were in there? Any Swedish stores? Oh, yes, there was a Swedish store for clothing, and they had a market, you know, with slaughter. Everything you could... and they were all Swedes, you know. Oh. Yeah. No Italians in there in Brooklyn Square? No. No, I don't think so. I think there was one that, I don't know if he was Italian or somebody who had a cleaning shop, you know, for cleaning clothes, you know. But otherwise, no business. Dry cleaner. Dry cleaner, yeah. Oh. How about masons now? They are being regarded as pretty good mason workers, the Italians. Oh, yeah. Were they more so than the Swedes, you think, at that time? Not at the time, you know. The Swedes were running Tom? Yeah. Samuel Carlson, he was in City Hall? That is right, Samuel Carlson, yeah. And he was regarded as a good man? Oh, yes. Even by non-Swedes? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I don't know how many years, 14 years or something. 24, I think. Oh, was it that much? Yeah. Yeah, he's the one that started the electric plant. And they're still running? Oh, yes, yes. They're making it bigger now than it was when he started it. You know, they even put in some steam lines to heat some of the stores up in town. I think the high school and YMCA or something, I don't know how many, they're heating. They just finished that this year, I guess, you know. And those pipes that are steaming in were imported from Sweden. So they learned from the Swedish system? That's right. How to do it? Yeah. Oh. So Jamestown is still keeping the ties with Sweden? Oh, yeah. Yeah. How about in your home now? How long did you stay home then until you got your own apartment or living quarters? You stayed home with your mother and your grandparents or...? Yeah, we were, my mother and my... Sister? Sister and my grandmother for a while, and then we got a house of our own, my mother, you know, and my sister and I. We got a home of our own, you know. But my grandparents was with for a while, you know, so... Yeah. So, and then you moved out when you married then? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. Oh. Oh. Yeah. Your mother, now, did she get Americanized, fixing American kind of food and stuff, or did she keep it Swedish tradition? Oh, yeah. No, no. She was a good cook. She could cook both Swedish and American, yeah. Oh, yeah. And at Christmas time you had the Swedish custom over? Oh, yes. We used to have it at my grandmother's at first, you know, long as she lived, you know. We used to meet over there. Yeah. So then... And did they learn to talk Swedish, I mean English, the grandparents? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. They were able to do that? Not my grandparents. No, my mother, of course, but not the grandparents. They were old when they came here, you know, and nobody could understand a word or two, but... I spoke Swedish to them all the time. So you kept your Swedish then over the years, talking to them? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I talked Swedish to my mother, too, you know. She liked that, you know. Yeah. I talked to my sister last night in Jamestown. I called her up. Oh, she's in Jamestown. She's taking care of my dog. Oh, I see. What's her name? She married? Elsie. Elsie. She was married, and her husband died, so she lives alone now. So she can take care of my dog. I'm glad of that. So you still keep your house then in Jamestown? Oh, yeah. And go back in the spring? Well, we're not going to stay too long here now this year, because I don't feel well, you know, so I'm going to go home. My wife wants to go home, so we may sell this place here and go back home. But even if it's colder up in New York State, it doesn't bother you then? Not any. You'd rather take the cold than the... Well, I used to go cross-country skiing and everything like that. So you miss the winters then, really? Well, not now, of course, but my back, I can't go cross-country. I played tennis for 20 years, you know, and so on. So I was... Oh. Yeah. Did you belong to any athletic organization in Jamestown? Well, I belonged to that tennis association up in Lakewood. I belonged there for years. So who were playing then? Were they engineering-oriented guys that played in it? Well, there were doctors and everything that played there, you know. You had to join that club then? You had to, oh, yeah. It was like a country club. No, it was just tennis. You know, they had real nice... I don't know how many... It's all inside, see? And showers and sauna bath and everything like that. It was real nice. Is that close to this... They have a big gun club up there in Lakewood. Yes. Is that one the same area? Yeah, I belong to the Rod and Gun, too. Rod and Gun, yeah. That's a big one. Yes. They have a lot of members, I understand. Yeah, oh, yeah. Yeah. It's for the shooting and for the fishermen. Yeah. Your mother now and your grandparents, they never complained about being homesick? No, no, because they were the last ones to leave Sweden. There was no one left that they missed then? No, no, because all their daughters and sons were over here, you know. So they were the last of the family to come, so they... No. So they had nobody to correspond with either? No. You are the only one that keeps the line open with your school buddy? That's right. For so many years, every year? Yeah. Yeah. I had another friend, too. He doesn't live in Ekby, but we've been sending cards to him, and write, you know. I can't think where the heck he lives, no. It's a small town. It's not too far from Ekby there. But we don't keep track as good as this guy that I went to school with, no. So you've been back then once? I've been back twice. Twice. My wife didn't go with the last time. I went with a friend from Jamestown here. They'd never been back to see his brothers and sisters, you know. For 50 years, I guess, he almost had been there. So I've always been after him to go back and see his sisters and brothers, you know, when they're still alive. Well, he says, if you go with, we'll go next summer. We did go. I had a real good time. So I get cards and stuff from them now, you know. They've done real good, you know. One of them lived just outside Stockholm. Two of them lived outside Stockholm. They had a nice summer home, a fair garden, you know, out there. So I was out there, too, stayed overnight with them there. They treated me real nice, you know. And they had done good for themselves. I took an awful lot of pictures that time. They were all born in the same area there, you know. I took pictures and I sent to everyone, probably 80, 90 pictures to each one of them. They liked that. You were talking about so much to them. Did you have a cottage at Chautauqua Lake at any time? Yes, I did. Oh, yeah. You had like, went out fishing then? Well, we lived by Chautauqua Lake for three years, a nice home. On the lake wood? No, it was on the other side, towards Bemis Point. Bemis Point. Yeah. Oh, I see. So you were right on the lake then? Right on the lake, yeah. You didn't need any summer stuga? No. But we did have, before I bought the place on the lake, we had a small summer stuga, you know. But then I bought that expensive home and moved up there. My wife never liked it, you know. Oh, you still live beside Chautauqua Lake? No, no. No, we're... Live in town now? We're right in town now, yeah. More convenience when it gets cold and a lot of snow up there. Yeah, I know. But it doesn't bother you then, the winters, because they are harder? No, it doesn't really bother me that much. My wife doesn't like the too hot climate, you know. But I can't go cross-country skiing now anymore, with my back, you know. So I don't enjoy it as much as I did then, you know. I took my dog and we go out cross-country skiing, you know. Oh, he goes with you? Oh, gosh, yes. You've been interested in hunting? A little there, yeah. In the early years? Yeah. Out at Asheville, Sugar Grove, Bostai? Bostai, yeah. We used to go up through there hunting, yeah. But I never really cared so much for hunting, you know. I liked to get out in the woods and that, but I didn't care to shoot any animals, you know. I used to go out to the dogs and have fun with them.