 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Richard Tulane, Rockwood, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. Well, as I was saying, they were kind of laughing at us for making socks without heels in them. And the equipment man from Stanford University came in and he saw the socks and he says, no heels, huh? How do you put them on? So Fred took off his shoe and pulled them on. There they are. There was no wrinkles in them or nothing, see? Because of the nylon, stretched nylon in there. And he thought for a while and he said, how will they wash? Fred says, they'll wash like any cotton sock. They'll wash and wash and wash and wash. He says, can you get me some? Yeah. How many do you want? Well, I want 150 dozen. So Fred calls up Tubi and says, I got an order for 150 dozen tube socks. Who for? Stanford University. Fine. So we made them up. It didn't take long at all. We only had to put half a dozen machines on and 150 dozen comes out in no time. And so we didn't have any boards to board them on, but I got some maple boards to make straight boards instead of with a heel on them, because we didn't want to stretch a heel into them because it probably wouldn't stay anyhow. So we boarded them straight, folded them nice and flat, made a nice bundle, a dozen pair came up about like that and tied them on both sides. And we even put them in a box, I think. So they went off to Stanford and he used them. This was the sporting goods show, which was in his basketball season. Well, he used them the basketball season, he used them the football season and the baseball season. They went around the clock and he still had the socks. Now when he was using wool, one season was about long because the fellow had a size 12 foot. After they go through the laundry three or four times, it was size 9, see? So that was before they had shrink proofing the wool. And boy, he wrote the most glowing letter that you ever saw. So two of you got him on the phone and he said, can we get permission from you to use that letter in advertising? And he gave us permission, or he got permission from the university anyhow, so we got a letter giving us permission to use it and copy it or make copies of it, you know, prints of it. And we sent out a mailing on it and I think inside of a year, I think the first month we got orders, we got orders for about two or three thousand dozen. And by the next year we were manufacturing around 40,000 dozen of tube socks. And that was the schools that had to come on? Yeah, schools. It was all universities. Did you produce them in any color they wanted? No, these were all white. All white. But in the top, we could put on three different colors, stripes. So they'd tell us the colors of their university and when we'd put them in there, see? And then there was another guy that came into the picture. We didn't do it, but we had it done. Some of them wanted like a tiger's head down here near the instep, see? And that was done by silk screen process. But we didn't do as much of it, but there was some of it done. But most of them were just serviceable stocks that the university could use year after year until they were kaput, you know. And they were customers as long as you stayed on there? Oh yeah, yeah. How about the baseball teams, though? Well... Did they use also those? Yeah, they used quite a bit of them. I don't know how many. I don't... The universities were the biggest of them. And of course, the baseball teams, they went in for colors. In fact, we did make some for different baseball teams and then have them dyed. Cotton had them dyed different colors, but it wasn't a big deal in the thousands of dozens. And we were a mass production manufacturer. I mean, that's what we wanted, see? We wanted to put out as many as we could and the least amount of specialty to them. Because when you get into specialty, then you have to raise your prices. The production is slower, then? The production is slower. And you had to take your time and everything. Yeah. So you came in then to the company when your father was still working there as a lieutenant, right? Yeah, yeah. And you came right out of high school then? Well... Or did you have a job before that? When I started, I just went to high school. I never went to college or anything like that. I took all the mechanical courses I could in high school, and drawing and shops and all that thing. They had those, offered those courses in high school. And they had a beautiful, the old Central Rockford High School. Because at that time, when I was in high school, they'd just taken over the old watch factory there at the south end of the buildings, you know. And that's where they had their foundry and a pattern shop. And on the top floor was the mechanical drawing. Were you assigned the classes or could you pick? Well, you picked what you wanted. If you took a mechanical course, you were entitled to, in your four years in high school, you could cover all the courses there. Woodshop, that was in the far north end on the corner of Walnut and, I guess it was Walnut Street, isn't it? And Madison Street in the new building, right on the level there. They had a beautiful woodshop. And they had lathes and planers and grouters and everything that you could have. So you took about two or three years of that then? Well, I mean in school? Yeah, vocational. Huh? The vocational part. Four years. Four years? Oh, yeah. I started in with a freshman. I think it was Woodshop was the first one, because we just finished up with Woodshop at Jackson School when I, I went to Henry Freeman School, but we had to go up to Jackson School for the woodshop because they didn't have anything at Freeman School. That was just once a week. And then I took the other courses. Now I got out of there, the first job I had, I went out to Sunstrand Adding Machine Company. And I got a job out there in what they call the motor drive department, working for a fellow by the name of, or as we called him, Ackie Gustuson, his name was. And that was a small department that they used when somebody ordered an adding machine that they wanted a motor drive put on it. And you had to take the base and do some drilling in the base and that sort of thing in order to accomplish the motor, which hung under the base on a platform. So that was before they moved out to Bridgeport? Oh, yeah, long, long before that. But at the time I was there, they were making the first 12 direct subtraction machines. The first Sunstrand machine didn't do any direct subtraction. You had to go through a series of multiplication and all this and that in order to get something to subtract, to get it to subtract with different consonants that you put in the machine. But this direct subtraction machine was just hitting a button and putting in your stuff and you'd get an answer. So they were making the first 12, and we had a pile of blueprints about like that and like that. It was about that high on rods, and you'd go pick off one of those and it would tell you how big a piece you got to have and how many parts to make, usually 12 parts to all this stuff, one for each machine. And then you'd go down to the raw stock department and you'd get a piece of tool steel, annealed tool steel, and take it back up, you'd blue that with bluing, and then lay that out according to the drawing that you had and scribe that around and then saw it out as close as you can to the line and file it down to size. Then you'd drill a couple of holes in it. And then you'd take that down to heat treat. And well, after Edwin Cedarleaf was the boss on that project, before you took it down there, you'd take it to him and he had gauges, go and no-go gauges, that he would test it on if it was to size, fine. Then you'd take it down to heat treat, and they'd harden it to about, oh, 68, 69 Brunel, and then you had a nice hard piece. So then you'd go back to raw stock and get 12 pieces, and you'd put your master over it and drill your two holes and put two pins in it and then file that down to the size of your master, which was glass hard, see? Make your 12 pieces. Then you'd take those over to Cedarleaf, and if you passed those, then get yourself another print and start over again. I filed and filed and filed and filed for about almost a year. And then I transferred from that up to a finished stock room at the top floor where all the adding sections and bases and cases and everything came in there and were checked out of my stock room. And the fellow on the floor there had been there for years, and so I noticed when they came through and checked my inventory, I was short on adding sections. An adding section is about like that and like that and about that high, you know, and you can't put those in your pocket and take them home. And I said, Well, I don't know what happened. Well, I rode a bicycle out there when I went to work, and I had a lock, had a hasp on it about that long that I could put through the forks. You had the lock device? Oh, yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah, we locked them. It was a combination lock, you know. So when I went to the restroom, I closed that gate, I put that hasp on that and locked it, see? And this superintendent on the floor came in there to get something and I said he couldn't get in, see? I didn't hear anything from him, but I think it was at lunch when I was down to the lunchroom. Yeah, it was at noon when I was down to the lunchroom. When I came back from the lunchroom, I no more got in there, and the telephone rang and said that Mr. Munson wanted to see me in the office. Mr. Munson was the big wheel downstairs, see? And so I went down there. I have a report from so-and-so, I forget what his name was, that your stockroom was locked and he couldn't get in. And I said, well, I said, Mr. Munson, I said, my inventories have been short, some on cases and some on adding sections. And I said I was looking around out on the assembly floor and I can see adding sections have been laying out there for two weeks and haven't been used. Now I said, to me, when they go out of the stockroom, they're supposed to go into an adding machine. But I said, these, I would think there's something wrong with them, and so they came back and got another one. He said, well, that may be, but you can't do that here to a man that's been here for la-la-la so many years, see? And I said, I'm sorry, I said, I'm just trying to protect the stockroom. He said, well, we'll have to get somebody else to protect it, and so they canned me. And then I went down to the, my brother had worked at the powerhouse and figuring the log sheets down there, and he got an increase, they were going to take him up to the main office and make him industrial engineer for the Rockford Electric Company. And he said, do you want my job? And I said, well, I'm not very good on figuring. He says, you don't have to figure, he says, all you have to do is learn how to read a slide rule. And so he had a 12 or 14-inch slide rule that you could read, oh, you could read two decimal places and guess the third, see, if you wanted to. And he taught me at home and all that sort of thing, how to do it and all that. And I took that job, and I was down there for, oh, well, until about 1926 when I started Nelson Litting Company. So you quit the search, do you understand? I got canned. Quit nothing. Nelson canned me. He says, well, we can't have that happening up there. And he said, we'll have to get somebody else to run the stockroom. So that was the end of the day? That was the end of it. So the ailing machine on the Sunstrand that developed, was that perfected here in Rockport? Yes. Oh, yes. Why did they move out to Bridgeport? Well, I don't know. I couldn't tell you because... There was no labor trouble, was there? Not that I know of. There wasn't any while I was there. But I wasn't there too long. But I never read a lot in the paper about labor trouble, but I think they took over some outfit out there. And then I don't think it was more of a consolidation because the only thing that moved was the ailing machine. The Sunstrand machine tool, the Sunstrand machine... Let's see, it was the ailing machine, milling machine and tool company, Sunstrand. There were three of them in Rockford, but they were all the same outfit. But there were three divisions. And then when they moved out to the out east, I just think the ailing machine went out there because there were some fellows who worked here that went out with the ailing machine company. But they were only out there for about three or four years and then were back in Rockford again. How was the working conditions then in the early 20s when you came from high school? There were no unions then at any shop? Oh, there were unions, but it wasn't... I mean, nobody ever approached me when I worked at Sunstrand to join a union. I don't think there was any there. Were the working conditions good times in the early 20s? I'd say it was pretty good, yeah. You didn't make an awful lot of money, but things weren't expensive either. I got along all right, and I paid... How much were you paid at Sunstrand, an hour? Thirty cents? Well, I don't know. I know that the Nelson Eddy Company, when we took in... We had a permit that we could hire beginners for 460 hours at 25 cents an hour. Then after the 460 hours, there was other 460 hours, we had to pay them 28.5 cents an hour. Was that a state law? It was something about the Illinois law, I think it was. But that was called a beginner's permit, see, because in teaching a girl to be a looper or a sower, it took a little time to break them in, see. There was no minimum age, you had to be over 15 or 16? Oh, you had to be over 16, yeah. Because it wasn't considered like working on a buzz saw or anything like that. The sewing machine, you'd have a hard time getting your hand in it. And after that, because I used to keep... I used to have these 8.5 by 11 centimeter sheets, you know, and I would make a red line up here. When a girl started to be a red line here, that's 25 cents an hour, see. And then every day I'd plot her production. And if she got up above that 25 cents an hour, well, that was fine, see. Then there was another one up here that... This came in here when they started, and then 460 hours later, here's another one up here at 28 cents an hour, see. And so by the time she had so many weeks here, she better get up to 28 cents an hour, otherwise out. Because they figured she was costing us money, and until she got 28 cents an hour was just about piece rate, see. So how did you come to start now for the company? How did I come to start for Nelson & Co.? Start to work for them? It was 1926. Yeah. Well, 1926 is when they built the plant down on 909 South Main Street. It was a new plant. And my dad was superintendent of all knitting and the machine shop and the pressing and finishing department that the men worked at. And... There was another superintendent of all the women. That's all of the inspectors and the packers and the loopers and all the women that worked there. And his name was Anton Stenholm. And so it was agreed on the new plant, Anton Stenholm would move his girls and their tables and all their equipment that they needed, and Dad would move all the men. Well, two weeks before moving day, Anton Stenholm quit and moved to Florida and retired. And so Dad had this whole thing dumped on him, see? And I was working at the electric company at the time, the powerhouse, and... my mother was quite beside herself because Dad was so wrought up because Stenholm had left and all that sort of thing. And I wish you boys would help him or something. Well, Lee, he was on his way up in the electric company. He wasn't going to quit, but the job I had was a good job, but it wasn't hard. It was just figuring all day long, and then I'd have to take the... It all comes down to a final figure, what they call the thermal efficiency of the powerhouse, see? And that had to go into Adam Geschwindt, who was a big shot, every day. So when I got through at 5 o'clock, I'd have to hot-foot it or ride a bicycle or something up to the office and bring it up there. Well, I said, well, if he needs help, if I can do anything, I'll help him. And so I gave him two weeks' notice, I guess, and I think they had somebody in there before the two weeks. And so Dad would bring home these blueprints. They were about like that, different sections of the plant, and what they were supposed to do. And I remember when I first came into it, they were putting up shafting in the knitting room. And so he told me what I should do, and I should supervise these fellows putting up the shafting. Well, I knew what shafting was, but that's about all, see? And so here is this snot-nosed kid coming in there telling these old-timers, machinists of the Nelson Knitting Company, how to put up shafting, see? I remember one thing. When we bought the shafting there, you can buy two kinds of shafting. You can buy what they call sheared shafting, or you can buy polished and ground shafting. Polished and ground shafting is a lot more expensive, and sheared shafting is where it rolls out and they chop it off. Well, when they chop it off, they put a bend in it about that long that goes one way, and over here, back here, there's a big long bend that comes in it from the reflex of this bend, see? So you've got to straighten those. Well, if you straighten the thing that they were doing, they were straightening this small bend first. No, they were straightening the long bend first. That was the easiest one. And then they would straighten the short bend, but the short bend, they had a lead hammer about that big around, about like that, to hit it with across what they call a block, a mandrel block with all the round things on it, you know. And so they'd straighten this out fine. Now when they come to this, they'd hit that so hard to straighten it out, they'd put this back in here again, see? And I saw them there going over to here, to here, then back to here, and here. And I finally suggested something. I didn't know I'd get away with it or not. I said, Why don't you straighten out the short bend first? What difference does it make? I says, I don't know, but straighten it out. So they straightened that out, so they rolled it around, put a straightedge on it, you know, so it looked pretty good. I says, Okay, now separate that and go back to the long bend. I said, And don't hit it too hard. I said, Get one guy on each end of it and put it over the mandrel. And I says, Hit it, hit it, just move it, and move it, and move it, then go back here and move it, and move it, and move it, and then roll it around. You may put too much into it, you may put not enough. But they did that, and it worked out like a dam. And so after that, I got a little respect. Oh, you were a young lad at that time. Yeah, I was young. And you were facing another old stubborn Swede there. You can say that again, brother. And there's nothing any stubborner than a Swede. We had a fellow, Oscar Johnson. He knew the knitting machine from A to Z. And there was a young fellow there working alongside him, right on the next bench, Chet Gustafson. And Chet was a far better mechanic than Oscar. Oscar, if he saw a swede, he would have to go to the swede shop and maybe sawed something out. Oh, he'd file it off a little bit, you know. But when Chet made a part, boy, you could pin it on your lapel if you wanted. It was beautiful, see, finished. Well, Chet would run into some of the snags on a Nelson machine, and there were a lot of them. And there were ways to fix them, that sort of thing. But you had to be able to see it and do it, see. And you could spend a lot of time figuring out what you're going to do. Well, Oscar Johnson would sit there, and Chet would be working, and he'd just be smiling to himself, just like the kid don't know second, see. And he didn't on that particular basis, see. And I'd come through, and I could see that look on Oscar's face. And if I saw that look on Oscar's face, I'd go, I'd say, Oscar, over and help Chet. He says, well, I thought he was doing all right. Well, you know he's not doing all right now. I says, get over there and help him. And so he'd go over and help Chet fix it up. And that was the only thing he had ever to do the first time, and Chet knew it, see. And I always, my dad, I know when I first started down there, he told me, he says, now Richard, he says, don't ever tell anybody to do anything that you can't do yourself. Boy, he drilled that into me. And if I didn't know how to do something, I went right to him until the day he died. And he could always, he always had an answer for me, see. So he didn't want you to be put on the spot then, because you were... No, he didn't want me to horse around with something that I didn't know anything about, see. He says, if you're going to tell somebody to do something, you're going to have to know that if they do what you say, they're going to come out all right, see. Now sometimes you tell them to do that... Would you mind like... This is cassette two, side two, continuation with Richard Shillane, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side two. Like this Oscar Johnson you mentioned, he was probably an old merchandise from the beginning of the factory, so to speak, more or less. He'd been there many, many years. I think he had. He knew the machines inside out. So he was long before you then at the plant, so he was an old... Oh, he was, I was there when he was there. Yeah. I don't know when he started, but he was there when I was there. And Al Stolgren was another old one. He was a good friend of Dad's. Were they talking Swedish then at the time when you came in 1926? Oh, there were some, yeah. But I mean, it wasn't... The management didn't talk Swedish. They were all English. Yeah. So the men, they worked in the machine shop then, fixing the machines and setting them up, and off on the floors was 100% women there. No, no, no. No? No. The knitters were all men. They were men? Men, yeah, absolutely. Why? Huh? Why? Well, women hadn't come into the picture. In 1926? Yeah, no. There's no women working in the... Of course, why is there working... No, there was men working... You see, Rockford had, at one time, they had the Nelson Knitting Company, the Forest City Knitting Company, the Burson Knitting Company, the BZK, the Burson Knitting Company, the BZB Knitting Company, the Contour Hosiery Mills. That's five knitting companies in Rockford. The Nelson Knitting Company was cotton. The Forest City Knitting Company was cotton. The Rockford Mitten and Hosiery Company was wool, mittens, and hosiery. The BZB, that means Brown, Zeokin, Burson. That's why they get the name Brown, Zeokin, Burson. That was a full-fashion mill. That's when they used to make the socks, the women's hosiery, flat, and sew them up the back. That's what they called full fashion. And the Contour Hosiery Mill was started by two men, Doyle brothers, that came out of the BZB company and got money from the Condons, the good Catholic property, or people in Rockford, and started the Contour Hosiery Mills on South Main Street. So there were five hosiery mills in Rockford at one time. The competitors, now, were they able to get some of your machinery? The who? No, no. They had different set-up? Your competitors were all circular machines, which we put in also in time. When we went into the athletic business, making athletic socks, we made a few on the Nelson machine, but they weren't competitive because they didn't look as good. How long did the Nelson machine last? What? The Nelson machine, how long did it last over the years? When did you disband that type of machine? Oh, they're still working and running them. With the old John Nelson? Oh, yes. There were a lot of Nelson machines down there. I don't know how many there are now, but... So they couldn't... They weren't able to keep up then with the... Well, that's the problem, see, because the people who took over... I can't think of what his name was, but I met him out to a country club, or somebody that had some money in it wanted me to meet him. And so I said, Where? He said, Well, we'll go out to the Mauna Tee See Country Club and have lunch. And this fellow, he didn't know anything about the knitting business, but he thought there was a great possibility for the Nelson work sock if it was packaged properly and advertised properly and all that sort of thing. And, well, he had a good idea, but I said, One thing that you've forgotten, and that is the maintenance of the machinery. I said, Those machines are old. And I said, They can be patched up. But I said, There's going to come a time when you're going to have to build new machinery. And I said, You'll have to start all over again because there's no prints on these machines. And what they are being done on them now is done by seasoned old employees. And I said, You would have to get a new school of employees in here to take over. And then, while these machines were built in the Nelson Knitting Company in their own workshop, machine shop, I said, Today, you don't even have the machinery to build in there because they've sold it all off and got rid of it. You have to have a—these wheels on the machine are about that big around and about that wide, and they have these slots in them. And as that thing goes around, that throws the needles in and out of operation properly. About 10, 12 inches diameter then? Oh, the diameter— Over a foot? Oh, I would say it's close to 18 inches. And the face of that whole thing is about— well, it's about that wide. And that's all one casting. And when you get those castings from the foundry, you would have to center them up and put points on them and put them on a lathe. And a lathe has to have big enough so it has a tailstock and a headstock big enough for that to rotate on. And then your tool rest has to be special, built back, to get across there and get that smooth. Then, after you do that, then you have to set up a mill. And index heads that will move your tool and also rotate the drum and grind these grooves in it. So it's quite a deal. Well, when he heard what I had to say about it, he wasn't there very long. He cooled down. He left. And I don't blame him. I would have, too. And now this outfit that's got it now, but these people in Rockford, there's 15 that took it over, they lost a lot of money. And one fellow I know had something like $30,000 in it, and he was a security salesman for one of the big security houses in town. And that's the fellow who invited me out to talk to this boss man that came in that was going to do such wonders with it. But he didn't last long, and now, as I say, I understand the 15 people who were in it, I don't know how much they settled on the dollar, but it was sold, anyhow, to some outfit down in Texas. And what they're going to do with it, I don't know. Why did it fail then, in the later years? Were they too hot on it? They wanted more profit out of it? Well, you see... They didn't understand the fundamentals of it in the first place. Well, that's true, but then there was another thing on the sales end of it. You see, when the Nelson's Inning Company was at its height, the farmers were walking behind a plow. They made a difference. They wore out more socks. No, yeah, but they would take their overalls here and pull the Nelson's socks up over them. And they kept it in there? Huh? And they kept the overall down there? Yeah. Well, they were walking behind a plow. Now you take a farmer, he's sitting on a tractor, and he's probably wearing Argyles or silk socks, see? Well, that's true. You take in a foundry, where you have foundry men walking around and pouring hot metal over these little pots. Now they have a crane come over there and dump so much here and so much there. And a guy sits up in a booth there and operates it. You can have dress socks on now. Yeah, well, that's right. So the working man was actually the biggest... The working man was the biggest. In the depths of the Depression, in 1932 and 1933, or 1931, 1932, and 1933, there was three years there. 1932 was the low end. But in the depths of the Depression, we were only down to 4 days a week for about 3 weeks, and that's all. Otherwise we were working 5 1⁄2 and 6 days a week. That was the biggest sales we had. In the Depression? Yeah. You would think it was a hard time though for people to buy socks. Didn't they twist them around and wear the other side of the heel? Well, a lot of people who were wearing what you would call dress hosiery didn't have the money to buy dress hosiery. And they could buy a work sock that would last them 5 times as long as a 220-needle sock like this, where they only had 80, 90, or 100 needles in the circumference, and it was made out of practically grocery string, you know. Well, you take on a 3-pound sock that weighed 3 pounds to the dozen, or 9-0-1s, the yarn on that, the body yarn, was a 7s 3-ply, 7s cotton. Well, I couldn't say what it's about the size of, but it's a fairly heavy yarn. And then 3-ply, it made a regular cord out of it or something. And it was usually two white and one colored, just to give it that heather look, you know. And, yeah, you couldn't wear them out. So it was a good investment. Yeah, oh yeah. This is indeed a curiosity. There are machines that knit the whole sock, the heel, the toe, and all. When one is completed, drop into a receptacle below, and without stopping, begins another. The proprietors, Measures Burson and Nelson, are pioneers in the department, having invented and perfected the first successful machine in this kind in the United States. They began in 1868, and now employ 75 hands, who turn out 100 dozen socks per day, of all grades. Their business extends from Cleveland and Cincinnati, Ohio, to Denver, Colorado. They are also makers of the seamless sock knitting machine. So that gives you a date there when Burson and Nelson started knitting, I guess. You'd say in 1868. So this was the only place in the United States they had this kind of machinery? Oh yeah, yeah. What kind of machines did they have that produced socks and other parts, like the East Coast and South? Well... I don't know, but I think... there was one outfit down in Illinois someplace after that that had a reciprocating machine. I can't... They went back and forth? Yeah, back and forth. Now, most of the hosiery machines today are circular machines. They're a lot simpler, and they can do a lot more with them than you can with a reciprocating machine, because on a reciprocating machine, you've got needles that come up on both sides here. You've got this big wheel back here, and the back needles are controlled by that wheel, and that's what makes the toe and heel. But the front needles, you can't do anything with. They just knit back and forth. So that's the front of the sock, you would say, see? And so you can't... You can't make a rib top on a reciprocating machine, but you can on a circular machine. Because you can have, on the cylinder that goes around, you can put a lot of different cams in there that you can raise up. Now, on a circular machine, you have the needles coming out from the center here, which you can have cams on, and the other needles come up around the cylinder, see, that you can have cams on, and that all is hooked together and goes around. So you can take, for instance, a regular rib top on a sock, and it's what they call a one-on-one rib. That is, there's one needle in the dial against one needle in the cylinder, and that's what makes a one-on-one rib. One knits on the inside, and this one knits on the outside, see? Well, then you can have a two-in-one rib and a three-in-one rib and a four-in-one rib. You can regulate that, see? Which you can't do on a reciprocating machine because you don't have any control over the front needles. Looking at the sort of pictures you show me, you know, I noticed that the heel and the toe had white colors, usually. Was it a different kind of yarn there, or...? No, it was just white cotton yarn. It was not stronger or... Oh, yes, yes. Your... For instance, if you made a sock with a two-ply cotton yarn in the body of the sock, you would use a three-ply cotton yarn in the toe and heel and make that a little heavier so it'd wear better, see? I see. Now, we had a very, very... In the depths of the Depression, we had a very, very cheap sock, and that was made out of just one single cotton yarn in the body. And that yarn was a kind of a dirty gray, and that was made from what they call card strips. When they put cotton through a carding machine to card it, you know, after they get through carding, if they're going to put another color on that, they have to strip that card of any lint or anything that's on it, see? And that's what they call stripping a card. Well, they keep that stuff, and pretty soon they have maybe 600-pound bales made up, and you can do one or two things with it. You can throw it away and get waste costs from it. A lot of times the railroad used to buy it, and they used to pack their journal boxes on the freight cars with it and then throw in a heavy, gooky oil, see? But otherwise, they could put them on a spinning frame, and if they had a real tight twist to it, it'd hold together pretty good, see? And they could sell that. Anything they could get for it would be better than waste. So we used to buy that for the cheap stuff, and then we'd put just a good cotton yarn in the toe and heel, but most of it was junk, you would say, see? But those socks sold sometimes as low as six cents a pair. And, in fact, we've got... I had an old Sears Roebuck catalog that listed Nelson's socks at seven cents a pair. How long did you continue with that production? After the war, then the discontinued? That was just during the low end and the 32s and around there that we made some of that stuff, because there was a market for it, but it was very cheap and it was nothing we were particularly proud of, but we made it. But it didn't last very long, because as soon as business in general started to pick up, we went right into our regular... We had our regular yarns anyhow, but we didn't have any of these side items, you would say, or cheap stuff. So six, seven cents a pair. How about a good quality pair, then? Oh, a good quality would... say a medium, what we call a two-pound sock, our style number 551. That would retail for about... I would say in that time around 35, 45 cents a pair, 35 cents a pair, maybe, something like that. And then as they got heavier, why, it cost more to make, so you got a little more money for them, the lighter weight ones. Now we had some... We had some boys' and girls' socks that we made, or boys' socks, I would say, and there we just... We took an 80-needle machine and we cut it down to just 72 needles. And we took a 90-needle machine and cut that down to 80 needles, and they called that 80-needle narrow. And that made a sock about that wide. We sold a lot of those for kids' socks, you know. We made those from size 8, 9, 10, 8 to 10, I think, 8, 9, and 10 sizes, on the foot size. Why couldn't they be used for larger? Huh? Couldn't they be used for a larger size, too, or...? Well, the only thing is, when you cut down the width of a sock, there's a limit to how long you can make the foot, because if you've got a foot, say you made a narrow sock with a size 13 foot, well, a guy who has a 13 foot has an ankle about this, you know, and a calf, and... He couldn't get him over there. No, there wouldn't be room enough. Does it make any difference now with the number 80 or 90 needle for the wear of the sock, if you make it tighter? Do they wear better? Well, I would say... granting that you're making a sock a standard width. The more needles you've got in it, and the heavier you can make it, you have a great deal more abrasive qualities to your heel and toe and that sort of thing. See, your stitches are closer together. Less longer. Yeah. It's stronger that way. And if you make a sock that... For instance, you could take a 2-pound sock, which was our 551, and you could loosen that up on the knitting and pull a long stitch. Every time you pulled, you pulled a longer stitch. Your needle's going to be longer. Your needles went down farther, and they pulled a... Instead of pulling just a round stitch, they pulled a pear-shaped stitch. And that made the sock sloppy, or there wasn't much to it. It felt nice and soft. It didn't wear very good. How about the tube sock now when it came into production? Yeah. Did you sell less socks then? We sold less heel socks, yes, because most of the universities, and as I said before, they went to the tube sock, or schools, high schools. If you had made, produced now heel socks to the university, would they have bought more dozens a year compared to the tube socks? Because they're less and longer tube socks. Yeah, that's right. And then there was, you see, that was a change. A cotton sock years ago was nothing for a basketball player or anybody who worked a lot on their feet because there wasn't any cushion to it. And so they used wool because there was a cushion to it. But the wool socks were expensive to begin with, a lot more expensive than cotton. And due to the fact that there was no shrink-proofing to them, you had to buy big socks all the time because these laundries in the colleges, they weren't, they didn't use this fancy stuff to wash with. They were washed with heavy detergents, and it shrunk the wool. And so they got almost kind of boardy, you know. They got so tight. Because the Rockford Mitten and Hosiery Company, when they made mittens, they used to knit mittens about that wide and about that long with a thumb in it. There was no, there was just one piece here, you know, and a thumb. And they'd knit them that big, and then they'd put them in hot water with what they called a fulling mill. And these fulling mills were just a wooden tank that you had hot water and steam in it to heat the water. And they'd put these mittens in there, and then they had two plungers that went back and forth that were driven by a belt or something, you know. And they kept on pushing them down, and just that fulling, that would bring those down. And the more they fulled them, the smaller they got. And so they could control it by the amount of time they were in the fulling mill. So I think the sizes on mittens were, oh, maybe men's mittens would be down to a 6, 7, 8, and 9. I don't know what their measurement was. I mean, but that was, I know, when you buy rubber gloves, why, they come in sizes that is good, heavy rubber gloves, 6, 7, 8, and 9, and 8 and 9 are usually a good-sized glove. I mean, big enough for anybody, you know. Another thing that the tube socks know, they simplified the matter quite a bit, because before when you had the toe and the heel, you had to have different sizes for the different kinds of people. Oh, yes, yes. The tube socks completely eliminated that. It eliminated all sizing. You didn't have to put the size 12 there or size 10 there. No, that was just tube socks. And the only thing you did there was to, you had to accommodate the length of them. So when the kid that had a size 10 foot, he didn't pull that tube sock up way over his knee or anything like that, see, because it would be too long. But you, what we did, we went on a size 11. And we made, so on a size 11, you had enough put on a size 11 sock and then pulled it up here. It pulled it up, oh, about like half holes are, not quite as high as this one here. This is a 5 8ths, but, oh, maybe 2 inches shorter than that. That was long enough so when they used to wear garters, you know, you could fasten a garter on and put that back in your calf here, you know, garters they used to have. And that's about what you did. But if they, if a school says they wanted, got a lot of guys with size 13 feet, why, we could make them longer. It was just these links in a chain were about that long. And they knit about, oh, not about 3 8ths of an inch of knitting fabric to one link of chain, see. So we could put in one link or two links and there wasn't a great deal in cost. And if you had a good customer, you'd do it for them. You've seen the first machine that John Edson invented, or? No, I never did. No, not unless that's the one, no, I don't think that one. What's the first one? The one they have at the museum, no? I don't. What do you think, or something like that? Oh, that goes back, I don't know. There's a fellow in Rockford, I don't know if he's here now, but Ed Eisner, who's retired from the Forest City Knitting Company, because he spends a lot of time in Florida and Texas and all that. But he would know what machine it was that they had over to the museum because I think they got one of Fitz's machines over there. I know they got our machine over there because I worked on that before they took it over there. We had it down in the shop. We used to put that in different shows around town. We'd go to the Waterloo Dairy Cattle Congress, and we'd set up a knitting machine there, we'd knit socks, and we'd bring a looper over and loop them, and then we didn't have anything to press them with, but then we'd put them in a package, and anybody comes in, wants us to mail a pair of socks someplace in the United States, we'd mail them for them, and we did that free, see, just for come on, see. It was an attraction. Yeah, attraction. And then we used to show in the Dairy Cattle Congress in Chicago in the stockyard.