 My father always used to say when he was living that he was more of a Swede than he was an Englishman, although he was very proud of his English heritage. But mother drew him into the Swedish culture. She was on the farm and there were ten children and we were always going down there and visiting. And of course he came along and he was just like one of us. This is Mrs. Risolo in Moline, Illinois. She was born 1920, 26th of August in Grenhaven, Michigan. And we have today June 20th, 1986. So you're Swedish background though. Your grandparents, they came from Sweden. Yes, yes. And two of the children, I know Matilda came and I think there was a young boy too. And they came over on the boat with them. And this is what the story is that my Aunt Matilda has written. That she's told the story of their life in Sweden and then when they came over on the boat and then their early days here. So that you'll find that very interesting. What was the reason that they left? Do you have some idea? I think she tells it in there. I think it was just that they wanted something better. They were working on this man's land and their living was not that great. And they didn't have that many opportunities. So I think they came to the land of opportunity. Did they have any relation before like uncles and aunts? That were here? Yes. There were some that came with them. But there wasn't anybody that was here. What was the reason they settled in Allegan? Oh that I don't know either. You know there were sections where the Swedes went. And I think it's possible that there was more than the one family. But now I think that would be in her story too. And there was Swanti. That was the Swedish name. He took that when he came to this country. Well that's the only name I've ever known. You know known of them. I don't know whether that was their name in Sweden or not. That's all you know about the Swedish name? Yeah. So you don't know the particular area they came from in Sweden? Malmo. Yeah. And there are some relations still back there. How many of the family came over? Well it was John and Anna and their two or three children. And then he had a brother who came. And I think there's a Martin, oh no that's his son, Nell Swanti, who is a brother of John. And that's this one. He was young. But there was at least one brother. And they settled in that same part of the country. Were they married and your grandparents? They were married when they came over. And they had at least two children, maybe three. I remember Matilda and a son. But I'm not sure I've got them all on here. And one of them was your mother? Mother was born here in the United States. In the United States. Mm-hmm. How big of a piece of land did they settle on? Did they rent it first or did they buy it? I don't know that. I think this would be in her story that she has. Is the homestead still there? It's there and somebody told me it had just been sold again. I see. So it's not in your family anymore? No, it hasn't stayed in the family. So your mother, now, what can she tell you about her experiences? Like in this picture here. Oh, yeah. During the time, you know, she's, I don't know if there's any special stories. But, you know, ten children and the house wasn't very large and the down mattresses and the cold upstairs and, you know, the potbelly stove and that was all there was to eat. I remember going out and in the kitchen, of course, was the fire stove. And I remember when the time came that with Roosevelt, all the farms were electrified and inside bathrooms and, oh, boy, you know, this was a big event. So you remember that. Were you living on the farm? No, no, we used to go down there and visit quite often. And sometimes I'd go down for a week or two in the summertime and stay. So I remember, you know, the milking and the milk shed and where they made the butter and going back to, you know, all those days. So I probably see between 1925 and 35, about in those years. When the family came out to Allegan, did they join the church? Oh, yes. It was the church, the Augustana Lutheran. They have this Jenny Lynn Chapel. They had one that was just identical to it. And they wanted the family to buy it and keep it, but, you know, that's difficult to do. Now I think there were stories that someone had brought it and was keeping some of the furniture and some of the original and keeping it, but they were living in it too, you know, or in a house next door to it. So the church abandoned that building and moved into town and built. And that was, I don't know what the dates are. Without your grandparents, were they charter members, you think, of the church? Or was it already? Well, it could be possible. It was a long time. So your mother, she grew up there and went to Sunday school. Do you remember if they talked Swedish? Oh, yes. Did you meet your grandparents, for instance? Oh, yes. You met both of them? Yes, yes. They were, well, you see, she didn't. He had diabetes and died first, and he was on the farm all the time. But then after he died, they brought my grandmother into the same town where I lived. So, you know, I knew her quite a bit. Did they talk Swedish to you? Oh, yes, yes. When we would go down as children, you know, there would be all this Swedish talk, and we'd beg them to teach us, but they never really taught us. Now, Mother, when we had relation come over here from Sweden, they would swear up and down that she could pass for Sweden with her talk. She had no accent at all, and she was very fluent. And, you know, she would just talk so that they did. But we never convinced them. You know, I probably can't use the language, but, you know, she taught us schmear for butter and, you know, just a few little things like that, and that's all that I can remember. So your mother, did she have to talk conversion Swedish to her parents? Yes, and she still can. And then my aunt that lives in the same town, she's 80, oh, dear, 88 or 89, and she talks Swedish too. And they're going to this Midsummer thing on Sunday, and there'll be, you know, a lot of it there. I wish I were home so I could go with them. This is done in Ellington? Yeah, this is in Ellington. So they have a Midsummer festival? Mm-hmm. Is that arranged by the church or by somebody else? I don't know. You don't know what kind of group it is? No, no, no. So they gather Swedes down from all southwest of Michigan? Mm-hmm. All the way up from Muskegon to Joe Harbor or is it Benton Harbor? Benton Harbor, St. Joe. St. Joe, yeah. And your mother, she stayed on the farm all along? Yes, she went. They had to go to, you know, get to town for any kind of school. Well, no, they had the, you know, the— They lived out on the farm then? Yeah, they lived on the farm. They were not quite in Ellington? No, no, no, they were on a farm. And there was a farm school up to, I don't know, you know, six or seven. Then she, the family, all of the children that I know of went to school because Aunt Matilda was the oldest girl, and she became a teacher so that they all, you know, the grandparents saw to it that they all got education. One boy was killed by lightning when he was 18. In Michigan? In Michigan, yeah. And then, in fact, my aunt was telling me last night she has a confirmation picture of him, and he was 18, and she says it's a beautiful picture. I don't know whether they've ever seen it, but she's going to take it with her. And then that next summer he was killed by lightning in the field. So, but all of the children that wanted to go to school, and my youngest aunt came out here to Augustana for— they all pooled their money together, and everybody chipped in to it because she was the baby and she was the youngest, and she came here for, I think, one year. But then my mother went on and got her teacher's certificate, which was, you know, it wasn't four years in those days, and then she went on to teach, you know, other places in Michigan. So she was a teacher for grade school or all the grades? I suppose there was one in schoolhouse. No, no, no. It was in a city school. City school? Uh-huh. No. But just, you know, exactly what, I don't know. Now Aunt Matilda, who is the oldest girl, she taught in the country schools because I've driven past, we've driven, and she said, well, now that's the school where I taught. So how many years did your mother teach them? She didn't teach too many years because she was in Grand Haven, and I don't know what for, but she met my father there, so maybe she taught two or three years. And there was Mr. James Wesley Lee. That was Mr. Lee. How did you meet him? It was a blind date, I think. I don't know. You know, she's talked about it, but I don't really remember. And this sounds like an English name. Oh, yes. He's very definitely English, full-blooded English. And his, well, let me see, it's my, his father was, oh, he, oh, I get difficulty following them back. Oh, no, no. His father is J. Edgar, and he was born in Iowa, which I think is up here in Dyersville. And his father is buried out here at the LeClaire Cemetery. But I haven't quite traced that all the way. There's a couple women there that I don't know. And we thought that his wife had died in England, but there's a woman's name on this. I haven't really traced it back. But they go way back then to trace these ancestors to do this kind of thing. They originally were Longbottoms, but when they came to America, everybody called them Longbottom. So their middle name was Lee, so they changed it from Lee Longbottom to Longbottom Lee. So that the Lee kind of started with my grandfather. So she met him then, your father. And what happened now when she brought him home to your grandparents? I think they fell in love with him. You know, I mean, it was just a— So he passed the test. Oh, yes, he passed the test of being an Englishman with the— because, you know, like he said, he became nearly more of a Swede, particularly when he was with them. But how was your mother's in-laws now? Did she— They lived in town. In Grand Haven. Yeah, in Grand Haven. So that there was, you know, a union there. And then when my grandfather on my father's side very seldom came out to the farm. Dad did. You know, we went as a family a lot. But his father, once they came out for the wedding, you know, of course. And the wedding was at the farm. But they did not come out as, you know— What kind of work were they? They make printing machinery. In Grand Haven? Mm-hmm. Graphic arts. So he worked with them also, then, your father? Mm-hmm. So he had a good vocation then. Oh, yes. Yes. And, of course, then she didn't teach school anymore after that. Oh, she stopped— Why did she do that? Well, because of his position. And they started having children, and there wasn't much time to teach. And she had— There was sufficient money. You know, women in those days didn't work. Was there, like, degrading yourself if you two had to work? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There was the status you didn't want to miss. Right. So what happened in your household when you were growing up? You were growing up Swedish, you said. Well, yeah— No, well, you see, it was a double thing because the English people were in town, so that there was a real strong English. And I had a brother was born first, and then two years a sister, and then myself. So there were three of us in four years. But with the English, the brother was always given the prominent— You know, I mean, we always wished we were boys because— Oh, you could see the difference? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Quite definitely. Was there any English saying that came forward because— Yeah, I don't know whether— Actually, they never really talked about it. And when we would bring it up, they would deny it. I see. But it was there. It was an English trait, then, that the boys are— Yeah, yeah, yes. Yeah, the boys are important and to be favored. And it was wonderful that he was the firstborn because, you know, then they just showered everything, and he had— You know, and we'd always say, Why can't we do it? Jim did it. You know, and that sort of thing. So you resented them when you got a little bit older. Oh, yeah. There was a certain amount of it, but it was in pretty good fun. You know, I mean, we didn't get real mad about it, but there were times. When you had some problems, did you go to your father or to your mother? I went to my aunts. On your mother's side? Yes. Uh-huh. Yeah. Don't blame this for my mother. They were able to straighten out. But they were far away, though. They lived on in— No. Well, no. There were two aunts that lived in town most of the time. I see. But much of it we went to both my mother and my father. My father was a very strict Englishman. We usually knew the answer before we went to him, so we didn't have to bother. But if we wanted something special, my sister and I, then we could appeal to him. But Mother did much of the disciplining when we were little, and we'd get sat on a chair until Dad came home and that sort of thing. Then you knew the answer already then. Yeah. Right. So it was pretty much the two of them together, and they were always very united in supporting each other. Because there was two different cultures, your mother's and your father's. Yeah. But we would have to go visit my grandfather at least once a week as we got older. We did not speak until we were spoken to. We were put in a chair, and that's where we sat. And if we had anything to say, we didn't. Because when we did, we were told not to. Then as we got older into teenage, there were all these nice magazines that were on the coffee table that we didn't see at home. We started reading them, and Mother was told. We were never told directly by my grandparents. They'd tell my mother, and she would have to tell us, that we were not to read the magazines. We were to sit in our chair, and we were to listen. And we were not necessarily to participate, except we got asked on Sunday if we'd go in after the children's service, that we'd have to repeat the children's sermon to my grandfather, so that he would know we were listening. But it was a very strict atmosphere with my grandfather and with his home. So he was strict Lutheran then? No, he was strict. He was the Englishman. But what kind of religion or denomination did they belong to? They came into town, I think it was Episcopalians, but then they moved to the Presbyterian Church, and I don't really know exactly why. So your family... So I was raised Presbyterian. So how did your mother fit into that one? Very well. She didn't have any problems? Not that it was apparent to me. And she was very active in the church. They were active in the Sunday school. We had to learn the Ten Commandments before anybody else, because they were teaching. So there was a strict religion for your children, I thought. So really, I hadn't really kind of thought about the two different cultures, you know, molding together, but they did quite well. I mean, there wasn't any... The English kind of dominated, because, you see, the English grandfather was there. And he checked up on you? Oh, yes, yeah, and watched the papers to see our names were on the honor roll. And I think there was the feeling then when we got down on the farm, we let everything go. Then we were happy, and then we played games, and there were always a lot of other boys and girls our same age, and we made up plays, and they'd dunk them in, and horse trough, and do fun things like that. But we never did fun things with my grandfather. So then you came into the freedom. Yeah, so, you know, in that way, the culture... When you look back at it, I mean, which way was the best? Oh, well, having the fun was, you know. We never liked going to my English grandfather's home. I mean, it was never a pleasure. Because, yeah, we were allowed to participate. What was the reason for that, though? Because, you know, they never got your opinion about certain things. Oh, no. They could never tell your opinion about things. They never dared to say, for instance, that you are wrong-noggin. Oh, no. No. Oh, no. There was often. No, no, we never dared say that. In fact, my father and his father didn't have that kind of relationship. They worked in the same company, and when they did that, but then when the doors closed, then there was more freedom between the two. But still, his father was dominant, very definitely. Your father never questioned his father down the both sides? Not too often in front of us. Because then my mother, in the process, has become, like I say, don't play this for her, has become the matriarch. She, and we've, I've thought of doing this with a psychiatrist, you know, to go through and see the steps of how she, my father has been gone for 20 years, and, you know, she's become more and more the matriarch. But she was, even with the dominance of the English, she was very dominant with my father, and not in a very kind and a very loving way, and in a giving way. It wasn't, you know, real, but she wasn't real Swedish with him, when I think about that. You know, she wasn't the farm girl Swedish with him. But yet, you know, it was a very good marriage, and it was accepted by both of them. So your father, now, could he, did he feel the same freedom as you children did when you came to the farm? When he'd get to the farm. He could feel it? Yes. Did he mention something? No, but he'd join in with it. He did? Yeah, yeah, yeah. He'd become a part of dunking the brother in the water trough and things like that. Because when he came down there, he could hear the broken English, of course, and the mostly Swedish spoken. Yeah, there wasn't too much. Did that bother him more? No, there wasn't too much. Most of them learned English without an accent. Yeah, but I mean, your grandparents, though. Well, they were, as I remember, they didn't have too much of an accent. Maybe I wasn't conscious of it at that time. But he also, you know, would be out of it when they talked Swedish. But he'd joke about that. And they didn't necessarily, as I remember, talk too much in front of him. Did your mother not talk to her parents about certain things her husband wouldn't do? Well, see, they talked Swedish. They talked Swedish to you? Yeah. So then you were out of it? Yeah, then I was out of it. You were not able to understand them when they were talking? No, I never learned. If I'd sat down and listened like I did at my other grandparents, maybe I could have picked up some of it. But I never did. There were always enough kids around, so we'd go off and play. So you were three kids then? Yeah. Three children. One boy and two girls. What happened when you went through high school? And did you have confirmation then in the Presbyterian Church? Yeah, we have, it doesn't call it confirmation, but we go through a, oh dear, it's been so long ago. There's a series of lessons that we go through. You don't receive the communion after you're with? Yeah, that's the time when we received our first communion. But it's not called confirmation? We are confirmed, but I'm trying to think. Confirmation does not sound right. Oh dear. That word doesn't come back. So the Ten Commandments and the prayers were important in your life? Oh yes, they're strong. How about table prayers when you were sitting down for a meal? Yes, we always had prayers at the table. Were you taught Swedish table prayer? No. Never? No. So your mother omitted that one then? Yeah. But each one of the three children had a different prayer, so that we said our own prayer, not one at a time. We would take turns as to when we would say the prayers. But we always had prayers at the table, and then prayers at night when we went to bed. And there was a daily routine in your home then when you were growing up? But then you came out to the Freedom Farm. What did you do there? Did you pray there also? Oh yes, oh yeah, there were the table prayers. In English then? Who did Grandpa say in Swedish? I don't know, I don't remember. I don't remember him saying it. And a lot of times, you see, we children were fed later, or we were fed first and then sent out. Or they'd make us wait so that we weren't always many times, if there wasn't too large a crowd, but if there was a fairly large crowd, or if it was the threshers that had come in, then we didn't sit down with the adults. I couldn't let that ring, I didn't have to. So you remember then when they had the threshing parties? Oh yes. Well, there was actually not a party, there was a lot of work. Yes, oh yes, for them. Did you have to help out then? Well, sometimes, you know, as a city girl, that fascinated me, and I loved to be outside. So when there weren't the threshing parties, the hired hands maybe would let me go out and toss hay or do something of that sort. They never let me milk a cow, but I would go out and then I would brush down the horses or something of that sort. I liked to be out there. Now, my sister didn't particularly. She didn't like it? No, she was different. How about your boy? I mean, your brother. Yeah. He'd go down in the summer and spend a week or two. But, you know, I don't remember anything specific about it. But then we'd clean off the corn, you know, take the two corn and rub them together and get the corn off to feed the chickens. I remember that. So you liked those kind of exercises. Your father, now, did he participate in helping out on the farm? No, no, no, that would just stay a visit. No, no, no. He was raised in the city and then by the time he was 14, they'd moved to Grand Haven. And in those days, he could work in the factory. That wasn't child labor then. So they came through Chicago then? Uh-huh, yeah. And when you went to high school, you continued schooling then? Uh-huh, yeah, I went to high school and then my sister had gone to a girls' school in Missouri, so I went too. You know, I was asked, you know, if I'd said, I don't want to go, I probably wouldn't. But, you know, I just went ahead and did what she'd done. And then I went two years at Northwestern and got my teaching degree. Then I taught a couple of years. And how about your brother? He went, no, he got his four years college somewhere. My father wanted him to come in to the factory. He wasn't very thrilled about it, but he did go to a technical school. And he had just gone into the factory when World War II came along, and they were drafting. And he and a friend said, well, you know, we'll go in the draft and get our time over with, and then we'll come home. Well, they never, the friend came home. But he was with the bombers out of England, and his ship just didn't come back one day. So he was missing in action? Yeah, and he was missing in action the whole war, which was real difficult on my parents, because there were enough of those rumors about, you know, the people, you know, falling into friendly hands and being hidden and everything. But there was one man that survived, and he came back and told the story to the others that the plane was hit. With their bomb bay doors open, but the bomb's still up there. So when it was hit, of course, it really exploded. And nobody came back then to Gren Haven? But then my sister did. She married a, there was a Coast Guard camp in town, and she married a young man from there. And then he was in the war in the Coast Guard, but then they came back, and she set up her home there and had six children. Then I got married and came down here, so that I separated from them somewhat. So you all went to school, and so your family was pretty good off, and well off economically. Much better than Don and Allegan. Oh yes, oh yes. Could you see the difference there between the two households? It didn't, I've always said that I never knew until I went away from town, you know, out to school, that I was more privileged than other people in town. Or from the farm family. I mean, it was just, you know, the consciousness of that was not in the family. The family was, we were just, you know, it was never talked about, we never thought about it. Did your mother help her parents with something, or bought them, if it was possible? I think that there were times, that you know, as I was a child, that she could help them out, and that my dad did. One time, they were wanting to buy some farm animals, and he invested in that, and you know, things like that. I'm sure that they helped them, and then when grandma came to town, of course, they took care of her. Now she lived with another sister, but there were three sisters in town, and all three of them took care of her. Because it was pretty hard times down there. Yes, yes. It wasn't easy. And it wasn't easy, you see, for those people to make sure that their children got education. But they really did. There wasn't any of them that wanted an education, that didn't get it. They all pulled together. And you see, with this youngest daughter, they really, there were some resentments that came out of that. Because she was the baby, and she got to go away to college, you know, to a regular four-year college. And there were some, and she felt that. She felt that they resented her, but that, you know, by now, that's pretty much gone. She's still the baby, but she's older. She's nine before you said that. Well, that's my mother. That's your mother? Yeah. The baby is about, oh, she's 70. And she also lives in the... Yeah, she lives in Kalamazoo. Kalamazoo. Yeah, there's my mother and a sister that live in Grand Haven. Then there are two sisters that live in Kalamazoo. And then their families. Did you meet any other Swedish families or their children when you were down there? Oh, we'd go to church when we'd go down there. And we'd, but, you know, and my grandfather's brothers. And then Ernest, and I'm trying to figure, is Ernest, Ernest was their son. He had an adjoining farm. But we didn't mingle too much with the others. You know, if we'd go down for Midsummer's Day or something like that. What's the distance to, I mean, the years you were there? You know, that was quite a drive from Grand Haven to Allegan. We do it, you know, in about an hour now. But it was, and they were gravel roads, and, you know, the cars were. In some places? Yeah, but, you know, maybe that was just about once every summer. And I'd be there for a week or however. But that was a time you really relished and enjoyed. Oh, yeah, I enjoyed it. To the fullest. Uh-huh. What did your grandma on your mother's side, did you call her Mormor? No, not a call. She was Grandma Swanee. Grandma Swanee. Uh-huh. That's the way you... Yeah, Grandma and Grandpa Swanee. Did she tell you anything? No. Give you any kind of pointers or? Well, they used to give us coffee. And butter on a knife. My grandfather was, he gave all the grandchildren butter on a knife. That was the big thing with him. Oh, Grandpa? Uh-huh, Grandpa, Grandpa Swanee. And then Grandma Swanee, the kids would always beg for coffee. So she'd fill a couple drops of coffee in the wrist with milk. But, you know, they would... And she'd hold all the children on her lap and was very supportive that way. But she was very busy. She was usually with the stove and cooking and keeping things going. But in your parents' home, now, was there tea instead of coffee? No, there was coffee. Your father didn't... No, no, oh, in the English. Yeah. Like your grandfather on the father's side. Yeah. Well, there was coffee for the adults, but, you know, the kids got milk. You know, we never... You couldn't have coffee. Oh, no, no, oh, no. That's the... And not even tea, you know. And there wasn't much tea with him. Because you see, the lady he married that was the mother of my father, they were divorced by the time I was aware. So this was his second wife, only I didn't realize it. And I'm not sure that... I know she wasn't the strong English background. So that the English influence came from the grandfather. But, you know, we didn't get any privileges as children, you know, no coffee. And my sister always got sick on ripe olives at Thanksgiving time. We always had Thanksgiving at his house. Had a great big table and all the relatives. What did they serve there then? That was turkey. Turkey. Always turkey, and he carved it. And as an artisan, he was very good at carving the turkey. And that was the male figure standing at the end of the table carving the turkey. And my father had to learn it, and my brother had to learn it. So there was very formal upbringing. Oh, yes, yes. Very formal. It's very strange, though, coming to a small town in Michigan, the Greyhaven, and be so formal English. But you never thought anything of it? No, no. Because that was the way you were brought up? No, no. It was accepted. You know, we kind of weren't quite so happy at his house because we didn't feel so free. You know, we had to do it. But how about your mother? I mean, she was sitting there. She was very proper. Very proper. She was? So she learned fast, then? She learned fast. And it's kind of like we say in our family, we learn which side the bread is buttered on. And she learned to fit in, and they loved her. You know, they really took her in and really loved her. So that, you know, she knew how to be the good daughter-in-law for the Englishman. But when we were home and everything, you know, much of that. In fact, there was a time when this second wife died, and he had no place to go, so he started coming to our house for meals, and that didn't go. That didn't go because it was pancakes every Sunday morning at 9 o'clock, and it was lunch at 12 and dinner at 6. When he came into our home to impose his Englishness, that didn't work. When we went into his home, we adapted. But that finally broke up. He kicked the dog once. That was it. So it's fun to look back because there were, you know, maybe things at the time that we'd be a little bit angry about, but there was never any deep, you know, we just kind of accepted. Do you think your mother, now, because she knew she was brought up in a farm home there in Elgin, and she knew what the rest of the people were up to. If she had married a Swede, for instance, being a farmer down there, do you think she was afraid of coming away? Because she had a better life now than being married down there to a Swede farmer. Yeah, but she had a much harder life. She tells the story when my brother was a baby, and she sprained her ankle, and her mother-in-law came to visit. No matter if she'd broken that ankle, she had to make tea or coffee, whatever it was, and she had to serve and present something to the mother-in-law. So there was no excuse for her being hurt? No, no, she talks about it. She's, you know, talked about that. So she felt like being a little bit imprisoned in a system that she particularly liked? Yeah, yeah, I think that there was that. But she was happy with your father-in-law, in other words? Oh, yes. Well, here comes the in-laws again. Do you think it's better if the in-laws are living further away or? Well, it depends. On the less than average? Yeah, yeah. You see, I have the same problem. I have a son and his wife out in East Moline. So if I repeat the question once more, if your mother-in-law had chosen a Swedish immigrant, for instance, or an immigrant son, your parents, grandparents, the Swedish grandparents, probably would have been very happy, but, you know, married the same kind of people. But then she would have probably had a harder life. But now she moved into a complete unknown area for herself. Right. And that was harder in another respect, but also more pleasant in another. In other words, she got more earthly things. Because your father-in-law, he could provide much more than a Swedish could have. Yes, yes, right. Definitely. Did she complain at any time about this difference now? She complained about, you know, the fact that when she had hurt her ankle and her mother-in-law was coming and she had a new baby, she was coming to see the new baby, and she had to prepare tea, she had to prepare something for the mother-in-law. So that she has talked about that, the rigidity of the English and the switching from the culture of the easygoing into something that was more rigid and more precise. And expected more of her. The children were expected to live up to what the adult was. She had to keep that line. Yes. And looking at the picture of her now, she looks like a very stern lady. In other words, she looks like she has skin under her nose. Yeah, yeah. She kept a poker face towards her mother-in-law. Oh, yes. She would never call in for anything. No, and she wouldn't let them know how she felt. That she was hurting inside. That she was hurting or anything. I see. So she was able to cope with the English traditions and also English way of life, so to speak. Because you were raised in a... Would you say you were raised in an English home or a Swedish home? Well, it was such a balance because Dad always said he became a better Swede than he was an Englishman. And he used to kid and joke about it, but he'd do that with her family. He'd never do it with his family. He didn't? Not particularly. So I never really thought about that being that there were the two rather extremes. Do you remember the grandparents on your father's side and the grandparents on the Swedish being together discussing things? No. It was very... It was... There was a distance between... There was a distance, definitely. Yeah, my grandfather on the English side very seldom went down to the farm. And, of course, the farm Swedes did not come to the city until Grandpa died and Grandma came and lived there. But there still wasn't much between the families. Grandma Swanee didn't go and visit Grandpa Lee particularly. They knew each other were in town, but there was no particular mingling. But your mother, besides raising the family, and you were one among them here, she was on the board of the Challenge Machine Company. That was your father's business. Yes, yes. That was after he died. After he died? Yeah. No, she wasn't on it when he was living. But she groomed in that kind of business? Well... She knew anything about it? He would come home. He would share things with her. She never worked there. There was never anything, but she shared, you know, practically everything with him. Because he came home and it was a small business and, you know, they talked about it. And she has a business sense that it's just... Some people have it and some people don't. So she had a way to cope with it in order to understand it. Mm-hmm. Did he complain about the difficulties in his business sometimes with her? Oh, yeah. They would go over it. So she could get her input, too. Uh-huh. Right, right. Like to have good advice. Yeah, yeah. So she became a director after your father died. And he died in Canada. Yes. They were out there to see a Shakespearean play? They, towards the latter years, maybe five, maybe... they always traveled quite a bit. But towards the end of that time, they did a lot of traveling and short trips. And, you know, they'd been to Canada before. And so that it was, you know, another trip that they were taking. Did they go often on the theatrical things like this? This was their second time there. But they had been to Canada before. Was it by heart attack or...? I guess I never really have been. He collapsed on the street, and they took him to the hospital, and he was there, I think it was 10 or 11 days. And then that was the end. So then your mother was alone. Then she was alone. And how about your grandparents on your father's side? Did they come to rescue them, to help? No, you see, they were dead by then. They were dead by then. Yeah, yeah. So she was alone then. Mm-hmm. No, she was definitely alone. Except for her family. You see, then the support of... And you were old enough to also be a director then of the... Yes, and now, six years ago. You're still a member on the board. Mm-hmm. But she was also in the community affairs, your mother, Hilma Lee. The Lee Foundation, what is that? It was started by the Challenge Machinery. It's a... They have money, and they grant it out to different places. Like scholarships or...? Yeah, yeah. Not a lot of it. There isn't a lot of money. But now they had a new memorial to the war dead, and in the paper it was saying that there was money given to them by the Lee Foundation. And then also helpful with the Salvation Army. Mm-hmm. They were very active there. Was it common that church people also helped out with the Salvation Army? No, no. Was it because it was of a British ancestry? I don't know why. I think it was because someone there was very nice to her, and I think they were very supportive to her, I think, after my father died, and so that she became involved that way. They helped a lot with different things. And also on the school board, she was elected. Oh, yes. She was elected, I think, one of the first women to the school board, and then she was eventually elected the first woman president, and she was a very dominant influence on the school board. What kind of political...? They were Republicans, I mentioned before. And they was in Grand Haven School District then. And then also an elder in the Presbyterian Church. That was unusual, though, at that time. Yes, yes, definitely, and the first woman elder. The first one. So she was really a woman laborer. Oh, yes. A head of her time. Right, right, definitely. So she had some respect then in meetings and discussions. Oh, yes, oh, yes, very definitely. Did you attend in some meetings where she was...? No, most of that was when I was out of town. See, after high school, then I went to college, and then I worked out of town. Then I got married and came down here, so that there were many years that I was not right there. But she was active in community affairs. What did her parents say about this, now? Were they happy about her being involved in so many different things? No, they were probably very proud of her. But did they say anything? You see, the English people were gone. Well, not for the school board. I don't know. I don't remember any feeling or reaction from any of them, or even from the English thinking that she was overstepping and not doing what a woman should do. I don't remember any of that. But she certainly was active. She didn't just lean back and take it easy. She was not afraid to say her... Oh, no, no. There was a time when my sister and I, it was wintertime, and we lived in the home that it mentions there. We were the only home on the block, and so for about a good half block or more, it was just us. And so when a big snowstorm came, they didn't plow that. So we would walk, and we'd made a path. If you stepped off that path, you'd go up to your knees. Well, we went in our ski pants, which were just like slacks, and we ended up in the counselor's office. And girls did not wear those to school, absolutely. And they sent us home. And my mother made a telephone call to the principal, and she sent us back. And we wore ski pants every day until that snow was melted. So that's how strong she was. And she believed in something. She really pushed it. So what year was that, during the war? Oh, that was before the war. That's when I was in high school. During the Depression? Well, no, because the Depression was about 1930. I was 10. So later on, you see, just before 40, to 10 and 30, about 36, 35, 36. So it was a known auto business like a boyhood. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, definitely. I see. So it was a very conservative number. Yes. It was a Dutch community, and that was something else. And I thought about that, you know, with the Swedes and the Dutch. The Dutch pretty ruled, you know, as far as nationality. But Mother never took a back seat to them. But here she was also English, though. Her name was English. And the Dutch people probably don't mix too well with the Swedes. No, no. But she didn't... That didn't stop her. She carried the colors through. Right. So you came in... She was also a new leader in that field. Oh, yes. Now you have to bring in the practical clothing then for the wintertime. Yes. Yes, very definitely. You didn't do any skiing in the wintertime? No, just across the street, you know, in the small... Well, you never went to school. Not like they do like to, you know, today by any means. So that was one of her first... Yeah. Uh-huh. So what did you feel then when you came to school? Did you feel that you had done something? I mean, did you get ahead of the teachers? Well, not terribly. We felt right about it. You know, we felt, you know, why should we wear our bobby socks, our boots, you know? And you didn't have boots like they do now. You know, it was just the little foot boots. And, you know, if we fell off the snow, we were drowned practically in the snow. So Mother gave us that feeling of being very justified in doing what was right. I mean, she felt she was right. She made us feel that we were right. How has this affected you now and your sister and your brother? When you started, for instance, now to date other boys at school, what did your mother tell you? Did she have a little lesson for you to tell you whom you should go with or...? She was very... My sister was a rebel. She was the younger one? No, she was... Well, my brother and then my sister and then myself. I was the youngest one, and I was the nice little girl, and I did everything that Mommy and Daddy wanted me to do and everything else. My sister was the rebel, so that they really kind of watched her and guided her. What did she do then, I mean, to make her...? Well, she just did as she pleased, you know. She didn't follow many of the rules, and she wasn't a good little English girl. Was that a Swedish way of doing things, do you think? Well, I don't know whether that was some of it coming out or not. How did that go with her English grandparents? Not very well. No? No, no, but you see, then when she got older and she married, then she moved into the community and raised eight children and did pretty much about what a nice, young, married lady does and did the proper things. And whom did she marry? She married... We had a Coast Guard camp in town, and there was a young man that courted my mother. We used to kid him that. He courted my mother and married my sister. And they were married. And then he came to town and went to work at the Challenge Machinery Company. He was an American then? Yes, he was an American. He's from Michigan somewhere, and I don't know what his nationality particularly was. So what do you do now? Well, then I went to school, and I went out and I taught school for a couple of years. And then I went west during the war as a special missionary type of person. I did missionary work in a settlement area. Non-church missionary work or...? Well, it was sponsored by Presbyterian but non-denominational. And then I came back to a Presbyterian church and did Christian education work for four years and met my husband there on a blind date. And that's when Mother said, Oh, Italian! How are you going to mix Italian with Swedish and English? That would just never do. But, you know, it worked out. The children were... How did you present this Mr. Rezolo? Well, I guess I just presented him as this man that I was... You took him home before you brought him home? Oh, yes. I told him that I was dating him, and, you know, and then... Oh, no, I didn't bring him home until we got married. And my sister cried through the whole wedding. For your happiness? For my happiness, yes. She was sure I'd ruined it. And then, of course, after 16 years when I got a divorce, then they knew they were right. So you had your... But they had me condemned before. So you had quite a few lessons then in choosing the right man for your partner. Yes. You see, I was 30, so they thought I knew better by that time. Yes, you were old enough, I mean, to... But it was still that familiar parents... Yeah, and my dad had sent me away to school not to become learned, and he never told me that, but to get a husband. You know, to get a good husband, a college-trained husband and everything. I never realized that until later. Were your mothers in there? No, none of them really said it, but I put it together that that's pretty much what... because he wasn't so much interested in me being, you know, an intelligent person. Was there a feeling, I think, when you grew up, I mean, you were of the later generation, but it was unnecessary to send the girls to school? There was a certain amount of that, yes. It was? Yeah, there was still... Still there? Although my mother had gone and was a teacher, you know, and that helped. She was more open-minded. Yes, yes, very definitely. And we went to a girls' school in Missouri, which... and my sister only went two years, and then I went the next year, and then I went on to become a teacher. Was there a church-connected school in Missouri? No, no. It was private? Yeah, it was a private school. But you didn't meet anybody that... Not at the girls' school, although we were right by the... we were right next to the University of Missouri, but then I went two years to the Northwestern, and... You didn't meet anybody there? I didn't meet anybody there. I was very shy. I was very introverted. I couldn't carry on a conversation with a man. I can now. People laugh at me now when I say, well, I never could talk then, and they say, we don't believe it. So you married Frank Crisolo. And how was the wedding then, in the Presbyterian Church? Oh, yes, yes. And it was just the family. So he had to convert? No. Well, he was Catholic, raised Catholic, but he wasn't a participating Catholic. So that was one thing that I stood up to him, and I said, I will not become Catholic, so if we're going to go on with this, you're going to have to either give it up or become a Presbyterian. So it was a very small family wedding. It wasn't accepted in town. This was something that Mother and Daddy definitely disapproved of, but they were willing, for my sake, to go ahead with it. So then we came down here, and we became quite active in the Presbyterian Church here. But shouldn't there be seen as a victory, though, on your side, I mean, to convert a Catholic over to Presbyterian? Oh, yes, yes. They showed that you had a mother strong doing things. She should have felt proud of you. Yes, she should have, but she wasn't. She never mentioned that? No, no, no. She was disappointed most of the time. Did she recommend anybody else than your husband, Frank? Not strongly, no. There was another young man at one time, but they didn't like him either. And they arranged when I was out of town to shift him out of the picture. So they were very dominant in their relationship. And with my brother, the girls that he dated, they were very selective, and they objected to several of them. So your grandparents on the English side, well, both sets of parents, they were dead then on your father's side? Mm-hmm. They were dead then on your grandparents' side? Yes. How about the Swedish side? No, no, no. My English grandparents didn't die until after I was married and came down here. So they were participants within the wedding hood? I don't even know whether they were there. They took my side because they felt that I was standing up for what I wanted so that they were more supportive for me. But my grandfather had injured his hip at one time and did not get around as well. I don't even remember whether they were at the wedding. I'm not sure. I imagine they were. There were so many conversations you couldn't have time to find which one. In other words, there was no one for you then? No. You had the only one with you at that time. Right. It was the one. Right. How did that feel, though? I mean, you were strong enough anyway to be with him. Oh, I was quite a dominant individual by that time. I said, well, this was what I wanted to do and I was going to do it. And your husband, he was born in Senteville, Iowa. How about his parents? They were not alive. His family was. I got to know his family in Chicago before we were married. They were much more supportive of me than my own family. They accepted me like one of the group. Did you move away then from Greenhaven? Yeah, I had been living in Chicago when I met him. So then we moved down here. To Moline? Yeah. Was it because of his work then? Yes. And the fact that I knew I couldn't live in the same town as my mother. My sister could because she let her come in and clean her house. Let her come in and do the things. I wouldn't have said, Mother, if you're coming in to clean my house, goodbye. So we never would have gotten along. So I knew enough to put some distance. Now she has said, well, I deserted her, I left her. She's feeling that, that my sister stayed close to her and was with her. But that I kind of took off and left her. She's very strongly family-minded. But do you think the years will prove that you did something that you believed in? Yeah. But the strangers don't respect that. Yeah, that's no. Now she, and as she grew older, she became the matriarch to control this. It was the family is on a pedestal and everything for the family, not for the individuals of the family. And your parents, were they the same way, were they more easygoing? No, they were more easygoing. And they didn't have the pressure of being visible in the community. No, and about the girls marrying farmers or somebody, they didn't have that. They were much freer with their family and allowed them to be what they wanted to be. So you should really have married a banker's son. Right. A banker in Presbyterian church. Right, right. Yeah, you can carry on her tradition in Greenhaven. So your husband, what kind of work was he doing? He worked in one of the factories here in town. John Deere or? No, they've left town since then. It's out in East Moline. Evans? No. Single corporation? No. No, for many years. I got out my, I found in some of my things the other day, my budget that we ran on when he was. And boy, that's interesting how much little money we had to spend for food. So you came here then in the 50s? We were married 1950. And then you had two sons. Now the first year, the first son was born in 53. And the next one was 18 months after that. And they worked out all right then? You raised a family and they also went to the Presbyterian church? Yeah, in fact, my youngest son, when he wanted to get married, he was 32. And he, you know, the girl, his wife didn't have a church. So he said, we're going back to the Presbyterian church. They had not been there for maybe 10 years. But that's where he wanted to be married. So he had some strong ties there. And they're active there. They're mad at me because I won't go back. Well, you don't belong to the Presbyterian church. No, I don't belong to any church right now. So you divorced them in the 19... 1976. But it's hard to find the right person, you know, for everyone. It doesn't matter religion, but it doesn't make it easier if there's a change to another religion. Then you have a double wall against you. There's some things. So... So in... When you look back at it now, like your mother's strong conviction of leaving and running things, because she was a go-getter, so to speak. You can see that, what she has done. Do you think there was too much in running your life, for instance? Oh, yes, yes. She's much more supportive. I used to, when after college, I had a friend in Chicago and we'd run around together. And I'd say to her, oh, if my mother could see me now. And, you know, everything I did, I based on what my mother would think of what I was doing. And she finally, she got mad at me. She said, if you say that once more, we're going to cut our relationship. Because that was so dominant. I wanted to please my mother so definitely, and she was a strong...