 Yeah, I'm sitting together with Oscar Magnuson, Moline, Illinois. He was born 1906, 25th of May in Alcatra, Iowa. And we have June 4th, 1986. Your father-in-law, John Magnuson, he came from Forshaga in Vermont. Yes, right. Do you know approximately what year he came over? Have no idea. I know. We can figure it out. We can figure it out. We never did use our head and figure it out. He was my grandfather sent him over here. So his grandfather, no, he stayed in Sweden though. Oh yeah, he stayed in Sweden. But his sister came over here, lived in Chicago. Dad's sister lives in Chicago. She married the... Don't we have that? Dalbum. She married Oscar Dalbum. Okay. He was born 1896, 1861. And he was 19 years old when he came to this country. So 19, that mean he came here in 1880 then, wasn't it? 1880. 1861 and 19, he came here in 1880. Did he come alone then from Sweden? Dad, I think he did. He never said anything about the... No. He's coming over, the reason why he came or anything like that? Well, his grandfather sent him over because he was kind of wild, see? And he was afraid to... Yeah, grandfather was pretty straight laced and he was afraid to disgrace the family. He gave him $500 and shipped him to America. Gave him $500, got him a visa and everything and sent him over here to the United States. And he didn't like New York because there were too many foreigners there. So he wound up in Minnesota building railroads. Where did he settle in Minnesota then? I have no idea. He went all through Minnesota building railroads. They started building railroads at that time then. And he was an engineer. Who was he? He was a fireman on... A fireman on the rail... Branch line. There was an article in Des Moines Register several years ago and they called it that Petticoat Junction. You remember that television? Yes. They called that... Where did the train run from? From Marquette to Elkater. It's a branch line. Just along the... He was a fireman on that. Yeah, he was a fireman on that. And in 1909, they were on their way home and they... What happened, I don't know. They... The engineer... It was that night. And they had oil lamps. And it was on the engineer's side. And he... What happened, one of them guards, you know, keep cattle from going up and down the track. One of them had blowed over the rail. And he... The engineer was on the engineer's side. And he... What happened? One of them guards, you know, keep cattle from going up and down the track. One of them had blowed over the rail. And he... Whether he saw it, whether he was sleeping, no one knows. But he derailed the engine. She rolled over in the bank. And of course... And Ray Lang was the baggage man. He was... He had a kerosene lamp. He had a door open where he could spit, chew tobacco, read in the paper, spit. And he felt that jar. And he looked down and he thought it was a thrash machine in the ditch. At night, you know, quite a bit of smoke around there and steam. And then when he kept on rolling, he got up and looked. And he pulled the air cord and stopped the train. And my dad, he... The coal gate busted and buried him in coal. Of course, he crawled, managed to crawl out and get... When the steam cleared away... See, somebody had presence of mind, opened the angle. There's an angle cock on the engine and it was laying on its side. So they opened that angle and blew the steam down. When the steam cleared away, dad was sitting up on a rail. He had 52 stitches in his head and he had a couple of ribs broke and a shoulder out of joint. So he survived? Oh, he survived. But he result... That happened in 1909. And he died in 19... What was it? 14, wasn't it? Yeah. Dad died in March of... In 19... See, he was bruised internally. And he let the drops in. He died in 14. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. He never did work another day, you said. Well, he worked one day and couldn't handle the job. It was too much for him. So, do you remember your dad and... Oh, sure. My dad loved to fish and he'd take me fishing. He'd wake me up in the morning and we'd go fishing. He had an inboard on the river, Mississippi Marquette there, and we'd go fishing. Oh yeah. Dad and I, I went with dad and awful lot fishing. So you were raised on the river then? Oh yes. I was raised on the Mississippi, yeah. And that's a beautiful area up around there. Oh yeah, that's beautiful. Oh yeah. Have you ever been... Yeah, I've been there....pitcher's rock, Pike's Peak? Yes. Yeah, that's pretty up in there. It sure is. So, but how about your mother now? Could she survive with the rest of the family? How many children were you in the... She, there was four boys, no girls. Four boys, no girls? Four boys, no girls, yeah. Here's a picture of his father, kind of beat up. But it's really ironic because his son looked like a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. He was a little boy. him in Sweden and he sent him over. Yes, that's right. But he never elaborated on why he sent him over? No, no. Well, we know that grandfather sent that, we know that grandfather sent him over because he was a little wild, see? But he settled down here though, so he was not on the wild side when he got married here? No, that's right. How did he meet your mother? Well, I tell you, he had an infection, what was it, ear infection? Remember, anyway, he went to Doc Clark at McGregor, Iowa and my mother was housekeeper, that's where he met her. She was a housekeeper for Doc Clark at McGregor, Iowa and that's how he met my mother. And she was of a Swedish background also? Oh yes. Born in Charlottesville? No, my mother? Was born near Albuquerque County. That's right, that was your first wife was born in Charlottesville. So, they married and they settled down there in, where you were born, in Alcaide. That's right. And his job then was to be a railroad guy? He was a fireman on the railroad, yeah, until the time of his death. He was just about ready to be set up as an engineer when he got in the wreck. And it ruined him for, you know. Well, Oscar, you didn't tell about his first marriage. What? No, I didn't. My dad was married once before. What, no children? Huh? One boy. Yeah. Bob, Bob, the oldest boy, Bob. Will you tell them how that was kind of a thing? See, yeah, he was married to, what was her name now? A Hulse, Mrs. Hulse. And they had, they had one boy and when the baby was a boy, she took him up and handed him to my dad and said, here, it's yours. Left him with the baby, see. And then, and. Not because he was a boy. No. He was just, he was. Cause he was a baby, yeah, just a few months old. And she didn't want him and so she divorced, got a divorce. She walked off and left him. And she never showed up again? No, left him, no. Well, years and years later, just before Bob died, he found, he heard, she evidently had gone to Indiana and remarried and she had children. And Bob located, but she had already died before Bob located him, right Oscar? What? His own mother, she was already dead. No, no, he met, he met, Bob met her before she died, yeah. Oh yeah, oh yeah, they met. I was up at the house one time when she was up there. Oh, well then I didn't know her. Hulse, Thornton was her name then. She remarried again, her name was Thornton. So your stepbrother then, he was a little bit older than you? Oh yeah, quite a bit older. See, I had two brother, I had a younger one, Clarence younger than me and then Don was older than me. So what kind of work did you start to do then when you were growing up in? Well, I worked for Decker Patent Company in Mason City for a while. And then I left there to help to run my aunt's farm up on Northeast Iowa. And then I got word that there was construction down here. My brother, he was working for the power company, so he said, come on now and we'll get on construction. So in 1936, I got on the power plant here. In Moline? No, Riverside, on the other side of the river. They got a plant in Moline and one across the river. So they'd been in deployment there for 35 years? For like two months, I haven't 35 years. And I fired every boiler they had there. The last one was a big one. And it was fired by coal? Oh yeah, coal and gas both. For a while they had us on oil for a short time, but it didn't work out very good. But we had gas and oil. Gas in the summertime, unlimited amount of gas in the summertime, no gas in the winter. Just for starting, we used gas for lighting fires off, lighting the boilers off. It was kind of hard work though with all these? No, everything's automatic. I could really go to sleep, everything was automatic. But I had to watch it. There was one thing that we didn't have in the gas alarm. Sometimes, there were times when the Moline, we tied in with Moline. If they got into trouble, they'd load us up. And you had to be on your toes then. To request what you needed. There's four Magnussons worked at that. At the plant? Four Magnussons? My nephew, his brother, his nephew, and his son. And now our young son works for Cordova. My youngest son, he works at the Cordova, that nuclear power plant. He works at the nuclear power plant. So you followed the same footsteps then? Oh yeah. Big line of the family. So he has more automation than you had, I suppose. Who? Your son now, at Cordova. Oh yeah, it's different, entirely different. A little different, yeah, quite a bit different. Now in El Cajor, Iowa, were there more Swedes living up there, or were you the only one? As far as I'm concerned, we were the only one. There was not like a Swedish colony or anything? See, we moved there in 1914. So actually, I was eight years old when we moved. El Cajor? Yeah, see, that was where the end kept the end. We had a turntable at El Cajor. Dad used to take care of the fire and build it and get up early enough to build a fire and engine and get on the run. He decided he moved to Marquette, because at that time it was North McGregor. They didn't change the name until later. And that was the headquarters for the division point for all the trains going east and west and north and south. So there was a turnaround there. So were you interested to be a fireman or engineer on the train? No, not on railroad, no. But I worked in the shops though. Right after I got married, I got a job in the shops. I was married, first time I got married, I worked in the shops. I done all the jobs they had in the shops, you could think of. I cleaned engines and wiped the engines, and I helped the boiler maker and boiler washer. I even helped the blacksmith one time. They needed somebody to help him, but I was bucking the extra board, what they called it then. Young guy, full of bizarre income. They had me on the extra board, doing everything. So like your dad, when you were out fishing on the river there, didn't he tell you to be an engineer? No, no. He didn't push it? No, see he died in 14. I know, but you were with him though earlier. You would think he would give you some credit, or tell you it was a good job or not? No, see from 1909 to 1914, he was laid up, he was almost an invalid. He developed dropsy of the limbs, and his limbs were swelled way up from water, and that's what killed him. So he was bedridden then? He had an easy chair where he sat in all the time. Was he covered by insurance during that time? Well, I'll tell you, there's a little catch to that. See, the railroad company had to cover him, and he had insurance with the railroad company. But a crooked lawyer got him to sign a release, and he didn't know what he was signing. You know, when he was busy, you know, and when he came in on the road, and he had him sign a release, and he signed a release, so he couldn't sue the railroad company. There was no comeback, so. And my mother had to take in Washington to support the family. So he didn't get one cent then from the railroad? I don't know. They got a little bit, I don't know what it was. Just a little dab is what it was. Hardly paid, you know. It was a tough time then, too. The crooked lawyer, that's a crooked lawyer for him. There were no unions at that time. No. There was just one man for himself. That's right. Nobody was speaking up for anybody. That's right. Only the lawyers were running around with the signature on the paper. There should be, around Lansing, there should be a lot of them. I used to know a Swede up there, Carlson his name was. And he had 11 years on a Scottish sailing vessel. And it was a scream to hear him. He had his Scotch and his Swede mixed up. He'd get his Scotch and his Swede mixed up. And he was a card dead guy. I enjoyed it. He was an all around handy man, too. In fact, my cousin married his daughter. Carlson, yeah. Carl Carlson, I think is that his first name. I don't remember. It's been a long time ago. And in Lansing, now there was a Swedish church there. Oh, yeah. Did you belong to that one? No, there's what they call a Swedish Baptist church. Yeah. Up the valley, though. That's up in the lower valley. The road goes up below Lansing. Up the Swedish Baptist church up there. My grandmother and my grandfather are all buried up there. At that cemetery? At that cemetery. Behind the Baptist church. So they belonged to that church? My aunt, yeah. My mother and my aunt and grandmother all belonged to that Swedish Baptist church. So they lived not too far away, so they could walk there? They had a team, usually. The team. I think it was three miles down the river by road. We walked it a lot of times. Walked around the hill. So there was a little church in the valley? Swedish Baptist church, yeah, in the valley. Is it still there? It's still there. It has to be. I haven't been there for a long, long time. I want to take my boys and take a trip up there one of these days and show them where I was born and raised at Alcatraz and look around and see. It's familiar to me. I was up there to see. When was it? When Joe went up that time. You know when that was? That was about 12, 13 years ago. Casey was a crippled young man. Long ago than that. Yeah, that was probably six. That time was late, about that time. Huh? That time. So your brothers, now, what kind of work were they able to get up there? Did they have to move out of the area? What's that? Your brothers. My brother Don, he was a superintendent of a school. And he was a teacher. No, no. He went to University of Upper Iowa University and got his degrees there. And he also was on the Lyceum, traveling with the college Lyceum group, singing. And then he got a job with a power company at Genoa, Wisconsin. He worked for a power company up there. And he's the one that got me the job with the power plant down here. And then he went from there to Genoa. And that was a new plant. He helped build that, you know, operate that, get it going. And then he quit there and went civil service, Joliet, Illinois. And he got a good job. He worked at, where was it he worked? I'm trying to think of now. He lived at Joliet. No, he lived at the— He lived at La Crosse, Wisconsin one time. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he lived at—well, no, it's up—no, below La Crosse. Stoddard. He lived at Stoddard for a while. And then the government come and got him during the war, and they drafted him as civilian instructor. And then they sent him to Fort Scott, Illinois, to teach young fellows radio. Was that the Second World War or the First? Huh? Was it the First World War or the Second? That had to be the Second, didn't it? Yeah. But he is younger than you or— Older. He was six years older than I am. I see. And he was the city—what was he? Electric wind inspector for the city of Albuquerque, the last job he had. Yeah, last job he had. Then he developed a heart and arteries, and he finally died, you know. He must have had Alzheimer's, Oscar. Could be, yeah. So the area where you were born and were not able to support any young people, they had to move out. Oh, yeah. To get another job. Mm-hmm. And how about the river traffic? Now, there was always good paying to be a river captain. Oh, yeah. And a young fellow come to me and he asked me, he come out of high school when I lived up in the Clara Isle, I lived there for a while, and he told me, he says, how about, what do you think of me going on the boat? I said, go ahead and go. That's a good job. That pays good. Because you're making money while you're traveling, while you're sleeping, too. And so, what was he, he come in there, just got home just before the holidays one time, and he come up to the house to see me, and he says, you know, he says, I'm glad I stuck it out. He says, at first I had trouble trying to sleep with those diesels, you know, close by. It kept me awake, but I got used to it, so finally I did. And he says, here he is. They paid him, they gave him a check to fly home, and he worked his way all the way home by boat, all the way up the river by boat. And, of course, he had all that extra money. He showed me a check for over $1,000. And the checks and money that the government gave him. And he said he likes it real well. He's going to stick it out. He's a young fellow. So that was a good-paying job. Oh, that's a good-paying job, boat job. So your family didn't belong to any organizations of Swedish background up there? No, no. No. Not at all? No. You didn't associate with any Swedes then? It was a Swedish settlement, is what it was. Yes, but they were spread around. Center Valley, is what they called it. Center Valley. Center Valley, yes. The Swedish settlement there. Baptist church and all of it, yes. And most of them were farmers? Yes, all were farmers, yes. So your father, he was not interested in farming? No, no. He was trying to do something else for you? He was a railroad man from the beginning. But you mentioned now that your grandfather, he has made some inventions in Sweden. He was an... I said if he had been this century, he'd have got a Nobel Prize for his work because he got a distinguished service medal from the king and queen for his work on rockets. Beginning of rockets. He compressed the powder so it would go higher and higher and be seen further and then he colored it for gold. Didn't they own a bakery too, Oscar? Oh yeah, he had a gristmill and a bakery. Grandfather did. But somebody else over on that though. In Närmland? Yeah. And it was in Forshaga? Yeah. And he died the same two weeks before your dad died? Yeah, that's right. My grandfather died two weeks before my dad died. And you never saw him? He never came to visit? No, I never saw him. And not your grandma either? No. How about the uncles and... I had one uncle, he married my dad's sister, Betty Dalben. She married a Dalben. I don't know whether they were married in the old country or they married here, I don't know. They were married in Sweden because Sophie was born in Sweden. Oh, that's right. I remember Sophie saying she was born in Sweden. So Dalben, that's where we do them. Where did they live? Chicago. Chicago. Oscar Dalben was my uncle on my father's side. Betty was my dad's sister. She used to tell me stories about Sweden, how the winters they had, the snow. He never did learn any Swedish. She said he understood it, but as soon as they... When I was a child, my mother and my aunt and them would talk Swedish. I knew what they were talking about, but when they talked to me, I couldn't understand it. I knew what they were talking about, but when they talked to me, then I couldn't do it. I couldn't answer in Swedish. But you could follow it. Oh, yeah. You talk Swedish? Yes. And do you have the same sex as yours? I used to count there. This was an interesting thing about that family that lived in Chicago. I thought that there were six girls and one boy, but the boy was killed. I never did meet him. But the girls, one was married to a Frenchman, one to a German, and was the other a Polish? I don't know. One of them was married to a different nationality. My cousins. They all lived in one... Three of them lived in one house. Three couples when we were up there one time because it was a three-level house. And they were all very clannish. They were all... The sisters had a club that they met every Friday, these six sisters. And they were always all together. And Oscar mentioned when they were growing up, they would travel. Four cars would go on it, and they'd go on a vacation. They'd all take a vacation at the same time. We lived at Marquette when I was a kid, and we got a call. They were coming across on the ferry. We didn't know who it was, so we went down and waited. And here, three carloads come off the ferry, come up the house. Man, the house was full. We had them sleeping on mattresses, on the living room, all over. There were 27 altogether. 27? 27 at one time. And they'd stay with them for a few days? Yeah, about two or three days. Two or three days. There was a crowd for your mother to take care of. Yeah. But they helped with the cooking, I suppose, all the time. Oh, sure, yeah. You know, I left. We got a big boat, and we took them fishing over by McGregor, down between Marquette and McGregor. And one of the fellas, he was a Kinney Rome salesman, and he'd just come back from Cuba. He was a furniture salesman, I bet he owned everything else, I guess. Anyway, he had a picnic bottle of bourbon from Cuba, and they were passing the bottle around to everybody. And so I told them, I said, Hey, why can't I have a little of it? They said, Okay, give him a little. They gave me a little shot, and I gulped that down, and I could already breathe for 15 minutes. Oh, it was powerful stuff. Bourbon, you know. So they all took a little shot of it? Yeah, they just, you know. This cousin, Sophie, she was the oldest of that family? Yeah, Sophie was the oldest. Tell him about that time that she was riding a motorcycle when she was 80, wasn't she? Yes, she was 80 years old, and one of the kids says, Come on, Sophie, get on, I'll take you downtown. So she rode him on a motorcycle, and they had an accident, and I don't know what happened. Skidded, I guess, or something. And they put her in the hospital, and in the hospital she got to talking about the races. And the doctor said, Hey, don't tell me that you're going to do it. Yeah, don't tell me you're going to the races now, horse racing, you know, ride a horse. I don't know, they kidded her. She rode a motorcycle at 80 years old, and got banged up in the hospital. So she was not afraid to tackle anything? No. And they were all married in so many different nationalities? Yes, all were married in different nationalities. What was Colas? Carl Colas. He hung himself, Carl hung himself. When I was married to Lamar, she was Frenchman. Yeah. And Kaplan, was he the German? I think he was. Kaplan, I think he's German. And, but they were, I thought that... They were the best gang to get, I'll tell you, when they get out on our front porch, we was on a bluff, up high over the railroad yards, and those guys get out there and singing and playing. And the people at the shop said, Hey, what's going on? Our boys are going out, listen to the boys. They could harmonize good, they could, the whole gang would get, they had what they called a sweet potato, you know. And they'd play that sweet potato and that harmonica, and they'd get out there and sing and harmonize. Man, they were good. And they... Were telling about how you rode in front of the train and shot the rabbits, and then you sent them to Chicago, didn't you, to your family? Oh yeah. Yeah, my brother Bob and I, we, he worked in the yards, so we'd get on a train, on the front end of a pilot of an engine, steam engine, and the snow on the ground, and we'd shoot rabbits going up to Monona. And we'd pick them up, deadhead, deadhead back, just the engine. My stepdad was a conductor on the train, see, my mother married again after Dad died, and he was a conductor, and we picked up 31 rabbits when we got home, got down to the yards. We had 31 rabbits, we had to dress them, and we'd freeze them. We'd ship them into Chicago and they'd have a rabbit pie. So you were sitting down there and shooting... On the front of the pilot, yeah. They're going slow, see, and we'd get them on, he'd get them one side, I'd get them another. And we don't know how many the fox or the owls got, but we picked up 31 rabbits, because nowadays you can't do it, you're limited, you can only limit. We'd clean them and freeze them, we'd send 50, 70 pounds to Chicago, and they'd have a big rabbit feast. So they paid them during the Depression to have a little bit extra? They paid off them to do something like that? Oh yeah, sure, you know, we didn't know they liked rabbit, but they'd have a big rabbit pie, you know, and have the whole gang together. We had a lot of fun. So what kind of dinners did your mother put on when there was a big crowd like that came from Chicago, 27 people? Was it hard to arrange, or did they bring food with them? No, they'd go to the store and get stuff. It was not uncommon for a mom to cook a dozen eggs in the morning. Mother, she's cooked for railroad men all her life, so it was no trouble for her. She had boarders? No, no boarders. Well, for a while, she had my stepdad's brother, he boarded with us for a while. She'd get meals any time of the day, she could get a meal any time of the day. She was handy in the kitchen. But she had no girls to help her? Did she have to hire somebody? No, no. No? She took care of herself? Oh yeah. Did any of your boys help her out? The older boys, yeah, we did. You peeled the potatoes? Well, I helped mother a lot of times doing dishes. I started early. What's that, thundering again? Yeah. More rain is on the way. So you had an interesting upbringing then in El Cajon. Oh yeah, oh yes. I want to take my boys and go back there to County Seat where I was born and show them where I was born and see where I brought, where I, the last time I was up there, there was two blocks between our house and where the jail was up on the hill in El Cajon. Now that's all filled in and built up now. Can you imagine that? In all that time, they filled it in and built it up. That changes quite a bit then, since you're... My... This is side two, continuation with Oscar Magnussen and Moline Renaud. June 4th, 1986. Side two. So your family now, were they really Swedish? Could you understand that? Did they talk Swedish? Oh yeah. You understood? My mother, my grandmother, they were all Swedish. My grandmother, see, my mother's father died when they were babies. And she married a, she married a Swedish man. They were babies. And she married a, she married a Martinsen. He was a big Norwegian. And he's the one that moved all the... They were cutting the trimmer down, and of course they were having flash floods then, and they had to move all the buildings on high ground. And she hired him to move all the buildings, because he boarded a room there and had to cut all the logs to do the work, you know, and moved all the buildings on high ground. And when he come to get paid, he says, I'll take you. That's one way of getting out of paying a bill, ain't it? And she said yes? She married Matt Martinsen, yeah. Were they a big settlement of Norwegians there too, or... Not too big, no. There was quite a few... It was Swedish, mostly Swedish in Center Valley. So when you went to school now, did you have mostly Swedish boys? I didn't go to... No, I went to a... I went to a grade school in Elketer, and then when we moved to Marquette, then I went to Marquette School, public school there. And Marquette is the same as McGregor, you said? North McGregor, yeah. It used to be North McGregor. Why did they change the name on it? Well, because McGregor... They didn't want that McGregor name to it, see? McGregor was getting all the credit for a lot of things that they weren't entitled to. The railroad was a big business up there, and a lot of people in McGregor were working for the railroad. The shops were up there, big shops. And so they decided to change it to Marquette. Separate, you know. So McGregor got all the publicity, and on your Des Moines Register, for one thing, everything was McGregor, not much about North McGregor. That's one reason why they changed the name to Marquette. So the city then was all Republican, I suppose? Mostly, yeah. That's right. How about you, though? Your family, were they leaning towards the Republican? Oh, yes. Mostly Republican. Why was that? I don't know why it is. I've been a Republican as long as I can remember. And so was your dad? Oh, yes. And your brothers, too? My brothers were, too. I'm pretty sure my brothers were. I don't know about Don. I think Don was a Donetsk Republican. Don was. I know Bob was. So, well, you came together, and you had Swedish food, of course, for all the different dinners and doings. Oh, yeah. And is there something special you remember that your mother made for certain occasions, for Christmas? No, I... There's nothing special? No, nothing special. Well, I do remember that one time my aunt sent us a goose. My dad bought one, and my brother bought one, so we had three geese. And the one that my aunt sent we gave to my brother Bob, and that was full of fresh eggs. Big goose, and it was full of fresh eggs. So Bob got the eggs. Well, I remember when kids... My aunt used to ship us a lot of, you know, beef. Beef and hamburger, sausage balls and beef, you know, hamburger and roast. Butchered in the fall, late in the fall, in the cool. And we'd always get a big box of, you know, from the express office, meat from the farm. So you didn't have any lutefisk up there? What? Lutefisk? I've heard of it, yeah. But you never had it up there? Not to know of. My dad would buy it every time he got a chance. I knew that. What is lutefisk? It's called ling in English, you know, a big fish. Oh, it's a big fish, huh? Yeah, it's dried up in the summer and dried. I think I've tasted it when I was a kid, yeah. But your mother didn't prepare it, though? No. There was no way for her to get it up there, perhaps? I guess not. I know they used to buy it at the market sometimes, lutefisk. Usually they'd have it on holidays. Yeah, on Christmas. Yes. And there was no other Swedish customs or doings that you remember of? No, no. No dances or anything like that? No, nothing like that, no. So they were an all-American citizen? That's right. In the Swedish Center Valley? Center Valley, yeah. And do you remember any, did you go to their Baptist church? I went there when I ran my aunt's farm, I used to go there quite often, yeah, the Baptist church. Did they preach in Swedish, then? Huh? Did they preach? No, it was English. But the preacher was a Swede. He's a, whoa, I'm trying to think of his name now. I can't think of his name. It's hard for me to remember, I'm getting too old, I can't remember. But he was a Swede, all right, because I fished on the trout stream in the valley down in front of his house one time. He was telling me that he was fishing and he caught a big trout. The season hadn't opened yet and the losses throw it back, so he threw it back. So he was righteous. So there was good fishing then on the river, on Mississippi? Oh yeah, always been good fishing on the Mississippi. Did you fish as you could sell to other people? No, no, no. Just for your own need? When we lived at El Quero, my dad, you know, he had his fish poles on the engine, the small engine, see? And when they changed the engine, they were told to put, when they got a different engine, to be sure and transfer the poles. That was understood. They had to put dad's fish pole on the tank of the other engine. Dad had come home a lot of times with his dinner bucket full of dressed fish. He'd have four hours, two or three, four hours wait in Marquette. He'd go take the boat, go fishing. He'd come home a lot of times with his bucket with coffee in the bottom, the old fashioned one, sandwiches on top, and he'd have that full of dressed fish. Did the coffee actually keep warm there? Well, yeah. He drank it cold, I imagine, too. I don't know whether he had it on the engine or not, but his coffee in the bottom, about a half a gallon in there. I can remember my dad used to, he had a 22-foot launch inboard, and he'd go out there in the main channel, and he'd have a long anchor rope, and he'd have a long anchor rope and an anchor, and that boat, with a long anchor rope, he had a cane pole, and he made his own lure. He made his own lure out of a home comfort tobacco can. And that long anchor rope done the trolling for him. And he had a heavy sinker on that lure that he made, and he'd come home with walleyes, a string of walleyes like that. Dad was an expert at catching walleyes. If he'd have made that lure and patented it, we'd have been wealthy today. So do you have any other lures left from that time? No, no. I know how they were made. I know one that's pretty close to it on the market. Nothing like what Dad made, but it's closest to it. If he'd have made that back there, had it patented back there, we'd have been millionaires today. So he was an expert fisherman? Oh yeah, he was an expert. He took a fellow with him on the piling across the river. He took a fellow with him, and this guy was so mad, Dad was catching fish and he wasn't catching any. He says, because your pole is doing that. So Dad says, here, take my pole and I'll take yours. And Dad still caught fish. He was so mad, he was ready to throw both the poles in the river. What about Don's invention of the iron that he controlled? My brother Don, when he was in college, he designed an iron on paper. Thermostat controlled. So, you know, the old irons, if you let them sit, they'd burn all through the iron. And we'd try to get him to patent it, and he wouldn't do it. And it wasn't long before somebody would come up with it. I had the same idea. He could have patented that automatic iron. And he also built radios. Huh? He built radios. Yeah, he built radios and sold them while he was in college. So you all went away then from the small community where you were born? Oh yeah. And settled somewhere else? That's right. I went to Mason City and worked for a patent company for a while. And then I left there to run my aunt's farm. She was all alone on the farm with about 30 head of cattle and three horses. Her son had moved away. She went to Washington State, him and his wife. So I left her all alone. You were alone then? Yeah, so I went down. She asked me to come down and run the farm for her, so I did. And it was nice because I was handling coal meat and I was getting rheumatism from handling coal meat at the Decker patent company. And so it was an excuse for me to get out of there. So I went down and ran the farm. That was a hard work though with so many cattle. Oh yeah, I loved that work. I enjoyed that, man. One time the telephone rang and the fellow down below wanted to know if we wanted to cut hay. He had 11 acres of hay. And I said to my aunt, tell him we'll cut it on shares. So we hauled the team down and pulled the mower and the dump break behind it. We went down and cut. We cut in the morning and stacked it in the afternoon. And that way we got extra hay. It was the life on the farm. That's right. And then you married a girl from Shaw City. How did you meet her? Well, I met her on the dance floor. Local dance up there? Marquette. See, her folks moved down. In fact, her folks rented a house from my mother. And that's how I got acquainted with her. They were dancers then arranged by the different... It was a city, what they call a commercial club. Oh, I see. In a hotel? No, it's in a city hall. And there were the young people met them and danced around. And she was German, wasn't she? Oh yeah, they were German. The Ritzs were German, oh yeah. She died then? Yes. We were divorced. We were divorced. Oh yeah, we got divorced. And then about six months after... What was it? Six months after we were divorced, she got married. And then she died about two years afterwards. And then you met Eula Tipton? Down here in the Quad Cities? No. I first met her at Kansas City one time at a church convention down there. So at church you said, what church did you join then when you married the first time? Did you marry in a Baptist church? It was Methodist church. Methodist church in Marquette? Marquette, yeah. And then for 39 years I've been in what they call the Body of Christ now. For 39 years I've been in the Body of Christ. It's the Old Pentecost is what it is. In fact, when I first met the body, I met the founder of it. Will Soutter was the founder of it. Today he died and I got to talk to him and shake hands with him, a fine old fellow. See, what happened, he was a preacher on a boat on the Ohio River. And the Lord talked to him and said, why don't you preach my gospel? That's how it started. He started preaching his original gospel. The same as the first church on the day of Pentecost. How did you happen to come into that church? How did you join? You don't join it, you just get into it. You don't join nothing. I've been in it for 39 years and I've never found anything better. It's here in the course it is? Oh yeah, we got our church set up here on 2753rd Street, back there in the field. How old is our church? About 8 years old? Mula? I don't know. It's about 8 years old. We have a convention three times a year. In fact, we got a convention coming up 13th, 14th, and 15th. Louisville, Kentucky. The head of our church, Tommy Jolly, he wanted to build a Quonset hut. That would handle 3,000 people and not have to heat it. He had the batter boards all laid out for a big... And he couldn't get a green light from the Lord to build it. He was waiting on the Lord. He went a couple of years and no church. Then he heard about this Bethany Baptist Church for sale. So he went and looked down in Louisville. They went to look at it, a bunch of fellas. They had it. The Bethany Baptist had a 69-acre and a $4.25 million church. A beautiful church. Our boys looked it over and they said, We'll give you $800,000 for it. They were asking $1.25 million. The bank had had it for two years. So the salesman says, Give us $850,000 and you can have it. So they bought it. They paid cash for it. All the churches went together and paid cash. Bought it. The salesman got fired. The bank fired the salesman. They figured he should have gotten more money out of it. We've had three conventions a year down there. April, June, and September over Labor Day. This is Louisville, Kentucky. Louisville, Kentucky. This is the headquarters then for it. That's the headquarters. Body of Christ. Yeah. Beautiful. It's a massive church. They had a gymnasium. They took in the gymnasium and made a church for the local people. Because they're going to sell their church. They can't keep that big building open. It would cost too much. So they built a church in that building. They added on a dining room. Now they can feed a thousand people in one hour. We were down there in April. How many independent churches are there across the United States? They belong to this unit. We're in the minority, about 4,000 people. We're in the minority. Across the whole nation? Yeah, 4,000 people. How can they afford such a big church? Because we tithe. Everybody tithes. We've been tithing ever since I've been married. At the September or April meeting, what was the collection? They took in over a quarter million dollars, just people donating. Just people, just free will. No thing. They just asked for money. And it came in so fast that they finally had to tell the people to quit. Over a quarter million dollars. See, the head of the church, Tommy Jolly, he's a bachelor. And he is a man of God, boy. And he started people years ago to make pledges. You know, pledge so much for the building funds or whatever they needed. And that's how come they have the money. And Brother Jolly said, I'd like to get a million dollars in the bank. I've been to conventions in Louisville, Kentucky years ago. When a preacher, they take up a collection, give a preacher anywhere from $1,000 to $1,500. So they trade cars to get a better car. They take care of their preachers. The preacher now used to work for General Motors in Lansing, Michigan. That was his home. And the last time they changed, 16 ministers were chained around, rotated. They rotate the preachers around. In other words, they all preach the same thing, but some of them had better delivery. It's very good. How did you teach the pastors then? What kind of school did they go through? They have a minister's meeting once a month, as in the scripture, discussing the scriptures. And they preach the baptism of the Holy Spirit and speaking in tongues. You've heard of that. So when you go down to Kentucky now, for instance, to Louisville, are you a delegate then or you go just as a member? We're just a member, yeah. Anybody a member can go? Why, sure. You don't have to be a member to go. You don't have to be a member. They welcome anybody. How long have you belonged to this church? 39 years now. This year, 39 years. So there's been a church like that in this area for that long, for 40 years? We got one in Oswego, Illinois. It used to be Aurora. But it was a hard element back around in bad times. So they sold their church and built one at Oswego. They bought a church there and remodeled it. And they have one in Indianapolis. Where have they got them all? Indianapolis, St. Louis. There's five or six in Illinois. Yeah, six of them in Illinois. So you met your wife then at one of these conventions? That's right, conventions. The first time I saw her, I thought she was a stuffed-up shirt. She also belonged to this church. She was in the Kansas City. Kansas City? When I saw her, yeah. You were born in Joplin, Missouri. So they had a church back there then? No, I worked in Kansas City. And there, how did you join up with them? My sister went to church here and she told me about the church there in Kansas City. That's how I got it. And then my sister's little boy had leukemia. And I came up here to help her. That's how I met him. But how about you being a Stanch Baptist now, a Swedish Baptist? How could you transfer over to a new denomination? Well, when I was a youngster, I was baptized in a congregational church. And then when we moved to Marquette, then I had to go to the Methodist church. And from the Methodist church, I went to LeClerc. Then I went to the, what was that, Presbyterian. I've been in a lot of churches. But this is the finest I've ever been. Four Square, where you went to Four Square? Yeah, Four Square. That was Four Square, yeah. But this is the finest in there. I like this. I've been here 39 years. Try it up. You have to come try us. Be our guest sometime. East Moline, where do you go to church? Faith Lutheran. They must be dry compared to your church. Huh? My church is probably pretty dry compared to your church. It's a little bit more lively. What's the difference? Try it sometime. What is the difference now between the Methodist, for instance, that you were used to? Oh, all the difference in the world. But they say there's only one Bible. Yeah, it's the way they put it out. The way they interpret it, put it out. Our church really can skin you alive sometimes. A preacher can get up there and eat. One thing about it, our ministers are not voted in and out. The people. So they speak the truth. And if people like it, well, they, you know, a lot of ministers are fearful to tell their congregation different things. But ours are not. You can fire or hire a new preacher or teacher if you want to, though. You decide how you want to have it. No, no. The church body. The church body, ministers. But if the minister is not good in your judgment, what do you do then? Well, we've never really had one. We never had one? No. We've had one that left because he didn't like it. Back in the old days when the church first started here, the ministers more or less didn't have an office and they conducted business out of their back pocket. And then when they changed over and started having an office procedure and keeping books like they should be, a lot of the ministers didn't like that. So some of them left. So we have a well-run office where they account for every penny of the money. And they spent wisely. They're aware the people works hard for their money and they spent wisely. Mom, get him something to write his name and address on, will you? Something to write it on. Back to the ministers now. Do you have a collection for your church only or for the worldwide body of work? We tithe and then we pledge so much. Whatever you can feel, we're not pushing you too hard. We pledge so much a year. Every six months we pledge. Now when we go to convention, our church takes $500 along. How much? I think they take $1,000. Oh, yeah. You can check it. I think they give you a little. Here's your $500. You finally confessed it. Well, it used to be $500. Back in the old days when food was less expensive. Now every church brings $1,000 in there. Well, there's 31 ministers that I counted one time. But each church brings their contribution from their assembly because they spend about $25,000. Those three days were there. All it takes to go to convention is just your gas down and motels all. Because you eat, it don't cost you nothing to eat at the cafeteria. But you don't have to even have... they provide bedding for people that don't want to... The local people don't need no rest. Yeah. And then they have facilities on the ground. Now, just last year, they built a building just for the ministers and their wives where they have their own private room when they go. So they don't have to be out the expense of the motel. Because the motels in Louisiana are terrible. They're crummy. The church is on Dixie Highway and it is really bad condition. What is it, about 9,100? Yeah. But they were very low class. Until the church started having conventions down there and they found out that so many church people stayed there three times a year. So they have upgraded the motels now that so many comes in there from the church. And they used to give the church, I guess they still do, give the church people discounts. Because they know the people won't carry off things. They can trust them that they don't carry their towels and not destructive and everything. So they give them a discount. So that's every year then you have a convention like that? Three times a year. Three times a year. April, we went to that. How can everybody afford? You can pick either one then, in other words. You don't have to go to all three. You can go to all three. We want to go to all three. On account of her dad being so late, we can't go this June. What is it, 13th and 14th? Next weekend. Yeah, next weekend. We can't go on account of her. But everybody, like when we go, we take a carload and they help for the expensive gasoline. And there are only tanks. We can drive down there and buy a tank of gas. We have the gas up between Louisville and Indianapolis. But I guess we could really maybe get into Louisville on a tank of gas. But everyone, like a lot of the widow women go together. Maybe there's four or five or six in a car, so they all contribute toward the gas. So it doesn't make it hard on one. So that's a real family affair then. Yes, it is. Really. Of course, when you go down there, like on a Thursday night, they have a service on Thursday night. And that's usually a good crowd there on Thursday night. And then Friday morning, you get up and from 8 to 10, they have breakfast, don't they? Yes. And then about 10 o'clock they start service in the morning. And then they don't quit now until 4 o'clock. And then they go and have dinner at the cafeteria. And then they come back and at 8 o'clock have night service. And what I mean, what is it? When all the churches come together, we have about a 50-some-odd member band. And we also have, I forget how many was in the choir, over 200 or 300, I'm not sure on that. Combine all the choir, the best choir members. The band leader, the main band leader, he picks out the instruments that he wants from the different assemblies and they all come together and they go down a day early and practice. So we had 50, I think 50-some in the band the last time. We have real good music. Our leader has emphasized really having music to perfection. So there's some musical church, gentlemen. Oh yeah, oh yeah, very good. We have an excellent piano player. In fact, we've got three young girls that can play the piano. But we have lots of good emphasis on music, doing it right. It's really good. So you have the opportunity to have your own input too. If there's something you don't like, you can say your... What's that? Can you say your piece of mind, for instance? No. You can't do that. No, no. Well, yes, we can. You're into certain respect. Come here, Kevin. She was going to take me along just for company, my Aunt Betty. And it was about that time when the U-boats, German U-boats were sinking. So they wouldn't give her transportation, wouldn't let her leave the country. We could have had a boat sunk. We were going by ship, you know. So you had to stay home then? I had to stay home. I had no chance to go to Europe. Now, I understand that you're... From what I understand, you've got to get all your material from the churches over there. They keep the record of everything. Yes. Yes, but you can get the information also from the Mormon archives in Salt Lake City. Is that right? Yes. They send all the records. All over the world, not only Sweden. The Mormon church has all the records.