 The second one is page number one, and it's a sequel to Ratchet Rutherford in Rockford, Illinois. If I ask you now, it was easy to get into Rockford? Oh yes. It was a more handy city, so to speak, and to get control of it than Detroit? I don't know. I never had any difficulty in Detroit either. Were people helpful and helpful in answering the questions you had asked? Oh yes. I never had any difficulty in contacting people. I've always had it easy. And then you got a, how do you say, transfer to a new church here in Rockford? Oh yes. Still the Assembly of God? Yes. When we first came in 1960, it was a small church. It was much smaller than the one we belonged to in Detroit. It was down on 14th and 2nd. Were you active? Oh yes. Very active. On Sunday school? Yes, I had Sunday school class and I was there playing. I played the piano, and Aldor played the violin in the orchestra. Our oldest son played the violin in the orchestra. At that time, Aldor had a boy scout. And it was under the church's control? Yes. For a while, I was in charge of the women's association in the church. So the Assembly of God is the same as the Pingsvänner in the Swedish Church of the Federation? In the big whole, yes. Do they use the same rituals? Yes, and yes. The first time I came to the church in Detroit, I had grown up in the Pingsväckelsen in Sweden. It was almost like a shock. I didn't understand anything. But when they started singing, it was the same songs, but with different words. And when they started praying, it felt like we had the same God here in America as we had in Sweden. How did you learn English? Because TV wasn't that popular at that time. I went to school a little, but not much. I listened to the radio and talked to people. It was easier to talk to Americans. When you were among Swedes, you didn't want to speak English. You were just Swedish. So we were more of an American-centric group in Detroit. I learned a lot of English while I was listening to the church. I had my Swedish Bible with me. It didn't take long before I understood the whole sermon. Swedish and English are in the same language group, so it's not difficult to learn. But at the same time, it's nice to keep Swedish. It's not difficult to grow up with Swedish. When the kids get old enough to go to school, they have an English lexicon. Yes, and they have been the best when it comes to me. They have been my best teachers. And when you're open, it's easy. It's not easy in the beginning. Everything is possible, but when you think about it, it hasn't been difficult. Everything is going well. God has helped. Has the church been a good support? I don't know how we could have done it without God's help. When we first came to America, it was very difficult to get an apartment. We wrote letters to our parents. Alda's mother prayed a lot and prayed a lot to God. My mother did the same. I remember how my grandmother wrote to us. Suddenly, we got an apartment. It was almost impossible to get one in 1949. The kids had come home from church and my mother was singing and was so happy. They asked, why are you so happy, mom? I said, because the kids had gotten an apartment in America. She knew that we had gotten an apartment. We wrote to her and she wrote back saying that she already knew that we had gotten an apartment. That's what has been holding us back during the years. When our children grow up, our grandparents can't help us. We take care of the kids and my daughter goes to work and the kids are here. But when our kids were small, we didn't have any support. But it has gone well. The people who had apartments and rented them out in the years 1948, 1949 and 1950, the rentals were usually in the houses. No, we had another family that lived on the second floor. But they didn't own the house. It was a big apartment with two bedrooms, a bathroom, a living room and a kitchen. And a basement. I think we gave $50 a month for that apartment. It was a little different. But the dollar was worth a lot more. We had a lot of money at that time. When you think back, the value of money has changed a lot. When I was 14 years old, I started working at ASEA as an accountant. I earned $30 a month. So you didn't have any thoughts in your family about continuing with your teaching? Or was it not so popular with your family? I had a very easy time in school. I was one of the best students in the class. My teacher sent me home and asked my parents if I could continue with my teaching. But we lived in a cramped house. There was so much going on. It was during the Depression. There was no talk about it. I didn't like office work. But my younger sister went to a higher education school. But Aldor started going to school after he had finished high school. He studied dance at the choir school. Then he took his engineering exam and went to a technical institute in Stockholm. The first two years we were married, he worked from 3 to 5 in the evening. He came home at 11.30 pm and studied until midnight. He took his engineering exam at that time. You had a big family. Did your other siblings also go to higher education? Yes, on my side. My oldest brother had a lot of studies. My sister Gulla was a teacher. But when there was a will to go, we went. How have your siblings succeeded in Sweden? With work and marriage. My oldest sister... They have been doing well. They have managed. There is no surplus, but she is not so strong. She has been very ill. My sister Maria got married. Her husband went straight to Africa as a missionary. It was in Belgian Congo at that time. When he was 49 years old, he became ill. He died and had cancer. She was left alone with four small children. They came back to Sweden. Two boys and two girls. Two of them are pastors in Swedish congregations. One daughter is married to a missionary and they are in Sudan now. My oldest daughter works at a company. They have managed well. My youngest sister's husband works at ASEA. They have four children. Their children are very musical and have a good life in Sweden. They have children and grandchildren. We have said this many times. We feel that through our lives, there is a blessing of God that has been with us for generations. Not just one, but two or three generations. It has been Christians and that blessing has been with us. We still feel it. I hear a lot about young people and children. They have problems with children in schools. We have never had any difficulties. So your children are still stuck in the slums? Yes, two of the children are in a slum. Our two boys belong to another congregation in Springfield. They go to God's house. How long did it take you to go back to Sweden? Thirteen years. The boy who was three years old when we left was fifteen. We had two more children. So you visited Stockholm and Västerås? Yes, we were at home for two years. Robert had to go back after two and a half weeks. I stayed a few more weeks. It was interesting to see how the cousins played. Loas spoke to them in English and they answered in Swedish. They could play as well as they wanted. But before we went back Loas spoke good Swedish. She didn't want to change it when she came back. We were very happy to go back that summer. That fall, Aldors father passed away in November. That was the last time we saw him. We were very happy. Both parents were alive. We were very happy. How would you say that Sweden would have changed? Oh yes, it would have. Were people different in your opinion? No, I don't think so. I don't think we noticed that much then. Maybe we noticed later on. But the only thing is that when you come back after so many years you don't notice that it was thirteen years. You think it was like you saw it yesterday. We were very happy to come back and be together as a family. It was very nice. But it was back to America again. Yes, of course. It's becoming more and more like that. We have been in America longer than we have been in Sweden. Both Aldor and I were 29 years old when we came over. So now we are a bit over. But it's a long time to become an immigrant and change. Not so much. 29 isn't that bad. We have seen other people who have come over when they were between 30 and 40 years old. Maybe even a little older than that. Then it's harder. It's like in nature when you move a tree. You take a small tree and it's easier to get the roots. But you take a big tree and... And the old soil gets stuck. Yes, that's what it is. You break the roots. What did you see in Sweden? You stayed only 2 1⁄2 weeks the first time. We visited our relatives and friends in 1961. But we didn't see much difference between 1961 and 1948. There wasn't much difference at all. But later than that, the Swedes have changed their thinking quite a bit. Especially towards the American people and the American government. But in 1961, we didn't see much difference. Did you visit any of the old factories that you worked with? No, not at 1961. But later on, we traveled so many times to Sweden. After 1961, we went there almost every other year. We go to Sweden, we go across the street almost. But in 1965, I went back to the company I used to work with in Mellahöjden. I talked to some of the old friends there. Some of them were still there and some were dead. But I talked to some of them there. It was interesting to see how that company had developed over that period of time. It must have been then 20 years, I guess. It was interesting to see how things have changed and developed to the better and improved in every respect. So I talked to some of them there. It was interesting. So politically now, how were you involved here? You became a citizen then after... I became a citizen as soon as I was... I think you had to be here 35 years, I guess it is. So I applied for citizenship after five years and then I became an American citizen. And my wife did the same. And I think that's the way to do it. I don't think if you live in a country and enjoy what the country has to offer, I think you should participate in the elections and in the social and economic and political life of the country where you live. I think the thing to do is to become a citizen. How were you affected by the political life? By your buddies at work or on your own experiences or thinking? Or how did you become a Democrat or Republican, whatever you choose? Well, of course you had... Because you were 29 when you came here. You had your way set politically, though. Yeah, that's right. Were you a Moderate or a Social Democrat? Well, in the political sense, I was a Swede. Let's put it that way. I was not the one or the other. I was just a Swede. Like now, I am a basic Republican because I believe in that system that they offer better than the Democrats. But besides that, I am an American. Let's put it that way. I see. Some Democrats have the rights and some Republicans have the rights, but to differentiate strictly one or the other is pretty hard to do. So therefore, I like to think of myself as an American. But I tend to be a Republican, if you can know what I mean. How did you... When you discuss it with your brothers in Sweden, or sisters in Sweden, are they looking upon you with an... Have you changed their opinion? Well, in the later years... No, that's quite a question there. To answer that directly is going to take a little time. But briefly, I'll have to say this, that as being an American, you have to defend the American Constitution and the American way of thinking. And that's what I've been trying to do. In Sweden, in later years, the Swedes are... They don't understand. They think they understand the American politics, but really they don't. They don't understand it. But the Swedish politicians especially, they are against the Americans' way of living. And they think that they have the rights and the Americans are wrong. So when it comes to discussing politics with my sisters and brothers, I try to avoid it as much as possible. But sometimes you can't. You have to get into it and discuss it a little bit. But I always give them the answer that I am an American, and I believe in the American system, and you are a Sweden, and we believe in the Swedish system. I remember one time just a few years ago, we were discussing the American government and the Swedish government, and I told this person, I said, you can keep your palm as long as you want them, and I'll keep my reagan. And that stopped the discussion right there. That was the end of it. So your sisters and brothers now, they tend to go by Palmas? Yes, they do. All of them? Basically all of them, yeah. Well, there are some that are more, what do you call it, höger, höger, höger, synnerlig. But they were still defending Palme? Yeah, some of them were still defending Palme. I said, you can keep your palm as far as I'm concerned, and I'll keep my reagan. And that stopped the discussion. Then I told them, I told them frankly that I didn't come here to discuss politics. I came here to visit my friends and relatives and have a good time, and I don't want to discuss politics with Swedes. So that usually stopped the... What do you think is the, in American ears now, Palmas way of politics? What is the most offending you think he had? Well, he was just a big shout and had a big mouth, and that's about all. I remember the one time he tried to get in to see President Reagan, and he didn't get in. President Reagan didn't want to see him. And the reason was that Palme had been too much towards the left, you know. And we know that in America we are not friends with the left as much as the Swedes are. So you think he is looked upon by the Americans as a communist then, more or less? More or less, yes. Yes, he is. So Reagan didn't want to see him, and I think that was a very good gesture of President Reagan not to see him. So politics is a hard question to crack then. Yeah. When you meet your relatives. Yeah, it's a little ticklish, to put it that way. But I try to avoid it because it's no use to discuss politics with Swedes. They are so stubborn and they are so set, so I said you might as well keep your palm as far as I'm concerned. So... So in the technical field, have you followed what has happened in Sweden in recent years? Oh yeah, oh yeah. In the car industry, especially in the U.S. and in Volvo. Sure. I'm reading the Swedish technical journals quite a bit. And through my brother in Stockholm we have contact with the Swedish developments. Sure, sure. And it's quite remarkable that the Swedes have, I think I'm correct in saying that the Swedes have developed the robot industry more than any other nation. The robots came from Germany originally, but the Swedes have developed it, and ASEA and Westeros are probably the forerunners when it comes to robot industry. They produce the big ones. They produce the big ones and the good ones. Now ASEA has a factory up in Wisconsin here. I've been up there a number of times. The Swedes are making the robots in Sweden, but they are assembling them in Wisconsin here. And they are good, good machines. Very, very good. And that's for the big heavy industry? Big heavy industry, yes. And they're supplying robots mostly to the automotive companies. In fact, I was going to buy one for my company here, but it never materialized. For some reason it didn't work out. But the Swedes are good when it comes to technical advancements. Very good. So I follow this as much as I can, you know. And my brother, of course, in Sweden, my youngest brother, he had his own company in Sweden, a mechanical company, and he's up on it quite well. So you can play notes on what's happening over here? Oh, yes. And my oldest brother, he's retired now for many years, but he worked for a company in Linköping, Flygverkstaden, in Linköping for many years. And then he moved to Pentaverken in Skövde. He was an engineer for a department there in Skövde for many, many years. And then after that he moved to Upplands Väsby. Upplands Väsbyverken, I think that's what it's called. Up in Upplands Väsby, outside Stockholm. So all of us brothers are technically inclined, you might say. So if you had the capital, you could have started something very big here in Rockford, if you had your brothers over here. Yeah, I could have had, yes. But you had no thinking in those lines? Well, mostly because of finances. I couldn't swing it. It was too much money and all. Was it harder for one person like you to start something in the 1970s? Yes, it was. Because if you take now Svan Hilman and Erik Andersson, they were just working guys, but it was way, way back. They started with the raw tools of the time. That's right. My boss Ernest Estwing, he didn't have any money when he started. He had to borrow a thousand dollars from another Swedish in Rockford to start his business. He didn't have any money. But he was able to borrow the money and got going that way. But that was back in the 20s. That's different. You can't compare that to the 60s. In the 60s, you had to have a little capital to start a business. The industry is too sophisticated now to be up to snuff. In other words, you've got to have more modern technology and it costs too much money. To be successful, yeah. So you almost have to have a million dollars then today to start something. Almost, almost. So that time when they started the company, it's now the Swedish immigrants in the 1920s and 30s. Is that possible for one that is laid off today, for instance, to do that? Yeah, you can't do that. No way. There's no way to do that? No way. No way. You can't do it. And today there's more competition, you know. You can't even think about it. Everything is volume today. Yeah, everything is volume. But back in those days, like you said, they had two hands, you know, and that's all they had. And with a lot of hard work, they made a go of it. So when you left the automotive industry, you still had kept up with what was happening in it. You know, the Japanese and the Europeans that came in and got a foothold here. What happened actually in Detroit? Were they sleeping there in the late 60s and 70s? You might say that, yeah. You might say they were sleeping. Because you came in here in the 50s with something very revolutionary in the industry. Yeah, that's right. You had like the dimmer and the adjustable seats and everything. But then it stopped. Yeah. Well, then the Japanese came in with their products here. And they had proven that they could make a good automobile, a quality automobile, for the same money as you could buy an American car. Just about the same money. And you get more quality and you get better mileage and so on, so why not buy a Japanese car? And in the meantime, Detroit people, they sat back and it seemed like they just were sleeping. They didn't do anything about it for a few years. And then later on, they finally woke up a little bit and said that we have to be competitive with the Japs. And we have to build a car that will give you 30 miles an hour. So they have done that. Now today you can buy an American car that gives you 30 miles an hour without any trouble at all. But a few years ago you couldn't do it. But the Japs had proven already that it could be done. So in the 50s, whatever General Motors produced, the people bought it. And it was produced by the engineers and by the thinking machines in their offices. But nowadays the people are giving them impulses over to what they want. You might say that. And they have to change accordingly. You might say that, yeah. And because there is more competition from abroad, they have to change their thinking. And they have done it now, but sometimes it's too late. What do you think will happen now with the unions when the robots come in here to replace hundreds of workers in the painting department? It's going to be a problem. You think so? It's going to be a problem, yes. Because the robots, they don't have any social security, pension plan or anything. No, that's right. It's going to be a problem. But then the people, they will be the customers. They don't have a job. No. So then the robots can't buy the cars. The robots themselves will create jobs. They will take away jobs, yes, but they will also create jobs. But do you think they will take away more than they produce? Probably. It's debatable. It's debatable because somebody has got to make the robots. I read, for instance, that in Japan, this watch that I got here, it's made in Japan. It's Seiko. It's one of the best watches you can buy. This watch, I read about it, it's been made by robots and assembled by robots. That's hard to conceive, that a robot can make the part for this watch and assemble it. For us, it's almost unthinkable, but it's being done. But once those robots are produced, they will last a long time. Yes, they will. You will replace a few parts here and there. Yes, we will. But I think the future is going to be, in America as well as other countries, the future is going to be robot labor. Because they have less sick leaves. Oh, sure, sure. And the labor that remains are going to work, say, 30 hours a week, 35 hours a week. And they're going to sit there and press a button and get the robots to go to work. So, you retired about two years ago. Right, right. You were the chief engineer then. Yes, after 25 years of service. And there's about 400 employed on there. Today, it's roughly 400 people. When I started, we had 60 people altogether in the company and the office, 60 people. And today, it's about 400 people. So they've been able then to produce and produce and even expand. Yes, right, right. We're exporting hammers and hatchets, you might say, all over the world except Russia. But we're selling hammers to South Africa and New Zealand and South American, European countries and Scandinavian countries and all over. So that means that this 100 percent steel hammer has been beaten out of the wood hammer. It's very successful. I wouldn't say that, but a steel handle is particularly intended for a tradesman, for a carpenter. A homeowner wouldn't have any use for it, but a tradesman, a fellow that makes his living on using a hammer, he's got to have the best. So he's the one that's buying the Estong hammer. A homeowner, he wouldn't want to spend $25 for a hammer. But the tradesmen, they don't mind it a bit because they want a good hammer. They want one that's of a neat quality. So that's why the Estong hammer is the top quality hammer that you can buy. And the factory here in Rockford, they produced the whole thing from the beginning? Everything, from the beginning to the end, everything. Everything is made right here in Rockford. As you mentioned, the old guy, he was over 90 when he... He was 97 years old, Ernest Estong. Did he visit the factory then, even up in the high age? He was semi-retired for many years, but he came in almost every day and just talked to people and checked things over, you know. And his whole heart was in the business, of course. So, and like I said before, he was my boss for many, many years. And he was interested in instrumental in the museum at the... Yes, yes. He was one of the original supporters of the museum. And I built a display there some years ago. It's still out there. You've seen it. That's very impressive. So that's one of the big names carrying Rockford. Then not only that, but in younger years he was active in the Rockford government, the city, the council, I guess you call it, of Rockford. He was working on the planning commission here in Rockford. He was working on the school board and a lot of different things. He was a very active man. It was when they had Swedish mayors in town. That's right, back then, in that time. But it was old-timers, P.A. Peterson and the names like that, they were gone when you came in. Yeah, they were gone. They were gone. It was a new era. Yeah, they were gone. But I heard about them and I know some of them, but most of them are gone. And then what we have done here, we have done a lot of traveling, and I think that's a good thing to do. We travel in this country, we travel east, west, south, north in Canada and even South America, we travel quite a bit. In fact, I checked the other day and I visited 44 states out of 52. By car then? Most of it by car, yeah. And some of it by business travel. In the company I've been traveling quite a bit, buying equipment and not selling. I've never been involved in selling, but buying stuff. That's been my job at the company, buying machines, you know, different kinds. So I've done a lot of traveling, and then we're traveling together. We're traveling in Europe quite a bit. My wife and I were on vacation trips, for instance. Last year we rented, together with my brother and sister, we rented a house down in the Alps in the southern part of Germany, and that was very interesting. In Germany I travel, I don't know how many times I've been to Germany, and the reason for that is because I speak German, so I can get by pretty good with German. Did you learn it in Sweden before you came here? No, I learned it here in this country. German? Yeah. You went to school there? Yeah, I went to school here and I took private lessons in German. In fact, I still study German a little bit, not as much as I used to, but I know enough German to get by. So you bought machinery for the company in Germany? I looked at some machines in different places in Germany. They wouldn't buy them yet, but they probably will someday, but we haven't done it yet. But there are some big machinery companies in Germany that we are interested in. So, like I said, we like to travel. We take a lot of these cruises, not a lot of them, but some, two or three of these cruise trips. A few years ago we took a trip over Norway from, I think it was Gothenburg, we started out and went all the way up the North Cape in Norway and then back again with a 10-day cruise with my brother and his wife. We like to travel. We like traveling. So you leave your worries and work behind you? Yeah, yeah. How about you have a shop at home after the daily work that you tinker around with things? Yeah, my hobby is woodworking. Oh, yeah, sure. Woodworking? Oh, yeah. I like woodworking. I do all kinds of stuff at home. I got a little shop in the basement here. But it's just as a hobby. But you are still called back then as a consultant to the company? Yes, yes. Oh, yeah. I'm still as a retainer fee, they call it. I get paid for it. That's a very good deal. And then as a hobby, we are very interested in music. I've been playing the violin for all my life and my wife has played the piano. And I play an organ. And so that's interesting for recreation, you know. I've taken lessons every week in my organ. And I find it interesting. Do you play at the church then? Yeah, I play the violin at the church, yeah. I play in the orchestra. And my wife is in the choir. We are active in church. We've always been active church people. Always been. And it's the only organization you belong to? You don't belong to the Swedish Culture Society? No, no. Just our assembly is the God Church. That's all we belong to. And that takes our time and that's all we've got time for. So, we like that. You were settled in Rockford, Illinois. Yeah, that's right. So that was a good move that you believe? We never regret it. Never regret it. We like it here and we're going to stay here. But of course, like I said, we go to Sweden quite a bit. Every year, just about. The last year and the year before. So, we travel probably too much. Oh, but you've got to keep getting more news and more knowledge. Yeah, yeah. I remember one year we went to Sweden and it so happened that my brother met us in Malmö, I believe. Yeah, we were in Germany. And we went up to Malmö with a ferry across from Lübeck, I believe it is. Travemünde. Travemünde, yeah. Travemünde. We took the ferry across. We had a... No, no, he met us in Frankfurt that way. He met us in Frankfurt and we traveled up to Travemünde with his car up to Malmö. And then he told us we were going to have a family reunion in Nybro in Eltnafur, Kalmar. And they had organized a family reunion on people on my father's side. So, for the first time I met 39 cousins in that family. You'd never seen them before? I'd never seen them before. Never seen them. So, that was quite an experience. And then after that we made friends with some of these people. We traveled together with them and we visited them a number of times and so on. So, we've been very fortunate. You've been active? Yeah. You haven't been actively involved with politics in the city government of Rockford? No, no. No, I want to stay away from it. I don't want no part of it. So, it's a violation by itself? No part of it, yeah. I want no part of it. I was active in the church with the Boy Scout troop years ago. But that's as far as it goes. And then, of course, I've been active in the orchestra all these years. Because I play violin. Do you know they musically? Yeah, they are playing instruments. My son, Robert, he plays the violin a little bit. And David, he plays piano. He's very good on the piano. In fact, he went to a music school up in Michigan, Interlaken. I don't know if you've heard about it. And he was going to go in for music. And he decided to take higher education music and take a degree in it. But he got up there and I paid for it and he decided against it. So he changed his mind and came back and said, No, I'm not going to be a musician. That's too boring. I'm not going to do it. So he changed his mind and today he is a psychologist. So I'm glad he changed his mind. But he had his own piano here and he was practicing. He was teaching lessons to other kids and he was good at it. He played very good. But then something snapped and he said it was not for him. No, it was not for him. So good in this country. They used to make out, you know, but that's it. But the second generation, they are the ones that go someplace. But you have beaten that art story. You made it pretty good. That's what they say. I mean, tell you our children are, I mean, Bob, our oldest son, he's a lawyer. They are the ones that go someplace. And he is with the Woodbridge Governor's lawyer, the company. Woodbridge Governor, have you heard about that company? Yes, corporate law. And our other son, he is with the government and he's a doctor. And his wife is working too. She has her master's degree in occupational therapy. And then in Lawrence, it's a nurse at a high risk as well for memorial. And her husband is a dentist. Yeah, we can't complain. They have all the places. But they have not, it has been in them. We have never pushed them. David the second son. In fact, did you tell about David when he was 16? He was very musical inclined. And when he was 16, he had a choice, he had been working. He worked and had put money together. But he wanted to buy another piano. He needed another piano because the other one we had wasn't that good. But he wanted a car too, so he had to take a choice. He took the piano. He was 16. And he gave piano lessons. Yeah, I told him. You told him that. I told him that. They had learned to work. They had to adjust and be kept home together. But how about the first generation of immigrants that came from Sweden and did it pretty good here, like Eric Anderson and him and P.A. Peterson? Well, he didn't have any kids still. How about that generation of kids that were born here? Were they as affluent as their parents? Did they continue with their S-Wing? His son is sitting in the driver's seat. Well, they claim that, basically. They claim that the first generation, they make it go on. They manage all right. But the second generation, they had to go to town. They can enjoy it. Like, for instance, one example is John B. Anderson. He's a second-generation Swede, and he really done something. He was born here, but he has Swedish parents. And Norman S. Twain and many others. So it didn't happen that some parents got it too good and they spoiled the kids. Did that happen to you, though? I mean, in some instances, they got it too easy. They didn't have any initiative to struggle like their parents did because they had it all on the tray. But you have children yourself, so you see what's happening to your kids. Well, we had to do it with small means. Pardon? We had to do it with small means, otherwise there was no abundance. I know, they did too. Well, when you start out in a new country, you know. You had to feel your way. You had to feel your way. We weren't born with a silver spoon. Oh, no. No way. No way. We were born in a poor family. But, you know, at that time, you never felt. I never felt it. I don't think I ever did. We never felt that we were poor. Well, we grew up during the Depression in the early 30s, you know. And we know what it means to be poor, you know. We didn't know that we were poor. We didn't know it because everybody else was poor. We were all poor. I remember my dad, he worked in a company in Sweden, and most of the guys were laid off in the early 30s, in the Depression years. But my dad, he was kept on work because he was a good worker, so they kept him. He was one of the few. But he didn't make much money, but he made a quarter of it. There were nine kids in the family. It wasn't easy. I remember my dad, he needed new shoes, you know. We were all boys, you know, but my dad didn't have the money to buy any shoes. So what he did, he bought a piece of leather and put leather sole on the shoes there and stitched it on my hand at night after work. We had to have shoes, you know, but he couldn't buy any shoes. He didn't have money for that. I remember I asked my dad one time for a bicycle. I was 12 years old or something. He said, oh, no, you're crazy. You can't have a bicycle. You don't have any money for bicycles. And that was a luxury. He couldn't buy a bicycle. I know he couldn't, but I kept asking and asking and asking. And finally one day he came home with just a rusty frame. No wheels, no handlebar, no nothing. Just a basic rusty frame. He picked it up in a junkyard someplace. So he said, Al, here's your bicycle. And I was happy. I was happy. I was happy. I had the beginning of a bicycle. And then the rest of it I put it together myself. I ran errands for some stores after school, you know, and I made a few pennies. And before you know it, I had a bicycle. That's the way it was. There was nothing unusual. Everybody did it. So you put together yourself then? Oh, yeah. I bought a wheel. One week I bought a wheel, and I painted it with black paint, you know, and I put the spokes in there. And I bought another wheel. I put the spokes in there. And before you know it, I had a bike. That's the way it was. And that was ordinary. No, he couldn't afford a bike. I know he couldn't afford a bike, but I kept asking and asking. Was he also good with mechanics? Yeah. He was. You inherited from your father then? He was handy, yes. Yeah. I remember I wanted to buy a violin. I was 16 years old or something, and I took an interest in music. And I went to my dad, and my mother said, No, you can't buy a violin. I don't have any money for that. So I kept asking and asking and asking, and I couldn't get any money. But finally my sister lent me five kronor for that deal, five kronor. And that was the down payment on the violin. The violin cost 25 kronor, I guess, something, 30 kronor or something. So I went to the store and asked the guy if I could buy a violin on time, you know. So he said, Well, you're too young for that. You're too young. You don't have any income. I don't have any income, but I'd like to have a violin. And I kept asking, and finally, Well, okay, we'll let you have it. So I gave him five kronor, and I got the violin. And then I paid, I think I paid one kronor per month or something. I don't remember what it was. But finally I was paid for it. That's the way it was. Sure. That was life. We didn't know any better. It was not easy for Dad, though. No, no. During the Depression years, you don't remember the Depression years. No, because I was too young. You were too young, yeah. But I tell you, we didn't know any better because everybody was in the same boat, you know. So you had to start to work immediately after you got out of school? Absolutely, right after school. And then you went to evening school later on. Yes, yes. In fact, I started work. What kind of work did you get then? After school? I went to a factory. It was a factory out on Lelsinger, Primus. I don't know if you heard about Primus. Primusköket. Primusköket, yeah. That was my first... How old were you then? I was 16. Right after folkskolan. 16. I've been working ever since. I've never been sick. So you worked with the Primusköket. Yeah, oh yeah. From the boat, I'm aware. Yeah, yeah, yes. No, I worked every day of my whole life. I've never been sick. I've never been in a hospital. So you had good health in your family? Yes, oh yeah. You've been blessed with... We got good soil. That's my wife and the kids. We've never been... Never been sick. That's probably one of the... best fortune a person can have. Yeah. With health. Oh yeah, yeah. And they've got to be maintained. Maintained. Yeah, that's right. Oh yeah, that's right. Well, okay. So you had the opportunity here to come here and you have made the very best of it. We made a good out of it, yeah. And I don't regret it one bit. Not one bit. We're about to go in for an interview with other road rangers. Rockford, Illinois.