 29th of August 1986 and I'm sitting together with George Carlson, Vinton, Iowa. He was born 1920, 12th of April in Vinton, Iowa. Your dad, now Gustav Carlson, he came from Sweden. That is right. And do you know approximately what year he came over here? I think it was probably 1905 or 1895. He's about five years old. And with his parents then? With his parents, yeah. Both father and father? Mother and father and at least, well, one sister, Emma, came I think at that time and probably his brother Carl came at that time. His brother Herman was already here in this country. And but then like I say, the rest of the family came in 1895, yeah. So do you know the reason why they left Sweden? Well only, only indirect, there again Tom can probably answer this better than I, but I had the impression it had something to do with the military draft or something of that nature over there. And then of course Herman had already been in this country and was quite impressed with, you know, with the opportunities here in Iowa and he sort of convinced the rest of the family to follow him. And that's, that's about all I know. And Herman, he was also in this area then? Yeah, he was in this area. Did he farm or? He farmed and then, but he went back to Sweden, well I can't tell you what year, but fairly, fairly soon after the rest of them came here. But I can't tell you what year he went back to Sweden. Did he stay in Sweden then? Yes, yeah. He stayed in Sweden. His family, the boys, I don't know how many there were, there was Albert and Joseph and wasn't there a Leonard? I never knew the details and then there was, well it would be Albert's sisters and brothers. And they were all in Sweden and Albert and Joseph were the only ones of that, of Herman's children that came to this country. Albert came first of course and then Joseph came later and the rest of the family are still in Sweden. So your grandparents, did they buy the farm or did they rent it then at first? I think at first they rented. There was over by Gersen, just west of it a few miles, a sort of a settlement there, a bunch of the, some of the folks from the old country were farming in that community and in fact when my dad first came to this country for a while they all stayed with Herman there at Gersen until they went out on their own. Were they mostly Swedes? Mostly Swedes, yes. There was Carlsons and Bostroms and quite a bunch of the Swedes in that general area. What kind of acreage did they settle on, 40 acres maybe? Most of the farms in this whole total area at that time ranged from 80 to 160 acres. Very few larger than that and very few smaller. There were a few 40 acre farms but the farms that most of the folks were on at that time, I'd say the average was about 160 acres at that time. A quarter of a section then? Yeah, that's about right. And your dad, he was raised there on the farm? Yeah, he was raised on the farm, went to country school. In those days of course the farm kids, a lot of them, the boys especially, would only go during the wintertime because in the spring they were busy helping in the field and in the fall they were busy helping in the harvest. Dad used to kid about it, he only went to school about three months a year. Whether that's the truth or not I don't know but that seemed to be the standard practice at that time. The farm boys just went to school when they weren't busy farming, that's about the size of it. Did he continue through high school then? No. He never went to high school. I suppose now you'd say it was probably the equivalent of seventh or eighth grade is about the way he put it. But from that point on, why he sort of self-educated himself, I mean that's about what it amounted to. So he had taught on the farm then? Oh yes, yeah. His dad died when he was quite young. Let's give him my blue address book up there by the TV, Tom, I can tell you the year. I think he had to more or less pick over as the boss, the man of the family so to speak, and he was about 15 I believe, I think that's when his dad died. My father's father was born in 1836 and died in 1905 so my dad would have been 15 years old when his father died. He had to then support the family, he had to do the farming, he had to be the man of the house. Was the grandparents living close by then? They had another farm? Yes. Dad farmed at home you see, with his dad until his dad died and then his mother, my dad's mother of course lived with him and kept house and dad did the outside work, his mother did the inside work and until finally he went off on his own, started farming for himself. And how many children were there? How many children you say? Your father's? Well there was Emma and Anna and Carl and Herman. That's it. Five of them? Five in the family, two brothers and two sisters. Did they leave the farm when they got old enough to seek employment outside or did they stay? All of them basically stayed, the girls married farmers and stayed on the farm for well most of their lives actually and Carl, he stayed on the farm until all of his life, he never moved to town and Herman of course, the other brother, he went back to Sweden and I guess he farmed over there. But no, they were farmers, you might say the whole family were farmers basically all their lives. So they settled in the vicinity of? Yes, right around Vinton. Did they marry your father or he married Stewart? Stewart, yes. She was, I say her family goes back like Tom said to the revolution and from England and so forth. But the others married Swedish girls. The sister Emma married a fellow by the name of Guy Liljell and his family was from Sweden and my father's sister Anna married Richard Bostrom, we called here. Some more back in time, their family came from Sweden and Carl married a Swedish girl, I can't remember what her maiden name was, Ida, some of us. And Herman I think was married in Sweden before he came to this country I believe. So for the large part, that generation, with the exception of my dad, pretty well all married the Swedish people. Did the family join the Lutheran Church in Vinton? No, see where my dad farmed, right across the road from it was a little country church that was a Methodist church. My mother was a Methodist and they went to this little church right there, I say next door. Then they were Methodists the rest of their life. For the rest of the family, Carl, his brother Carl, and his sister Emma, and his sister Anna, they all belonged to what they called the Bethlehem Lutheran Church, the Swedish church in Vinton. And it was right in town? Yes, it had its origin out in the country, just south of Vinton, but it moved into Vinton in the early 20s, about that time, and it's been basically in the same location since that time. So some of the people that had retired as farmers moved into town maybe? Yes, some of them had retired, but of course the little country churches sort of disappeared gradually over the years with a big reduction in churches in the country during the 1920s. You know, as the automobile come into the picture, people travel a little further. Most all of the little country churches ultimately moved to Vinton, had larger congregations and so forth, but I can say as the neighborhood sort of broke down a little bit, you know, and their horizons expanded, the congregations moved to a larger, you know, larger... Do you remember any Swedish services? Like the Methodist church your mother belonged to, no? And your father joined? It was not the Swedish Methodist? No, no. It was the English, yeah. Do you remember any Swedish servants? Oh, we used to... Dad used to go to the Swedish church special events, special activities, you know, quite frequently, and occasionally the rest of us would too. I was always at a disadvantage because I never learned Swedish, you know, and the services were conducted in Swedish. And so I didn't know what was going on, you know, but I'd say they had special Christmas programs, you know, and they'd always have a midnight church service on Christmas Eve, I believe it was, and folks used to go to that. And Dad and my oldest sister continued to go to that Christmas midnight program for years as far as that's concerned. So in your home then there was only English spoken because of your mother, of course? That's true, I mean, so far as the immediate family is concerned. Now we'd have these family get-togethers, all the relatives, or all the Swedes, you might say, whether they were close relatives or whether they weren't, would get together at somebody's house on Sundays throughout the year. Just about every other Sunday they'd meet at one place, a whole big crowd of Swedes, you know, and they were mostly people from the Swedish church. And the older generation, my dad's generation, they would all sit around visiting with each other in Swedish, and the rest of them, like my mother and a few of the other women and most of the kids, we'd sit around visiting in English. So we'd have two conversations going at the same time, you know, and probably neither of us understanding what the others were talking about a lot of the time. And of course you'd pick up just a little bit of Swedish, you know, it'd just sort of rub off on you. But I always sort of regretted that I didn't learn Swedish. Tom there, he knows more Swedish than I ever did, or ever will, as far as that goes. So your dad, he used English all the time, of course? Yeah, but he talks, he would speak Swedish. To his parents? Yeah, and the sisters and brothers and the other Swedes, you know. And he could understand, and quite often somebody would bring me a letter that had been written in Swedish, you know, from Sweden, and he would sort of translate it for them, you know. He was, well, of course, in the family, you know, at age five, why, obviously, he was at that age, you know, you're probably as fluent in Swedish as you ever will be, you know. How did your parents meet now that she was living there by your mother? They were next-door neighbors, basically. They were farmers also? They were farmers, yeah. They were next-door neighbors, and they went to this little Methodist church right there, basically across the road from where my dad farmed, and that's where they met. And your mother, was she born in Winter? She was born in Blairstown, I believe, in the southern part of Benton County. Blairstown? Blairstown, mm-hmm. So they were married then in the Methodist church? Yes, yes, mm-hmm. By her ministers or something? Yes. And then you grew up on a farm then. He bought the farm, or how did he? Yeah, he bought, he rented at first and farmed, well, quite a large farm. And he bought this farm in 19, I think 1923. And from that point on, added some more acres as time went by, and basically lived here until he died. I mean, that's, yeah. What did he change now from his parents' farm? Because they had to change over from the Swedish ideas, and there must have been a... Well, of course, you know, at the age that my dad came to this country, he probably wasn't too intimately acquainted with Swedish farming, you know, except as he got it from his parents. But they adapted to Iowa farming methods by necessity right away, you know. And they learned that from their neighbors? That's right, yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah, that's right. And I can say from, of course, Herman had been here some time, and he was familiar with Iowa farming, you know, and of course, back in those, in the, back, I'd say, you know, before 1915, there probably wasn't that much difference between Swedish farming and Iowa farming, you know. It was horses and cattle and hogs and sheep and poultry, you know, just a general... Crops probably were different, you know. We raised corn instead of wheat and this type of thing. Well, you had no wheat? Basically, the wheat went out of the picture for the most part here in Iowa farming. In, oh, around 1910, along in there, wheat just wasn't competitive with corn and oats and hay. I mean, that was, that was the main crops, corn, oats, and hay back in those days. And then they fed the grain to the cattle? Fed the grain to the cattle and the hogs, right. Very little was sold then? Very little grain was sold. I don't remember, oh, there'd be some oats sold, but very, very little. The only grain, you might say, that was sold was sweet corn. And back, oh, up until about 1935, I suppose, Vinton was the home of some of the, two of the largest sweet corn canning companies in the country. And so lots of farmers raised sweet corn. Did they go to Cedar Rapids or did they... The sweet corn was hauled, picked in the field and hauled into Vinton to the factory and they canned it and everything right here in Vinton. And then of course it was shipped worldwide as far as that's concerned. But that was basically the only crop that was sold directly from the farm. Practically everything went through hogs and cattle. Could they raise sweet corn beside the field corn though? Did they know about that? Yes, they posed no problem, the first generation. Now if they were to try to save seed from that and replant it, then they would get a mixed up mixture of yellow corn and white corn, you know, on the same kernel. So they had to buy new seed corn on every crop? That is right. Yeah, they had to buy new seed corn. That was part of the deal with the company, the canning company. They would furnish the seed corn. You paid for it, of course, but they would provide the seed. So there was a big crop then? Oh yes. Yeah, at that time that was a major crop around here for quite a long number of years. In fact, not only Vinton, they had two factories here, but there was one in Shalesburg down the road here a little ways, there's a factory in Garrison, La Porte City. There was quite a multitude of sweet corn canning companies back in those days. And their sweet corn was husked by hand of course? Oh yes. No machine? No, they picked it in the field, snapped it to the ear, you know, with the husks on, hauled it to town with a team and a wagon. And then they had these long sheds where initially mostly women would take the husks off, you see. Now in the later years, then they did develop machinery that could take the husks off of it. But that was done in the factory. You hauled it to town, it still was in the husks, yeah. Was this before the First World War had started or after, in the 20s? Oh, I would say probably during the 20s was the big time. It started prior to the World War I and it kept going strongly up until, well just before I would say World War II, late 30s. Why did it go out of business then? Was it different methods? Different methods and the companies that were canning sweet corn expanded, broadened their activities to the point where they were trying to do other canning, tomatoes and green beans and pumpkins and things like that so that they could keep the facilities in operation through a longer period of the year. And those other crops were really not, didn't fit into agriculture here as well as it did like up in Minnesota, you know. A lot of the canning operations that used to be performed in Iowa moved to Minnesota, for example, where some of these other crops were viable. And I think another thing probably that entered into it was the labor situation. Initially the canning operation was a rather labor-intensive type of thing, the husking and the sorting and all of that. And after, well you might say during World War II, with the labor shortage as it was with people getting rather lucrative jobs in factories, defense factories and so forth, the labor just wasn't available to continue that type of a labor-intensive operation locally. And there were no Mexicans? Very few. Now there was some transient, Mexicans would come in to Vinton to harvest asparagus primarily. And they did some with peas. Now that was another crop, of course, that came into the picture as far as canning was concerned in the 40s was canning peas. And we used to raise peas occasionally and they were contracted out. They were canned here in Vinton also. And the Mexicans then were here primarily to harvest asparagus because it all had to be done by hand, you know, stoop labor. But they would be here for a period of a few weeks during the spring and then they moved on to some other place, transient. They had a little camp right at the edge of town where they, sort of a barracks where they would stay. And then they would move on to someplace else. They disappeared during the winter, right? Yeah. Do you remember any Swedes coming over in the 20s when you were in the... Well, only the only ones I really remember, of course, was like Joseph, you know, and Albert. I remember when Albert came, I was just a little guy. I can't remember the year, but it was early 20s. And he had two boys. I think they were, I know Einar was born in Sweden. That was Albert's oldest son. That would be a nephew of Joseph. And I remember when they came and then I remember when Joseph came. But aside from that, there would be a few young lads in their, I would say in their 20s, I was acquainted with the fact that they were new faces, you know, when the Swedes got together and they would introduce them as having come from the old country. But I never got to know those people well. But there were, it seemed like a sort of standard practice when some of the folks would come over from Sweden, they would stay temporarily with some of the older Swedish families that were already here until they found jobs or went out on their own, you see. And sometimes it would be a few days, sometimes a few months, you know, they would stay with some of the Swedish families and then go out on their own, start their own operation, their own families. Was it possible then in the 30s to start a new farm? Were they scared for the economics? The early 30s was a sort of a depression time. In fact, from 31, 32, up until, well really up until World War II started, it was sort of a depression time for Iowa agriculture. Labor work was hard to find. A lot of the younger fellows, the fellows in their 20s, the unmarried Swedish boys, for example, would sort of, after harvest was done here, oats harvest in, we'll say, July, they would go up into the Dakotas, Minnesota, and help with the wheat harvest, you know, shocking grain and thrashing wheat and so forth, and follow it all the way up to the Canadian border or beyond. And then when the harvest was over there, they'd come back down. And by that time, it was corn-picking time here in Iowa. So every summer, there would be a bunch of them that used to make that sort of a regular trip, you know, each summer. And as I say, jobs were on or, well, there's always work on the farm, but it wasn't always that good a paid proposition. And the work off the farm was hard to find back in those days, that is right. How many bushels did they get out of an acre at a time? There was no commercial fertilizer in it. No commercial fertilizer. The corn, which was a major crop, oh, there was, I would suppose, 50, 60 bushel was considered about average. 80 bushel was considered good, and 100 bushel per acre was considered spectacular. And of course, now people talk about 150, 60 to 200 bushels, you know, so, but in those days, there was no commercial fertilizer. No hybrid corn? No hybrid corn. Hybrid didn't come into the picture here until probably 1933, 1934, 1935, and really didn't make too much of an impact until 1938, 1939, 1940, along in there. And then from that point on, basically became all hybrids. Were they resistant to farmers to the hybrid corn? Did they take a second look at it, or were they easy to convince? Well, they were fairly easy to convince once they saw the results. And of course, at that time, hybrid seed was expensive, but not as much expensive as it is now. The farmers accepted hybrid corn quite rapidly, I would say, quite rapidly. So they increased their earnings then? Yes. And of course, the thing I suppose really that turned the economy on the farm around to a large extent was the beginning of World War II, not necessarily at the time we got into it, but in 1939 when Europe started getting embroiled and export demand for foodstuffs and so forth became greater, that sort of turned things around on the farm as far as that. Site 2, continuation with George Carlson in Iowa. Site 2. Do you remember if there was a campaign out there in Iowa to have people drink more milk, increase the production to help the farmers? Not really at that time. I don't recall any major movement so far as encouraging use of any farm commodities until in the 40s. I think everybody, of course, prior to that time always assumed, well, a good farm produced food, whether it was pork or beef or poultry or whatever, was good. The farmers produced and accepted what they were offered in the market without any promotional efforts really being made, except to the extent that it was funneled through some commercial enterprise. Then the company that was processing would advertise primarily to convince you that their particular brand was better than the other guy's brand, not because promoting milk is a good product, but my milk is better than your milk, that type of thing. Sales gimmick. Yeah, right. How about the Swedish element of the farmers? Did they belong to a co-op or were they one on their own? I would say that there was no distinction there. In whatever neighborhood they happened to be in, they blended in with the rest of the community and took part in cooperative ventures. In other words, some of the earliest and simplest ones were the old thrashing ring where all the neighbors, everyone, would get together and help thrash around all the farms. Cooperative telephone services, this type of thing, cooperative creameries where they would manufacture butter. The Swedes blended in with whatever the next door neighbor might be, whether he was a Bohemian or an Irishman or what, it didn't make any difference. I wouldn't say that there was any isolation of the Swedish farmers separate and apart from anyone else in the neighborhood. They were not resistant to any... They didn't seem to be, no. In fact, I would say they were quite progressive and probably might have been a tendency to be somewhat the leaders in some of the cooperative. That is right. I think there might have been, like through the Swedish church for example, there might have been some effort back in the 20s and before for some type of cooperative insurance type of programs. Were there Swedish-named insurance companies in this area? Not that I can recall in this area. There were, as I recall, some Swedish insurance companies operating out of St. Paul, Minneapolis, that sort of promoted their program to the Swedes, you know. Not that they'd accept anybody, but I mean they sort of pushed it through the Swedes. But there's nothing locally that I'm aware of of that nature. And politically speaking, how were they directed, by Republicans or Democrats? I don't think you could, to the best of my knowledge, you could draw no lines. I think if anything they were probably all pretty much independent as they could be. And I don't think there was any alignment, to the best of my knowledge, between the Swedes and any political party. I mean if there was, I wasn't aware of it. Like Nebraska, for instance, they were all Republicans, you couldn't find a Democrat if you looked for them, they say. Well, Iowa, of course, maybe is a little more independent than that, I don't know. I think you'd find they were moved more by economic situations than by religious affiliation or nationality or anything like that. There's no question, but what, during the 30s, with the state of the economy being what it was, there was probably an awful lot of people who were at least nominal Democrats, you know, during that time, for Roosevelt, because he promised the farmers, and they did have farm programs in an attempt to solve the problem. So like I say, I think an awful lot of the farmers, Swedes and Irishmen and everybody else were Democrats at that time. And I think they're still doing that, I mean, as economic tides go up or down, why their political affiliations do the same. You have to look for something better. Yeah. In my own family, I never knew for sure just what my mother and father was. I think my father had a tendency to be a Republican, my mother a Democrat, except occasionally they reversed positions. And then we get into some lively arguments, you know, within the family, between the two of them. I never knew for sure how serious they were, whether they were just taking opposite sides for sake of argument or not. So they were involved in reading the papers? Oh yes, yeah. And coming into involvement here, your father, now, is extraordinary with limited education and everything. He has written, like your son mentioned here, about 1,500 different poems and articles. How did he get into that now? Well, the story tells that my oldest sister, who was two years older than I, had to present some sort of a poem or a saying at a country school Christmas program or something like that. And she was not getting very far and she wanted her dad to help her. So he scribbled out some type of a little poem for her to present. And that's apparently the way it started, at least that's the story that I get. But that was the beginning. That was the beginning. And then it went on from there. And he was a good friend of the farm editor of the Cedar Rapids paper. And the farm editor had become acquainted with some of dad's poems. And occasionally at the Farm Bureau meetings he'd read them, you know. And he convinced dad that he ought to send them in and put them in the paper. That's where it started. And then it went on, like I say, basically every week for thirty years. Every week? Yeah. Do you remember him sitting down and... I think he did a lot of the composing in his head as he went about his field, you know, the chores and so forth. But he wouldn't write it down. He wouldn't write it down until a few minutes before the mailman would go. See, the mailman, the country mailman, he'd pick up the mail here and get the mail, oh, around eleven o'clock in the morning. And dad would come dashing in the house quite often, ten-thirty, you know, and sit down and write his poem, take it out and stick it in the mailbox for the next Sunday's paper, you know. Usually that was on a Friday that he'd do that, to get it in the mail on Friday and so it'd be in the Sunday's paper. I think he had it pretty well formulated in his mind, you see, before that. And then he'd come in and sit down and send it off. Was this done in longhand, the manuscript, or was it... Originally it was. And then he got an old typewriter and learned to hunt and peck and he'd type it then from that point on because he said they couldn't read his writing. And so he'd type it out. In the articles you wrote now, what kind of subject were they on, locally? It was like an observer of things around. Yeah, I would say, I don't know if there was any limitation on his subject matter, everything from stubborn pigs to the beauty of nature. I mean, it didn't seem to make any difference. There was just no, occasionally, sort of a comment on the political situation that might be current at that time. Pretty much, I don't know if there was any limit, was there? Just whatever happened to strike his fancy at the time. So he didn't struggle with the writing that year? It just came spontaneously? It came natural to him, apparently. It'd be a nice thing to have. How did he learn to spell and pick out the right words? He was an avid reader. In other words, he would read almost anything he could get his hands on as far as that's concerned. He was an early riser. He'd get up early in the morning, 3.30, 4 o'clock, and sit at the kitchen table and read and drink coffee until it was time to go do chores. And that was his daily routine. That's basically where he just picked it up, you know, just picked it up himself. Did you become interested in watching him hunt and pick on a typewriter later? Oh, it was, I took it as a matter of course. At that time, it didn't take on any significance to me, except that it was something Dad did every week. I never developed a knack for getting into the poetic frame of mind. But my little Kathy here, my youngest daughter, she went through a period here a few years ago where she was writing little poems, you know. I don't know if she still does that or not. She's had a couple of them published, I guess. It bypassed my generation, apparently. I don't know, maybe Tom might end up being the writer in the family. You sounded well. I'll tell you a little later on. How about now, you helped your dad then on the farm? Yeah, yeah. How old were you then when you were— Oh, I helped him on the farm. Of course, I went away to school, to college when I was 16, 17, but I'd be home during the summer, you see. Was that a general rule for Desiree to send a boy to college? Was that kind of unusual from the farm? I would say at that time it was still rather unusual. Now it's real common, of course, but at that time it was rather unusual. The percent of the farm kids that went on to college was pretty small, 10, 15 percent perhaps at that time. Part of it was the economics of the thing at that particular time. So were you encouraged by your dad or your mother to— I was encouraged, I suppose, more by mother than I was by my dad because she was a school teacher before she was married, and then, of course, she raised a family, and then she got back into teaching school, country school, back, oh golly, long after I'd left home, into the 40s. She was back teaching school again, and she'd gone to a teacher's college. But I suppose I was probably encouraged more by mother than by dad as far as going to college was concerned. Did he want you to stay on the farm and take over? Was you the only son? I was the only son. He never said so in so many words, but I think that was sort of implied, yes, that he would like to have me—and, of course, I never did get away from farming as far as that's concerned, even after I got through college. Of course, I was in the military then for about four years, but after that, the furthest away I ever lived was Manchester. It was 50 miles from here, and I was home every weekend, you might say, and a lot of time in between. So I've never really been away from the farm as far as that's concerned. You were still in the pigeon when it was— Yeah, that is right. Did he hire a man to help him out? Oh, yeah. Back—he used to farm in his younger days a lot of acres, I suppose. He farmed as much as, oh, five, six hundred acres. And he had single help, and he had—usually he'd have one married hired man that would help, and that was true up until about 1940. And then he sort of cut back on the scale of his farming operations, and he did it mostly himself with, well, my help during the summer and with occasional exchange of help during the rest of the year. So but he still got time to jot down a lot of books? Yeah, he did. I say, I think he'd go ahead and be doing something physically out in the fields or with the livestock and be—the wheels would be turning up here in his head, and in just a matter of then coming in and setting down and putting that on paper as to what he had in mind. He was very active then. Yeah, yeah. In his whole body. Yeah, that is right, yeah. So your dad's farm, who took over that one then? Was it— My dad's farm. He continued as long as he— As long as he was able. He sort of semi-retired once when he was 65, but he couldn't stand it, so he got back into farming, you know, in about two years. He never left the farm and always kept some livestock around. But he—as he got older, as he got to be 70, why, he cut back. He'd rented out part of the cropland. He still kept livestock and farmed part of the land. And he kept livestock until he was 85, probably. You know, not a great amount, but some hogs and some cattle and that type of thing. He never really, as long as he was able to stay on the farm at all, he never really completely retired. That's about the size of it. What year did he die? In 81, 1981. He spent the last—well, let's see, 76—about the last three and a half, four years in the nursing home uptown. He got—oh, just old age could creep up with him. And he'd come out to the farm on weekends when I was down and then spend the rest of the week up at the nursing home. And like I say, he died then in 81. Did he print any more books than this Horseshoe edition? No, he never did. He—a lot of his friends sort of encouraged him to repeat, you know, but he never did. No, he never did. Do you remember if you had any Swedish newspaper in your home? Only occasionally. The only Swedish newspaper that I can recall would be one that one of the other Swedes, they'd pass it around, you know, within the group. And for a while I think my dad's sister subscribed to a Swedish newspaper and, like I say, it sort of made the rounds. And that's the only one I occasionally—or remember seeing occasionally. If you don't remember a magazine that was printed or published in Cedar Rapids, The Woman and the Home? I don't remember that. No, I don't. It came out every month. No, I don't remember that. So did your dad go back to Sweden at any time? No, he never did. He—oh, occasionally he expressed a desire to go back, but on the other hand, he was only five when he left and—except for his immediate family, Herman and Herman's boys, there weren't all that many people back there, you know, that he was acquainted with. So he never did make it. I think one reason that so many of them—well, like Albert and Joseph, you see, they were quite a lot older when they came to this country and they had a lot more friends and relatives over there that—so they went back—well, Joseph goes back real often as far as that's concerned. That's about the only ones in the family that go back regularly was Joseph and Albert when he was alive. Were you the only one that went to college? No. Both of my sisters went to college and I was trying to think, you know, in the expanded family. That was about the size of it, I guess. But no, both of my sisters went to school. My youngest sister graduated from college, my oldest sister. She went two years to college and then she got married and started a family. And the college you attended, it was agriculture? Agriculture. Iowa State University or Iowa State College it was at that time down at Ames. And that's where both of my sisters went to school, too, as far as that's concerned. And your studies led to conservation? Yes. After I got out of the service in the fall of 1945, I went to work with the Soil Conservation Service. Was that coming into being more pushed than at that time to all the farmers? That is right. That is right. It was always brand new then. Yeah. Basically at that time, that was, see, it really didn't get started until the soil conservation movement in Iowa. It really didn't get started until 1940. And of course then there was sort of a pause during the war years and it really didn't get started again then until 1945, 1946. And that's when I joined the mission. What brought on that type of reasoning? Was it the farmers that pushed it or was it somebody else that had the brainstorm? Well I think it came about because of the problems associated with the drought and the Dust Bowl activities back in 1936, you know, all through. Was it the dead also, or so far east, the Dust Bowl? We weren't influenced here directly by the Dust Bowl. We were affected severely by the drought. It occurred at the same time. But the effects of the Dust Bowl were evident even in this country because some of those big dust storms out of Oklahoma, we'd have days, you know, when the sky was just full of dust, you know. It was blue. Yes, oh yes. And everything outside would be covered with this layer of red Oklahoma dust, you know. And that sort of woke farmers up a little bit. And I think another thing that happened, we were getting into farming with tractors, you know, and you go bouncing across gullies with a tractor and you were a lot more aware of it than you were when you were driving a team of horses around. And I think everything sort of came together at about that time. Farmers began to realize that this soil thing, soil management, soil erosion was a serious problem. And of course, it is also true that related to the farm programs that were born out of the Depression that got started there in the 30s, mid-30s, late-30s, also pushed a soil conservation consciousness onto the public. But it didn't move rapidly. I mean, during the early years, it was a fairly—there was some resistance, you know, fairly slow moving. Oh yes, yeah. There was back in the early days, in the late 40s, there was a certain amount of resistance to—well, to the whole idea that maybe you're doing something wrong, you know what I mean? That is right. But that resistance was fairly short-lived, you know. Gradually, like I say, after four or five years, there wasn't much resistance there anymore. Because you were one of the farmers coming out brand new from a university or college here and the old-timers, what to do? Well, that is true. I mean, it's a matter of age, among other things, you know. Of course, like I say, I'd been gone to the service for four years. So I was 25. I was 25 at the time, which of course now sounds awfully young to me, but at that time 25 didn't seem so young, you know. But you were sold an idea that this was the right way to go, with the conservation. Yes, that is right. Do you have any thoughts about doing something? No, not really. From some of the things I observed overseas, more like in North Africa, where you saw some of the lands that history would tell you had been fertile valleys and so forth, now basically desert land, you know, non-productive, sort of give you a clue as to what could happen, you know, if nature got the upper hand and something wasn't done. But you also had a ton of farmers then that was going to cost a little bit. That is true. That is true. It's not always easy in the cell of something that... No, that is true. It wasn't an easy task. But there again, in every neighborhood, you'd have some key farmers that saw the light, you know, as we like to say. And they would start doing some maybe contour plowing or something of that nature, you know. And their neighbors would be skeptical for two or three years. But then they'd sort of maybe try it themselves in a small way. And first thing you know, you'd have a neighborhood. Like I say, there was always somebody in each neighborhood that the farmers would sort of look to, you know, as sort of a leader. And if you could get the so-called leader in the community to start moving in that direction, well, the rest of them just sort of came along as a matter of course. So the horse farm or the living horse farm, horses and mules, they were often a picture in the 40s? I would say yes. They started disappearing rapidly about 1940. There were still a lot of horses used on farms up until the late 40s. But by 1950, horses were real limited, you know. It all took place pretty fast, actually. From, I would say, from 1935 to 1945 was the decade where the big transition from animal power to tractors took place. So over the years now, you've seen the beginning of a new program, livestock conservation. And now you also, we are living in 1986. The farmers were resistant a little bit to government, what they were telling them. Are they receptive now, what the governments are telling them? No. I think the attitude has switched somewhat. Not because from a technical standpoint. I mean, I think for the most part they believe what the state colleges, experiment stations and so forth, tell them from a technical standpoint. Use of fertilizers, use of hybrid seeds, better production techniques. I think they believe that portion without too much question. But when you get to the other side of the coin, the so-called production controls, marketing controls, price supports. I think farmers for the most part accept it as part of the climate they have to operate under, whether they believe it or whether they don't. In other words, I know there's a lot of farmers that don't believe in some of the farm programs. But they face it as a matter of fact and realize that they've got to take advantage of the opportunities that are there or adjust their programs accordingly. Whether they believe in it or whether they don't. So it's a turning point again. Yeah, right. Yeah, it is. Because they really don't know. That is right. And like I say, I don't know what the future of farming is going to be. You look back on the way farming was when I was a kid, a certain amount of nostalgia, the good old days, so to speak, and sort of regret the fact that probably we'll never return to that type of thing again. And then you look ahead and try to anticipate what the future might hold. And one can't be all that happy about what one sees, you know, the decline of the family farm and the tendency to get bigger and bigger operations and to a degree corporate type of farming. I don't like to see that. And yet on the other hand, I don't see anything in the picture that's going to stop it from happening. It's sort of a natural process that we don't like.