 How did this idea of the two high school teachers come about? Well, I came from two high school teachers started... Did they belong to VHGAU or Temperance? No, no, no, they were... How did you get into it then? Well, I heard about it and of course I was interested in the co-op. That was another one of those liberal ideas. And the first meeting we had, I was elected vice president and one high school teacher was elected treasurer and a minister in a Unitarian church was elected secretary. And then we had three other board members. That was the first board. And then after a couple of years, the president declined re-election and I was elected president and I was president for about three years, I think it was. But the trouble was, we had a good start. We had about 250 or 300 families in the co-op but some of the families or some of the members didn't buy in our store. They went to other stores. They walked past our store to go into... At that time it was a national tea company and there were places like... How much cheaper could you sell your stuff for then? Not very much, but on a profit we paid dividends. How much did it cost to belong to it? We sold shares for $15 and most of them bought three or four or maybe five shares. And that's all it took to get started for capital. But like I said, when the members don't support it, the co-op will never make a goal. Why was that though? I guess they thought that they could buy it cheaper someplace else and then they lost interest. That's the trouble with the American people. Unless it's an organization that they belong to, you can show them profits or benefits to a degree right away, otherwise they lose interest. I think that's the... Were you able to buy in volumes to compete with other stores? Yes. Like big groceries or like Highlanders for instance? Some things. Of course there was a lot of competition. But you know, if the members had supported the way I should in the beginning, in the long run it could have been better. And we bought a service station and sold gas too. You did? And we had an agreement with the Texaco company. But at all, I... When I declined presidency, there was only two years after that that they discontinued. And they didn't favor that one either, the members. In other words, they went to another station instead of filling up. If they'd all bought gas there or... They didn't pay the price. No, they didn't pay the price. We had another Unitarian minister at that time that took the place of the first one. We had a secretary that belonged and he was a real good speaker. He tried very hard to keep it going but it didn't work out. So the last four years? That was between 1944 and 1949. So did you sell out into another outfit or how did you... We sold out. Sold out the stock and fixtures and just quit. Because you don't like being in office. You have several members there. A good share of the members in our co-op were good to have, yes. There was a lot of them. How about now Viking and Vasa and Switjord? Were they... There was... Why didn't they patronize it? I mean, there should be thousands of people. Sure, there should, but there wasn't. One of the main... One of the most active members on the board was president of the board of the Vikings, the one on 9th Street. And a Norwegian organization, they were in on it from the beginning. The Harmony Lodge? Yeah. And they were not able to convince their members that this was a good deal? No. That's one of those things that's hard to figure out. Do you think the Swedes are more independent than the Italians and Irish and Jewish people? Because they patronize their stores, usually. What do you mean independent? I mean, they like to be odd. In other words, they don't want to go together in a group and help each other. The Swedes? Yeah. No, I think they're more for working together in a group. You think so? Yeah. Maybe not in this country. Yeah, but you see Vasa now. Yeah. They have 34,000 members, or maybe 30,000 now. It's the whole country. Yeah. And you know, they've got to be millions of Swedes. Yeah, that's true. And the Italians belong to it. That's true. And Vikings, it's about 7,000. Yeah. Well, of course, they're... There are very few that belong to an organized body. Part of that is that they never got their children into it. Now, like the good tempers, there are very few. Now, I have my daughters and her husband belong, my youngest daughter and her husband, and two of their daughters. And we were the only family in the Central States Organization to have three generations in. So you were able to convince your children not to... And I didn't have to ask them. My wife and my daughters, on their own initiative, joined the good tempers. My granddaughters, two of them, three of them, when they got to be about 12 years old, now Morfar, they all call me Morfar. Morfar, we want to join the large town. I'm old enough so I can join the large town. So I never had to coax them. I never had to try to induce them to join. So they did. But they're not active in the sense that they take part in every meeting or take part in all activities. But they do as much, as big a share of the work as the average member does anyway. You know, in any organization, there's only a very few that do all the work. And that's the same thing in the good tempers, in Boston, Vikings, and all of them. And the trouble is now, most of those people are old, getting older. So what do you think will happen then with the organizations? They're going to die. They're going to die. My prediction would be that the Vasa and Vikings and even the good tempers are going to be gone in another 10 years. Maybe not all together, the good tempers, because they have up in Minnesota, they have a younger group. Have you been up there in Italy? Now, they are, on an average, I'd say about 15 years younger than they are in this part of the country. The tempers, now, I mean, they had the mission to fill in the 20s and the 30s. Because we all know that the Swedes, they like to drink. Well, they have a mission to fill now more as much. You know what I mean? I mean, now it seems that the IOGT has a bigger mission with the drug problems and everything. People seem to listen to it. You get attention on TV. It may be, it may be that the pendulum will swing the other way as far as the good tempers are concerned. Now, they have public support for their idea. Before you didn't. Not necessarily to join us, but to listen. And they know that we were right and we are right that the only way that they can keep away from alcoholism is never to keep away from it altogether because there's no halfway in between. Once you could be an alcoholic, you'll never be cured. You can quit, but as soon as you touch it again, you're going to be right back where you were. But in the 30s, when you had the prohibition, for instance, what do you think about the prohibition? Was that a good thing or was it a bad one? Nothing wrong with the law. It was the enforcement of the law that was wrong. It was never enforced? No. Did you see more drunks during the 20s than after the 30s? No, no, absolutely not. That's one thing that if somebody was drunk there, they knew that they were drunk illegally. And when they tried to abolish the prohibition, they used the argument that for one thing, there wasn't going to be hard liquor. It was going to be only beer and wine, but of course, that was just a front. And they used the argument that there wouldn't be any more drinking and it would be safer if they discontinued the prohibition. But you didn't see many drunks on the streets during the prohibition. I never did. Was it mostly the old ones that were drinking and the young ones stayed away from it during the prohibition? I think so, to a good extent. It was the old people that had gotten the habit before the prohibition. Prohibition went into effect in 1922, didn't it? It was after the first war. It was just before when Harding was president. Harding was president when I got here. That was in 1922. We had an omrissning in Sweden in 1921. They were going to have a prohibition. That was in 1921. But it was there when they got the motbuken. There was a north growth to that. It was probably a reason that they had to give them something. But you were not old enough to vote, though. No, I wasn't old enough to vote. But you remember. We had a rostejo on our bicycles. We lined up, bicycling on the roads all the way around the Dachau forest. I had an R on my letter on the back of the bicycle, about the size of this one. It was a big R. Rostejo. It was to be in favor of the prohibition. The omrissning. They lost here. But it wasn't by such a big margin, if I remember right. Did you have any program with the local high school here in Rackford from the temperance? No. You could never produce any kind of legislation or lectures in the high school to the young people? We have Illinois law that says that they should teach about alcohol in the schools, but they don't. They never did? Well, I guess some teachers do to a certain degree, but not to the degree that they're supposed to. No convention of yours tried to enforce this? Well, we have a resolution. Sent in to Springfield? To Springfield, to the governor, to the legislators. But nothing came out of it? No, not much. Didn't you see a fruitless thought to be fighting the big sea gram? What do you suppose would happen? Because they have so much money. I mean, money speaks. Yeah, sure. That's the whole trouble. They spend something like $250 million just in advertising, and maybe much more than that now. Now, what do you suppose would happen, for instance, if Thompson had been running on the platform of Prohibition? Do you think he would be re-elected? No matter how much damage the liquid traffic does to this country, and the support of the general public, even the churches don't do it. That's strange. How about the churches now in IODT? Did you have any cooperation with the First Lutheran, the Zionist, and Free Church? No, especially the Lutheran. They consider the Good Templars as a bunch of radicals. And of course, most of the Good Templars in this country were liberals, what I call liberals, not necessarily radicals. So that's the conception of the churches, that the Good Templars are a bunch of radicals. So during the 30s, now when they had this rough, hard time, people without work, and the people, they get a few quarters, maybe they bought a lot of booze, you know, to soften the terrible things that went through. I mean, they started drinking. I'm sure the Depression brought on a lot of drinking. You know, like a novocaine, I mean, against the problems. Did the churches at any time contribute to your work in other words? No. They never did? No, not that I know of, and I wouldn't have known about it if I had. I mean, you heard it, Rosamond Ellis. No. And of course, the Prohibition went out in 1932, when Roosevelt was elected. Yes. The election in 1932, the election was partly about the Prohibition. That was one of the big issues. So Roosevelt was against it? No, he was for it. The Prohibition? No, no. No, to abolish it? To abolish it, yeah. Of course, they gave the reason that it can't be enforced. And it was hard to enforce, especially when, well, the same thing as drunken drivers. The policeman probably has to drink here himself, and he hasn't gone to do much about getting a drunken driver unless he's really done something bad. I had an experience one time on 7th Street. I was in my car on this side, and another car was stopping at a stoplight, and we started out at the same time. And we could have gone straight ahead, and this other guy just turned like this and scraped my side, and I had to hit another car that was parked. And he was drunk, and the policeman on the beat, he was not far from me, he came over, and I says, this man is drunk. That's what must have caused the accident. He says, I don't think he's drunk. He was walking around, but he could smell it from as far up. I don't think he's drunk. Well, I says, can't you smell him? He says, if you don't like this, I'll call the squad car. I says, call the squad car. And two of the policemen that were two people, a friend of mine, people that I knew really well, that were customers at the store where I worked, and I told them about it. Well, he says, we can arrest him, but we take him in front of the judge, and he can fall flat on his face, and he still won't convict him. So nothing was done about it. Now they don't get by with that anymore. They changed that. But that was a long time. That's about... Oh, it was sometime in the 50s. So there was a one-sided jury. Yeah. Well, of course, that's the trouble, you know. The jurors and the judges and the police and the lawmakers. But they were all Swedes here, though, in the 20s. You had Herman Hallström, you had Blom, you had Bargryn. How was Bargryn out keeping order here in the city? He was drunk most of the time. Yeah. He was a wetshirt, you know. Oh, yes, he was. I didn't know that. Berry green. Yeah. So he was there for many years, though. You wonder, you know, how they can keep a position like that for so many years without faltering. It's the same thing as Herbert Hoover. Look at the way he was there. He was nothing but a crook in all those years as head of the FBI. You never turned Republican, though. I mean, you were your own... No, I......industry, so to speak. I mean, you never... I voted... I'm an independent as far as voting is concerned, but I'm registered as a Democrat because I voted in the Democratic primary. But I never voted Republican. I have voted for Republican candidates that I thought were good. Local candidates, you mean? Well, the state now... For instance, the Secretary of State we have now, I voted for him twice. He was a good man. And... How about John B. Anderson? No one I voted for him. He would have been all right, but... Democrats had good candidates against him. When he ran for president, I probably would have voted for him, but I didn't vote for him for the reason that he split the votes. The Democrats made the Republicans win. Now, if Anderson got something like 5 million votes, wasn't it? 5, 6 million votes? Well, if that had gone to the Democrats, he would have won. And we had another case like that when Stevenson ran against Eisenhower. Who in the heck was it? Somebody voted... Anyway, you've got to be practical when you vote. You've got to think about the effect it will have. If you have two choices, you can take the one that is the least bad instead of taking the one that's worst. So you have a choice. How about Chicago now? You have a typical case where there's going to be vote splitting. You have Wydaliak and Hines and Washington. If two Democrats... Well, there's one Republican there and one Democrat. Now it's only... Wydaliak, whatever his name is. Is he going to run? Yes. No. Well, yesterday he was. Oh, is he? So he's going to take a few votes away and then we'll... Yeah, well, I think that's going to make Washington win because he'll get the colored vote. So politics... Yeah, Washington hasn't been a bad mayor. He's been a good mayor compared to what... Well, I don't know. I don't think the machinery works so much. So according to your opinion, have the Swedes been good in politics here? Herman Hallström, was he a good mayor? Hallström was a good mayor and Blum was a very good mayor. He was a socialist. He came in on that ticket and then he turned to a Republican. Hallström? Yeah, he turned to a Republican later on. That I don't know. Yeah, Blum was... He voted a Republican ticket and got registered as a Republican, but I think he was pretty much independent. But I don't know Blum. I think he was a Democrat. And he stayed there. He was... No two ways about him. You knew where he was. And he was a good mayor, a real good mayor. No, we haven't had any Swedes here in Sweden. But the police chiefs, they have been Swedish. Yeah, and Delbert Pedersen was the one... He was the last one. Yeah, until he retired. He was a good one. Is he still living? Yeah, sure. He belongs to the Trinity Church. My wife belongs to the church here. Delbert Pedersen? Delbert Pedersen. He was good. He was considered a very good police chief. He was born here in Rundfors. Yeah. And then we had Benson. He was a Swede. Bargain was a Swede. And then there was one in between there. I don't know where that was. Bargain was for about 40 years, or was it? He was from before 1900, I think. He was for a long time. He died in the 1940s. Oh, Benson. Yeah, Folke Benson. Yeah, he was chief. He was the one, the big arrestor. So at your meetings now in Rockford Lodge and also Vigga, where you visit, of course, did you have any discussions then among the membership of different subjects that you took up? Politics? Did you discuss politics at the meetings? No. No? Good Templars are supposed to be neutral. As far as politics and religion, that doesn't necessarily mean they're very neutral. In Sweden, you were more… Well, that's a problem with the international good Templars, that they're neutral as far as politics. But when you were home in Sweden, though, you discussed politics at your meetings, Templars meetings. Yes. It was more open. Yeah. But here you had to be more careful because you didn't know the people, I suppose, and you had to follow the orders. But my main interest in this, since I got to this country, has been the good Templar movement, outside of my own family, of course. So how long did it take then before you got the position here on the board of your local lodge, Rockford? You served all the different… Most of the officers in the lodge and in the district and in the Grand Lodge. Now, we don't call it Grand Lodge anymore. We call it council, you know, that central states council, regional council. But as far as the regional council is concerned, this central states Grand Lodge, when I was elected the first time in 1944, I was elected educational director. That was to lead the study circus and such. And then in 1948, I was elected Grand Chief Templar. That's the same as president. And I had that for five years until in 1953. Do you know of Lars Sput? He was here then, so he was elected president after me. He lived here in Rockford? No, he lived in Chicago. In Chicago. And then the period from 1953 until 1957 and 1958, I had this linen business, and I didn't take any job. I was still on the board. I was, for one thing, I was past president when Lars Sput was here, but he only had a job one year. And then a man by the name of Louis Anderson, if you've ever heard of him, he had a job for six years, and I was elected counselor. That's the equivalent to vice president. And then in 1962, I was again elected president, and I had it for three years. And then in 1970, I was elected for two years. So all together, I served as president of the Central States Council for ten years. And I had been on the executive committee or the board from 1944, and now I'm still on the board, except for three years that I had other interests. And then between 1948 and 1953, you were the chief Templer for... The Grand Chief Templer, they call it. Yeah, that's the same, the oldest Templer in Sweden. How many, how long time did it take for you to come on the board now at Rockford, Lars? Did the old timers, they look at you as a young person coming in, green-horned, we should keep... No, they didn't do that much here. When I was first elected as an officer of our lodge, I'd only been here a year, two years. And I was elected vice or vice-lodge Templer. Did they do something at the meetings here that you didn't approve of? In other words, you brought your own ideas from Sweden? Oh yeah, sure. What did they do? I can't think of anything in particular, but there are always things that you don't agree with. I mean, there were a lot of older people than you, of course, because you were a young guy when you came here. Yeah, I was 18. And you had the 40, 50-year-olds sitting there, and had they stagnated, you think, in their ideas, or were they open for new things? No, I think they were pre-emerald. They had a man, a very prominent man, August Turner. You know him, Lars. He was a very well-educated man, that guy. Yeah, but he was nothing but a mason. He wasn't a teacher or anything else. He was a mason. But he came from a well-to-do family in Sweden. I don't know how well. There were Morris Sterner, John Sterner, and August Sterner. Yes, they were well-known. And then there was another brother, but he didn't have the name of Sterner. So he was a mason here in Rockford. Yeah, but he was well-educated, and he was a good speaker. He was one of the top men in our lodge, Rockford No. 6. And Axel Rennberg, you ever heard of him? He was the one that was in the companionship with Clip Pearson. Well, Clip worked for him. Yeah, he worked for him. But didn't they get partners later on? Well, yeah, they had interest in it, because Clip Pearson was his brother-in-law. Yes. And... So they were officers there? Yeah, they were two of the leaders of the Rockford Lodge. And then... I'm trying to think of somebody else that was outstanding. Now, Axel Rennberg, of course, he was on the police board. He was active. In Rockford? Yeah, he was active. And Stoner was on the library board. He was chairman of the library board. And Falk Engstrom, I used to remember, he was secretary of the board of education. How did that come about? In other words, they were sworded in by the people then to be on the library board? No, that was appointments. Appointments. Yeah. But here comes a Mason. How was he able to get into the library board? Appointed. Appointed? Appointed by... He was known then as a well-read person. Yeah. He was a good speaker. We had our public meetings in those days and public discussions about liquor and other things that he took part in. And they were well-known. But you were not afraid to bring forward your ideas when you came from Sweden? If there was something you didn't like, I mean, you raised questions about it? That was my biggest trouble. So what happened then? Nothing much. Were you afraid to get into a position where you could do more damage? No, no. I never got that far. I wasn't too active in politics. Two sides. During the Second World War, I volunteered as air raid warden and I worked on the air. You were too old then to be drafted? Yeah. Well, I wasn't too old, but I had two children. Oh, I see. You had the... See, in 1942, I was 38 years old. So I wasn't too old. I was registered. But you were deferred then because of your family. Yeah. See, I had two children and they didn't take any of it. They didn't need it. And I'm glad. I'm glad I didn't have to go. But I usually volunteered for a lot of works, like the air raid warden and drives that we had for scrap metal and other things. And I did a lot of that stuff too, to help the war effort. And I can truthfully say that I was more patriotic than a lot of other people that were born in this country and always were talking about their patriotism and that. Yeah, what do you think about patriotism now? Is that something that's... Yeah, that's just a phony. A phony. Not a baloney, in my opinion. Yeah. It's like the scare for the communism. Yeah. But that's a sure sign, though. I mean, to be an American, you wave with the red flag. Yeah, yeah. And then you know... And we had some of those people, you know, they were always waving the flag and all that stuff. And then they were cheating on the... on the rations. They were buying up... We had one guy come into the clothing store and bought 15 suits because he thought it's going to be short, it's the clothes. And then when they were... A few... About a year after, you know, then he wanted to bring them back because he knew it. And we had one woman that was particularly waving the flag. She belonged to the Daughters of the American Revolution. She had tires, bought tires for her car that would have lasted her 200 years. So that's the kind of patriotism you run into. So you made in killing them in tailoring. Yeah, we had a lot of phony experiences, you know. And we were not allowed to make cuffs on pants because that took material, see. That was against... That was one of the regulations. During the war? During the war. So you didn't have any cuffs then on the pants? So some customers come and say, I won't buy a suit unless I can have cuffs on. And they want to make me cuffs and I absolutely refused. Even if I had to get fired, I wouldn't make cuffs on them because that was the law. It was actually a law against that? Well, it was regulations during the war. So if you had done that, then you have been... I was broken the law. But they did it all over town, but I didn't because I thought that was a thing that was something for the war effort. So I was backing the war efforts as much as anybody. So where do you get the patriotism and where do you get communism and all that? So when did they come in style or without cuffs? Oh, that was a couple, three years later. They couldn't make it. But now they don't make them at all. I haven't made any cuffs for 25 years, I don't think. Just to collect the dimes, you know. That would do it. That's probably something that's unnecessary. When the Swedes, now they came in the 20s, when they bought the suit for you, for instance, when they had the Swedish made the clothing on them, did they try to shed away from there as fast as possible and went to the American? What was the difference between Swedish tailoring and American when you came? Well, for one thing, wide pants. I had a pair of wide pants coming from Sweden and when I walked down the street, the dogs were barking. They couldn't notice at first. We had bottoms about that wide and here in this country they were about 14 to 16 inches. At that time we were 19 to 20 inches here. So the dogs were barking. And then here, one style at that time was bell-bottom in the pants. They were about this wide at the knee and they tapered out like this. That came from the sort of pants that the sailors were wearing. So that was one of the modes. So they were behind in Sweden or were they behind here? I guess they were. Well, who would they be behind? Who set the trend? Is it France or is it...? I think this country had their own styles. In those days I don't think they paid much attention to the form. When you came here in the 20s, you had the people, the better people, they had spats. Did they have these in Sweden? Not... When did they have spats? In the late 20s and 30s. But they didn't have these in Sweden, though. I don't know. Well, I was wondering. Do you remember that? I wasn't there in the 30s. No, but I mean the early 20s they didn't have it. No, I don't think so. And in Sweden a lot of immigrants, they came with knallhatt. You didn't have the air in the 20s. In Sweden we had what they call a bilkishatt. You know, wide brimmed hat, and I had one of those when I came over. You didn't have knallhatt? You mean a derby? No, no. No, I never did. No. How about Ölster, Överrock with the schnaef in the back? No. No, in Sweden, in style? They were in style here when I got here. 23? Yeah. With belts all around, too. And wide lapels. But like the dog now, he recognized that you were a foreigner. Could you see them when the Swedish immigrants came walking on 7th Street? Oh yeah. You could tell that they were in clothes. Did they try then to get away from you as soon as possible? Yeah, I did. I was working in a clothing store, so I was more conscious of it than anybody else. No, I didn't make my own, but as soon as I could get the money, I bought a new suit. I had an American-made suit. How was the method now of manufacturing the suits? Was it different to Swedish sewing, or were you more careful over there than here? In making suits? Yeah. At that time, when I came, there were very few people who were making suits in the small shops. But in Sweden, that was quite common. But it didn't take more than about 10 years, and tailor shops disappeared here in this country. Where they make a suit right in the shop, there isn't anybody in Rockford anymore, and there are very few in Chicago. And if you have a suit made in Chicago right now by a custom tailor, it'll cost you about $1,200. $1,200? Well, from $1,000 to $1,200. Nothing unusual. Do they sew in the buttons then so you don't have to have a spare part with you? They still make it. But it was better made, the Swedish tailoring. You were more careful in Sweden when you were sewing on the buttons. Well, you could say they put more work into them. They did. But I don't think they were any better clothes. I don't think that you could buy any better clothes if it was made in a single little shop than it makes in a big factory, because in the big factories, they can make some real good clothes. And you take some of the top lines in this country, like Hartshaft, Marx, and Louis Roth, and many others, they make as fine clothes as you can wish for. There's no need to have. And, of course, they don't have to be tailors. They have what we call operators. One of them makes the sleeves, one makes the pockets, and one sews in the buttons and so on. So the assembly line. And they're experts at that particular thing, so by the time the finished product comes through the assembly line, the product looks A1. You think this is a better product than the one when the tailor makes the whole thing? This is good. I think it has more style and more practical. Of course, they make some lousy clothes, too. They make some terrible clothes, too. So when you go back now to Dolchakfoss and Buros, I mean, the quality of the fabric is superior in Sweden, definitely, isn't it? I don't know. I don't think it's any different. Well, if you go for wool, of course, the wool is superior. You can't buy that for less than $300 or $400 if it's all wool. But I don't think all wool is any better than polyester mixed with wool. For instance, pants. I wouldn't buy a pair. I did buy a pair of all-wool pants, but I wouldn't buy another pair. They get wrinkled faster, and you're going to press them more often. You can't wash them in a washing machine, but you can buy a real good pair of pants here for $65, $75, but you can wash in a washer. So this, depending on the climate, then. In other words, it's too hot there to have something that's heavy. I don't know if that's going to do it. Because you can weave wool in light materials, too. You don't have to be heavy. But, of course, at the time, all of Sweden, the materials were real heavy. Have you bought any Swedish taffy when you were back on your trips? No. I had no reason to buy. I can buy cheaper. I worked in a place once. There's stookies I worked. We used to get 20% off the wholesale price. So if a suit sold for, say, $50, I could buy them for about $20. So you had learned the trick or you had done? No. I didn't know I had to learn it. Or you had done. Well, I suppose you know the line, so you know what to do with it. No, I never could do that. I never could drive a real bargain. But to be a businessman, you have to. No, not necessarily. Why is it the Jewish store owner is so successful? What makes him that? Is it the context? He's smart. Well, what does it mean, the word smart? He's good at merchandising, if you know what merchandising is. In other words, he's able to sell anything he has in his hands. It seems to me that the Jews are able to pick out the things that people like and do the things that people like. And convince them this is the right way. They don't have to convince them because they know that the people like that. And that's their ability to design things and do things and plan things that they know that their customers are going to like. That's the rule. Of course, they have Jewish failures too, you know. They're not all. But Jews are smart people. Are they competing against each other more than others? Oh, no. They're competing against each other. In fact, years ago, every clothing company and manufacturer in this country were Jewish. Albert, Alfred, Decker & Cohen, they were making society-brand clothes. Copenheimer, that was a Jewish outfit. Hart, Shaffner & Marx, they were Jewish. Michael Stern, that's another Jewish. And Louis Roth, one of the finest clothing companies in the country. They're out in California. Louis Roth, that's Jewish names. They are dominating the clothing market in the Harbin for a long, long time. And they came, most of those tailors, they started, they came from Poland and Europe. They had learned... A lot of Russian Jews. Yeah. Are they tailors themselves or just salesmen? Well, they're tailors to begin with. Some. There was, I know three or four tailors in Chicago. They were born in Poland and they started their tailor shops. And then they had the stores. And before we knew it, they had great big stores. Because they are known to buy a lot of big stuff. Smoke damage, a lot of damage, and they get it dirt cheap. How can they convince people to buy those? That's one branch of it. I don't know what that's Jewish. You sell the shirt for a dollar, I mean, the other has to sell for five. Yeah. Yeah, they're smart merchants. But the Swedes in Rockford, they didn't hesitate to buy from Jewish stores, though. I mean, they... Oh, no. No, there was no racism or prejudice. No. And the stores in Rockford, while there were... I don't recall any Jews that were in years ago. That is going back in the 20s and 30s. They were Swedes, most of them. There was Albert Anderson, Beck Olson. The two that I worked for, Neiman & Johnson. And Peterson, Westin & Bergeron on Broadway. Anderson & Carlson on Broadway. They were all Swedes. But they were tailors from Sweden. But none of those are still in business. They're all gone. Yeah, they're all gone. Before I forget, you were also very active in the gymnastics. That was in the... That was a Swedish gym. Yeah, the Swedish-American Gymnastics Club. And you went to Chicago for 1933 World's Exhibit. Yeah, World's Fair. World's Fair. Yeah. 33. How big of a group was it? 16. 16. Yeah. Only men. They had a Swedish day at the World's Fair in Chicago. Soldier's Field? At the Soldier's Field. And we were on that program. So how long... And we trained for it. Boy, we had a good troop of men. What did you do then? Well, Lings System of Gymnastics. And then we had Tom Lings on the bars and the horse. We called it plint, Swedish. Plint, you know. Yeah. And... Lings System, was they the only one at that time? Well, that's the one we used. Like the Germans, the Turners, now, did they use another system? I never heard of it. But the Lings System was well known in Sweden. Yes, but other groups in this country... There still is it, isn't it? Yes. But they never used Lings System, other groups, like the Germans, Irish? No, no. Not that I know of. Were you the only gymnastic team in Rockford? Swedish-American? Yeah. Yes, I mean, the Germans didn't have anything or the Irish. No, not as far as I know. So the Swedes had... No, of course, we had a good... We had a big club. We had about... At one time, we must have had about 250 members. So we had gymnastics, and we had boxing, wrestling, and ping pong, and the soccer teams. And we had, in the summertime, we had baseball, softball, and hardball, both. And we had some good teams, some good... We had some real athletes. We had Sammy Mandel. You know of him? I heard the name. Yeah, he was a light world champion in the late 20s. He was at the Swede, though. No, no. But he could join the Swedish gym. Oh, yeah, but we're not all Swedes. You had the Italians and the Irish. We had all kinds of people. And Sammy Mandel used to train in our gym. As a matter of fact, one day he came up there, and I had my afternoon off. I got one day off in the week, in the middle of the week. And I was in the gym, and here comes Sammy Mandel, who was going to train, and he wanted to spar shadow box with me. And I said, you're kidding. You're going to knock me cold. No, no, I said, I'm not going to hurt you. So we did. Of course, he tapped me any time he wanted to. That was kind of… So he was a light… He was world champion and light, lightweight. So he was professional then? He was professional, yeah. He lived in Rockford? He lived in Rockford, yeah. Rockford has not been very good for sports of any kind. Even when he was in his prime, when he put on an exhibition, he couldn't even draw enough people to pay for the rent of the place where they were boxing. So they were not interested in that? No, they never supported sports much. They used to have professional baseball teams years ago, but they don't have any more. Now they are. Now they've got kids training in soccer. So my Greek grandsons are soccer players now. So they have to be started in school, then, to draw the interest? I've got one Greek grandson, he's 12 years old, and he's real good at it. Oh. And his name is Justin Martini. Martini? My granddaughter is married to an Italian. He's a fireman. And he's one of the best guys I've met in my life. He is a native Rockfordian? Oh, yeah. His mother is Norwegian, his father is Italian. But when you look for a girl, you look for a Swedish one? No, I wasn't looking for one, she was looking for me. You never dated an Italian or Irishman at that time? Not that I can remember. But there was the trend, though, to marry the same nationality, I suppose. Oh, I suppose, because what we did then, we went to dances, like the Vikings had dances, the good Templars, and Voss, and they were mostly Swedes. But there were a lot of others, too. I used to go out with girls. I can't remember if anybody was an Italian. But I met my wife in a restaurant, who I ate. She was a waitress. And I had just broken up with another girl. I asked her out that night and went to a show. That was the beginning of the end. You did good service. I did good service. So where did you marry, then? Did you go to Belvedere like many Swedes did? No, we went to Geneva. Geneva? Justice and Peace? Yeah. I didn't want to minister. I don't have no use for ministers. I consider religion as a personal matter. I don't believe in organized religion. Religion is something that you have in yourself, and you want to practice in your own heart, in your own mind. And you don't need no minister. You don't need anybody else to tell you what it is, because you should know. And if you don't know, going to church isn't going to make any difference. That's my opinion. You got the conviction when you were confirmed in Sweden, then? No. For the minister, or you thought of that? I got fed up with ministers when I was in Sweden. That's right, because they were so dominating, you know. And all the books and all the things I read about Sweden goes back to where the ministers were using the poor people, the slaves more or less, you know, in cahoots with the rich farmers or rich landowners. And Sweden was not any different than other countries. They were all that way. I got about a hundred volumes of Swedish books over there, and I read them all. And some of them I read more than once. And I had a pretty good idea of what things were like long, long before I was born. So you have studied Swedish history over here in Rockford, then, too? Not history particularly, but I've read books that has to do with it. Yeah, in other words, you have read the literature about the past in Sweden. Oh, yeah, sure. Because you were only 18 when you came. I have the latest, like The Immigrants and The Emigrants. Which one do I know? I got both in Swedish and English. And of course I got a lot of Stenberg's books and Bergman. And of course I got American books, American authors. My favorite author when I was in my teens was Jack London. He was a radical. You could call him a communist if you wanted to. Because he was advocating a fairer deal for everybody. But some people didn't believe in a fairer deal. They wanted dominance. I liked the books like Jack London. And some of those authors like Hugo. Victor Hugo, yeah. So when your kids were getting older now, did they go to Sunday school? Did you send them to any church? Yeah, they go to church. They went to church. My wife goes to church. She belongs to Trinity Lutheran. I go there once in a while. So they were confirmed and then became church members? Oh, yeah. What happened now with the Italian in the family? Did he have to join the Catholic? No, he belongs to the Lutheran church. So he converted? Oh, yeah. They made a good Lutheran? He don't go much for religion. Not the Catholic religion anyway. How about the kids though? Are they Lutherans then? Yeah, they go to the same church. My daughters, my one daughter is active in the Lutheran church. And her husband is a painting contractor. He just finished a $20,000 job painting in that church. But like I said, the church is leaving me cold. I don't think they do much good. That's my opinion. Because they don't do as much good as they could if they really wanted to. During the Depression, you always heard about the Salvation Army and the soup lines. Did the churches participate in that, feeding the poor people? I don't know. I don't think so. All the religious organizations that I really have respect for, there's the Salvation Army. They do something for people that are in need. And they seem to be more neutral. Everybody can go there and feed and bathe. They try to rehabilitate some of these drunkards and do some good in that respect. But the others, they looked on them? Well, in other words, they didn't help anything. I know ministers in this town, I have known ministers in this town that would have drunk before they got to their wedding party or something. And make no bones about drinking. And of course, that doesn't strike much response in my mind. You would think preaching temperance should be something combined with religion, though I mean teaching religion to help people. Very few. On the right line. Very few church. On track. Very few. The Methodists are supposed to be, of course I never went to a Methodist service, but they're supposed to be temperance people. And Baptists. But... They don't openly embrace your teaching, for instance? Well, they don't openly fight the liquor traffic. But they are, I suppose, they're abstainers. I mean, themselves don't drink. But that's not always true either. I mean, I don't say that everyone that ever joined a good temple never took another drink, either. Well, I suppose there are. There are lots. The devil is working in many different ways. Yeah. So you went back to Sweden many times then, and still have connection with Sweden because of your... Oh yeah, I still have a sister there, and I've had several relatives coming over here for visits. My oldest brother was over here in 54. His daughter, my niece, was here four years ago. Another niece was here two years ago. So you had good contacts. And I've had one young man that married to one of my nieces. We'd have been here several times. He traveled for Sweden. He had some job where he was over here. I can't remember exactly what it was. Well, I have contacts in Sweden. Of course, I have friends. I had one of my schoolmates was here for a visit about three years ago. I went to school the first day until we finished school together. And he and his wife and daughter and her husband were here. Did you feel any homesickness the first few years? Oh boy. Last summer was so damn hot here that you could fry an egg on the sidewalk. And I worked in this fourth floor. It was a top floor in this furniture factory. Oh, and I suffered. And I had hardly any friends. I didn't know anybody. If I'd had money, then I would have gone right back. But you didn't write back and ask for money. No. Did you have to pay back the aid? Oh yeah. You paid it back? At Christmas at that time, no, at that time the exchange was about $3.75 to a dollar. And I sent home $350. And I told my mother to pay the bill, pay my loan, and I'll buy presents, Christmas presents for the rest of the money. And that was the only time I ever got a letter from my dad shortly after I sent that money home. And he couldn't figure out how I could make that money in such a short time. So you felt pretty good then? Yeah, I felt pretty good, but I was wondering if he thought I got it some crooked way. When did he die? Did you see him in 1952? No, no, no. He was dead. My mother was dead too. My mother died three months before we got there. My dad died in 1937. And he never wrote back to you at any time? Only once. Of course, he was not much for writing letters. He wasn't very good at writing. One thing, I don't think he had very much schooling. He was smart, but he didn't get a chance to learn anything because he had to work. He came from a very poor family too. And then, of course, after he got married, we lived at Kulla. And we had six kids in the first ten years that they were married. So we had luck. So I don't blame him for not writing. Yeah, of course, when he was four, then...