 I'm sitting here with Mr and Mrs Ernst Bengtsson in Tennessee, Illinois. Ernst Bengtsson was born in 1903, November 3rd in Abild, Holland, and came to America in 1927. He died on the 11th of June, 1986. He was in the family, kids, three girls and three boys. And there we grew up and were happy together. Then we moved north when I was 15 years old up to West Jutland and lived there until 1919 we moved up there. And then I left for America in 1927, so I was up there about eight years, was it? So he bought another farm? He bought another farm and my daughter stayed on the one farm where we left. Your sister? My sister stayed at my daughter's. Where in West Jutland was that? Well, not too far from Strandjunga. Kalv? Kalv, that's the name of the congregation. Kalv in Sandvik. Was there a bigger farm than the one in Holland? Somewhat. Why did he want to move north? I don't know. I think my mother wanted to move north. She was a Smålanding and she never liked the Skanska. The dialect, even in Holland she didn't like the dialect. And of course the dialect in Småland was no better, of course, I can judge it. But there was like a compromise though. Yeah, it was. And then my sister got married and she could stay on that farm. That's where we lived. And we improved that farm a lot. My brother and I deserve a lot of credit for working there with my dad. We fixed up that farm a lot during those years. Things were not good way back then. But that was during the First World War then? Yeah, right after the First World War we moved. And then we stayed there and we would work out some... You could work out by the day then and you could earn equal to 50 cents in American money in a day working on the farm. And we being home two boys or three didn't see fit to stay home on that farm. So I was the one that pulled out and left, the only one. Were you the youngest? I was next to the youngest. Yeah. And... So who gave you the idea of... you went to school in Abel first? Yes, yes, yes. And you were confirmed in Abel Church? Yes, yes, yes, yes. And there was no thinking about you going to the United States then at that time? No, it didn't come on until several people left. And people thought of the end of immigration when I left, I think. It sort of ended there more or less. And none came here after that time, I don't think. No. Well, except Ellie Henn. Yeah, she married there. So you were 24 then? I was 23 when I came. You didn't have a girlfriend in the Karlsförsamling in Västergötland? Yeah. I mean, you were ready to buy a farm or something like that? No. You were interested in farming, though? I meant to go to America and make some money and come back. I said, five years I'll be back. And then buy a farm? Well, not necessarily buy a farm, but be able to have a few dollars in your pocket. At least, you know well what thought was in the mind of those people. Make a little money. And so I came on the first couple of years. I was in Detroit, Michigan. And worked on buildings. I learned to work on buildings as a rough laborer to begin with. Then I got more to be a carpenter. I was sort of a rough carpenter when I left. And... And the Depression came on. And I saved a little money in central Sweden, and then things got tough. And you had to pay your room and board up there at least $10 a week those days. It was in Detroit? Mm-hmm. And the money kind of went down. And I thought I had to get out of there. So I happened to come out here in the country just to look for work. I was a man I knew out here, and I came out here to Yeniseio just blind. And didn't mean to stay here neither, but here I am. So what happened? There was no one giving you the idea to go to Detroit. There was no relation there or no friends? Yeah, friends I knew. Some boys from home that were there, yeah. Did they visit Sweden then so you could talk to them before you left? Yeah. No, there was a few boys that went about that time, three or four of them, really close together. I knew those boys in Detroit, and I went there. But I wish, in a way, I had never gone to Detroit. I rather liked the country. When I got to the country, I liked it better out in the country. So when you bought the ticket now, you still have the ticket framed on the wall. Yeah. You were able to pay that for yourself, though? No, no. I didn't have all the money I borrowed from somebody. I didn't have any money for tickets. My dad couldn't even help me with the ticket. So there was hard times then on the bus? Yeah, it was hard times, really. I think I borrowed a little bit from my brother, if I remember right. Hans Josephson, I borrowed a little money from him. That's right. My brother-in-law. So you had no money then to bring your sweetheart with you from Sweden? No, I had no sweetheart that dear to me at all. It was just, you know... Not worth the money? No. It was just, you know, when you're young, you can say you have a girlfriend or two, but that doesn't mean too much. Did you tell her that you were going to come back within five years? No, I didn't tell her nothing. She didn't ask. You have those things in your mind, you're going to go back and get married. My mother had, when I left, she had what they call a myrten that grows in... That grows like... They make braille crowns out of it in Sweden. Myrten, they call it. Ah, myrtenkronor. I don't know. And they are myrtenkronor. She had one of those and she said she hoped that stays till I come home. She's going to use that for your bride. Oh, I see. And it never came across, of course, but those dreams you have... So she had made plans for you then? Well, hoping you'd come back, which I did, but it took 12 years before I came back. And my folks were still alive. They were nice. Well, I came home for Christmas. And then I wasn't rich. And then we were engaged to be married. So I didn't mind leaving Sweden that time because I was going to... I liked to go home and see my relation and I liked to go back because we were going to get married. So it wasn't hard to leave Sweden that time for me neither. So this was after the Second World War then? Or was it before? Before. Before. 1939? Yeah, that was 1939. Right after that. Yeah, I barely got across the ocean for trouble. For Germany, Hitler sunk these submarines for going around there, battling ships. But I did come back and not much after that. Not much traveling after that. How was the conditions then if you compare this to 1927 and 19... Here? No, on the farm in Sweden where your parents lived. No, conditions were... I think maybe more or less here. Here we were stepping up, gaining in America. But in Sweden we were stale. We were stale. There was just nothing going on. The trade was bad and things just weren't moving at all. And like I said, you could work all day for equal to 50 cents in our money. Not when you went back to Sweden? No, no, but the first when I left. How about the improvements now on the farm? Did you look for them when you came back? When I came back, oh, it improved. I say that as I've gone back each time in my life, it's been several times, each time I found Sweden almost ahead of us. Up to 1939, though, you couldn't see any... 1939? Very little. Very little. No. How was the feeling then? Your brother had the farm and your father... I didn't have it yet, but he bought the farm. My brother shot me after that when he found out I was going to stay in America. He had worked home and worked out. But then he did buy... My first was getting old and he bought the farm. And still has it. Now he's an old man, but he still has it. How big of a farm was it? About 200-acre farm. Tillable? Oh, no, no. Just 40 acres tillable ground with valuable timber up there. Valuable timber. That's something we don't have out here. We don't have our timbers here, but we have... Here in Illinois, we have valuable farmland, valuable, wonderful farmland, the best you can find. So did you... But at that time, you had not getting into farming, though, 1939? No. You were ready to get married, you said, and have you tried farming? Well, I had worked out here for seven summers on the farm before that time. I see. So you had some experience then. Well, and that's how we got acquainted, through our church and so forth, how we got acquainted. And I had some experience, but I still was put a grain on the farm. But I did learn a lot of things in seven years. Things were done different then from what they are now. We had electricity that used to come in here in 1936. And before that, I started out with land in the senior horse barn and stuff. And it was very, very... Then somehow, we got acquainted and we got married. I moved down here at that time. And we landed this land from... I worked with her mother on this farm. She was a widow? Yeah, she was a widow. And she... It's many years ago now. So what did they do different now in Sweden? Like, we take 1939 now compared to here. You had a tractor here? Yeah, they had a tractor here when I came here on this farm. And... How about Sweden? Did they have a tractor? No. I was home at Christmas time and the winter was cold and I didn't see anything going on in any field work, of course. Some did, yes. Some did, no doubt. But I noticed that the prices of labor was going up and you'd be paid more for a day's work and so on. And not too much more, but it had changed. But then... Then the Depression come on. But it was before 1939? Before 1939, yeah. But then... I should say, it changed the other way quickly, right there, you know. We had Hitler walked into Poland in 1939 and that was the turning point. That was the turning point in history for a lot of us. And... Things started to look the other way. We had to do... United States had to provide a lot of material for the world, as you know, and the... And there was demand for things. Things went up. I say that when we got married, we came into farming at the right time. We came in at a time when we could pay off some debts we had, sort of against our mom and so on. You were able to expand... And got a lot of good and even bought more land that belongs to the same place here. But... But between 1930 and 1939, you were saying there was like a... dormant period. 1930 and 1939....hanging on to it and no more. They couldn't buy any land or anything. No, I would say, yeah. You had to be careful. I would say, yeah. So not much happened then on the farm. You just had to survive. Pretty much. We bought... Take this farm here. We bought the land very cheap in those times when land was cheap. And we got a lot of good, distilled our land, and we bought it cheap. So there was some good down there. And things started to go up a little bit, so you could do that. So we got some good out of the cheap times. But if you really go back to... Did they look cheap at that time? In other words, if you compare it today, of course it was cheap. About 1939? No, when we bought this other land. It was hard to get money to buy something. Yeah. Yeah, it wasn't... It was not as cheap as people... They didn't look as cheap. No, it didn't. Because you really had to work for that money. Oh, yeah. You bet you did. So now, of course, when you compare it to today's price, it is nothing. I mean, it was like a... Like a cup of coffee. But not at that time. No, it was money. At that time, when you worked here, you came to Geneseo, you said, from Detroit. Yeah. And you stayed on farms for seven years, during the Depression. Yeah. Were any other farmers hard set? They had to move out of here to go to California or some other states? No, I don't think any moved away. Nobody moved away? No. People moved here from Nebraska. People moved here. There was a better territory here than a lot of other places. So the Dust Bowl didn't affect this area at all? No, no. Not too much? No drought? No, they... We had drought. Well, yes, some. We had chinch bugs. Not that bad. We had... We had... That was before he came here. Yeah, we had a chinch bug in 1934. We had grasshopper drought in 1936. You were in... Yeah. But I was in on that stuff. The... It was pretty hard, very hard. But people hung on here pretty well. And we, we in this area were blessed by the farm machinery manufacturing down in the cities, started to step up and step up after that time as well. Now we're on the other way down. Farm industry has left us and we are going downhill. Now we're going the other way. Land is cheaper and people are out of work. A lot of people are out of work. And it's going... So you were fortunate then after 10, 12 years you came in at the right time. I say we did. We came in at the right time. And my son that now farms, he reminds me of that. He's right that, Dad, you come in at the right time. So you were able then, you expanded your farms with... How many acres you said you bought then in 1939? We bought three 80-acre farms. No, not then. Not for at once? No, not for once. First we bought the one and that was first one what would help with backing of her mom too, remember. We had a little backing then and we had a backing. I had a backing of her mom that if you couldn't make it, we always make it, you know. It was in our name. It couldn't all pay for it. So, so you had backing. You see how safe that was at that time. And if somebody has a backing like that now, it's hard to get, you know. But your mother-in-law, she was an older person though when you met her. Yeah, she wasn't that old. She was, when we got married, she was born in 75. She was born in 75. But that generation was known to be very careful though. They were very thrifty and don't buy anything unless you really have the money. No, she was paid for cash. Her ID was there too? Her ID had to pay for cash. We hid, we bought. The 180 we bought, I remember we laid out $20,000 cash, half piece that time, for the last 180 up there. And cash money. And now, now you don't have it. People don't do that anymore. No. No? No. But she was not afraid then to... She trusted us. We were pretty young, I guess. And she was a wonderful farmer. She liked the farm life. And she was a hard worker on the farm. And that was her life, the farming, you know. My father died in 1933. And he had borrowed from his hired men and from his brother. And she had that to pay off. It wasn't big sums, but it was big then. So there was a hard time during the Depression to hang on to? Oh, it was miserable. We had... When I came out and worked, it was dollar a day, $25 for a month. And you got paid in the summer and not in the winter. Well, there was no pay during the winter months? No, not for a couple of years. There were very worst years where I was. You worked for your board properly, did some chores, got up at 4, 3 or 5 o'clock and milked cows and took care of horses. And I didn't mind. I just didn't mind. But you didn't get any place that way. I don't see how come I didn't worry more. I didn't. But... It was a different philosophy than... It was a different philosophy. On the farm, the farmers, they had a chicken dinner on Sunday and the neighbors came in for dinner and had a good time. That was that. Now it's not a story with all that. Were people generally happy, though, when they came together for dinner and sitting and talking? No, they were grumbling. I'm sorry. They were mostly happy. Yeah, but people were grumbling. But it was going on for so many years, though. You had the whole 30s. Yeah, it was. You had to step carefully, step carefully what you do. That was the motto for the day. That was who you worked for more than was... Yeah, the guy I worked for. In my mother's family, there wasn't that much grumbling. I worked for a guy. His name was Willard Anderson. He's still living and he's still older than I am. He's a widow now and he's going to get married next month. It doesn't belong to the story, but that's the sweet for you. And he would grumble an awful lot about it. It really doesn't belong in this story, but very much about the time. So he was young and you could see why. He couldn't get ahead financially. And you shouldn't grumble because in his life, he acquired more property than he ever needed and always had more money than he could handle at the end of his life. What use? You don't need all that stuff. There was no one from the core cities, because I talked to a lot of people in the last few months, that ever thought of getting over their heads in debt and buying a little farm. I never heard one or never met one. No, no. Would it have been impossible for you, for instance, to go to the bank in Geneseo and say, I'm going to be a farmer now, I'm going to buy a house? No, well, it started slow, possibly, some place in a small place. You got some backing before you had... They knew you were well acquainted with farming or something, possibly. The owner had to back you then financially, I suppose, to write a signing note. We never bought any money when we came here. My grandfather took a mortgage on this place. They had a mortgage way back. But it's way, way back, though. It's way back. In the 30s, it was unheard of. Nobody would ever... Because there were a number of people that lost their farms around here in that time. No, you can't... When we acquired some of those land pieces, the Longs, and I came back to Sweden and heard that we had added to the land a little bit. I came to Sweden and the neighbor boy said, You're a millionaire. So they made you a celebrity, right? Yeah. Did you tell them about the war on those stones out there in Illinois? Yeah. Ingen kvick, ingen sten. You know what kvick is? But we had other ways to do well out here. It wasn't hard to explain it. That makes them sick in Sweden when I tell you there's no rocks here. Inga jersgårdar utan sten. No, no. I had a headache and I cussed out. I wish you could see or go out and enjoy as much as I can go out just today and watch these men out, two of them this morning, cultivating the field. They finished here this morning. And how we farm today, we are not really modern on this farm because we don't have enough money to run it. My son don't have. But we do pretty well. Go out and follow them in the field here. Last night I told Ruth, they cultivate this field down here. And I said every time they cross the field, they take an acre. On your Swedish tunnel underground, if they cross the field, four rows with one cultivator and eight with the other. And you really move when you do those things. And when crops grow and look good like they do now, it's fun to be on the farm, see it grow. It's a good smell then in the soil. But then there are times when it's the other way, when it's too wet or flood. It's been lovely this spring, really, here, all spring. This last rain was a good... Yeah, yeah. It would be knee-high then before July. It is. Before that. It's more than that now. This is the earliest we've ever had our crops in this year. Is that right? 11th of April, wasn't it? And I thought last year was extremely early. But this year is the earliest that I can remember in all the years I've lived here. It was dry early. But if you compare this country today with Sweden, every time I come back to Sweden, they are very modern in Sweden. They are more particular. They take better care of the ground than we do, really. In what way? They work every corner of the field up to the very fence, you know. And we get a little more careless that way. Still, we do well in our field, take good care of them. But they are very efficient in Sweden in their farming. And we are here, too, we think. We are pretty efficient. But there is no crop you can compare to the yield, though, because you don't have any winter wheat here. You only have corn, soybeans. We have 25 acres of winter wheat right now up here, but we seldom have wheat. But it's corn and soybeans this year, about, around, some over 500 acres together of corn and soybeans. Wheat here would never be as good as it is in Sweden? No. It wouldn't yield as good then? What? It wouldn't yield as good as in Sweden in the winter wheat, for instance? I couldn't say. I don't think so. When I travel through southern Sweden, through Halland and down Skåne, it's amazing for the grain they grow down there. We don't come up to that here, no, not with small grain. No, not with small grain. You get off in Copenhagen and travel up through that road and then all the way up towards Falkenburg and Warburg, that ends up there more. But the crops, the small grain and oats and all that wheat, it's heavy, it's wonderful. The climate is just right for it. Take an oat crop here, it can get pretty warm, it gets lighter oats. It can get good too, but there's no money in oats here, period. You've got to have... It grows too fast there perhaps? Well, I think so. It gets too hot too quick, it ripens too quick. But... Up there it's cool in the nights and... But the corn and also the beans do well here. Only now the market is shut pretty well here. Can't make things meet now anymore. We have... I don't know how much concern it is to you, but things have worked. Somebody quoted yesterday on the news that... Yeah? That corn, new corn was quoted at $1.98 a bushel, new corn. I heard that. Yeah, how do you think of that? It's impossible, it's far below the production cost. Oh, you can't... it doesn't make sense, you know. It won't make sense. The John Deere workers, I see in the paper, they average with all the benefits they get, $24 an hour, and you compare those workers, what they make. They got expensive machinery for that kind of a wage. Isn't it strange, though, that the John Deere are so close here now in East Morine, that they would have knowledge of how much the farmer is making and how much he can pay for the equipment he's going to buy? There's too much of a difference between the workers at John Deere and the farmer. That's right. You would think they would have seen the light 10, 15 years ago and something is going to happen here. With all the benefits the worker gets and the farmer, he was on his own. Well, you know full well how that... as well as I do. How long have you lived in America? 59, since 59. 59? Yes. Long time, that. Well, you know the story pretty well, but... I say that it's the people, it's the worker mainly, that it's the demanding higher, and we'd like to live better and better, higher and higher, that union strikes have done this work. Somebody sees the other one gets a little better benefit, he's got a strike and gets that too. And so it builds up, builds up, to now where we run these factories over to Korea or other places in the world, and we buy manufactured stuff in other parts of the world that comes cheaper. And I saw it speak out in the paper the other day, I want to do the letters, that how we have run... they say the union has run the farm factories out of the Tri-Cities, and it's true to some extent. You can't say directly so, but it's true to some extent that what happened. We may be blamed too a little bit on the farm. We like to live better. We lived better years ago, but now today, to go out and pee for a real good machine, $100,000, and sell corn at $2 a bushel, you can't do that stuff. It won't work. No. So you're going downhill. So this is strange to the management, not like John Deere International Harvester. Why did they buckle under, under this demand? Because they said this is it. The forecast doesn't look that good. John Deere isn't fully buckled under yet. John Deere isn't fully... They have a rough time to sell the machinery. Yes, they do. John Deere is the one that survives the longest. You know that. Like my son said, they have the office here. How can they quit, he said. Well, they have that new nice office down there. And John Deere has been a wonderful company for the farmers. Done a lot of good. They help produce. In fact, they are true to blame for developing this fancy machinery at such a high price that it cuts labor out. So you see both sides work there. Labor-saving devices. When I came to this place here, 320 acres, whatever you call it, there used to be two hired men all the time, didn't there, Ruth? Twelve horses in the barn or more, to work. Sight 2, Ernie Bengtson, Genesee. Sight 2. And he... But two men put in there. Though I don't think we learned it quite as particularly as far as Schwartz is concerned. Not quite as... We don't milk cows or anything like that, so we don't have any of that. But we have... Where he lives, we have two harvests of silos. And we have automatic feeding for the cattle up there and so on. So he has it handier that way. But there is still manure hauling and stuff to do and all that moving livestock around. So you can see what we've done to this machinery. This machinery has also helped us get ahead. So we've outstripped ourselves as farmers. See what I mean? You can't blame all the Union for this stuff because through this machinery that they've developed, we have overproduction. We can produce a little bit cheaper, so it's a bit of overproduction. So food gets cheap. Too much of the food. And the income for... Still the taxes are a little bit high, I think, when it comes to that. We have quite a few taxes. I think we pay on all this land around our tax bill in June around $10,000 to get her on board place. That's a lot of money you got out with. And... So the overhead is not light. No. Yes. You got to be a lawyer almost around the country. Yeah, you bet you do. You got to be an economist and everything. Yeah, you bet you do. Now the bankers sit down and just so hardly... It don't matter if you got shares in the bank. We have bank shares in our bank, but they don't count for nothing. You got to... They don't borrow money unless you know what they're borrowing it for. Now interest are coming down, things have changed, and things are leveling out a little bit now. But how are we going to live on this different income that we get now? We still can't buy that high-priced machinery at $24 an hour for the worker and come out as it is now. It's got to level down much more. I think we need to come up and they need to come down some more. How it'll go, I don't know. And you have the foreign market all over the world. It's just the foreign and national. International, it's just the whole world is in the stuff. I would say. The farmers in Sweden, he's heavily in debt also with machinery and fertilizer. Debt, I never can figure out how the Swedes can work at all. I can't figure that out, how they work. You never discussed it with them? My goodness, I have discussed it with them. They have to declare every month, I believe, in pay the tax. Every month it goes that... The money just moves in Sweden like that. Just right now it turns around. How in the Sam Hill the Swedes can keep on that way, you ask me. With that high interest they have and that national debt they have. But it seems to work. My gosh. They are happy and they travel all over. Free vacations and they have summer homes. It makes you jealous when you come over there. See, the father has maternity leave, you know. And his wife goes to the hospital. My gosh. But a lot of the single young men like these over here, they complain bitterly about the taxes. They do? Yes, they do. Well, there'll be higher taxes for the single person, of course. But they forget about all the coverage they have, you know, their insurance coverage over their head. So, for instance, now when you came here in the 1930s, you didn't have any hospitalization insurance or anything? No, we didn't. In case of sickness? We got a little bit something when we got married, didn't we? Not in ancient Sweden? No, not here. I mean here. Here? No, no, there was nothing. And now, as far as being sick in America, it's a terrible thing, you know. You have to take care of all your insurance needs by yourself. Yeah. You don't have any group insurance? No. You don't have insurance co-op, for instance, that we can group insure? No, not particularly. So, like the John Deere workers now, he has group insurance. Yeah. And he is insured over the deep. Yeah, yeah. He has to pay $2 on a prescription. That's right. So, you are lagging behind already there in that field, for instance, that you have to make up in selling your product? Yeah. Yeah. So, it is an unfair living condition when you compare it to the one that produces the machinery and the one that's going to work with it and pay for it. Well, I suppose it's the farmer's fault. Farmers never can organize in America. That's the reason that there are so many different diversified stuff. There are so many kinds of farming in America. It's a big country. You have the wheat farmer and the corn farmer and the soybean farmer, the tobacco farmer, the rice farmer, all that stuff. And they put in all they have to organize. Then they can't do that because they can't agree on that stuff. It's been tried many times. It's impossible. I don't think it's ever been tried to any extent for that matter. But impossible. It's just like... Has there never been a co-op on the Geneseo, for instance, where the corn farmers... We have a co-op buying. Where you buy things? Buy things, no. Not selling? Not particularly in selling, no. That's what we need, but they don't seem to do any good anyway. The only co-op is co-op gas and oil. Yeah, co-op gas and oil. They sell a lot of fertilizer and stuff and all our gasoline and stuff and so on. My son is a director in that affair. But they do some good for the purchasing thing, if it's a concern. But selling, no, not too much. You would think that they have tremendous leverage, all the corn farmers, for instance, go together and sell to Russia and China direct without those middle hands. What leverage have you got when you've got your bins loaded up with corn and want to sell it? You can't say, here's what it costs. If we could say that, here's what it costs. We buy a machine, they say, here's what the machine costs. You can have it, you pay me that money. We wish we could say that, see? You can have this corn, you can have these beans. You gave me so much for them, I've got to have it. Well, keep your beans. I'll buy them from another foreign country or whatever, you know. Like I mentioned, even from Korea, they send, get work done in Korea, cheaper than we can do them here. See, what are we going to do there? We are cut in this mess and they're struggling right now. I say we are struggling. America is struggling to get on her feet again, as far as agriculture is concerned, and other things, too. All kinds of manufacturing. Well, wait, more than ten years ago, we were back in Sweden, Ruth, and you remember we were up in Jungby, where were we? And the lady had a store there where they sold clothes. Remember, a buy-good store or something. And she says, now you can't compete. They can send it away and have it made cheaper than we. Ah, that was in Stromsnesbruk. Stromsnesbruk it was. And get it made cheaper than we can do it. So they were in to close the store, which they finally did, didn't they? Well, it's probably true because, they said two years ago the farmers in Sweden was going to use the oats for firewood or something. They talked about it? They were organized to it and they couldn't sell it. We could burn corn here, but we never burned the oats. We love people in the papers. So they are supposed to be organized when everything is going that way. But if it's problems, then maybe a co-op will have problems with lead fee too. I thought the Swedes were protected price, protected. Yeah, the government, through government regulation. Yeah, what do you mean? Two years ago they had too much corn in the European market, so they were shipping it all over. Over the European market, yeah. They have very good crops. We were there two years ago. And they were talking about using the oats for methanol, I think. Yeah, yeah, I remember that. Overproduction. They fertilized too much, they said. Well, that's what we joke about here sometimes. Take the fertilizer away from the farmer, you'll be all right. Bring in the change bucket. That was a really good answer, two years ago. Yeah, take away the fertilizer and you're all right. Cut down or take away this planting we do today and take away the insect side and the pest side and plant your oats with the wire where you can cultivate truss ways. Do you remember some of that stuff? Yes, I see that. There wasn't as much weed killing, but those days you didn't need it hardly. You cultivated with truss ways and length ways. Now it's just length ways. And we have used insecticide and pesticide now. We do it every spring. And this year I have never seen things cleaner than it is this spring. Everything is clean here all over. It's wonderful to see how this stuff has worked, really done some good. People do complain bitterly on it, especially the city people. I don't think it's a healthy thing, really, in the long run to have this stuff because some of it might get in the water finally through drainage and could hurt something. I don't think it's the best, but I'd hate to give it up. And I know in Sweden they use plenty of it. You can go in Sweden and see the marks through the oats fields and wheat fields all but they're driven with a sprayer through it and spray to keep the weeds down with that weed killer too. So it's a necessity, I suppose, and especially when you have the combines, they always bring the weed killer in because when you have a combine you usually seed a lot of weeds. Oh, you think so? Yeah. It was different when you bundled up in sheaves. Yeah. You can save the weeds seeds for the trashing machine, but you can't do it out in the field. No. And the city people don't understand that. It's hard to explain every line in the business. Oh, my goodness. When I was a kid we cut the grain with a scythe when I was a little boy and they started to have binders that laid it in bundles or something and we started to get that. Wasn't that a life for you? Yeah, and instead go back there and tie up these bundles of grain in hot, wet, or hazy. The women would go there and work and that was slave work to her. They had stockings on their arms. Yeah. To protect them. To protect their arms, yeah. But they said they were pleasant moments too though when they came over. They did, they was. They had a dance on Saturday night and they would tie you a bit. So if you don't know any difference why. I remember I said to a pastor we had there many years ago, I said I wish my dad could have had a little more modern machinery and he had to work so hard with so-and-so poor stuff. He said it didn't hurt your dad that he didn't know that you could plow with a five-bottom plow and it didn't hurt him. It hurt him not to know. It gives us happiness, like you said, where you are. That's the way to be in this world. But now we have been some place and we don't like to go back to this. This was hurting. Yeah, but it's easy for you though because you like to be a son of. Yeah, it is. He was not used to the 30s. It is. He is completely foreign for that. Yeah, it's been a lot of worry for him. His place, he bought on contract and if it was someone else, he would have lost it. Yeah, we sold on this land. We had, you know, we're of this time. She's now can say she's old, but I'm old. And she's old too. We're getting old. And you quit. You think you're going to quit, but you try to sell your land a little bit, you know, for your family. And we did. We had some land up there. All this land was fixed, so it was in my name. And all this land here, she had a brother and they inherited this place. And then he died and then she got it all down here. But then I owned the land up there. And then I sold the wind 180 to him. He had a part in it, fixed it, so he owned that. And we gave him brother, his brother $20,000 in cash against it. He's an electrical engineer, lives in Naperville, his brother. And he makes good money, but he always uses up the last nickel, just like anybody else. And so he got that 80. And then the 80 north up there, that we gave it, I signed that away to boys together. Sign your pen, over $100,000 of what the land at that time was given to him. So that was gone. Then we sold the 80 where he lives, where the harvesters are, a nice set of buildings, to him and a contract for $2,000 an acre. My land was a little higher than it is now. And he paid a couple of years on that, but now lately he can't pay on that. So we have now for the last couple of years, we give him a check for $8,000 and something, and him a check for $8,000. And they go to the bank and put that check in there, and then they pay that then, and then they pay the money back to me the same day. So we don't gain or lose nothing, only we don't get the money. But it shows that they have paid for it in the future, that he had paid for it. But then I'm stuck on interest, usually around $8,000 or $9,000. It used to be $10,000 usually. I pay taxes on it, that makes me mad. That makes me mad. I give every year that counts for $1,000 more income tax. That makes me mad. Your son is smiling all the way. Yeah, he knows. Well, this year he paid the tax. But they're all saying, you know, if you like to play poker, always play with your own family, don't bring your neighbor in. That's the thing we hang on to. But there still is $100,000 left in there. And now I... It isn't worth as much either now, the land. And the contract, we thought maybe you could give it up and still own part of it some way or other, but you couldn't. Yes, I don't work good. We did it the other way. We did it the other way, instead of let the land go back to us or to me. And then we come in to the lawyer after all this was done. The lawyer said that she was too rich and she had to give something to me. The lawyer said, you sign over that 180 acres to me, which she did. That's why I say you need to be a lawyer. You've got to be. Between the family, we work it out, you know. You get experience after a while. Yeah, you sure do. So as long as we live here, it goes pretty good. And it will afterwards, too. He has one brother to deal with, and they'll get along, I think. It's all kind of different. He's not a farmer anymore. He never was a farmer. He liked to study, and he started to study. He's doing good in his work. Got a doctor's degree in his work. And very smart. We claim that we are no dummies anyhow. This boy is almost no dummy. He only went to high school and did a short course, whatever it was. He's got a lot of training in farming. He knows it all, I'm telling you. He's just as well educated in farming as any college boy can be. How about you now, when you came here from Sweden? You had Swedish farming in your blood, and they know how to do it. Sweden in your blood. You bet it was Sweden in your blood. When you came here, you had to learn that on the farm. Yeah, it was different altogether. In fact, I learned to get up earlier in the morning, and really I worked harder than I ever did. You had earlier hours. In Sweden, they get light at 2 o'clock in the morning, while you still slept in. Well, I could have stayed in Sweden, I guess. My brother stayed there and made it well, but I felt like we were not needed at home on the farm. I worked a number of years on the farm and helped improve that land there. I never got more than my board for that, so things were tough, really, in a way. When you came here to Geneseo, you didn't think about going into Jan Dier and start to work there like a lot of Swedes did. You could have, couldn't you? Yes, but you didn't think about that. You never started there? No. I came down there. I came on a bus from Detroit, and I landed by Moline Hotel. I was in the hotel and had a nice cup of coffee. There's a tail that still stands there. There was a lady in Dearborn, Michigan, that wanted to send greetings to her family there. I went to find that family, look that family up. She knew who I was talking about. I went back to Geneseo and came out to the place where he worked. He said he was going to move that guy that I came to, and I could probably work where he worked, which happened to be the way that he did move. The guy said I could stay there until the 1st of May, and if I was any good at all, he'd pay me something, maybe. That's how it started. I thought, good Lord, what a country have I got into here. It didn't look too good to me. I got homesick, and not too much out here, but in Detroit I was homesick when the Depression came on. You get homesick, oh, you get homesick. The first couple, three years, when things started to back up, working conditions and so on, to begin with, it was fine. You get homesick, and you got to swallow that. Remember, you left on your own accord. But now as I look back on this whole story, good night. It's been a wonderful life in America. It's a wonderful country, and Sweden is still a wonderful country, but I just as soon spent my days here. I just as soon spent my days here. I do like America. That's one reason I stayed in the country, evidently. Not necessarily that I got acquainted with somebody that we married, but people were friendlier out here in the country. You knew people. They talked to you out here. Like in Detroit, you were a stranger more. Were you able to talk Swedish here in Geneseo? Or did you have to use...? We had come to a Lutheran church, and they talked a little Swedish there. You joined the first...? Yeah, yeah. That's why I met a lot of people through that church. The people you worked for, were they members of the first Lutheran...? No, they went to Grace Church, but it was an off shot from the good Swedish. How come you joined the Lutheran then, just because you were a Lutheran? No, the boss took me to that church first, and I heard a different name. It sounded right to me. We still had a Swedish Bible class. I saw you two met then. Yeah, we did. We knew each other a long time, really, before we ever got married, before we ever dated or anything. I never really meant to stay out here. I don't know why. I meant to go back to the city, and I never made up my mind. I'm a slow guy. When I get stuck someplace, I stay, but it's hard to move me. That's really the truth, isn't it? She always says, What in the heck didn't you come around sooner for? Seven years to get you to find me? She was too young. I was a teacher. She was a school teacher out here, and I knew her well. She belonged to us. My father gave him a ride to church. I did like the people. Some people were so sweet to me when I came to that church. That was kind of welcome. So you felt good, then? You felt that you had some people you could... And you couldn't go far. If I'd gone back to Detroit right away, I couldn't. Things were tough. You'd have to wait. You'd have to go on after four years, I think, and find work again. But then you kind of liked it out here. I liked the country. So who introduced the farming methods to you, do you think? Was it your mother-in-law? Or did she give you ideas? Because you had to listen and learn as you went along. Well, you learn by doing. You watch others. You learn by doing. What? You watch others, then, how they do it. Well, yeah, and you learn by doing yourself. You make mistakes, and you learn by your mistakes. You learn, yes, by... On the farm line, you soon pick up the necessary things. Necessary things at that time was hard work, that's all. The threshing parties, for instance, was hard work. Yeah, yeah. You had to kill a lot of people. I earned $65 the first summer I was out here in Illinois. $65. And I guess I saved some. There was no tax to pay at the time? No, no, no tax. No tax. But... There was no income tax on the farm either at that time. No, no. No. Anything you made was yours. No. You didn't make that much. No, but... Did you ever get any ideas how to change methods of farming as you went along? No, not... Did you continue on? Just for the better, just for the better, going with the times. I was not quite as watchful, maybe, on those things as my son is now. He's more home than he was brought up, and it was a kid here. And it wasn't quite as easy for me to put in anything new because... I felt like I... You know, I was a poor boy, really, when I came out. I was a poor man, and I couldn't tell anybody what to do. And learn by doing, that's all I can say. Some new things naturally came along that you had to follow. You had cattle, dairy cattle to start with? Yes, not too many. There was a few milk cows and stuff, and we almost fed a few cattle. How about pigs, hogs? Yeah, we almost had some hogs, probably. A hundred, a hundred and fifty, or two hundred. Today you learn by experience, though, if there was something that was wrong. By the hog racing, you learn something how to make it better the next year. Yeah, there's nothing new in hog racing. The hogs used to be good then, better than we do now, really. Had them out on pasture and so on. Now we have trouble with the hogs. We have farrowing houses for them, and it gets sickness easy in there. But it's the easy way out of it now. But we didn't have that then. The farrowing houses have come up later up there. And the biggest improvement we've had was the harvesters we built. We built them up there. I think they only cost $38,000. And they shed, and two harvesters. And that's been a good improvement for the farm. Because we store a lot of tasks. Harvester holes, 10,000 bushels of corn, and the other side of the holes full of roughage silage. And that's a wonderful way to... You cut it green then, you know? You blow it in there. You cut it and blow it in there. And lock the sharp corn for silage. And that takes time to do, but that saves work. Even now, you don't have many cattle up there now. We probably have 125, 130 or whatever. I don't know. He gets up and feeds these cattle. It's done in 15 minutes in the morning and night. It's no different from feeding them by hand. But no, milk cows, you stay away from that. A dairy farmer, he's got his milk barn. He's got to work hard in that all the time. But steady income now, the dairy people are complaining too. They're cut down on their subsidy money. They are slaughtering the milk cows. So when your son came along then, the one that was interested in farming, he made a lot of changes. I had to tell you this is not the way it should be done. Well, no, I didn't tell you that. We've always had a very good understanding between us. But of course new things came on. The young boy sees it different. We had a nice fence around this farm. It's one of the first things when he started to tear that fence out. You can't have a fence around the house, you know? No. And the next thing was... What's wrong with that? No, it just didn't belong there. And you said, okay, take it down. We didn't say nothing, but we didn't want to say no. But for a few nights I didn't feel safe. I felt like the bull would come and tear into the house or something. The fence was gone. Now I never think of it. There used to be a nice fence around here. You used to landmine on the other side of that fence. Now we landmine all around here. So it was a picket fence, you're on? Yeah, no, it was a steel fence. It was nice. There's nothing left of it anymore, is there? No, it's gone away. And then more and more, I say, as time has gone on. Now he's been in it for a long time now. He's 43, what? He's been in it for 25 years since he's been in school. Yeah, so he's been in it longer. By and by, get the fence out here and there. Get your fences out. My idea was to keep good fences all over. Well, now he says, Dad, what do you want a fence for? You build it out, you'll have to move weights around that fence. Well, we don't have many fences anymore, except the outside fences, and they are bad. And I can see some good in it now. Out here yesterday in these fields, they plowed right through wherever they were before. When I came, there were three different fences, one here, one there, and one farther down in that field. Now that's all in one field. That's 48 acres in the whole thing. And of course it grows much faster when you come to the cultivator plant. I like farming nowadays. I like it. We go out and, for instance, plant our corn in the spring. I just love to drive that corn plant. You drive there, you plant these ores down and eat the ores up, and the weather is good, and good night is all mechanic. And if there's any trouble, you hear a little clicking sound that tells you that that shoe isn't working. Keep, keep, keep, keep, you stop right there, but it seldom happens. But you better stop when you hear that peeping sound. The little sensors sit down in the bottom where the grain drops, and if anything happens there, goes wrong, you hear a beep, beep, beep, and you're here right now. And you can tell which one it is by looking at your tractor.