 Gunnar von Mark, Dixon, Illinois. So how could you, you stayed all year round and the first time you went over was only in the summer? In Åsjögle? You mean after we moved? When you moved from Rockford? Yeah, we stayed. We tended to stay in Sweden. I see. That's the old house and then we have a guest house. The Saab is sitting there. You have a car there too? Yeah. So when do you leave for Sweden then, in April? No, we could leave in August. We used to leave in May and stay for about six months. But now we usually leave in August. Last year we left in mid-summer because it was a wedding. Oh, I see. We usually leave in August because we only stay two months. And I love to pick mushrooms. I'm absolutely nuts. Oh, I see. Mushrooms, yeah. And July is vacation. Then everybody's out. Oh, and the roads are filled and packed. And we usually go to Norway on a trip and there's no fun. Everybody's on vacation, nobody's home. So you stay in Norway too then with your brothers? Karen has a cabin in Norway too. I see. So you have sisters and brothers. Yeah. But we usually stay with the girlfriend. So you have a busy schedule all year long. We have fun. And you know when you're always kept busy. You're not looking for that somebody is going to come and visit you. They come anyhow. So in Rakford, did you join any other Swedish organizations there? No. Because you had no need for it? No, what I was working on, it didn't exist in any schools. Gryna isn't very social. That's why things like that. We have a lot of friends. We have people coming here. You keep shopping for you. Sure. That he is not joining. No, to belong to a country club or something like that, I have no use for. No, it never come into your mind? No. How many of you could be the president of a Rakford country club? I would love that. How about if they draft you as president of a Rakford country club? What are they going to do? Yeah, we were talking about the Rakford country club. How about the other manufacturers now in Sundstrand? You have Svan Hillman, Erik Andersen, you knew them all. But I never had much to do with them. I have a tool and die shop in Rakford that do my work. I've been working with them for 20 years now. So when the models get too big, I don't feel like making the whole model myself. They make them. And they're very good. And the best worker there, his mother was a swedish background. And he's good. Well I suppose you gotta have people you can rely on and depend on. And they're the same as Ernie was. If they have a problem, they could come to me and ask me, how would you make this? So we can work things out together. That's the most important thing. But a painter or a bricklayer, you couldn't tell a swedish bricklayer what to do. You mean they are stubborn? No, they're professional. They're professional, yeah. I see what you mean. You're not supposed to tell them what to do. So the bricks that we had, we didn't want the mortar to be flush with the bricks. You want it to flow out? Yeah, we want it on the inside. So I told him, we don't do that, he said. So when he was putting it up, I had to go back there and take the mortar out of there, to get it where I wanted it to. He belonged to the union, you know, they don't allow stuff like that. It's the same thing as when we were finishing the walls. I wanted him, we had awfully good timber in that house, planks, no nuts or nothing in there. So we wanted that thing to show. They wanted to fill it up with paint so nobody could tell what was underneath. So I wanted those guys to put the paint on, but after they had put it in, wipe it off. So that the wood would show through, see? And of course they wouldn't do that, so Karen and I, we had to wipe the paint off after that. So did you design this house yourself? Yeah. The whole thing? Yeah. And then you had it built? Yeah. Those are big logs, you have, they are real logs all the way through? All the way through here, yeah. Where did you get the timber from? No, I didn't build this. Oh, you didn't build this? No, no, you see, after Karen and I was married in 1960, 59, we came down here visiting a friend here, the Eriksons. And then we saw this place, and nobody lived in there, and it was boarded up, and it all looked like hell, but we liked it, see? We liked the location. But the house is construction? Yeah, just as it is. This house was built in 25. 25? Yeah. But you have done a lot of remodeling here, though. Oh, gosh, you think, there were four windows in that, so we took those out, and let's go in. So, you knew Axel Linus? Oh, gosh, yes. How did you know him? Well, look, it was like this. Greta is his wife's name, and she comes from Huxby, and she went to school in Oskarshamn, so we met her there, see? Oh, I see. And you spent Christmas there last year? Yeah. That's her home, but she took the pictures, unfortunately. In Palm Springs? Yeah. Well, she's so Swedish, she wouldn't believe it. And she's terrific. She goes visiting sick people, and she drives people around. And she has a Volvo. She just bought a Volvo last year in Sweden. So, Axel Linus, now, he was a painter all his life, then, or how did he get started with it? He made his living out of it? Well, in Chicago, he was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter. He was a painter, and in Chicago, he was making paintings for commercials. What do you call it? Yeah, commercials. Commercials. He was a commercial artist. But I always admired this Vidholm, Gunnar Vidholm. So when I was a little kid, I used to copy his drawings. So he was my favorite. And Linus Gunnar Vidholm, and this guy that makes those Swedish kids. He draws up. They studied together at the university in Stockholm. So they were all good friends. So when he came over here, then, did you know him when they lived here? Well, they married. You met him in Chicago, too? Yeah, I met him in Chicago. And then, after he got married, I met him again in Palm Springs. He came to Rockford to visit you? No. Greta. Greta. Greta. Greta. You can have that if you want to. Thank you. Greta. Greta. Greta, she was a damn good friend of ours all the time. You know, he's buried in Hugsby. I heard that. I brought him back to Sweden. How did you buy the paintings from him? I bought the paintings from him. When? In the 30s? No, we bought after we got married. In the 60s. Oh, I see. No, and before... He had no Elena's pictures before. We got married in 60. Did you buy them all after that? Yeah. He wouldn't sell that. He wanted that midsummer to go to Urubu. They said some kind of museum there. They had a big doing for him three years after he died, I think, up there. But finally, he sold it to us. So that's also a self-portrait, because he's in there? Yeah, he's in there. And then the last one he bought was Lincoln. Well, you see Greta. She's a cousin to my schoolmate that I grew up with in Oskarshamn. And it's through him that I got a hold of Karen. All in the family. That's a long story, huh? All in the family. So you were familiar with them? Well, they hang out together. You were familiar with them? Well, they hang very well on the walls. Have you got one of his? No. No, too late. Well, why not do? He might still have some there. So he apparently did pretty well then, Linus, with his paintings that you got. Oh, yes. So he moved to California and there you... That is an interesting story, I tell you. You have to go out there and talk to her. Because they got married and had an old, some kind of car and drove out there. And she had a little money because she actually came from Hanosa. It's a big farm in Huxby. And then her parents died. So I guess the settlement and then the farm was taken over by a cousin. But they met over here though in Chicago. And then they drove out to California and down to Palm Springs and Palm Springs was nothing. Then Axel met a guy there and Axel and Greta lived up in the hills. They had a creek going underneath the house. Oh, it's really cute. And then Axel, he didn't have too much money. This other guy had some money. So they found a motel that was for sale. So they took Greta in to put their money into the motel. So she has been running this motel and the other guy, he lived in Spain, I think. He died a little while ago. So she had been busy running that motel. And Axel, he had a studio in another place. He has a nice studio. Oh, he had a perfect life. Absolutely. Now the motel is just when you come in and then there's a big dollar horse outside. And he sold it. No, he tried to tell me what I should look for when a painting is good. So he kind of educated me. And he is a peach. We got engaged in 1937. So she waited for you for so many years then? Yeah, so we were engaged in 13 years before we got married. But she went with you back then to... Well, the war came. And then, you know, they wouldn't let me go anyplace. I was working on alternating drives. She had a hole in the heart valve. Oh, I see. But she came over to the United States then, but only for a short time. Five years. Five years. The doctors told her here that she lived five years and that's all she did. I see. But she spent a whole year in Sweden in the house. I had a little girl there. Oh, I see you had a little girl. No, they hired a young girl from there. Oh, I see. A farm girl. No, she couldn't have any children with her heart, see. Oh, she couldn't walk up a couple of stairs. They had a carrier all the time. But that was a little more than that. She was in Sweden, Johan. She died in Sweden then. No, she died here. She died here? Yeah. But she buried in Kristallnacht. Uh-huh. But she was a spunky thing, I think, because she and Gunnar traveled almost all over the United States. And I had a carrier. Oh, it moved. So she couldn't walk any steps then, I think. No, uh-uh. What kind of house were you living in then? Did you have to have a one-floor house? No, in Sweden, it's... One floor. Yeah, it was built for her. But in Rockford, it was a stairway like this. Wow. It wasn't easy then. So you had to have some help then, I suppose, a girl that... No, no, she cooked. She cooked. The funniest part, she cooked food. She had a table that she could sit. But in Sweden, she was alone. She didn't want her to be alone. And the farmers were good, too. Oh. Oh. Oh, we... These friends that we have in Osjögle, they are peach. Uh-huh. Oh, that's good. You have good people you can rely on. Oh. Oh. Well, they wouldn't let me pay anything for the grounds, you know. Oh, I see. And in Sweden, you can't... the farmers in Sweden won't sell you any property. Oh. Well, you paid for it, though. You get the papers and everything. Exactly, yeah. But how was the living? You lived also in Sweden with them for a while? Only during the summer or all year long? Well, we were there for almost two years one time. Straight. Well, we had to go back a few weeks to the States, but... How was it then to live in Sweden? I loved it. It was great there. You could have everything you wanted or convenience? Oh, yeah. Everybody were shocked because I had to drive all the way into Oskarshamn, 45 minutes. That's what they complained about. 45 minutes. For the farmers to live so far away. And I had lived in Los Angeles, and gee, if I could drive 45 minutes, I mean, you didn't get very far in that traffic. So for me, that was nothing, and I couldn't figure out that I didn't complain. Oh. You know. No, I loved it there. I had fun. Wow. And that lake, the water... Illen. Yeah, Illen is so good that you can drink it. Oh, so it is clean. Oh. So there are no summer cottages around then? No. Are there a few on the south bank? A few, yeah. No. There's hardly anything. Yeah, no. That guy in Merlin, they have it. It's that log cabin they moved up there. And then there's the one fishing. You can't see anything from where we live. And one, he built a house there, black. But you don't have the scenery you have here, though, when it starts to get green in April. Oh, we have the whole lake. We have everything in front of us. But you're so high here. You're not that high at Illen. Oh, no. No. Oh, gosh. It must be beautiful in the spring, though, when it starts to get green. Yeah, and here I have shooting stars. That's the reason the carpet is... or the... Grass. Grass is so bad. I have shooting stars all over. Uh-huh. Yeah, oh, it's beautiful actually. So you have two great locations then to retire to. Can't complain. Oh, he's still working, though. He has a shop there, too. Oh, they want to understand. Yeah. So... So they keep you busy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In Merlin. So, so, here, here, this fellow that bought Hattertorp, he... We were out one summer blasting those round stones that are in the... Fields. In the fields there. Yeah. So we had to do a lot of blasting. And the drills had to be sharpened. And this guy, he had a blacksmith shop on the farm. But he didn't know how to sharpen drills in the... For this... Blast... But there's a different special method you have to use there to sharpen them up. Yeah. So, so, and it cost quite a bit of money to have the blacksmith. Then they had to go to Merlin and get them sharpened. So he said to me, now, you take these drills to the blacksmith. And you watch him, what he's doing. How he's hardening it. And tell him, we are in a hurry. Yeah, yeah. And you stick to him every minute. So then after that, I had to sharpen all the drills. And harden them. So you see, it's been so easy for me to be a mechanic. You were only about 14, 15 then? 10. 10? Yeah. And you started to harden the drills? Yeah. You got the feel early. Because he has told this story so many times, and then we come home to them one day, and she started talking about Merlin, and that her grandfather, I think, had been a blacksmith there. Oh my, I said, that was good, I did to him. That was this Margaret? Yeah. That's interesting, so you have... No, it's a small world. Small world, that's right, when you start to talk to people. The trouble with me, when I went to school, I went to Oskarshamn's Realskola. I was good in physics. But the rest of the thing, I became a quadsitter. So... Well, he didn't like grammar, and he doesn't like geography. No, but my grandmother, she knew where all these rare flowers grew in Habetorp. So I pressed flowers, and I probably had, instead of needing 50 flowers, I probably had 200 flowers. And most of them were rare flowers, and this guy, that was a teacher in... Bacteriology? Biology. Yeah, he couldn't understand where in the hell I got all those rare flowers from, and so many of them. And I had a perfect press, because my grandfather loved to press flowers. So I never had to read anything, see? Because this guy knew, when I didn't know anything about geography, he never asked me any questions. So he always let me pass. So you had what we call the herbarium? Yeah, herbarium. Well, they had the years ago in their homes, the pressed flowers. And then, the rector for Oskarshamn's Realskola, he was a peach. He was a peach of a guy. And he also... Physics, I was way ahead of him, in other words. But what we had to learn in physics in Oskarshamn, that I knew many years ago, see? So we had to be damn good friends. And this Grimlund, he was called. The rector. The rector in Oskarshamn's Realskola. Grimlund. So, in 1937, when I went back to Sweden to visit, see? He was then rector for a school in Stockholm. And this was at the time when new apprentices enrolled. So he sat at a table there and he had a whole row of new apprentices who were going to enroll. So the only thing I could do was to stand in that queue. And when it was my turn, Grimlund looked up at me and he said, Gunnar! And he shouted out loud. He recognized me right away. Right away. So we had a hell of a good time, see? Gunnar gave a little statue that a friend of his made of a little girl. So, 15 years? Yes. Is that the title? Yes. She's sitting there studying. She's reading the book, yes. Real nice little statue in honor of him. And if you go to Oskarshamn, then it's in one of the rooms there. Hallways. Hallways. Do you remember the dead man Axel Pettersson? No. He got one krona for them. That was enough to get him a fireman. He drank a little too much. It was Axel Pettersson. He was going to burn down the whole Oskarshamn. It was a fantastic place. I remember him. It's a little world, as they say. It's a name that passes through time. And old memories. And that was the end of the interview with Gunnar Wallmark, curator of Illinois. Stood point interview.