 This is cassette two, continuation with Walter Alquist, the Council of Bronx, Iowa. Cassette two, side one. So don't you think that people will go back not to passenger traffic, being tired of touring bikes and high-speed driving touring bikes and so on? Well, no, because in my experience in the passenger traffic department was the fact that you're seasonal and we'll start with January. January you have a little push from New Year's and by the middle of January you got most of your holiday traffic down. I mean you've taken care of it. Then through the latter part of January, February and March there's hardly any travel. Then April they start vacations and then you have a pretty good April and then a better May. And then June it's really heavy. July, August it's heavy. September, after Labor Day, down it goes again. And then you don't have anything then until Thanksgiving holiday and then the Christmas holidays. And it's just a bubble up and down, up and down. And when you run, say we ran a train from Chicago to Los Angeles daily, one each way, well you have to have seven trains, complete trains to maintain a schedule like that. In other words, you have to have all that equipment to be able to maintain a daily train going each way through the cities all the way from Chicago to Los Angeles because it's about a 36-hour trip. And that's expensive in its own right. So there's no cost effect in other words? In other words, your loadings are way down in February, March and April in that period of time. Then you've got your heavy summer traffic and then you have your tail off fall traffic and then boy it's dead until Thanksgiving comes along and another holiday. And that's what kills you is running that dead area and running all those trains with the same amount of equipment on them and very sparsely loaded because that's one thing we checked every day with our car loading. How about freight though? Freight is somewhat seasonal but it's pretty regular. And of course like I say, it's went through a revolution you can't believe. Is it high volume nowadays for instance? That's all it is anymore. Years ago we took off what we call less than car load traffic. We used to have freight houses in each city and you could take anything down there and I want to ship this table, you take this table down there and they'd ship it for you and all that and that's where trucks come into it. Railroad says hey we're going to cut out all these freight houses from now on it's going to be car load traffic only. And then they got these car loaders, Union Car Loading Company and all that. They says okay we'll take the stuff and they had their own warehouse, take the stuff and we'll take it down to the railroad and have them bring cars in. We will load a whole car load. We get the car load rate, charge you what they call the LCLS and car load rate and between the two of them that's where they made all their money see. In other words they charge you for each individual item and the railroad only charged them by the car load but the railroad wasn't responsible for the loading it or unloading it or having anything to do with it see. And so they went to car loads. Now railroads have graduated to what they call 25, 50 or 100 car load trains where we go in and we do a whole 100 cars we'll handle. And so that's where the trucks got big then and that's what they call LCL traffic. They went into it too. Well they can take any item you got and you can take it down to the trucking company and they'll ship it for you because unless the car load tripping. But the railroad went out of that so that's where the trucks come into it. So then the trucks got big and the railroad says heck we'll take your truck and put it on a flat car, we'll ship it to the coast and save you the, because you take those drivers they made darn good money in those years. And so that's how the truck lines became so big and boy they're big today I'll tell you. I just like I said I went to California and back twice I drove both ways and I never saw so many trucks in my life on the railroad. But wouldn't it have been better to have it on the railroad? Oh it would have been better. But uh. Safer? Yeah. Oh much safer now they're running, you don't see it around here but they're running triple bottom what they call triple bottom trucks now out through Utah, Nevada, California and all that. Heck they got three in Tarrant Trail. They have two is the low here but you can't have three. Two is the maximum here. But northwest is three. Yeah. And uh that uh you know they had a hard time getting two here. State of Iowa absolutely refused and they went through the federal government and said those are federal highways you gotta let them run. They says alright we'll let them run federal highways but they don't run any state highways. And they still aren't legal on the state highway. But if they keep going boy they're gonna have four of them on there one of these days. And boy I'm telling you it's dangerous just to try and pass them. Now they're uh I saw on the uh United Parcel they on the side of their trucks now they got brushes that hang down over the wheels. And that's to cut out all the spray. Yes. And uh I guess it's gonna be required of all the truck lines soon to have something to cover those wheels because you get behind one of those triples and uh it's uh either snowing or uh raining and you can't see nothing. The distance to pass is too long. I mean you're blinded for ten seconds. Yeah at first you're just blinded for the distance to the truck and now when you got those triples on there boy you got a long ways to go before you're not blinded. It's natural they don't clamp down on that kind of safety. They're not instant. One thing you learn today everything is for the dollar. Human life is not an element. Anything else just like your atomic energy now. Like Nebraska's screaming they wanna dump atomic energy waste over there. And they're screaming they don't want it they shouldn't have it and all that yet they got atomic energy plants over there. So they have the responsibility to dump so much of that. And I think that's the only fair way to do it really. Then on the other hand as far as the human life is concerned how many people are gonna die from it but they don't care. It's look at how much money we make on it. Everything's that way. Just like many of your automobile manufacturers now have gotten in trouble where they've let things go that they knew were dangerous and they let them go because it cost them to correct it. And what was it Falcon Ford Falcon they got in trouble with catching on fire. They allowed that one family 230 million dollars. It wasn't that they wanted to give the family 230 million dollars they wanted to penalize Ford for letting it go 230 million dollars. So they gave it to the family. So there's nothing to replace life. It's all politics and your politics are all for the dollar. Yes your politicians are always out there scratching you know. How about your grandparents now were they also Democrats or Republicans? They were all Republicans as I recall. Were you the only one Democrat then? I never a Democrat. You're a Republican. Yeah I've been a Republican. You're a management. I'm a registered Republican and I still am national and statewide. Of course you're always getting letters every day. We can use another hundred dollars here another hundred dollars there which gets pretty irritating. Always need money. But I think you gotta express affiliation and a lot of people like to you know just sit back and let it ride. Now I can't say that everything Reagan's done has been perfect and I can't say that I've always voted Republican because I still consider the individual and his qualifications more than I do the party. I'm not a diehard either way. I've been invited to conventions and I've been invited to their dinners and all that but I still don't do it. I mean go to them but to the extent of course I look at everybody as an individual. What do you think about religious politicians? What chance will they have? Well I think if they're a good enough man they're worthy of it but I have my qualms about that because I don't think that religion is going to get anybody in there and I don't know how anybody can be holier than thou and be in politics. There's got to be some dishonesty. Do you think people get sick of it after all they read if this goes too much? Oh I definitely think people, oh yeah you get tired of hearing all this baloney. There'll be no union meetings, they don't get tired of it. Yeah I mean you know darn well the thing that I don't like about politics more than anything else is criticize what the other guy did. Come in and tell me what you can do. I'm not interested in what's happened, that's past and over with you, nothing you can do about the past. The future you can do something about and how many of them come in and say this is what I'm going to do and live up to it when they get there. Just like I talked to Bill Shirley years ago when he became a representative from Iowa in legislature. I knew him and I talked to him and he said he went back there with the idea in Washington he was really going to do things for Iowa. He said he got back there and he says they come along and says you going to vote for this? And no he says I don't think that would be for the good of the people. Let's see down here we got this for Iowa, would you like to have that? Well sure, it's necessary. Okay you vote for this or you don't vote for that. So there's a border system. You betcha. And the more control they got in there, I still think a politician shouldn't have more than eight years in Congress. Because boy they get so much power they just sit there and dictate. You're going to do this. So he says I learned in a hurry, you fall in line. What do you think about the people that serve on the Supreme Court? Do they sit there for life? That's ridiculous too. It's too much. Just like they made such a big deal over this board. I mean that was a political situation. Democrats didn't want him and so they dug up all this stuff and got this people's right to life and all this other stuff in there. And I don't know, the blacks got the blacks against him and everything they could. They got him out. Kept him out. Talking about blacks now, up in the Romerity, 42nd Street, they started to move in there in the late 50s, 60s and they started to have riots there and they had to move. Yeah, they got the... Why did they move in there? Did they move in other areas of town too? Or what was that single dot to change the neighborhood so fast? I think they were just moving north. See they always were down around 16th Street and down through Lake Street. They were not on the south side of Romer then? No, not very much volume on the south side. Stockyards and industrial places. See those were your Polaks and Bohunks and all those and they made it pretty rough on the blacks down there. So they didn't move into those areas? No, they didn't. But the Swedes, they were vulnerable to the gain. Well, I think they had to go someplace and they just started gradually going north. Gosh, I know I had a son that lived up there on Ames on about 60th and he first got married and it's been about, oh, I'd say 15 or 18 years ago. And anyway, I told him then, 60th and Ames, this is his home, you have a lot of blacks up in here, he just lived in an apartment house there, you know. And sure enough, boy, it's all black up in there now. We're past the Fontanelle, you know, well that Fontanelle golf course over there, you don't go over there and play, just two people or one. You go over there with at least four people and you stick together or else you're going to get robbed or waylaid. They had several cases out there. So, I don't know, it just seems like no neighborhood is safe from not only the blacks, but other people that are just as undesirable. Yeah, found that out. Chinchy neighborhood. Well, I mean, they won't even stay in their own neighborhood. Just like here, we had a case right across the street just this last week where the guy lost his rims off his wheels and down the street here about a half a block, these people put in a new driveway and they had to park in the street and they come along and knocked out the driver's side window and got in and got something out of their car, they saw in there. And so I don't think any neighborhood is safe from that. And break-ins, they have periodic break-ins. Are those people visiting temporarily only or are the people living in the area, you think, that do this? I think it's people who just come in the neighborhood. Because locally I don't think you particularly have that problem. But like I say, there's no limitations where they go anymore. And they even go out in those fancy neighborhoods in Omaha and stuff like that. So Emmanuel Hospital, they had to move out to 72nd Street. Yeah. And they were in a bad location then for a few years there. Yeah, and then the... Were people afraid to go down there or what made it? I think seeing you go nights and you get off work, why, it's a pretty rough situation to go to your cars and nurses and doctors and all. And you just can't get enough security around a place like that. Of course, any place you go in a parking lot, why, you never know what you're going to get into. And I think the underground parking lots are worse than the open parking lots. Because the situation that develops there, you almost have to have guards in there of all kinds 24 hours a day because daytime don't deter them a bit. We've had cases, and I worked on the 11th floor over there, why, I parked my car across the street there all the time. And of course, kept an eye on the parking lot. And every once in a while you'd see somebody over there messing around with a car. And I'd call 911 and tell them there's somebody messing with a car over there. And they'd go out and check it out. And this one day, why, there was about three guys were hanging around this one car, and they had it hooked up, and they were doing something to the car in there. And so I called up 911 and told them it looked like somebody was in there doing something to the car. And by gosh, it came a cruiser in from both ends, and one right down the street. And they had those guys up there, the hands up there, taking a carburetor off the car right there in broad daylight. Two weeks on tune-up, huh? Yeah, and then one day, little kids were going through all the cars. They were trying to find one unlocked, and they found a couple of them unlocked and got some stuff out of it. Well, I called the police then, and so they got out there. And so then I called them back and said, well, it's too late. I said, the kids are walking down the street now. And he said, just a minute, I'll connect you to the cruiser. He connected me to the guy in the cruiser. He went down the street, and he said, are these the kids? And I said, yep. He jumped up and grabbed them. And I told them, I said, they're taking some stuff out of the car. And they found it and put the kids in the cruiser and says, thanks. I said, you're welcome. And they took off. Boy, they got a system now over there. Fast action. Yeah, here I am, an observer up 11 floors up, and watching them, telling them what to do. Well, there are 100 more cases there unsolved, of course. Oh, yeah, you can't. So people are reluctant to be involved, though? That's it, because one reason I think you don't know what side you're on. If you see two guys fighting, one pulls a knife out and starts stabbing the other. Do you know whether he's defending himself or he's attacking the guy? You just don't know. And so if you help the guy. Well, they had an example one day. I never will forget it. In the 60 Minutes, was it, where they showed where this one guy was trying to get in his car, and he couldn't get in it. And, well, I mean, this was all set up. And so he asked the guy coming down the street, can you help me get my car unlocked? He says, I can't. He left the keys in it. The guy said, sure. So here the guy's helping him with a hanger and unlocking the doors. And so then he thanked the guy, and the guy says, you're welcome. And he reached in back and got three fur coats out of the back, shut the car up and walked up the street right with the guy. And the guy never said a word. Well, heck, that guy could be breaking in somebody else's car to steal those fur coats. He gets you to help him to even do it. And then you try to lie out of it. Boy, I mean, this is a situation. So whenever you see anything, you say, well, what the hell was that? I'm getting away from it because I don't know what I'm getting into. And that's a perfect example. You think you're helping the guy out? You might be helping him commit a crime. It's just like picking up a hitchhiker. You never know. That's right. I never pick one up. Yes, it's a dangerous world out there. Well, I say. More complicated. But as you saw in the 30s growing up as a teenager, there were less crime than actually stealing. Well, yeah, because. Well, you take an leniency in the courts those days. Boy, they caught you stealing a loaf of bread. You can go 30 days. Yes. And I mean, that was for hunger. Now they steal just for supply, addiction of dope or some darn thing like that. Then they say, well, you can put them in jail, and within two hours they're out on the street again. But even the hunger in the 30s didn't make you thieves of people. Well, you take back in the 30s, they had the WPA and stuff like that. People had to earn whatever they got. I don't care whether it was on WPA or what it was. Now they say, you stay home, we feed you. We clothe you. We give you money. Welfare, welfare, welfare. That's all there is. And people make more money sitting at home now than they do working. Those days you went out and made a buck an hour, you went to work. Now the minimum wage is $3 or something an hour. In fact, they say, well, I can sit at home and draw more than that. But people in the 30s got kicked about this WPA and CCC because they thought they were loafing on the job. That's right. But it was actually better, though, to get them off. Yeah, I never will forget one time I was with my dad, and here was a whole truckload of WPA guys going out to work. And this guy worked for the post office, and he says, well, there goes some WPA guys going out to work or going out to loaf or something like that. And he says, well, who do you work for? And he says, the post office department. He says, you work for the same guy, don't you? Boy, that guy was mad. He walked away. There was another word. And it's true. I mean, it's just a different branch. Different branch of the government. Yeah, I mean, nobody loafed more than the guys in the post office department, and I still say that today. Of course, when I was a kid, they used to get their mail up there, and they'd catch a streetcar or a bus and go to their area and unload the mail and then go back and get another one and ride back. Now they furnish them a car to drive from one block to another. Then they wonder why the mail prices are so high. Was it easy to get into the postal service when you were young, for instance? You never tried to? No, I never tried to get into the postal service. No, it never occurred to me. Well, of course, I started on the railroad. Well, I went to the University of Omaha for two years, and I got out of high school, and then I tried to get into the service, like I said, and then I couldn't make that, so then I got a chance to get on the railroad. So I went over and got on the railroad, and at that time they were in a car program down in the work in the store department where I already started, and I got on the railroad in May, yeah, in May, no, March, March 10th, and so I went down there and worked in that, and then I worked up there until October, and then I went up to headquarters for a while, and I got laid off, and about two months later, up there, I went back down to the store department, and the day they had Pearl Harbor, I worked that Sunday down there in the store, and we worked from daylight to dark that time working on this car program, and I didn't even know there was such a thing as Pearl Harbor on the way home. Somebody started talking about it. That happened, what, around noon here, and this is after dark, 6 o'clock at night, and that's the first I knew about it, so, and then I went back up to headquarters, and about a month later, and there's where I stayed. I never missed a day's pay in my life since I went to work for the railroad, so. But during the Depression, were you able to get a job? Well, no, see. And your father, he was laid off as a salesman? Oh, well, he couldn't make any money as a salesman, and so he went to work in the port. What did he sell? He sold vacuum cleaners, basically, and then he got them washed machines for a while. Door-to-door, or? Yeah, well, he didn't go door-to-door. He'd set up appointments and go out on them, and Hoover vacuum cleaners he sold for years. But they were popular during the 30s because of everything that was going on. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. But Hoover was a bad name during the 30s. Well, I don't know. You couldn't sell them to the Democrats. Well, yeah, I see what you mean. Hoover, that's true. But you know, though, when you read history back, you find out Hoover was a hell of a president. It was the Congress that wouldn't let him do anything. But when you get Democrats against Republicans, they don't do anything. More like Reagan and Congress now. Everybody's blaming everything on Reagan. Congress don't do anything about it. That's the same thing you had in the Depression days. So it's easy to kill a person off if they want to. They just sit there and look at each other and say, I'm not going to do nothing for you. And the other says, well, I'm not going to do nothing for you. And then you've got the same situation right now you had in Hoover's day, and that's where they're worried about the Depression. And then they got Roosevelt in there with a Democratic president. Boy, things just started moving then and started coming out of it. But when you've got them working against each other, you're going to have problems. And I think that's the situation we're in now. It's like the stock market, boy, I'm telling you, that thing is so wobbly. Maybe Japan is regulating too much now. I mean, controlling too much. Yeah, they're controlling so much cash in this country. See, the Japanese people save about 17% of their income. American people spend it all. It's all plastic cards. They're paying out 18% every month. Yes, 18% interest rates and stuff like that. That's the bad thing about our economy. Why do you think the Americans now, like the Japanese, they have shown over the centuries and even in later years, that even under hardship, because they're living under very crowded conditions, still they are very periodic against the people or the nation. Well, my number two son in Los Angeles, he's in the import, export business, I should say. He exports a lot of stuff to England and places like that that he got into. He was in the food business. In fact, he was the vice president of several organizations, food business, like Coco's and all those. And he finally got tired of traveling all the time, and so he's in Los Angeles now. In fact, this is his third marriage, and he blames his traveling on the loss of his other marriages. But he says when you deal with the Japanese, the handshake is it. But it's exactly the way he says it. There's no leeway either way. And when it comes to another Japanese involved, he's going to lean towards the other Japanese. In other words, they take care of each other. And you're on the outside on all of them when it comes to that. Otherwise, as long as it doesn't affect another Japanese, they're with you. So maybe the Americans are too divided when it comes down to the nitty-gritty. I mean, there are many nationalities. They're all for themselves. Why do you think your Jewish people are so successful? They hang together. So they are Jews first before being Americans. That's right. But the Swedes now, they become everything. That's right. They're just thrown into the... Because you, for instance, you don't exactly look up a Swedish historian or anything like that. No. That's right. You look for the bargain, the best you can do. And you don't care about the nationality of the other fellow at all. But other nationalities, like the Jewish and the Polacks, for instance, they probably look for their own. Yeah, the Italians are very much that way. So the setback then, when the whole nation is going to pull together in crisis, well, during the war they pull together. There's no question about it. Well, the World War II, but then... It was a business. Yeah, and then you take back your Vietnam War, though. They were separated. And the American division, of course. Yeah, I saw. It was unclear. That's true. And then remember Ali? No. No, the fighter, Muhammad Ali? Oh, yes, Cassius Clay. Yeah, calling Cassius Clay, but he got in the... Anyway, he joined this religious organization, and he was a religious objector to the war and all that. Do you think that was a fake? Oh, it sure was. And then on top of that, there was a big article on him. Well, it was on TV, a short on him the other day. It says he was responsible for 90% of that. It's overdue. Yeah. See, college students all got behind him, and they didn't want to go. And, in fact, our son Larry, one of his college buddies, or school buddies, anyway, he went up to the University of Iowa there, and he became a Linquist. And he was a very Russian Linquist, very efficient. And he was a conscientious objector during the war. The Vietnam War, he wouldn't go. And so anyway, then they classified him the way he was, and he can't hold a federal job at all. And yet he'd studied all this, become an efficient Linquist so that he could go to Russia and be an interpreter or whatever they needed. But he can't. He can't, so he had to turn around and he took up nursing at the school there, and now he's a male nurse. But that was an example of him fighting the draft, and this was his penalty for life. But that's strange justice, too, though. I mean, how can the government tell people what they're thinking? But then on the other hand, I mean, they should have really went all out or forgot it. I had two brother-in-laws that served in the Korean War, and he said that was the biggest farce there ever was. He says, we were slaughtering them right and left, and every time we'd get an upper hand, they'd say, let's talk peace. He said they'd stop and they'd talk peace for two or three months, and they'd give an opportunity for the Communists to build up again. He says, then we'd go back to fighting again, and he says, the same old thing. And so he says that it was one of the most worthless things, and I think people took a view of that, just the same way they did the Vietnam War and took it off. It was a sad time. Yeah, and it's been years and years, you know, getting back to. And like I was saying, my two brother-in-laws were over there, and he says, I asked him one time in that one basin where they drove the Americans out, and I says, how in the devil did they ever do that? He said they had superior firepower and everything else to the Chinese. He says, when you got them 100 deep and they shoot one down, a guy just picks up his gun and keeps coming, and you keep slaughtering them, he says, you can only last so long, and you've got to get out of there. So he says that's the only reason they had to get out of there. But he says, gosh, we don't know how many we killed. But he says volume mass was just too great for us. And he was very discouraged. Well, we no longer get down to that, and here comes the Vietnam War, and they talk to these Korean veterans, and just like one of the fellows I worked with, he was in the Marines during World War II, and then he got in the reserves, and he got banged in the Korean War, and, well, he was over there. So when he got back out of that, he says, no more reserves for me. And I'm going again. But I think that's what a lot of people are thinking. If it was a war where they were attacking us and we were in danger, but then that's getting clear back to the dollar amount then, I mean, the valuation, because they're fighting for the money. They said for the young people, 18-year-olds with no experience, they've got to believe what the security force says. That's right, but people don't, young people. The interview continues next site. Next site. Site 2. So you think that people are better educated today than they were 20 years ago? I think so. People don't accept things as fact anymore. They find out for themselves whether it's right or not. So it is harder for a government to lead the people then because they are questioned all the time. That's true. That's true. I mean, look at Reagan. Half the time they sit there and say he's a liar. You don't know what he's talking about and all this and that. And of course, you take a job as big as the president. You've got to have people tell you what to do because, oh, yes, you can't make all these decisions on your own. I don't care how capable you are. And I think the job just keeps getting bigger and bigger and bigger. It's too complicated. I think 50 years ago it wasn't near the job it is now. I think our legal system broke down pretty bad because of the situation where it seems like they can get by with any kind of crime they want to commit today. How many crooks are walking the streets today? They're too lenient. Yes. I mean, our judicial system has too many lawyers out there trying to make a buck. There was an interesting thing I just remember. Before he was inaugurated as a president, Roosevelt, there was an attempt on his life by a crazy guy down in Miami. And the mayor of Chicago got shot. Sirmach was. Sirmach, yeah. He was executed a month later. Yeah. And look at the guy. Because there was a case. Yeah. They knew who did it. Well, look at the Kennedy case. Yes. They got so involved. And look at the millions of dollars this government spent. And they still don't know the truth. But that time was just one month. That's right. But this guy got knocked off by somebody else. And don't tell me it wasn't set up. I mean, he was, somebody paid him to shut him up and get him out of there. But you were surprised that the lawyers didn't keep it on the burning flame longer because they always liked to get money out of it. But at that time, no. Look at Robert Kennedy's assassin. No, not the one. The one that shot Reagan. So that means that the public's viewing all this spectacle, they are getting less respect for the law. That's right. Because it's more like a theater. Oh, you betcha. Oh, we used to have Al Capone, you know. At least we knew where it was coming from. Now you don't know where it's coming from. What do you do then when you travel? Do you just go around interviewing people? So you moved away then very young from the Swedish... Yeah, I was five years old basically when I moved away from it. Your grandparents kept you alive though with the Swedish? Oh, yeah. I mean, I used to love to sit and talk to them about it and things, but I don't remember a whole lot about it because I was so young at that time. And then when you get older and you get to be a teenager, you know, you don't have time for adults. I mean, you're out making your own life, and just like we've got a granddaughter, a senior in high school today, and we see less of her every... Each grade she goes up, the less we see her. Now we hardly see her at all except say hi and hello and goodbye, and that's about it. Like your children now, you have four of them, have they asked anything about your Swedish background? Very little. Very little. Yeah, they haven't... No interest as such to find out where they came from? Not that great. Have you visited Sweden? No, I never have. None of your family or your family have been to Sweden? I don't recall my grandparents or any of my... They don't come into the relation? Uh-uh. You don't know if you have any... No, I don't know. In fact, one of friends of ours, that girl is Miss Sweden, oh, several years ago in the Miss Universe contest, a friend of ours called me and told me that we were related some distance to this girl. Now how, I have no idea. And how she knew, but she's familiar with our Swedish background. How about your aunt now that made up this genealogy short here? Oh, she's passed away since. How did she find out about the background? Oh, I think she studied it pretty thoroughly and she was one of the older ones and she kept pretty close contact with all of them. And she... Now, on my mother's side, Seidel, they have a... Was this Swedish background too? No, theirs was Pennsylvania Dutch. And you should see what they go through. They've got a folder so thick of all the relatives. And the Carr family is what they are, C-A-R-R. And actually put out a yearly paper on everything that's gone on in this family. Like a news show. Yeah, and it's really an organized... Behind there, of course, this has all been done by my aunt. And she lived in San Diego when she made this up. She sent this to my dad, my dad gave it to me. I think I got a... Is it a letter? Yeah, that letter over there. I think that... No, that's another letter. That's from my cousin. But she must have had some rootstock. Oh, yeah, she... Because she's talking about Orby here and Linköping. Yeah, and then she also goes on to... How did she get that? From Sweden? Or were the papers left there in the family? I think she went back to Sweden and run down a lot of this information. I mean, through some connection she had over there. With Snell. Now that's another division. That's what she was really in, the Snell family. C. William Laird Snell. He was born in Omaha. So they were married in... They were Swedish? Yeah, they were Swedish. Snell? Yeah, they were... I think she married... Oh, that's probably a soldier name. It's been a while since I read this. Jessie Rebecca, I think that was... She was the one that was... And there is one that was poisoned by printer's ink. Yeah. In 1918. So there's quite a write-up in the Snell family, because that was her family. Oh, I see. She married into that one. Yeah, she married into the Snell family. So your sister now that lives here in... Your sister now, Mrs. Lange? Yeah. She married a nun, a Swede? Yeah, she married a Kirchhoff, a German. As a German can be, and there's a whole community of Germans out here. In Kanselblatt? Well, they lived on a farm just east of Kanselblatt here, on Pioneer Trail. You familiar with that? Yes. Is Lewis and Clark Pioneer Trail, or is it... No, you go out, I think it's 275, you go out and then there's angles off there. And there was a bunch of Germans out there. They're all German out in that area. And he was adopted by his folks. And so his nationality, I can't tell you what they were. And then he passed away several years ago. And he married Roy Lange. And she'd be interesting for you to talk to, because like I say, she was older than I am. And she probably would have more of a background. Did she speak any Swedish? No. No? She was older than you, and also with the grandparents. Yeah, she's just like I am. And like I say, our grandparents never spoke Swedish to us, nor did they attempt to teach us. And my dad never spoke, well I knew he could speak some and understand quite a lot of it. But he never used any Swedish around us. It just seems like English is all we ever spoke. And that's ironic, because today so many of the Spanish bring their Zen in, and the Portuguese, and Puerto Ricans, and all those. They bring their language in and they continue to teach their kids that. Well, in those days they didn't. They were strong Americans. How about the customs for Christmas? You had a Christmas tree? Oh, sure. And it was brought in by your dad, and you bought it somewhere? Yeah, we always had a good Christmas, you know. How about the food? The foods that we used to have at Christmas, was there Swedish? No, not too much here. My grandmother used to make it. I remember when she used to make that, what do they call it, pickled herring thing? Yes. Inlagsyl. How about lupus? Yeah, lupus. Yeah, me too. Oh, yes. She used to make wines of different kinds, and all kinds of Swedish dishes she used to serve. I can't remember what they called them all now, but I can remember the lupus. But in your family, your mother was Dutch? Yes. Pennsylvania Dutch. There was no Swedish dishes then? No. Well, see, my mother died when I was three, so I can't remember too much about my mother. And then he remarried Vivian Haller, and they were German. Yeah, they were German. And so there was no particular German dishes or anything else we got involved in. Do you remember being visited by Santa Claus when you were small? Oh, yes. You had the Christmas stocking on the fireplace? Sure. Yeah, we had that with all our kids too. Did you have Christmas presents at Christmas Eve or in the morning? No, we generally had a Christmas morning before you got any presents or anything. And, yeah, we had a pretty nice childhood. But your grandparents, they celebrated more Swedish Christmas then? Well, yeah, I can remember that because I loved it. I still like it. Well, you got used to that, I know. Oh, I love pickled herring. In fact, I've always got a jar in the refrigerator. I just finished my last one yesterday. How about your kids? Well, see, Betty has never been a fish eater. She doesn't like fish, and so I was very limited fish in our family. And she, you know, rubs off on the kids. But when I was in Los Angeles in June, Larry took us to a sushi house. Japanese? Yeah, in L.A. there, and they had all raw fish there, you know. And I ate everything they had there, and Betty wouldn't touch it, but I didn't eat any of it. But, no, I'm the one that will try anything. And she isn't, you know, a bit experimental as far as eating is concerned. So in our lifetime, in our family, we had very, very little fish. I remember one time a friend of ours went up in Minnesota, and he brought back fish and filleted it and all that, and Betty cooked it all. Sat down and ate, and I was the only one that ate it, and had this whole platter of fish, and I didn't want to eat any of it. But now Dale is one of the finicky eaters. That's our oldest one down in Texas. And he was in New Orleans for a while. So he'd eat oysters anyway, swallow them whole or on a half shell and all that, you know. Betty couldn't believe it. Of course, when I went down to visit him, well, we had a lot of, well, in fact, we went and got a whole gunny sack full of oysters, and we fixed them every way possible. And then I think we had all the shrimp we wanted and stuff down there. And one time he brought shrimp up here for us to fix, and Betty was fixing it in the house. And they use these kind of seasoning in it, you know, and she was boiling it in there, and my nose swelled up about twice its size, and I had to get out of there. And I said, boy, it's got to be what you're cooking. And sure enough, boy, it went down just as fast as it went up. I got away from it. And while I was down in New Orleans, I noticed they had cookers they put outside to cook it in. They didn't cook it in the house. And I said, uh-oh, I'm not the only one that gets ill effects from those seasonings. But down there, that's all you eat is practically seafood. In fact, we went to one place, and we had a steak on the menu, and I was tired of seafood. And I said, what kind of steak is it? And they said, I don't know, steak's a steak. What the heck is there to eat seafood off? That's the way they are down there. But up around Omaha and Council Brooks, there's meat, beef. Yeah, beef is a big thing. You get a little pork, but most of it's beef. All the way around, chicken. Black Angus. Yeah, that's a big thing. Of course, you've got to take care of your calories around here. That's right. And that was the end of the interview with Walter Alquist, Council Bluffs, Iowa. End of interview. And we have 27 October 1987.