 This is cassette two, this continuation with Carl Mortensen, Moline, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So you started to work for Minneapolis Moline and the first window you came here. And that was with your brother then? Yeah. He got you a job? Yeah. And what were you doing? I put hairs together. I did like that and tied the place tight so the pins wouldn't come loose in the hairs. And I did that during that winter. And in fact I got a twenty dollar gold piece at the end of the week. So a gold piece? Yeah. Twenty dollars. And the Midwest Bank was on the other side of the rail downtown in Moline. And it wasn't far from the factory. And I went down, put the money in the bank. Yeah. That's how I started with my money over here. Over in Sweden, the first acquaintance I got with money, that was out in the country. And some fellow had a handkerchief in his pocket with some money come out with the handkerchief and he was going to blow his nose. And then the edge of the coin I could see in the snow. And I dig down there must be something down there. And that's where I found my first quarter of money. And I was very sick at the age of eight years old. And my mother thought I would die from that. And she got a medicine, she went to a doctor, a doctor, some place. And he gave her a medicine, what you call, a medicine of iron, two irons. And boy, when I got that, I was raised right up out of my bed and stayed up. Yeah. That's how. So you became a strong man then after a while. Yeah. And then when I went to school in Ramshussel, that school is still there, when I was going past Ramshussel with my brother Oscar. He had a, he drove a long belt over there and they had seatbelts, fastened seatbelts there. So he drove all day and among those places, I saw Ramshussel School that I went to when I was my fifth, not, 12 years old. And that's interesting. Oh, so you had to. But the school, I saw the Scottish Highlanders, walked by a band with the blowpipes and skirts, suits. I thought it was really interesting. I'd never seen anything like it before. But the real music is in those days. That's 90, no, 85 years. Yeah. Many years ago. What did you study about America in school? Did you read anything about America when you went to school as a young boy? Well, my dad told about it. So he told about it? Well, he had a newspaper called East Coast Island and he read that in that paper about America. And of course, his two sisters was here in America. They went over here early. And also my mother's brother was in Minneapolis. And my brother Gus went to live with him as a tailor. And finally on his way to California, he left his mother and went to California to San Mateo where he was doing tailoring over there. And he thought, when I was in California, in my automobile and my aides were with me, we visited him there. And Norman and Dwayne, my sons, was with me. And the first time we were there, he got houses at the same time. But the second time he come there, well, he said, you got to find a place where you can stay and come here in the daytime. So that was that then. And he made the suits for me out of wool. And he said, that's Australian wool. That's very good. And he taught me $200 for the suits. I paid for it, I come back home again. No discount on his brother. That's right. Many years ago. A lot of water has to go under the bridges since you left Sweden, 1909. Yeah. I'll tell you, with my army I went over to French-speaking province, Quebec, one time. And then I went back to the United States again. And they didn't see me, they called if I had anything that I shouldn't have. And that passed along good. Then I went into Maine, that is in the north part of the United States. And we visited there for quite a long time. And then we went back to New York and on the way here. I always went back to Moline, Illinois. So I didn't need the entitlement. I went on the Canadian side to the west to British Columbia and Lake Louise. He's done a lot of traveling, and I'm glad he has because he works so hard. He's seen a lot. He's been up in Canada and all over the United States, haven't you? I bought a new automobile, but it hadn't been put together yet. I went to the Holland Center in New York City, in the bus. And the thing had to look like that to see it. When I went from there to Washington, D.C., then I went into a place where they fix iron wheels. So they told me what's wrong with it. They had put a washer in, but they hadn't put it in by the notch. The steering? The steering. So it was on the head, and that's why the steering act like that. That was hard to die, that way. But on the way to Washington, I got it fixed. It didn't cost me anything. You wrote to the President? I'm going to show you what they've been sending him. He's a real Republican. He's a real Republican. What did he answer you? I told him that I should get, I told him that Dexter should be in the more than 35% of the income, because you had to pay it in cash. You had to get money ready for that. What did he answer you? Well, he'd been working on a thing in the newspaper, and they're in the process now of changing the taxation. So when you look back now, has it been easier to live under a Republican government than a Democratic? Well— In what way? They claim the Democrats, they spend— They've been sending him so many, many, many things, pictures and I don't know what all. That's a certificate. Wow. Here's a picture of the White House. I guess that's the White House. No, that's not the White House. That's the Capitol. And this is him taking his oath with his wife, Nancy. Yes. And here they're coming off of a plane. Here's a great big picture of him. Of Mr. Reagan himself, yeah? They sent two of these. That's two of them. Here's him with Bush. And here he is again, and here's Nancy. California days. Oh, look at that. Boy, they're really flattering, you know, with the pictures there. You have like a whole gallery. Now, this is—he recently got this. He's a 60-year member of the American Legion, and this is a certificate, 60 years of the American Legion member. He just recently got that. So when you see something that is wrong, then you just write to them and tell them that this is not the way you like it. In other words, the tax bracket is too high. You say 35 is the percent. It should be the limit. No, that's the limit. That's the limit. So you are not leaving any pages unturned? No. You are 96 now. You are still going with the politics. I'm 95. 95, yeah. Well, I'm 96. Sure, you're 96 this year. I'm on the way. Yeah, you are on the way. And you are keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the— I'm keeping the president's men busy. Uh-huh. I'm keeping the president's men busy.