 Q This is cassette two, continuation with Professor Conrad, Rockford and Lloyd. Cassette two, side one. A Okay. A Okay, huh? See ---- Q The pastors you were talking about. A Well, I was going to say that among the pastors, there's some are evangelistic or evangelical, they call it, and they're more interested in Bible study and the personal experience of Christ and so on. And they still have their liturgy and they believe in that. And I have three nephews that are pastors, but they were all in the ALC. Q No, Sterling was LCA. Sterling is LCA. A Oh, yeah. I guess so, yeah. Q And so is Victor. There's only one, Hub. He's ALC. A Yeah, because Ruby and Ralph, they were with the Augustana Synod, that's right. But Hubert, he's pastor of a large church in Minneapolis, ALC. But now they're all coming together. Q Yeah, there was, I discussed that with L.C. Youngdahl. He's a pastor from, he lives in Rock Island in Illinois. A Oh, yeah. Q And he's related to Youngdahl's in Minnesota. A Oh, yeah. Q And he complained about that even when LCA was formed in 1962. The church was getting too big. And now it's even getting bigger. A Yeah, that's right. Q He said they lose the contact with the people that way and you don't get the feeling of togetherness like... A Yeah, that's right. They're getting larger. And then, of course, by uniting the different synods, some people are against that, of course, but as a whole they've decided on that. But the personal contact with each other is less and less the larger it is, you see. So, for instance, in my case, most of the Lutheran pastors in Rockford now, I don't know them. I'm retired and they're active and I don't attend meetings because, you see, I'm out of the work right now. Q But you do know Dr. Chilstrom. A Chilstrom, you know, the head of the new church now. Chilstrom. Q Was our bishop in Minnesota. A As I attended a...with my young people, I went up to a Bible camp in Minnesota with a busload of young people. And that Bible camp was of a very spiritual emphasis. And many of the pastors didn't like the fact that I went up there, you know. Q Why? A Well, they had a different idea about...it was Lutheran Bible Institute that had this Bible camp. And they were more spiritual, you might say. They emphasized personal testimony and personal experience more and not just being a member of a church. Q How was it in the 1940s and 50s? I imagine you had more contacts than with all the pastors within Augustana. It was like a big family. A Oh, yeah. Q You knew who was the pastor in the city? A Yeah. You see, the Augustana Synod, it's so different now and has been different because many of them united, you know, years ago. But the Augustana Synod at that time, when I was in the seminary and so on, I knew many of the pastors. I was personally acquainted with many of them. But now we lose contact with each other because it's so large. We attend a convention and we're lost in the big crowd, you see. Q Nobody knew each other. They didn't know each other. You had to be introduced to everyone. A Yeah. Q We don't go to conventions. A Too big. Q Bigger is not better. A That's what I was going to say. That's probably true. But they went through anyway. But there are a few outbreakers up in Minnesota, I understand. Two hundred churches are not going along with it. Are they going to form their own synod then? Q Two hundred churches aren't going along with it. A Oh, yeah. Yeah, there's some churches that aren't going along and they're forming their own Q Their own synod then. A Their own church, yeah. Q And most of them are from Minnesota? A Quite a few from Minnesota, yeah, because I know one of the headmen is in St. Paul. Q But there are no churches here in Rockford, though. They're all in St. Paul. A So, but most of the churches are joining this new church. Q Are there pastors for it? A Well, there's a certain number of pastors that are against it. Q Well, wasn't our saviors, weren't they against it for a while? A Oh, yeah. Q That's a big church, big church. His nephew was there, Hub Nelson. A Oh, I see. Q For a while. For many years, in fact, about 16, 18 years. A Yeah. Q He's the one that's in Minneapolis now. Q Would you like to be a church member now? Do they really understand what's going on? I mean, how can they follow all this? A Well, they're kind of lost in the crowd. They don't know what, they don't really know what's going on, and they don't know what the whole church stands for. They just go along with it. Q But Rockford is going to be the headquarters for this area, the Illinois Synod. Rockford, it's going to be the Luther Center. A Yeah, for one part of the whole church. But the whole church headquarters will be in Chicago. Q In Chicago. A No, there's been a transition since I became a pastor, quite a transition period. Q It was simply years ago when your dad was pastor in Stockholm. A Yeah. Q Everybody knew each other. A He never visited the homes. He never knocked on their doors. Q They never did engage with him? A No. Q Well, don't you think there was a feeling of the membership that they didn't want to have any intrusion or... A Well, and, you see, he was assured of congregation. They wouldn't leave. Where would they go? So he didn't have to knock on any doors. The immigrants come in? Q No, the immigrants. He was in Minneapolis, and he just waited for the immigrants to come and ask for membership. So evangelism wasn't so important then because they came to the church, to the pastor. But now they start new congregations, like a nephew of mine in Alabama, where there's very few Swedes. And he goes from door to door. It doesn't make a difference who... Q Hundreds have called a month. A Yeah. So it's entirely different. But now he and I are good friends spiritually, I think. We're together as far as that part of it goes. Q Almost a few years ago, when you were standing in the pulpit, could you make any sightings with the political movement, like in the Depression? Could you tell the people that the government was wrong or something? Like today, they always do. They're criticizing. A Yeah. Q You didn't make sightings? A No, I didn't go into the government part at all. At that time, in the Augustana Synod, there were very few references to government from the pulpit. Q But some on the church council criticized you when you had prayer when John Kennedy was here. They didn't like that. Q They didn't like that. A Well, you see... Q They just needed prayer just as much as the Republicans. A Most of our Swedish people were Republicans. And they had this rally for Kennedy, and they called on me to give a prayer. Well, I thought... Some of my board members didn't like the fact that I went down there to give a prayer. Q He was coming in as a speaker? A Yes, he was on the same platform. Q What platform was he on? A He was running for president. And when I went down there, it wasn't because I was for Democrats. I went there because the Democrats asked me to give a prayer. And I told my church council, maybe they need prayer more than the Republicans. So why shouldn't I go? Q And Dirksen? Dirksen was there? A Yes. Q He sat right next to Dirksen. A So when I gave a prayer, I didn't indicate that Kennedy was there. But I didn't indicate that in my prayer that I hoped that Kennedy would become president or something like that. I wouldn't enter into it. Q It's strange, though, you know, in our times they can be very close-minded without understanding. Q But Kennedy came up to you. A Oh, yeah. Yeah, he thought I was a Catholic priest, maybe. But you see, the people as a whole, they were a little bit leery about the Catholics. So he was glad that I was a Lutheran pastor, Kennedy. Q Well, I think the Swedes had their years ago, and I think still today that they are a little bit suspicious about the Catholics. A Maybe, yeah. Q Mainly because we don't understand what they are doing or how they really think. A Well, we're getting pretty much close to what they are anyway. A You see, nowadays, for instance, in my case, I don't judge anyone by their church connection. And Catholics, they can be sincere Christians, too, but they have a different way of expressing it. Q Do you remember Pastor Larson? A Larson? Q Up in Minnesota, during the First World War, he made some speeches against young people going to war. A Oh? Q So he had to move to Canada. A I don't recall that. Q He is the father of Signe Schell. You know her? A Signe? Q Schell? Q Yes, yeah. A Oh, yeah. Q Her father? Q Yeah. A She lives in Rock Island. Q Yes. A Oh. Q No, he had to move to Canada. A Oh. Q And I don't recall that. A He had to live in the county. A Oh, is that right? Q But that was during the First World War. It was more aggressive. A Yeah, but as far as I was concerned, the churches that I attended or preached in, they didn't bring in the fact about the men not going off to the service. Q You're talking about the First World War. Q It was the First World War. A The First World War, yeah. Q He was younger, but... Q Uh-huh. A Yeah. Q How do you know Signe? Just very occasional. You don't know her very well. Q So there was one, and I think the governor of Iowa, he forbade all preaching of foreign language in churches. They had to stop that in Iowa. A Yeah. Q Yeah. Q So there was a... A Has to be an Englishman. Q...time of turmoil. A Well, there's just been a lot of changes in American life, you see, the home life even. It used to be that the parents, whether they went to church or not, they would want their children to go to confirmation and so on. But now it's a different situation. Many of the parents aren't interested in the church. Q And the pastors are getting divorces. I mean, there's one that, in Alabama, they've both been divorced. And he married, she was working in the church, and he married her. Q That's what it is. A Uh-huh. Q It's a strange world. Q A strange world. Q Tolerance level has been raised or lowered or... A I don't know. Lowered. Q No, there's been... and yet the head, Bishop Chilstrom is a good friend of mine. He's the head of the whole church now. Q Yes. A I have a lot of confidence in him as a Christian pastor and his convictions and so on. So it depends upon the pastor himself a great deal. Some have had a background of a lot of liturgy and others have had a more simple background. Only the pastor. Q Have you met Dr. Berg in Minneapolis, from Dr. William Berg? Q No. A I know who he is. Q He was at Augustana Church. A Yes. Q He's one of Connie's best friends. A He was connected with Stanley, Dr. Stanley Jones who went to India, you know, and Ashram. And that's very evangelistic or Bible-centered. And of course in their case it's not a church, it's just an organization. But spiritually he and I feel the same way about the personal experience and Bible study and so on. Q Are people different now like Colorado and Minnesota, Rockford? Are they different people? A They're different. In what way do they differ? Are they more relaxed, out west for instance? Q They pretty much take off for the mountains on Sunday in the summer. Pretty, just like any place else. Around here they go to the lake. Or Minnesota they go to the lake. But Colorado they go on through the mountains and spend the weekend. A So they don't come to church then on Sunday? Q It's pretty hard, wasn't it, in Denver to get them to come to church on Sunday in the summer? A Oh, yeah. Some have their colleges at lakes. That's true in Sweden, too. Q In Minnesota. A But... Q In Illinois they go, like last Sunday when it was so hot, there weren't too many in church. You just stay home and go to the lake. A Yeah, they have colleges up north, many of our members. And yet they're real faithful members. Q But they go on weekends. A And many of them attend church wherever they go, up by their colleges. Or in Florida they'll attend church down there. Q Some are winter church, they go south. A They're the best of both worlds. Q Yes. A But in Arizona I understand that they even do road work at night because it gets down to 70 in the daytime. It's too hot to work on the roads. Q Forty days straight now we're 100, I understand. A Oh, I guess. Just over 40 days? Over 100? Q 33 last week, I believe it was. So you haven't moved away to Florida in the wintertime? A No, we used to go after the holidays, mostly after Easter. The rates would be lower, we could afford to go. But we weren't gone more than 10 days or so. We weren't gone very much. Q Well, I had a large congregation here, so. And I didn't have the help like they have now. Now they have more people on the staff. And of course, financially everything is different. Q There are a lot of churches in Rockford, Ohio, you travel Elkhorn Road and Bunker Road. A Yes. Q There's four churches in the intersection, every one. A Yes. Q Three churches and Assembly of God. A Yes, Assembly of God. Q How can they survive all of them? I mean, now they're building a new one. They have a 5,000 seating capacity. A The Assembly. Q Assembly of God. A Yes. I don't know how they're going to do it. Q What church is this? A Assembly of God. They're building a big, is that a big sanctuary where the people were going to worship? Q Yes. Q It's in Woodford. A Yes. Q Yeah, room for 5,000. A Yes. We had a chance to go in one of their senior places, but we turned it down. We were in Minneapolis at the time. So they have some nice little places there. Q What do they differ on, like the Assembly of God? A Well, Assembly of God, they belong to what they call the evangelistic free church. Q They're what we call pings, then, in Iceland. A The free church and the covenant church and the Assembly of God. Pentecostal, they're more closer to the Pentecostal church. You see, that is a Pentecostal church. Q Well, what is it that makes people come flocking in there? Like, they seem to be Q Well, they seem to do their groundwork real well. A Well, they're Q There's a lot of work that goes on. Q There's buses and people picketing. A They're growing faster than the Lutheran church. The Lutheran church isn't growing in the United States. And it's mostly because the average person coming off the street, or if you're trying to reach a lot of people, a liturgical service, they don't understand that it becomes too Q Formal. A Yeah, it becomes too formal. They have more friendliness and more reaching out in the Assembly of God and the covenant church and the free church. Q There is spontaneity that they don't have in the Lutheran church, I would say. A Yeah. Q What about the music? Is there something that has a bearing on it? A Well, Q They have a lot of contemporary songs that I get very tired of, a lot of those songs. A But they are also going modern more with a lot of noise and Q Assembly of God and A But they have more Q Yeah. A They have more peppy songs. Q It's almost jazzy. A What's a good example of a good, rousing, evangelistic song? Q Right in the corner where you are. A Well, yeah. But anyway, there's more of that instead of just, now even in our church, many of our people don't, they're not familiar with the new hymns. Q Well, they react because they like the tradition. A Yeah. But even some of the Augustana churches, the Augustana Synod, we had more simplicity about our hymns. What would be some of the songs? Q Well, in our new book we have How Great Thou Art and Amazing Grace. Those are two new ones that we have in our new book. Q Yes, and they are taken from the Methodists or the Baptists. A How Great Thou Art, that's a Swedish... Q That was a Swedish Methodist song from the beginning. A Yeah. Q Mm-hm. Q Most Tove de Gud. A Most Tove de Gud, yeah. That's being sung in the Lutheran churches. Q And then we have a song we sing at Communion, Let Us Break Bread Together, sort of spiritual. A That's a new one. Q Yes, I love that. I just love it when they have it at Communion and we sing that. Q What church do you belong to? A Faith in Moline. Q In Moline? A Faith in Moline. Q But do you think the reason there's Pentecostals writing of those songs, is this for the young people you think to get them interested in the church? A Well, no, that's just their... Q To reject the youngsters. A It isn't just the young people. They all... Q They all like it. A They all... the real radical ones are those who, you know... Q Those are the charismatic. A Charismatic. You know, make a lot of motion. Q Raise their hands and they believe in healing. Q But... A Yeah, there are many religions. Q I don't go for that. Q So some of the old-timers among the Lutherans, they don't like the New Heaven. A Oh, no. Q Or they are lost. A Many of the... and especially the Augustana Synod, but many of the others, ALC, there's many of the hymns that they're not familiar with and they're not like the good old hymns. I'm trying to think of some... Q I think we have enough beautiful hymns in the game. A Some of the... Q The Green Hymnal. A Some of the... Q The Golden Hymns. A Some of the hymnal songs, for instance, that type of song. Q Day by day, thy mercies more to tend us. A Yeah. Q Blut und dog. A Blut und dog, und der geblickliche Sender. Those are the type of songs that people like because they're sung easily. The top musicians, they can understand the music better, but the average person, they need a simple song. Q Yeah, it doesn't reach. A Like what a friend we have in Jesus, that's an illustration. Will you condemn me, O Jesus. It's a real... as far as I'm concerned, it's one of my favorites, the songs. Q How about the Salvation Army now? That's an organization that everybody can go to, the Catholics and the Free, and the Salvation Covenants and the Lutherans. A But they have... Q It's a meeting place that everybody can... A But they have a service that's more like the Covenant and somewhat like the Assembly of God, regardless of who comes. They're evangelistic. They're reaching out to people on the streets and so on. And I like them very well. Most of those men are men that I respect very highly. Q Yeah, they have a nice temple right over here. Very nice. I'm glad for them. They needed that. A But you see, they reach out. They're on the streets and reach out to people, and they probably even go into the... Q Taverns? A Taverns, everywhere. Leave their letters. Q Well, they don't do that anymore, though. A Oh, they stand on the corner down by the shopping bag here, and they sell corn soup. We like that magazine. It's very good. Yeah. They're doing a good work. Q Yeah, they were good during the Depression, I understand. They helped a lot of people to survive. So you have settled down in a real Swedish town? A Well, we're in Limbo. Q How about Colorado? Doesn't that come back in your mind, to the Italian mountains? A Oh, yeah, but I can never get him out there. Q He doesn't like it there. A Well, I think you like Colorado, but we really came down because our son was here, and I had my very best friend who lived up the street was here, but she passed away. Q Well, you see, I'd been here for 22 years, so most of our friends were down here. And I thought if something happened to me, especially in my case, being older, and then our contacts here, there's much more chance because we have so many friends that maybe surround us on Sunday, and we're acquainted with them. And I've confirmed a lot of them, so I know them personally. And this is the only city comparable to that, where I would have a lot of friends, where we would have a lot of friends. Q Our daughter lives in Duluth, and she rather thinks maybe we should be there. But we haven't made any decision yet. Q It's cold up there in the wintertime. A Oh, seriously? Q But I like that climate myself. A I do, too. You get used to it. You get used to driving in it, too. Q That's right. Q During my seminary days and so on, Bible camps and so on, I was surrounded by young people all the time. So when it came to young people, I had more contact with them. Well, I had with the old people, too. Q Did you travel then for youth work? Did you travel then for the church in the youth? A No, no, I didn't travel. My brother traveled to hold meetings here and there. Q So I'm sure you know what doctor... A But Bible camps, sometimes I've attended Bible camps in Minnesota and Kansas and Colorado and so on. Q Nebraska? A So you must be a classmate of Dr. Bergstrand then? A Yeah, Bergstrand. Yeah. For instance, he's put out a hymnal for youth hymnal. And I sort of go along with him when it comes to, you know, youth work. Q Are you retired? A Yes, he's retired in Minneapolis now. Q Oh, he lives there? A Mm-hmm. And he was members of Augustana Church, but they may transfer to Normandale. You know, they're all going out there. There's a big condominium out there that there are several pastors that are there. A Yeah, they have different kind of programs, big churches and so on. Q Didn't he serve in Augustana Church as an intern or something? Bergstrand? A No. Q Was he there as an intern or something? A I don't think he's on the staff. He's not on the staff. Q I thought so. A No, he's retired, I think. Q I know he's retired now, but I mean before, years ago. A Well, years ago, no. He was pastor in Jamestown, New York. Q Well, before that. Before that. A Well, he was youth director of the Augustana Synod, I think. Q Yeah, yeah. A But he was connected with a lot of Bible camps. Q Yes, he traveled quite extensively. And he's a good writer. Writes and speeches all over up in Jamestown. You have two boys and one daughter. What kind of work are they doing? Do they follow in their father's footsteps? A Well, one, no. The one in California is landscaping. And the one in Florida is doing some carpentry work and remodeling. Q He's a builder. A And the girl's married to an oral surgeon. And they've been there about 15, 20 years, 20 years, I'd say. Q Oral surgeon is a dentist, you know. A Yes. A He's more than a dentist. Q No, that's right. A He took his fellowship at Mayo Clinic. Q So he's up in Minnesota, are you? A He's in Duluth. Q Up in the Mississaubee? A Yes, Range. That's right. Q Oh, yeah. Q So you had a lot of experiences then in your life. A Oh, I've gone through the whole thing because I was well, I certainly believed in God and so on when I was confirmed and so on. But I had a good time, like, in college and so on. I liked football and tennis and basketball. Q You were playing tennis until you were 82? A I played tennis when I was in college. And my older brother came home, so I learned it even when I was in high school. Q Have you visited Sweden? A Yes. I took one trip to Sweden after I came to Rockford. I mean, they took up an offering and sent me there. So I visited Denmark and then Skåne. Of course, I was there where the church where my father was confirmed. Q In Ospy? A In Ospy. There was a pastor there, Fodor Gunnar, they called him. Q Oh, I see. A Because he was sort of like a Catholic. Q Yes. A Fodor Gunnar. And then I went through Sweden, Stockholm, and ---- Q Did you have a plaque with your father's name, a plaque in the hip? A Oh, yeah. Q For the hip? A The church where he was a member, they had three names. Hasselqvist was one of the founders of our church here. Q That's right. Three names for him. A The founder of Bethphagia Intermission for the Handicapped. His name was on there. Q Oh, he came from the same parish? That's correct, yeah. A There were three. Q And then his parents? A I should know his name. Bethphagia and my dad and Hasselqvist, they came from this church in Ospy. Q So they have a plaque there now, though? A Yeah, they have a plaque on the wall, so the pastor showed me. And he asked me to give a message to the congregation. Of course, it had to be in Swedish, and I'm not too good at, you know, getting up and giving a message in Swedish, but I got along. Q So you attended one of the services then? A Yeah, I attended a morning service. And there were mostly young people in that church, and the pastor met the people at the church door, and he was very friendly, which isn't true with a lot of churches in Sweden. Father Gunnar. Q So he was preaching then? A Hmm. Q How was his service like then? A His service? Q Yes. A It was like the other churches in Sweden. I suppose it was quite a bit like, I think the Augustana Synod got their service from Sweden, quite a bit of it. Q Yes, but they made it a bit more... A They changed it some, like when they'd pray for the president of the United States and so on. But they had that long prayer after the sermon. But I think the service in Sweden, as I remember it, was quite a bit like the Augustana Synod. Q Did you meet some of your relations? A Yeah, I met some relatives. There were in Blekinge. A Q Vilshut. A Vilshut. Q Yes. A Yeah. And, well, I just looked them up, and they're the ones that took me up to Uspi, which was not too far away from Vilshut. Q Who's that? A And... Q No, I'm just saying. Q Oh, I see. A And in Stockholm, well, there, of course, the Church in Sweden has gone down in membership. And I asked one pastor, see, I used to have my confirmation class always up in front Sunday morning, every one of them. And I asked him, where are the confirmations this morning? Oh, he says, he just laughed about it. He says, if I insisted on them coming to church, they wouldn't even be confirmed. I mean, they wouldn't come to confirmation. So the parents, they just go through confirmation, and that's it. And nobody goes, very few go to church. Q It's hard to explain for Swedish Americans that the Swedes don't go to church, do not go to church, the Swedes. A The Swedes. Q It's hard to explain for a Rockford, Rockford Swede. A Yeah. Q But you have a lot of visitors from Sweden here to Rockford over the years. A Oh, yeah. Q Because every Sunday in the summertime you had the Swedes coming. A Yeah, you have some in the audience, even the last few Sundays. But years ago, well, they didn't travel quite so much years ago. So I didn't see them. So see, most of the poor people in Sweden, they can't afford to travel. So the later years they have been able to do that. Yes, yeah, that's a real sweet town, Rockford, Illinois. So you've been there so many years now, so that's your home. Q We came back in 83. We were gone from 69 to 83. So we haven't been back too long. A So he served... Q 22 years. A Yes, but I mean, after that he served... Q Oh, he's retired twice. A He served a year and a half in Duluth at an ALC church and then eight years in Superior, Wisconsin in a little... They were ALC, weren't they? A Yeah, they were ALC. Q St. Paul Church then. And then we were five years in Minneapolis, and then we came back here. So we've been moving around quite a bit. So I've been busier than most pastors after retirement. Q He still visits nursing homes. Q And there's a lot of nursing homes here. A Oh, no, that's a shame. Q And a lot of Swedes in them. A Yes, yes, unfortunately. A In the nursing homes, of course, oh, there's some that know the Swedish Psalms from Samboken. They know them by heart, you know, and they sometimes repeat them. So quite a few of them know Swedish. And I... Q Excuse me. A I may close with, Our Father Who Art in Heaven in Swedish. Or give a Bible verse in Swedish. Or try to say, Trygga det kan ingen vara. Trygga det kan ingen vara. Q And good will abhor in us, God. A Do they request that sometimes? Q Oh, yes, yes. A I say, how do you start that song? Q Trygga det kan ingen vara. A Trygga det kan ingen vara. She knows that by heart. Q I know the first verse. A The first verse. Q You know Swedish very good. Q If I'm with him, I sing that. A How many years Swedish now, from him or from... Q 31 years. Q With him. A So... Q There were 38 Swedish meetings a month when we came here in 1947. A The other day... Q 36. There was a guild, a choir, the missionary, the Dorcas, ladies' aid, and... Q Brotherhood. A Circles. And the guilds, they were part of the brotherhood. A So they're still existing. The other day I asked her to lead the singing with Trygga det kan ingen vara. So she led the whole group. Q Can't remember where that was. A I can't remember either. Q Well, anyway... Q How about the pastor's wives today, 1987? Q Are they doing the same kind of commitment? A They're mostly working. Q They don't work with the church? A No, they work outside and get paid working. Q For years they were not... A They're not in the teacher. Mrs. Leonard of the Zion Church, she's a teacher. And Mrs. what's her name, the Alpine pastor's wife, she works at Marshall Field at Cherryvale about three times a week as a hostess. So they're involved, but not as involved as we were, I don't think. Q And in some cases, of course, both husband and wife are both ordained as pastors. A Yes. Q And they serve together in the same church or in different churches in the same city. Q But years ago when you came in, there was like an extra work, an unpaid worker. A That's right. And I started to work outside the home. I started at Blue Cross and then I worked for Manpower. And I got a little experience in my time. Q Here in Oxford? A Yes. So I maybe was one of the first ones that worked outside. Q You grew up out of the mold. A Yes. Q Because of money, of course, there was... A Well, it helped financially, and why not? My children were getting grown, so hardly anyone at home. Might as well. I worked for Sunstrand in the personnel division, too, for maybe four years before we left for Oxford. Q Ten, ten times. A That is not still on, is it? Q No, it's on. A It's...