 We have 7th of October, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Richard Westlund from Omaha, Nebraska. And your parents, now, they both came from Sweden? Yeah, one from Arbica, or in that case, they both came from Wermeland. One from Arbica, and one from near Sessler. Did they tell you anything about the reason they left Sweden or Wermeland? Yeah, they left because there was no chance for any improvement. My mother worked in a family place in Helgord, and they knew they weren't going to get any place. And they had friends that came to America, and they wrote back and told how wonderful it was here. Were they related to this? No, but they came. My father came to one of his chums, and my mother some years later came from one person, and when they were married together, so they came to the same place. So your parents didn't know each other in Sweden? No. Your father, now, he came from a farm outside Arbica? Väsbor? No, that's the farm outside of Sessler, my mother's. Oh. He came from a farm family, though? Yeah. I don't know what they did. They were a little bit more educated, I don't know, because my father's brother, whom we visited in Sweden years ago, he was a jack of all trades, and he was well known in the... What was his name? His name was Adolf Westlund, because in Arbica they have a museum, and he's got a corner there for the western corner of all kinds of things from the past. He was well known, but I don't know just what he did. Was he an artist, perhaps? Not, no, but he was sort of a doctor, without a degree, so that he helped out. I don't know whether he had any special title or not, but well known. And how was he related to you now? My father's brother. Oh, I see. How did you meet him? We went to Sweden, and I went together to Sweden in 1955, and he was still living. He had a home right overlooking Glastfjorden. So you had much to talk about then? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. What did he say then? Well, I know that when we stayed at that place just a week, I remember he says, Oh, ni har just kommit! So han ville sitta och prata med er? Oh, yeah. But he stayed in Sweden? Yeah. Well, he had two other... there were two other... What were the four boys? Elias, Johan, Alfred, Adolf. Yeah, four brothers. My father was the only one that came here. Came to the United States. And how old was he when he came here? Oh, I can imagine about 24, something like that. So he had done his military service then as well? Yes, and I saw his papers, his report cards. And was he then in Sweden with the military service in Karlstad? In Karlstad, I guess. I saw his report card. It said Berundlig. So I guess he did all right. So he came here to a friend of his, to Omaha. To Omaha. And when did he come here? 1890s sometime? Oh, yeah, in the 1890s, because they were married in... Hmm. They were... you got your arithmetic? They celebrated their golden wedding in 1918. It happened to be the day of the armistice signature, so November 11th, I think. So it was 25 years before 1918. They married in 1918. You said golden. You didn't mean gold. No, I mean silver. 25 years. 25 years. So then he came in 1993? Yeah, 1993. And what kind of work was he getting hold of when he came here? I don't know. Iron worker. There was a Swedish man named Andreen, and he got work there. So he worked as an iron worker, put up fire escapes and things like that. And then he met your mother. And then a couple of years later, my mother came to that same home where he stayed. And she came also to a friend? Yeah, to... no relation. It was just... it happened to be that my mother and father came to the same home because she knew the lady and he knew the man. And her family background, was there farming also? Klesburg, Isefle, where she came from? Yeah. They were farmers? Yeah, I still have a cousin living on that same place. It overlooks... Harfjorden was the name of the... So they both were located on a lake or whatever it was. So both your parents had beautiful natural setting over the water? Yeah, that's right. So you probably wonder why they left? Yeah, and why they came to Omaha, where they had no water, I don't know. So your mother, she was the only one in her family to leave the United States? No, after that, I had a brother and a sister that came. Also to Omaha? Yeah. They all came to mom, you know. And you helped them over then, too? I suppose. With the first few years to get settled down and so on. See, my mother and father went to Sweden before I was born. And they brought someone with them then. There was some kind of a honeymoon trip then, too? Yeah. Oh, they also already had two children. Oh, I see. But I missed out on the trip. And they stayed only at home then for a couple of months? I believe they were six months. So he must have done all right to afford to do that. Afterwards he got sick and then poverty struck in. And then you were born 1899? Yeah. He was still working with the same kind of work? Yes. Fire escapes and iron work. And where were you living then? Where in Omaha? In Benson? No, we lived near, which now is quite near downtown. Until I was seven years old. Then we moved to 34th and Jackson where I lived for 78 years. 34th and Jackson, that's very close to downtown now. You know, 3400. So the first place where you lived, was that known as a Swedish neighborhood? Or was it mixed with all kinds of nationalities? A little bit away from the main part of the Swedish section. A little further south. Benson was supposedly the Swedish area, or was it some other? See, our church was on 23rd. That is 23 blocks. The Covenant Church? Yeah, the Covenant Church. Svenska Missionkyrka. So that was called Little Sweden. So there were some families around there? Oh yeah. That was probably why they built the church there? Yeah, that's right. So your parents now became members of the Svenska Missionkyrka? Yeah, our folks didn't belong to church yet. In the beginning? In the beginning. But they were very good Christians. And there was Skridsdal, he knew his Bible, but for some reason or other, they didn't join church. They sent me to Sunday school, to the Swedish Mission Sunday school. So that was the closest one then? Well, yeah. Well, the neighbors took me to Sunday school. Who married your parents? The minister? The Lutheran minister. The Lutheran? Yeah. The Zion or? Well, it was a church, it was called Salem. Oh, that's right. It's on the south side then? Yes, on the south side. So you went to Sunday school there and it was Swedish? Yeah, oh my, yes. I learned Swedish. Swedish, good. Is it easy to learn Swedish? No problem. That's one thing that I think is so strange when the Spanish people come here, the Hispanics. They want them to teach Spanish in school. I learned both languages at the same time. There was no effort at all on my part. No handicap. Because the parents talk Swedish, but we kids talk English to each other. Did you answer back to your parents in Swedish? Once in a while. Once in a while. Was it easier than to think in English? No problem. Bilingual, no problem at all. My brother reports one trouble when he got in kindergarten. He had some kind of demonstration and a teacher held up a rolling pin. And she says, now what is this? Nobody answered. My brother said, Bach, cover! And then they laughed. So he remembers that, but I don't remember any. Knowing Swedish didn't handicap my English at all. In fact, my father talked with an accent, didn't emphasize the right syllables. He'd say minister instead of minister, municipal instead of municipal, and things like that. But he learned the English language, could spell, could write English, without going to school. But my mother spoke a very, talked very broken. But she got along. She says, they understand me just as good as they understand you. So she was not off with people as much as your father, I suppose. Well, I suppose he didn't have to. She didn't have to. In fact, she learned too quick. And not good enough. It was mixed. So was she working now before she was married? No, as a maid in the home. But it was only for a short time? Yeah, before she got married. Then when she married, she quit working. And there was the custom or an unwritten rule at that time when two people married, one stayed home. Or the woman stayed home to take care of the child. And my father got, we all got sick, and then my mother took in washing for a while because he couldn't work for a long time. What kind of sickness did he have? Typhoid fever. We all came down with typhoid fever. He was working in Des Moines, that is just, had a job there, his company. And he came home, he brought, and all of us had typhoid fever. We were in the charity ward in the St. Joe Hospital for six weeks. All of you? Yeah, well, my father had gotten over it then, so he was not, wasn't hospitalized with us. You were so small, so you don't remember. My brother gave birth to a child, a girl at that particular time. I don't remember that excepting that the baby died right after he got home. I can remember somebody lifting me up and told me to say goodbye to the sister. And that, I guess it's a memory of a memory of a memory, you know, but that made a tremendous impression on me. You don't remember being sick with this typhoid? No, I can't remember the details of it. So, but you recuperated, all of you? I left my daughter, my older sister, very, very weak, and a few years later she died. So I had two sisters that died. And your father, did he... He never was strong. The next year he was in the hospital a couple of weeks. He had some trouble, I don't know what it was, but he was in the hospital all winter. Were you renting a house then at that time? No, I was paying, by that time they had a small home and they were paying on the mortgage. But what happened then when he was unable to work? My mother took him washing. To keep it going? To keep it going. So, and then you went to public school? Yeah. You don't remember having any problems there, the teacher telling you not to talk any Swedish? No, no, I don't know. No problems? No problem. And the confirmation was also at the Svenska? Yeah, and it was in Swedish too. We got a Swedish Bible. Did all of your classmates then take Swedish? They were still half and half. I believe there was just one girl in our class that got an English Bible because there was no Swedish, but all the rest of us got Swedish. Were they particularly your parents for you to learn Swedish or take the classes in Swedish? Did they push it? Not very much because they had a Swedish school every summer at the church. Vardarskola? Vardar, yeah. And that was conducted in Swedish, but I only went one year so I guess they weren't two. Most of it. Just in the summer? Just in the summer, yeah. You didn't wonder then why you had to go to school and the American kids didn't have to go to school? Yeah. You didn't question that? No, I didn't question that at all. So your classmates now, or I mean friends, your age group, were they many Swedes? Oh, yeah. But you talked English then between each other? Oh, between each other, yeah, but I gave a recitation, but it was all Swedish at the closing exercises. Were you able to understand at that time the sermons the Swedish preached? No problem that I know about. I remember when I was, I think, my father was a poet, kind of a scrub poet, I suppose. Yeah, I remember they took up collection. I mean, at our birthdays, they had to count your pennies. And when it came to my birthday when I was nine years old, my father gave me a little rhyme to say. I didn't want to say it, but he said I should. And that was, Man har mig sagt at nio år, jag fyllde klockan tolv igår, och nio pennies som ni ser, jag ny till söndagsskolan ger. And I was nine years old and I talked Swedish. You had to go up there and stand there? Oh, sound platform. And I noticed the preacher laughed and that made me mad. Well, he probably thought it was... Oh, I guess he did. No, at that time I wasn't sure I liked it. So what did you say then when you came home to your parents? Oh, I don't remember. I don't remember. You didn't refuse to do it again, though? Oh, yeah. Oh, I think I would have refused to do it again because I was a little embarrassed. And the minister, he had a little laugh about it. Yeah, maybe he just smiled. I don't know, but I thought he laughed at me. You noticed there was something different. So who was the minister at that time? Reverend Pamp. He could talk English. Before that, there was trouble in church. They had trouble with those Vordak schoolers. There was poor discipline because the kids would laugh at the preachers. Oh, I see. They didn't... There was discipline because of the language, I think. So the pastors, they had trouble to speak English, I suppose. Oh, boy. I remember when I was 13 years old, I guess. The time I went, it was just before confirmation, about 12 years old. A student from North Park College came, and he had trouble with discipline. So he asked Reverend Turnquist, who was a preacher then, to come over and help him. And he talked to the kids, and the kids weren't very respectful. And he said, you may laugh, but I mean beastness. And then they laughed all the more. There was no gas on the fire. Yeah, and they kept Swedish too long in our church. The young people left in droves. But you are talking about 1910 now or something like that? Yeah, but they continued until 1919, Swedish services. You think there was too long? Oh, yeah. There was too much ridicule from the kids. They had Swedish services when I came in, in 1931. Oh, yeah, they still did. They had one every month. Yeah, but it was all Swedish until 1919. But we kids in the Sunday school class talked English to each other. But didn't you show disrespect against your parents? Because I'm sure they told you not to behave and not laugh. Oh, yeah. Why, the kids were not afraid of the parents then? Maybe not, I don't know. They were brave enough to make a little bit of noise. Yeah. Rebels. Yeah, rebels, yeah. So those pastors now that came from Sweden, of course, they had the accent. There's no question about it. They never got into it. They very seldom spoke in English then. Yeah, they talked Swedish to us. But Reverend Pamp, who followed Turnquist, who— He was also born in Sweden. Now, I'm not so sure because he talked good English. He either was born in Sweden or came when he was very young because he had— And the discipline changed then, too. I had utmost respect for Pamp. So even the small children, they understood, you know, that they didn't talk funny or talk different. Yeah. But they kept on—Vivi, you came in 1931. Her brother-in-law was pastor of our church. He came after Pamp, you know. But they still had some Swedish. They had one service, one service every week—month. Every month they had an 11 o'clock service on Sunday, once a month. And it was for the old-timers, then, too. That's for the whole church. But the young people, did they go to the Swedish service? That's the only church— Of course, we had the service in the evening, which were English. We even sang in the choir, you know. We sang Swedish. I didn't go very often then because I couldn't sing the Swedish songs. How about—they had two services, one in the morning and one in the evening. Yeah. Did people attend both of them? Yeah. That's where Boy Met Girl, that Sunday evening service, and people from Sweden longed to hear some—you know, to meet Swedish people. So our church Sunday evening services, even when they were Swedish, were well attended. Because that's when Boy Met Girl, you know. The girls worked at— The maids. At the maids, and they couldn't go to church in the morning, so they came in the evening. They had some time off, then, too. Yeah. And there was a big group of Swedish girls in Omaha working in the American hospital. Oh, yeah. I think our attendance then was about as high as it is now in the church. They had a big gallery. It was made on the same plan as the old church in Stockholm. Swedish gave a full church in Omaha. Yeah. It was made with the idea of galleries, you know. Do you remember the church preceding the— No, no. I never went down there to that one. You never went down— Never went. Did you in Stockholm? Did you ever go to the— No, no. The Emanuel— The Emanuel church. No, no. I never been there. It was made of— They had two galleries, didn't they? Yeah. Well, ours was made so it was possible to make another gallery. Ours was one, but all the way— So there was a direct copy, then, or— All the way around, see? Yeah. I mean, the gallery was all the way around on the top. Not just in the back, but all the way around, I see. Where are you from, Sweden? Dalsland. Dalsland. Where is that? That's a good question. Before you come into Värmland, there's the entrance. There's the doorstep to Värmland. From the west, then? Yeah, right below Värmland. I know that we took the train from Oslo to Arvika. That's from the west, isn't it? Yeah. Sure, going west-east. So this Emanuel kyrkan in Stockholm, did they have the drawings for the church in Oma? When they built it, or there was a— I don't know. I was just told there was a pattern after the— I have an idea that they did. So how big was the church, then? How many could be seated there? Well, upstairs and downstairs, I think about between 400 and 500, I think. Maybe more than that. I don't know. Maybe more than— When Hultman—you've heard of Hultman? Yes. When he came there, then there, I imagine there were 600 in the audience. He was the brother to the Sunshine singer, though. F.A. Hultman. No, it was the Sunshine singer that started our church. He was there for 16 years, but he came as a teenager. So you saw him and heard him— Oh, my. My mother worshipped him. So you saw him as a young— Oh, yeah. He was a cocky guy. He was? Yeah. And his mission, it was to sing? Yeah, and preach and do everything, and raise money. But when he was the pastor there, he did a lot of traveling, though. Didn't the congregation wonder why he— Well, I don't think he did so much traveling then. At that time? No. Between what years was he the pastor, then? Well, it must have been— Were you confirmed for him? No, I was confirmed by Turnquist, who came after— No, he left the church before 1900, in the late 1800s. See, our church had its 100th anniversary a couple of years ago. So that was around in the 1880s. So that was after that he started to travel? Yeah, oh, yeah. But he liked to sing in between what he had to say? Yeah. Oh, yeah. So it was seldom we had a sermon like the pastor's today without singing. I was all singing. Interluded with— Yeah, with speaking. And then the church was filled? And then the church—yeah, standing room. Oh, that's remarkable. So your parents liked him, of course? Oh, my mother loved him. It was great. And his brother, though, F. A. Hultman? Yeah, he was here for—I don't know, I mean, a short year, but was not as popular. It was later, after the— Yeah, after, yeah. We've even got some relatives of theirs in Omaha. They don't belong to our church, but Harold Hultman, one of our leading brokers, is related to them. To the Hultmans? To the Hultmans, yeah. How about F. Gus Johnson, the Texas preacher? Was he here in your church at any time? Gus F. Johnson. Gus F. Johnson. Yeah. Oh, yeah. He had records of when the revival meetings. His grandson belongs to our church now. Oh, I see. Ron Johnson. He's a psychiatrist, psychologist. So he—how come he come to Omaha? Because F. Gus Johnson, he was up in Minneapolis. Yeah, and his brother still lives up there. In Minneapolis? Yeah. But his father, that is, Gus F. Johnson's brother, is dead now. He was from Minneapolis too, wasn't he? Yeah, he was from Minneapolis. But his grandson lives in Console Bluffs right now. But he belongs to our church in Omaha. Belongs to our church. And his name is Johnson? Yeah, Ron Johnson. Ron Johnson. Is he a young— Well, he's 43, I guess. 45, I guess. But Hultman, he was the one that drew the people in. Oh, boy. By Holtz and all of them. By Holtz, yeah. Did the Lutherans attend meetings like that too, or were they too divided? Well, they were too divided, I think, but he was well enough known so the Lutherans came too then. Their church was located not too far from our church. So the boys, after their service, they'd come up and look over our girls this Sunday evening. Then they crossed the barrier. Yeah, then they crossed— The barrier line. Yeah. Well, at that time there was a division between the different Methodists and Baptists and the Lutheran Covenants. Oh, yeah. The Swedes had quite a big Baptist church. And the free church, the— But it was not this big, though, the free church here. It was more in Iowa. Yeah. Not many. They don't have a free church here today. I don't think so. Do you, Vivian? Free—Swedish? I don't think so. There is a free church, but it's not Swedish, is it? No, the free Methodists are— So there's an interesting group, the Swedes, because you have the Polacks and the Irish and Italians. They are usually Catholic over the line, but the Swedes, they became everything. So many different denominations. So they are— Mostly Lutheran. Lutheran Swedes are strong in Omaha. Right now, they have a hospital in that, you know. In Ohio, yeah. And they're strong. Of course, now they're with the other— But didn't the Covenant and the Baptists and the Methodists help out with that hospital, too? Or was they completely Lutheran? Was that known as a Lutheran institution, the Emmanuel? Yes. Always been like that? Augustana Lutheran. That was a national synod. But of course, now they're all together. So there were no Covenant helping out them with the auxiliary sales or anything like that? No. There was a Covenant hospital in Omaha at one time. It was? What was that called? Covenant? Covenant Hospital. Covenant Hospital. And there was a Swedish— Yeah. What was that located on the— In— In North Omaha, in the black area. In the black area, no. But it went under during the Depression. Vivian's brother-in-law was here then, and that was a sad time. The Covenant in Chicago wouldn't support us, and we had to— Torture yourself, and there was no— Yeah, and that was sad. Because we had the church playing an active role there to keep it going. Uh-huh. With sales and different— Money-raging projects. Yeah. Because you had yours like the Lutherans, she free, and then— Yeah. Women's circles are different in different societies. It's interesting also to read those old ledgers and the financial records where you see all the different units they had to support. There was mission in India and Africa, and there were poor people in the South. Oh, yeah. And Alaska and the Indians. And you wonder how people just kept pouring in money. Yeah, it's funny. Before I was born, so it was the 1890s, I guess, they had what they called a mission school in our church. Maybe you've heard about this. Yes. And a bunch of the—I don't know, they come from all over. And then when they finally got ready and went to— The interview with Rit Westrund continues on next site. Next site. Site 2, Edith Westrund, Omaha, Nebraska. Site 2. They walked on, dodged— Yeah, singing as they went down to the depot to leave. And the story goes that somebody is standing on the streetcar and says, Who are they, anyhow? And they say, Oh, it's a bunch of crazy Swedes going to China. So that story goes down just—I don't know. But anyhow, very much interested. Well, that's the word mission meant. It didn't mean that we were a mission church, that is, somebody was serving us, but that we were interested in missions. Of course, we don't call ourselves— Those missionaries or those people who were sent over to China, you supported them locally, then? Must have, locally. You were responsible for them. Yeah. I suppose the headquarters were still in Chicago, were then too in Chicago. But you had to pull hard, still. Oh, we had to sacrifice for it. And those were missionaries. Had they earlier—were they pastors then, or were they— To what extent they were trained, I don't know, but they did take a special training course. They had to be some kind of— Preachers. But also, I mean, they procured maybe some health problems. Yeah, that's right. So they were— And they stayed there for many years, sometimes? Yeah, I don't know. The main missionary was named Madsen, and they were there for a long, long time. And he came back on the furlough every five years, or— Something like that, yeah. And then he talked in your church. Yeah, and then we sent out more missionaries. You gave out the— There were times I thought, sure, I had to be a missionary. Oh, you were also. Yeah, I had to. They said that these people were dying in their sins, and we were supposed to go. But I got over that. It is unbelievable, you know, how they could— Maybe the world was so big that you didn't know of our China. No. And certainly didn't know the population of China. It was an unlimited number of people. Yeah. And in— So after confirmation, did you actively— were involved in the church work in the societies? Yeah, yeah. I think I— I think I started teaching Sunday school when I was 16. And I'm still going to Sunday school, but not teaching. So that was— Aside from my work, I had to get to work. As soon as I was through high school, I didn't go to college. Although I took a lot of college courses, so I don't consider myself undereducated. But I didn't go to college. I went to work right after high school. What kind of work? I was a stenographer, clerk, secretary. I worked for the Union Pacific for 50 years. Union Pacific? Uh-huh. And they treated me well. Union Pacific Railroad? Right. Yeah. That's a big—it was a big office. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. So you got it right after high school? Yeah. Had no trouble? No trouble. Did you take tests then, stenography tests? Yeah. Oh, yes. Or graphic tests? And you started to work then long before the Depression. Yeah. In the 20s then. And I worked right through the Depression, too. I didn't know anything about the Depression. But it didn't affect you? No. I think we got about a 10 percent cut in salary or something, or 15 percent maybe. But our paychecks still showed our regular salary less 15 percent. So that was intact. So as soon as they could, that was taken off. But then, now I—people—we really missed out on it. Because I can tell that some of the people who are millionaires today didn't have enough income to feed their family at that time. I wasn't touched by that because I made about the same. Never got rich, you know, but enough so that I could support the family. How about your father and mother? He was still working then. They worked, too. But my father was sick, so he didn't work. He couldn't work. And he had heavy work. So he retired early. And they stayed in their house? Yeah. They stayed in the house, yeah. That we bought after we sold that first place where they had the typhoid fever. So then you went up to the next place where you lived for so many years? Yeah. So you lived with your parents then? Yeah. And your brother, no, he was older than that. He's three years older. What kind of work did he get? He worked in the Pacific, too. Soon after work, he started working for the railroad and kept on working. Soon after school. Soon after school. And you were secretary to the Swedish vice council. Oh, yeah. That one, an interesting episode in my life. We had vice council, you know. That was interesting. Yeah. But at one time, now, I cannot tell you exactly what decade it was. It was before you came, wasn't it? Yeah. It must have been in the late 20s or the early 30s. I don't know how it happened, but a man from Sweden came over and was the vice council. He was representative of the government of Sweden and was here. And his name was Hasselrud. He was, I think, wonderful looking and refined gentleman. And so was his wife. They were looking for someone to work as his secretary. And they got my name somehow or other. And I went down and talked to him. And I worked for him. I don't imagine it lasted more than six months, but I took dictation from him. Not directly in Swedish, but I wrote. I had the typewriter with O-A-Ö on it. And I worked for him. So I was pretty good at Swedish at that time. I had to be. I like to tell this story because the last Sunday they were there, I had to work Sundays because I wanted to get caught up with everything because they were leaving. And his wife was there and also helping out. And after we had been working together all morning long, she says, Hur länge har fröken vårit, har vi landet? And I thought, well, gee, I guess I got by that time. So I learned Swedish without any effort at all. So you took a leave of absence then from Öy? No, that was a moonlight job. So why did he leave then? I don't know. I don't know. Did they close the office then? Well, then they got a local man to represent his vice-counsel, Swenson, I believe his name was. Swenson at one time. Yeah. And Edquist, of course. He died in 1926, if I remember right. Edquist? Yeah. Well, see, it was after Edquist. It was after that time then. So you knew Edquist? Well, just by name. I didn't know him really. The folks talked about him. He worked in the city government for engineering. Yeah. But there were a lot of Swedish, wealthy Swedes here in Omaha, Swenson and Blooms and... Yeah, I say, you know, and then there was the other family, Renquist, what's the name of Ö Renstrom. Renstrom. Renstrom, what was he doing? Well, he's established a little manufacturing that made hairpins or something, but it worked. Oh, bobby pins. Oh, bobby pins. Yeah. And he had a big place on Pacific. He had a big farm there from, oh, about, what, 95th clear out to 100th. They're now disposing of his property. It was farmland at that time. Yeah. Well, it was, yeah, he had, it was farmland. He had horses. You remember horses? Yeah. Or he had a big house. Well, the house is still there, I think, Renstrom. On Pacific? He's dead now. On Pacific. It's in the paper all the time now. On the other side of Regency, if you know where that Regency area is. Yes. Okay, on the other side of Pacific there. And they're building there now a big, I don't know what all they're doing there. Yes, I noticed that, the brand new construction. But they were Swedish. I think they belonged to the Lutheran Church, however. So his hectare is still going or Ö I think so. Yeah. I think they call it Tip Top. Tip Top, yeah. Tip Top Products. And then the Swanson family. Yeah, they was with the TV dinners and small chickens and Yeah, well, the man before him was, he had a wholesale food place. I started with J, didn't I? J? But they all belonged, the Blums, for instance, they belonged to the Augustana Lutheran Church. He was in the furniture business. Yeah. He Ö Was that a bridge or was it Ö No, building materials. Well, what about this fellow that has monuments Ö Yeah, Alfred Blum was also Ö they had monument factors. Oh, monuments. Yeah. And there was Axel Ö And then there was Olsen's Tin Shop or Tinners. They had quite Ö They belonged to our church. Yeah. And this Lundgren that Ö Carlson. So in your home now then, was it Ö Can you call it a Swedish upbringing? You had Swedish food? Oh, yes. My mother was an excellent cook and they made all Ö They made the Svinsylta at Christmas time and Karvsylta, Lutfisk, and the Swedish rye bread, of course. She was an excellent cook. Too good. She weighed 200 Ö Did you have to learn to bake too or did she take care of it so Ö You didn't have to Ö I don't know. I don't think I was very smart or very cooperative. I washed the dishes and things like that. You didn't have to compete with mother. No, I never competed with her. Well, I had to work too hard and then I taught Sunday school and I was busy. But it's my fault because Vivian came to live with us because she became orphaned just after she was through high school. She came from Sweden or from Ö Her parents came from Sweden. But she lived with her sister who was married to our pastor. And when he got called back to Ö she was born and raised in Chicago. I was her Sunday school teacher and it was during the Depression. I said, I suppose you'll go back. She also had two other sisters in Chicago. So I just thought for sure she'd go back. So I got my job here and I didn't know if I could get a job. I said, well, come and live without consulting my parents. I said, come and live with us until you make up your mind. That's 50 years ago. She stayed. But she learned more from mama. She knows Ö even yet out here, this is the way your mother made it. So I just wasn't interested in cooking. I never married and I was Ö At Christmas time, for instance, how long before Christmas did your dad bring home the Christmas tree? Do you remember? No, this Friday, the 9th. Several weeks, I guess. Because we didn't wait until New Year, Christmas Eve to put up the tree. But of course we started making cookies way ahead of time. And we fixed our own lute fest. My father did that. My father was more of a cook than I was really. He helped. And Ö It was probably because he couldn't work then. So he was home. Yeah, that's right. He did more of the housework. I guess maybe that's right. Oh, yes, yes. So the Christmas tree now was a short needleÖ Yeah, oh yeah. With the candles, the lit candles. And we sang around the Christmas tree. We did something, a little dancing. There was a man walking across the country, met me, an old man. He asked, he said, where are you from? And then we had a game. I was from Høppeland, and then we all went up there. Or whatever we did. Your dad, he participated? Oh, yes, he was the instigator. Did he sing andÖ? Oh, yeah. And also wrote poems, you said? Yeah. Did he read those poems for you, or you had to recite them? No, he didÖ After I grew, they joined Augustan, one of the Augustan Lutheran churches. He didn't care much about Svenska Mission. Somebody had offended him, but he never told me who. I didn't know who it was. But then they built a church not very far, and he joined the church. And came to be known as First Stalingen's poet. Because whenever he had, he wrote little poems. What church was that he joined? Bethel Church, that's overÖ And whenever anybody had alsoÖ I know somebody just recently, I was at, met somebody I hadn't known for years. He showed me a poem that my mother, my father had made at their folksí silver wedding. I can remember seeing him standing straight. ìVi samlats ikväll för att lycka önska er.î Boy with emphasis, you know. ìVi önska er all hyslig lycka, allt gott från friden, från himlens gud. Må ingen sorg eller nöd uttrycka. Hyr väg ej blandas med sorglyd.î That came back to me right now, I don't know. But I thought it was kind of high class. So that was his hobby, I understand. That was his hobby. Did he read quite a bit? Oh yes, he wasÖ I remember at the funeral, one of the old ladies that knew him, one of the kind of the smart-aleck gal, came up and said, ìYour father was a well-read, dignified gentleman.î And I think that described him. He read Swedish books then? Oh yeah. Mostly Swedish books? ìIssa ias tegner.î Also, he knew more English, American history than I did. Smart guy, too bad he was sick. I think he would have amounted to something. And he never sent in any poems to the Swedish-American press? No. He had some, Skamle Kameran interviewed him? Oh yes, and then there was a Swedish publication, Omaha Posten. You remember that one? Yeah, I knew the editor. Did you read the papers then, the Swedish paper? Could you find any interest in it? Oh yeah, yes. And my mother wasÖ One of the Swedish papers had a crossword puzzle, of course in Swedish, and my mother was quite a crossword puzzle. Of course, I couldnít do that. So she looked for that one? Oh yes. But your dad, he never sent in any contributions? No, I donít think so. He was the register poet for the Bethel Lutheran Church? Yeah. So when he died then, he was buried from Bethel Lutheran? Yeah, then of course my mother, after his death, she joined the Covenant Church with me, and so he was baptized. He did not. He went to Bethel Church, his name wasÖ was a preacher. Your dad was buried still from Bethel Church? Yeah, yeah, I was mistaken though. Your dad was in Bethel Church, but your mother thenÖ Kindlund, did you ever hearÖ Kindlund, he was the administrator for the Emmanuel Hospital for some time too, in the 20s. It was while they didnít have a preacher at Bethel at that time, so Kindlund fit in and was a preacher. Do you remember any exchange of pulpits between the Lutherans and the Covenants under yourÖ No, no, no. It was impossible to do at that time? Yeah. It was unthinkable to cross the lines? No, it was a little feely. I wasnít so aware of it, but after Mom joined our church, she was offended because there was a reference to the Lutheran there. It is strange though, it should be like that, you know, the thing, the religion should be the communal factor for everybody. Yeah, thatís my big brief. Jesus said, ìI pray that they may be one,î you know. But there are many Swedes. Well, I suppose there were not too many worldly things that they couldÖ No TV, not too much radio at the time, of course, and religion was a hot topic. My folks, I say, did not go to church, but they were moral people. There was no drinking, no sweets, and the Lutherans did drink. Well, I suppose our people did too, but they didnít advertise it at least. There was the same thing with the Baptists and the Methodists. They were against drinking, dancing, and they couldnít smoke either, I suppose. Well, our people smoked. When I started going to the society in our church, you know, invited to the homes, I was surprised to know some of those old men who prayed in church smoked. That didnít look right to me. Some were showing snuff too? Oh, yeah. That reminds me, maybe Iíll show it to you. I got a snuff box that my grandfather made. A snuff box, but he used snuff. Is that from your motherís? No, thatís my fatherís side. Did you call youróyou never met your grandparents then? No, never. Did you refer at any time to morfarran farfar? Or mormorra or morfar? Yeah, my mother would tell me about her mother, motherís mother. Did you say morfarran in Swedish? Oh, yeah. Mormor. But you never met them? No. The onlyó Did they write letters to you? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Did they have contacts with Swedes? Yeah. They always started out with a Bible verse. You read the letters too? Yeah, sometimes. I still have a cousin in whatever, that town outside of Säfla. So you met him when you saidó Yeah, I still correspond. So you write Swedish then? Yeah. Itís a strange Swedish. In fact, in the last letter I got to my cousin, because I apologized for my funny Swedish, because I donít use it anymore. And she says, ìI write better Swedish than most Swedes do, because thereís a slang that I donít know of. So mine is really a pure Swedish.î You write a literary Swedish. So your father then, he was well-read and he liked to write. Did he write letters often to Sweden? Your dad? Oh, yes. Yeah. Mom did too, but he was a better writer. He didnít correspond with any other writers or poets you know of? No. There was no one visiting you oró Mm-hmm. Did you get a call that you were discussingó Did they belong to any organizations in Omaha, outside the church? Blobansk, Blobansk, anything. They were one hit. Well, we had a temperance. In Sweden, in this place right overlooking Glassjorden, right over theómy father was bornó Hey! Oh, will you give me that? Yeah, give me that. I donít know what youíre going to get. This is an air view. Not very light here. So Blobansk, where you used toó Yeah. On my uncleís property. But right in front was a place that they called Button. I donít believe that was a very complimentary name. But thatís where my father was born. And thatís still there. And it was there when Ió Did he join Blobanskföreningen in Sweden already? Huh? Did he join Blobanskföreningen in Sweden? I think so. And he continued over here too, then? Oh, yes. It was the only organization he belonged to. My father belongedóand I got to hear, he liked the ironworkersí union. And he was even elected to be an officer. He knew Swedish well enough to be an officer in the Englishó I mean, the American Swedes. So he was active union man then? Yeah. And then he was automatically a Democrat? No. Strong Democrat? No, he was still a Republican. All the Swedes were Republicans. Yeah, but how could he be a union man then? Well, they had to in order to have a job. You know, they had to beó You think they had a press on them for the employer? Oh, sure. Well, because he couldnít getó He couldnít get it thereóthat fellow Andreenó he couldnít get a job unless he had union people. So he had to haveó They had to be Republicans in their turn to sue the employer. Yeah. Did he discuss politics often, your father? No, but he was very much aware. I remember the crazy thing tható Well, this must be about 1921, because we didnít haveó We had a crystal radio set my brother had made. And he was taking over that when the news of Hardingís death came. And we wereósome young people listening to this thingó And you know that we had to wake up my father to tell us who the president was. We didnít realize who Coolidge was. A lot of people donít know who the president is, even now. But he knew. He knew, yeah. He knew what was going on. He knew who the president was. Yeah. We were kind of ashamed we had to wake up dad in order to find out who our president was. It was a good old time. Yeah. And how about your affiliation with politics? Did you follow in your fatherís footsteps? Oh, yeah. Iím still a Republican. I donít know exactly why, butó But in your work now for the Union Pacific, you didnít have any press on you if you were a Republican or Democrat. No, no. But Vivianó I did, yeah. I worked for Farm Credit Administration. Yes. I am a Democrat. Youíre a Democrat. Not a very good one. You were one of the few then in Omaha. Now I suppose itís more than years ago, though. Oh, yeah. Iím sure it is. But in the 20s and 30s, it was unusual to findó We had only one family who were Democrats, and the reason he was a Democrat is because he was in favor of William Jennings Bryan. And he was a Christian. Yes. You know, he got in on this evolution business and everything, and this particular man liked him so well, so he decided to be a Democrat. But heís the only one in our church at that time. Now, of course, weíre all mixed up. What did people say now, the Swedish people, about Roosevelt when he came in in ë33, when he was elected in ë32? What did they say about him? Was he aó Uh. A mercenary for theó Yeah, evidently. People were so down, you know, because of their finances, they were willing to try anything. They werenít against Roosevelt, really. No, there was no hostility there. But did they give him credit for what he did later on with all theóor was it moreó Well, we separated on that score, all right. Said that itís more Christian, you know, to give things andó Oh, I see. Yeah. But the church, no, they never brought themselves into the stream of politics. No. There was never a talkó Still isnít, yeah, still isnít. Well, they still today donító No. Well, there areó No, the churches seem to be more affiliated with politics, though. Well, yeah, we have some people who are interested, some people who run for offices, and some are Democrats. But they are notó In fact, they got a Sunday school class thatís going now of elite, de-educated people, and they are against Reagan. They really are, and thereís a little friction there. But it was impossible for a pastor, no, for instance, in the church in 1932 to say they should vote for Roosevelt. Yeah. He would haveó Well, theyó Killed himself immediately, wouldnít get the support then, I suppose. Yeah, they took the easy way. They still pray for the president, you know, and they did that then, too. They did. You mean thatís the easy way out. Thatís the easy way out, yeah, avoid trouble. Silent prayer. In the Swedes, they wereóthey followed the employersó Oh, sure, itís good business. Oh, my father says that when the richóit is good for the rich, then it will be good for the poor. But when the rich are in trouble, then the poor people will be, because they wonít have any place to go to work. That was his theory, and it makes good sense, sort of. But he was on the line then to be elected to an officer in the Union, a steel officer. Living underneath my bed, right on this side, thereís a square box, you know, that I bring out, got Oscar stuff in it. Your brotherís name now is Oscar. Uh-huh. Why was he namedó Oscar, after Kung Oscar. No question about it. So they liked the royal house in Sweden then, you mean? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. They had a picture of Kung Oscar, also? Iíve got one someplace in my souvenirs. One of my scrapbook opened up with Kung Oscar. Your brother Oscar, now, he made this family tree oró Yeah. ógeological shop. He died a year ago in August, and they sent me some things. So this is all sex tabla material. Goes way back. So that was after he retired, he went to Swedenó Yeah. óto study at Landsark, heó Yeah. It isóI donít know, because thereís an index, and I donít know where the index is, butó What is that first name? Johnson. Yeah, and the second one. The second name one. Yeah, see, I think the second one isó Heís written upó Yeah, see, thatís his own stuff. Then heís got me down here someplace. But then he goes all the way back, you know, which are just names. He was born in St. Louis, your brother. He was born in St. Louis, but they came back before I was born. So he went back to Sweden in 1897. Yeah, he wasó He didnít remember that. No, he was just a baby. Do you think they intended to stay in Sweden at that time, your parents? Oh, I donít think so. No? But everything that they were doingóbecause they were anxious to come back, butó My motheróthey made us feel good about Swedish, that they were good. But my mother said that she had a recó