 This is cassette two, side one, a continuation with the early discussions on Rockford and the East. Yeah, well, I always said I could write a book of my life and then some. So you have had a lot of ups and downs in your life. Nothing but. How about your sister, you know, do you sit and discuss this with each other, what you have? No, no, no, she's not interesting. No, she's one of these, you can't talk to her. She's not interesting. She doesn't want to talk about it? No, no. Like, you know those lights I got in the window there? That's from Holland, Sweden. I have them all, that's from Holland, Sweden too there. And you know, my sister, she got a pair too, that was on my husband's side, our cousins that were here. Tilly got a pair too. Then a couple years ago, thank goodness, I happened to go over, my daughter had a garage sale and Tilly was driving then, so we had to go over there. Then I saw in the box, in the shoe box, I thought, my God, Tilly, I said, and I looked at it, she's going to sell them for three dollars in a garage sale. That's how much she cared. Oh my God, Tilly, I said, this made me almost want to cry. I said, that's from Sweden, I said, that's precious. I don't care for that junk. So then I took them. I said, I'm not going to pay for them either. Then I took them. So, of course, now when I don't, I have them up here. So you have a real Christmas from Sweden then in your home area? Well, I don't know, but when I get started, I get carried away when I drag down my junk from the attic. So you still have feelings of Swedish in you then? In other words, you see the value of it? Oh yes, yes. I entertain, I had the Swedish food and everything. No, comes Christmas, then I make that syltsalad, all that stuff. Then I had that korv and cheese and gröt. How about Tilly? No. She doesn't care about that? No. Why do you stay, you think? Did she grow up differently than the... No, no. She stayed with your aunt? But she has never been interested in... They don't care. I call her lazy. She hadn't had that, you know. How about the rest of the family? You were five. What happened to the rest of them? Well, my oldest brother died. He died? He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died. He died about... I would say about 15 years ago. He lived in Chicago. He moved in and lived in Chicago. And then there was four left. What happened? And then my other brother died, that Eva that was in the children's home. He died about five years ago now. Then I have a youngest brother in Duluth that our relatives took over. He was two years old and raised. And he lives in Duluth. He has a family there. Is he interested in the Swedish background? None. None of them. No one. No one. You are the only one? I'm the only one. Why is that, you think? Because I had grandma so long. My father's farmer. Did you stay close to your father? Yeah. I always had her talk Swede to her. And my stepmother, she always talked Swede. And I liked Swede and I stuck to it. But I'm going to tell you something. These here up north, they talk beautiful Swede though. Now I don't know if that tape... So your grandma, farmor, what did she tell you that just stuck in your mind apparently all your life? In other words... Oh, she didn't say. We didn't talk too much about it. Yeah, but she talked about her early beginning in Sweden, the hard times and... Well, when they came from Sweden, it was kind of hard times in Sweden too. And I think when they came here, I don't know, I don't know how they come here and start out with. I wish we never had... When I came to Sweden, you know, oh, up north, the climate is just so beautiful. I thought, my God, why did we come here in the first place? We should have stayed there. They must have some happy times during their lives. I mean, there was nothing to be afraid of. Oh, in between, in between. Yeah, did she talk about that? Sure. Well... Did she talk about that? Not too much about that, huh? No? Nah. I don't know what you call happy times. I don't know. Just everyday life, that's all. Yeah. Well, now you heard it all. She was not homesick, though. She didn't want to go back to Sweden. You know what, Grandma? She was 65 years old. That was... Of course, she remarried. Well, you know. Yeah, her... Of course, she had been married twice, but when her husband lived, he was here, too. And they had property well-fixed. Then she got in her head she wanted to go back to Sweden, and she was 65 years old. That's young compared to the way they're living now, you know. And I'll never forget when they went to Sweden, oh, she was dressed so beautifully. Well, they got to Sweden, and they were with the intention of staying and living there, but no, she got homesick for the United States. So, she wanted to come back. And you know, all the years she'd been here, she hadn't ever taken out her citizen paper, ever. She never did that? No, uh-uh. So, then... But her husband didn't want to go back, so she left her husband and went back here. And he stayed in Sweden, then? And he stayed in Sweden. We had a heck of a time, her daughter in Duluth, then. They had an awful time to get her, because then they had that Alice Island, you know. They got stuck there. They had an awful time to get her back, because she had not taken her papers out. But they got her back here. So, then she went up and had rumors, and then she continued with her own life. And then I think a year after, he died in Sweden. So she had to come back. She was one of those, she was restless. She was going, she was going back and forth. Not to Sweden, but to Duluth and here. Couldn't make up her mind where she wanted to stay or live or anything. But Rockford, here she is. Yeah. But all of you, though, you've been, you settled down, you married and got a family and worked. Yeah. How was it, though, were people helpful during the Depression when you had bad times there? Did they help each other? Yeah. Oh, they were better than what they are now today. Yeah, we were on the relief and everything, yeah. But you all tried to help each other? Oh, yes, yeah. And it was a job I had in a big family. I always used to come over and have plenty to eat all the time. All I was busy doing was cooking and everything. Yeah. So, like, the way you started out life now, you were only a few years old when you had to start to set the table and everything. Oh, God. I remember, yeah, I come from Duluth. I still can remember me standing up on the chair doing the dishes where my mother lived. Uh-huh. No, she died of pneumonia. She died of pneumonia. And then a little girl was born, a baby was born two weeks before she died. But that was adopted out. We never, never made contact with her. Never did? Never did. No, we didn't care that well enough alone. And you never found out what happened? No. I know Grandma, when she lived, she caught in contact. No, she was a buyer from Weiss's, the one that adopted our little sister. Oh, you never saw her again? No, never. Did I see her at the hospital? I don't remember even. No, I don't think we ever saw her. But my grandmother kept in contact, so she came over one day and she had a, and that couple had adopted two boys. And they were in college, real nice, refined people. But that'll teach you, the two boys and our little sister was ever cute. She looked like my youngest daughter when she was small. But after our grandmother died, we never know. We figured that well enough alone. But is she still living though? Is she still around? Is she still in Rockford here? We don't know. No, I don't think, no. I think they left town. But we never contact with them. So That is interesting. You have a sister out there somewhere. Someplace, yeah. Maybe you meet her on the street in Rockford. You never know. We'll pass her every day. You never know. But if your grandma had contact with her. She contact a woman that adopt our sister. And then she came over one time and she showed us a picture of the two brothers there and herself. And she was about four years old. She looked just a picture of my youngest girl when she was small. She looked like the family, all right. But she didn't have any of your experiences though in your home. In other words, she was going out with a different family. Very nice, educated, refined family. Yes, indeed. So they went to college then? You think she went to college? Well, I don't know. I haven't got the least idea. But the two boys went on to college. What she, I haven't got the least idea. So my goodness. 1960, how old would that girl be now? In her 60s? Yes. 69. At the time of Friday. Oh boy. You know, people didn't live as long as them days. We live, you know, to tell you the truth, I think we're living too long. See what is it? I'm in the third or fourth generation. I can see my family is very wonderful, good. But do you think they ever come home? They're too busy with their own family. See my youngest two girls, they're too busy babysitting for their grandchildren, you know. So to tell you the truth, we're living too long. We're in a way. We're in a way. Yeah, but you are healthy, isn't that you? You can take care of yourself. That's what counts. That's what counts, yeah. And they know that. They know that I got a mind of my own. I know what it is. I do a lot of walking because I don't drive a car, you know, which is good for you. So what do you occupy yourself with now that you belong to the Swedish Historical Society? Yes, yes. And Swedish culture. Swedish culture. And a church. And a church. And then I got private friends so we get together once a month, you know. Oh yeah. I can't keep up with anything anymore. So you have a schedule appointment every day of the week? Every day. Lunches and things. Yeah. And when I hadn't got anything scheduled, I got my hands full cleaning up the house, which I hadn't done before. You know, I was a better housekeeper when I was working than I am now. Especially when I was working, everything was on schedule, you know. But now, what the heck, I got another day tomorrow. If I can't do today, I'll do tomorrow. That's the way it is. Yeah, but now you only have the cat, though. He can't do this or that, too many things. I mean, the kids were doing it years ago, but not now. She's old as a hill, too. Now I've been making my mind. There, this spring, you know, her fur was just like, she was just like a porcupine. What do you call that hair? I brought her down to the vet. She is 15 years old. My grandson, that's the one that the fashion designer, you know, like I said, he had a farm and had lambs and cats and dogs and everything, you know. And then the cat had kittens. She'd come with this cat. And my man lived then. I said, I don't want it. I said, you remember how much trouble we had with that guy next door. All the police, Humane Society, they all came and named him. They all came. Oh, he was going to get rid of all the dogs. And oh, he was creased around the neighborhood here. Now, Grandpa had to have a cat. So my man gone now 15 years. So she's 16 years old now. And I was debating on if I should have put her to sleep or not. But then after they cleaned her up and shampooed her, she looked so sad. And I asked the guy how long does the cat live anyway? About 20 years. Okay. I said, it'll come home another couple of years. She's not doing any harm, though. She hadn't ever had the habit of jumping up on a chair, never. But she just started this week now. I think she must be old and lonely. She wants to be close to me. I think so. And then the craziest part of it, my grandson, they're scared stiff of my cat. Do you suppose animals sense different people that don't like them? I have seen. When my grandson comes over, very old, but you know, oh, they're scared. But you know, I have seen, they touch the cat, she snaps at them. I said, must be the cats. They don't forget. You're just like an elephant, aren't you? Sure. No, she takes her food down the basement. So she gets exercise up and down. But the cat, they have it much easier than years ago when you were a little girl. Then they had the cat to catch the mice in the house. We don't have it. You don't have that trouble anymore? No. I've been in this house about 47 years, should I say. And I haven't seen a mouse yet. How was it when you were growing up, though? Oh, mice. It was all with mice and cockroaches and bedbugs. Every house? Every house we rented. But no bedbugs, though? You had any? Well, when we first came from Duluth, we rented a flat which was full of bedbugs. I could see my father yesterday, he used to pour gasoline on the mattress and burn and everything. Oh, we would wake up in the middle of the night, there were all bedbugs all over us. That's terrible. But no. No, I haven't ever had a mouse in this house, even. The only mouse I had, I don't know what happened. A gopher came in and I was scared stiff. And a cat was having a ball. Oh, boy. And I didn't even dare to go down the basement. So then I called a neighbor of mine and she, oh, she said, I'm not afraid of that. I'll get a broom. Oh, she came down and she ran out fast. Then I got a hold of a guy in the neighborhood and he came down. But the cat, she was having real fun with it. But that's the only one I had that came in. Yeah. So your grandchildren, they have a different life than what you had? Oh, beautiful. Could you talk about it with your grandchildren? Beautiful marriage. I talk about it to them, you know. Oh, I'm so proud of my husband. Bust. You know, we were at that fashion show. Now we were at the country club. First time I ever been in that swanky, swell place, the country club. So Joyce Holmberg, she was having a fundraising drive. Oh, you are a Democrat? A hundred percent. Are you? A hundred percent. So your husband? Are you? Your husband? Yes. To tell you the truth. You see what the Republicans are doing now, don't you? Yes. I know. To tell you the truth, I'm a strong Democrat. You know, I'll even say that if it hadn't been for the Democrats, I wouldn't have been alive today. You don't think so? When I was young, I was bothered with goiter. And I used to pass out cold all the time. But I worked like crazy during the day. But I used to pass out cold all the time. In them days, the doctor used to come to the house. But they couldn't diagnose what it was. And I used to get, well, I wake up at night. I woke up, all I could move was my eyes. I was just paralyzed. Couldn't move, that was a terrible feeling. But then later, then it went over. So you know, I used to, and my, remember the family, huh, there's nothing wrong with you. And I went around and said I had heart trouble, because my heart would need to beat. So you have heart trouble? The way you work and carry on? I had the meals on the table all the time, you know. I just worked. Then finally we got on a relief. It so happened, my man had gone to the club, usual. The club came first before the family, you know. You never went to the club with him? Never. Well, when they had parties and stuff, you know. Well, anyway, then, Tillinghall, they stayed with me too. They all went on their way, and it was on a Tuesday night. And I had just put Ina, the oldest girl, to bed. She was only about five years old then, to bed. And I was sitting, and I could feel it when it comes on. Everything was getting, so then I just, within December, I went air. I rushed right out. And then I went, we lived in a four-family apartment. So I rushed over to my landlord, and there's where I dropped. Oh, she said, there's something definitely wrong with you. She said, I'm going to make Ina go. We were on a relief, got on a relief, and down to the visiting nurse. You have to get to the bottom of this. So you know, then my man went there and got her sleep, and then I went. Had appointment about nine in the morning the next day, you know. And Dr. Charles Leonard, he said, that's ingoing goiter. You have to go to hospital right away. Another of those spells, you're going to be gone. So I was at the county hospital there, on a relief. I was on a county hospital for five weeks. And I had to lay there. I only weighed about 105 pounds. And they built me up, you know. I did everything that they told me to. So when they brought me into the operating room, I weighed about 125 pounds. There was two doctors working on it, Leonard and Dr. Owen. They didn't put me to sleep. They had to freeze it. Every once in a while, you know, I gave out a scream, you know. No, that was goiters on each side. Then on the left side was the abscess. That was crowding the heart. Either one of those spells, you're going to be gone. And they were able to correct it? Yeah. So you came home and? Uh-huh. Five weeks I was in the hospital. I went in December the 11th. And I thought, oh, I'll be home for Christmas. The hand touched me. Christmas come. So I went in December the 11th. I came home January the 14th. Oh, yeah. But them days, it was very dangerous, them days. You know, it was very dangerous. Did they say the reason for it? Was it the iodine that was missing? You know, they mixed iodine in the salt. That's it. It was a trouble. Yeah, I imagine so. I think I must have had that trouble for many, many years. Because I remember I used to swell up to beat the band. It hadn't come down for many years. I used to swell up to beat the band. Even my feet, if I walked downtown or walked home, I had to go to bed. Because under my foot was swell that high. But I was one of these. And I tell you now, she gives up. But I just kept going. And I ate like a horse. And that's what kept me up. So I say that's why I even can thank the Democrats. If there hadn't been depression, I would have been down under long ago. Maybe it's just as well. But that's all, yeah. So you praise Roosevelt then for his actions? Yeah, I really do. His son is working awful hard for that Social Security. Not shares or what they call it for the... Well......in 1916, 17. But isn't it terrible the way that guy is doing? I can't figure it out. I thought that Reagan done a heck of a damning job the first four years. And people vote him in again. No, I don't think vote got in. Money that they buy themselves in. Buy themselves. They're in a heck of a good trouble now. I hope it gets worse and worse. I'm rejoicing. So you think the Democrats will come in again then? I'd rather think so. I'd rather... Well, they better. But of course, like I say, as long as the whole Social Security holds on to that, I'm dead and gone. I don't care about what happens after that. But you know, like I say, my children and grandchildren, they got jobs. They don't understand all this. Hey. But you know, you worked 22 years. And your husband worked. So you have a pretty good Social Security. Yeah, fair. No, I won't say I wouldn't have too good because my husband retired five years before I did. And a painter, decorator didn't get that into the... I think of about a couple of years before he died. But he belonged to the union though, to the painting union. Thank God for that. He didn't believe in insurance. It didn't have one drop of... No, he was bullheaded that way. So thank God that he did paint. He was a life member of Painters Union. So I got a thousand dollars for that life member, which helped with the funeral. No pension? No pension. No. Nope. And he retired five years before I did. So his pension was not any higher than mine. Did you get any pension from your job? Yes. It wouldn't... We were just working on pension about three years. They went out of the country. They were the first one, the piano factory. They went to Mexico. So I was hoping that I could work till 65, then the Social Security would be higher. But I just turned 62. I got laid off in March, and then I turned 62 in May. So then I took my Social Security. So my Social Security, I didn't get more. I only got two dollars more on my husband's, that's all. So this piano factory, what was the name of it? Wooden Brooks they called it. Before it was Theraction. Theraction? Yeah, Theraction they started out with. And then they called it Wooden Brooks after. No, they, oh listen, about 18 years ago... They went to Mexico? Yeah, Mexico country. And never returned? I think that's the first factory that went out of the country. Cheaper wages. So there are no piano factories in Russia? No, no, no. They're all gone? All gone. I know there was one in Dikel, but I saw on the paper I think they were folding up too. So you got some pension though for Social Security in this... Well, like now we didn't get much pension. I worked at La Ha Company for five years before I went to... I should have stayed at La Ha Company. I would have gotten a real nice pension. You mean National Lock? National Lock, uh-huh. But then when the war was over, they pushed me around so much I got mad and I quit. Then I stayed home and drew my compensation money. Then I went to Wooden Brooks. Then when I got Wooden Brooks, they were fighting for the union. When I got in La Ha Company, they were fighting for the union. They got in. I got in the Cayamana Woods, then they were fighting for the union. I got in, all that stuff. But then they started working on the pension. But our pension was only two and a half years old, so they didn't have much time to build it up. And they were going to take it away, but then the steward, the union man, went into Washington and fought for our pension. So those that I had 22 years in, from those that had been 10 years and up, they got pension. No, I get $70 a month. That helps. What happened in all... You know how much you have worked and how much pension you have received, but how about your farm-mur? No. She didn't have any kind of social security. Your farm-mur? Your farm-mur? Oh, no, no. Them days, no, no, no, no. How did she survive, though? Well, when there's a way, there's a way, I imagine. Yeah, you wonder about that. Because they had nothing. They didn't have nothing at all. They couldn't go to an retirement home or nursing home or home service, and no meals, wheels on meals, no dinners. Nothing. Nothing at all. So they took care of themselves, then? Yeah. You never had farm-mur in your home? No, never. She stayed with herself? But the way things are going up now, I'm debating on... So how's it go? Ah, the high rise now. No, go into Wesley Willow, but that's quite a bit. Oh, that's a beautiful place to be. So how long have you stayed? When did you buy this house? Ooh, let's see now. In the 40s? It's in the low, it was 1942, I think it was. And you've lived there ever since? Uh-huh. And we've only paid the rent. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. And you've only paid the rent? Uh-huh. I've only paid about $45 in tax now, it's way over 500, even if I do get the circuit breaker, it's pretty high. But I managed. So you stayed in the same neighborhood, as you know the neighborhood? Well, yes, but the neighbors around here aren't too friendly. I don't have nothing to do with them. Of course, the renters, the renters, I talk to them, but I got a card that belongs to one of the neighbors over there. I don't even want to go over with that. But if you stay there now, since 42, there were mostly Swedes around here then? Yes. A lot of people have been dying. But weren't they nice people, though, the Swedes? Yes. Oh, well, they're all across the street. They're all, you know, they're all... And he is a Swede? Oh, 100 percent. Oh, God. Oh... That guy could never talk. He swore like the dickens on Swedish. He never could talk nice to you when he got mad. Oh, how he swore. Oh, and you know, they got money to burn. Who are they going to leave it to? Oh, I could tell you stories to beat the band by then. Oh, you know, we were... Well, that was some years ago, you know, she went to Sweden in April. And he was going to... Oh, he had a list about a mile long, what he was going to do around the flat, and he was going to go in July and join her. Okay. Time was flying by. It was just about two weeks before he was going to go. Then he got letters from her. You know, she went, and I think they had their family home intact, and she had a bachelor brother living in that house with another woman. And I think that she got in a fight with her brother. And she hauled... She had trunks with her, you know, hauled all kinds of stuff from the family home, and they were fighting to beat the band. And all of a sudden, he was ready to go. He got a telegram from her. She was on her way home. That was before we were announced. Then he come in here. We had been home. We had come home by 10 o'clock, and he was crying and crying. He had his suitcase packed and there, ready to go. Should I go or shall I not go? You know. I said, Mr. Johnson, if you want my advice, you should go. I said, you've been sitting here all alone, crying. You know, he had a habit of sitting there crying, too, you know. What he should do about his money when he died. That was his subject. I don't know what I'm going to do with my money, you know. I only can leave $10. One of the neighbors said, you can leave it to me. I'll take care of it. And that poor neighbor died, you know, before he did, you know. So I told him, you should go. Let her sit alone for a while. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know. Imagine when she left, he took out her telephone and everything. I think that's terrible. So he had to come over, no, 2 o'clock in the morning. My son-in-law's parents were living on the other side then. Come banging on the floor at 2 o'clock. He was dying, he was in a heart attack.