 Cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Otto Anderson, Love's Park, Illinois. Cassette 2, side 1. So Swedish Mafia. Yeah, they call us the Swedish Mafia and that's sort of a fun thing with me because, well, when you're in as president of the club, you more or less have control for the year, you know. And they'd always wonder who I was going to put on committee chairman and I've got some good Swedish friends. So there are quite a few Swedes that are in Love's Park. Oh yeah, there's quite a few here. In our country club, by the way, this might be of interest too, was organized in 1927 by a bunch of Swedes and they built a beautiful country club building. And with the idea that if it did not go as a country club, they would convert that into a factory. That building would then become a factory. Well, five years after it was organized, they went bankrupt. It was a depression. But then in 1931, there was another group of fellows from Rockford that decided, well, we're going to reorganize it. So in the old days, it was called Harlem Hills Country Club and they were going to reorganize it and bring it out of debt. So they called it the Forest Hills Country Club. And so it's been going again since 1931. Who were the first people to organize it? Was it Hillman? Hillman was involved. No, Peterson wasn't involved in that one. No, Faust wasn't involved in that either. One guy by the name of Hoagberg. Yes, yes. That's the only picture that I have in our, what we call a president's room. I got pictures of everybody that's been president, but that's since Forest Hills Country Club was started in 1931. And prior to that, I only have this one, and that's Fred Hoagberg. And so I don't, you know, I've heard names of different things. What about Hallstrom, the mayor? Hallstrom was not in the golfing end. There was an Ericsson, or not Ericsson, Ekstrom. Ekstrom, that was involved. Mayor Bloom, was he? No, Mayor Bloom wasn't involved in that one either. There were golfers then. It was the golfers, the old Swede golfers that started it, yes. So there was mostly the first generation born here that were interested in it. That's right. And then in 1931 when it got started, then there was a guy by the name of Frank Franzen, who was Swedish. Clarence Warner, I don't know if he had any Swede in him or not, but Dr. Clarence Warner, he's one of the guys that organized it. Paul Strish, he's not Swedish. He was one that was in the reorganization. He was some of the people that had money at that time that started it again. But out of all the people that are over there, we've checked to find out 46% of our membership is Swede. Today? Today. Right today. So we think that's pretty good. So there are quite a few in Rockford then. Oh yes. Oh, it's mostly Rockford. Mostly Rockford. In fact, the Scandinavian night that we had with our smorgasbord Saturday night is the biggest night of the year at the club. We had 320 people there for dinner. 320 people for smorgasbord. Then we had the Swedish owners sing for us to entertain. That was fun. So you have catered in or you have a chef there too? No, we have our own. Yeah, we have our own chef there. So that's been the joy of being in America again, to be able to go from shoeshine boy to president. That's why I mentioned that part of it. Well, that's kind of stepping up. Well, I've been very fortunate in my lifetime too because, well, Swedish American Hospital, I'm a secretary of the corporation and the trustees and been on the board now for seven years. And I was president of the State Association of Insurance Companies for two years. And that's just a little Swedish boy from Loves Park that was a 50... How long did it take now for you to stand up and settle to get the notice as a trustee in the banks and so forth? Well, see, I... You have to settle insurance then for your office or did you go door to door the first time? Oh, yes. I used to work 65 hours a week and do all that. Yeah, I used to go door to door. Life insurance? No, I never had life insurance until about 20 years ago I developed a life insurance department and then I went to the local commercial department. Before that it was more personal lines because you only have time to do so much, you know. But I was secretary... I was made secretary of a fire insurance company in 1952 when this Mr. Conklin I went to work for passed away. And I was 29 years old. I was the youngest secretary or executive officer in the state of Illinois of a company at that time. And I worked with that as secretary for 33 years. And then became secretary treasurer and I'm now president of that company. But the secretary treasurer is the one that runs the show. So he has that responsibility now. So he got another Swede in the footsteps of his dad. So, yeah, there was one thing that the Swedes lacked when they came here, insurance coverage, you know, for the hospitalization and so on. Yeah. Was it easy to sell insurance like that after the war? Or did the factories take care of it? Well, I guess one of the reasons it's been good for me has been because of my involvement. I've always liked to do what I could do for the schools, like to do what I could do for my church, like to do what I could do for my community. And I've been involved in so many things. And I can remember one time sitting on the church board. At that time we had deacons and trustees. Now they have just a church council. And they had 24 people on it. And I can remember, and of course you aren't supposed to think about this when you're in a church meeting, but out of the 24 people I had 22 of them insured. And I think the reason is because they got to know me and I got to know them pretty soon. And I never, when I went to a meeting, never asked anybody if I could write their insurance. In fact, I've never done that in my lifetime unless they give me an indication first they're interested. Then I'm gung-ho and then I go at it. But I don't want anybody to walk across the street because they see me coming. And it's never been that way. Some of my best friends have never had insurance with me. But they have reasons too, because they maybe got a relative or somebody they've been with for many, many years. But I've been blessed with what I have. There was a story about Henry Ford. His best friend was an insurance man. And he was married and he didn't take the insurance with him. And Henry Ford said, you never ask. I've heard that story too. Yeah, that's right. But you have to expose yourself. And being involved in all these various organizations, like Harlem School, I've been out there for 45 years now. And that certificate of merit thing there, I don't know if you can see it. Well, a couple of years ago they called me over and they said, we wondered if you'd talk to our students in an assembly. And there's 2,000 students. And I said, well, what do you want me to talk about? And they said, well, let's give them that positive kind of a thought and feeling expression that you have and just give them a gung-ho kind of a thing. Well, the reason they wanted me to come over there, they made a presentation to me of that. And that's only because I've been involved and want to do things to help the kids. Right now, the Undertaker and I, we're co-chairmen of a fund drive to get money for the marching band to go to the Peach Bowl in Georgia. And they needed $7,500. Well, we've made contacts, all the business people, because we do have these contacts. And it's not over yet because they don't go until the 20th of December, but we got $10,200 so far. And those are the kind of things that just set your time, you get all these things done. It's all got to be planned. You have to make plans. Of course, I'm blessed with an office. I've got 17 people here. And even though I'm almost retired, I can utilize any and all of them for whatever I want. Are you known as a Swede in Las Vegas? Oh, yes, very much so. Yeah, they all talk to me as being a Swede boy. And even over in the club, those that are Swedes, like Alex Firm, I don't know if you've heard of him, but he used to have a big dairy here, and we converse, a lot of those Swedes and I, we converse in Swedish. Roly Olsen, he lives out here in a big farm, and whenever we see, we talk in Swedish. See, my brother and I do this all the time, and that's why I keep up with it. And my wife and my brother's wife, they get such a kick out of it because when we're together, we're talking Swedish. First time when we flew from London to Gothenburg, we got on this airplane, and it's loaded with Swedes going home. And he's about six rows in back of me. So he and I are talking in Swede, and everybody's just roaring because they know we're Americans, and we're trying the best we can, but everybody got such a kick out of listening to us. But we do this often. We're always talking Swede. And I do that because I want to keep up with it because when I'm over there, I try as hard as I can to do right, be right by it, and it seems to work out quite well. I had one little funny incident, though. Went over there one time. Well, I was in 79. My cousin, who is Swedish, here in Rockford, and her husband, who is German, they wanted to go with us. So we said, Oh, that'd be fine because I always rent a car when I get around. I've driven miles and miles and miles in Sweden, just love to drive there. So that's why I've been all over with a car. Now, when I went up north, my son and I flew, of course, because it's a 2 1⁄2-hour flight from Stockholm. But anyway, this one year, I had a little trouble because all you do is eat five times a day. So I told my wife, I said, I've got to go to a drugstore. I've got to get some medication. Now, what I wanted to get was Preparation H. Well, I didn't tell her, and I didn't tell my cousin or her husband, but I said, I have to go to a drugstore and get some stuff. Well, they were laughing about it. Well, what are you going to get? I said, well, so anyway, we drove along, and I pulled up to a drugstore, and I'm trying to think, well, how do I say Preparation H in Swedish? So I went in, and of course, as it always would be, there was a woman pharmacist, not a man. It was a woman. So I thought, well, I'm going to tell her what I need. So I said, jag har inte endan. Jag behöver ha' som medicin. She says, I know what you want. She said, I know exactly what you want, and she brought it out, and it's exactly what I wanted. But I really had to laugh because here I had, first I had to ask a girl, you know, for it. So I got out in the car and I had my package, and I said, well, did you get what you wanted? And she said, yes. And I said, well, what did you get? And I told them, and they just roared. Do you think the people now that you meet in Tiddeholm, they are practical kind of people? Very much so. Like you, you know, you were straightforward and didn't hesitate to bring it up. Well, I think maybe the real old generation that doesn't get out involved in a lot of things, I think they're more reserved, as they are in Småland, which I think they really are, very bleak down there. But, no, they're outgoing, and of course they've learned from me that I'm noisy. I made a speech at the first dinner party we had in Tiddeholm and said, if any of you people come to the United States, come visit us in Loves Park. The next year, for 11 straight weeks, we had three groups, and my wife said, don't you ever make a speech like that again. Because, you know, 11 weeks in a row, that's a lot of people to have there. You must be a good salesman. Well, you know, I just was so happy to come on over, you know. And we've had them many times, many different people, but I don't say that same speech when I go there anymore, because that's too much work for my wife. And they always stay at my house. See, when I go over there, I never stay at anybody's house. That's why I think there's a big difference, although they are always planning things. What I like to do, well, my aunt and uncle always have us for breakfast, 9.30 breakfast, because I said, now I want to sleep. You know, I want to rest, because you're always on the go in the evening. We have a breakfast with them, and then my cousins have things lined up for noon or whatever. And then we always say, before the evening festivities start, well, we'll go back to our hotel and we'll rest a while, write some cards. Or what I do an awful lot, and they know I do this, I take a drive over to my grandparent's cemetery. That's so meaningful for me. And I don't know how many times I've been there, but every time there's a reason I go there. And then I drive to the house that my dad was born in. Betty and I alone will drive there. Still standing. Still standing. It was a farm commune down by the big lake. And right across from it now is a golf course, which I have played too. But this farm commune had six families in it, and that house is still standing. And the first time we went there, and of course we've been there many times now, but we got to meet some people that lived there. And they know who we are, and they were always so kind when we go there to visit. But then the other house where my father lived when they moved to Teton Home, I don't know, I'd like to own that house. I told my uncle if it ever was up for sale, I'd want to buy it, because it's such a nice place. You see, my grandparents gave land to the cemetery, and they're buried in the cemetery right at the fence. So if I get down on my knee, yes? Yeah. I get down and get a picture of their tombstone, and their farmhouse is right behind it. So that's sort of nice because they're on their own land. But I go there often, and that's what Betty and I like to do. So you have fallen in love with Stetna, isn't it? I've walked the steps I'm sure my father has taken many, many times. And I've met friends of my father. Now, the last guy died last year, but I have met friend, boyhood chums of his, because he left at 16. But when he went over there in 1950, they had a party. Like 24 of his school chums got together, had a big party for him, you know, coffee, whatever. But the last one was last year when I was over there, passed away. So they used to always ask about us too. I feel I've found my roots. In fact, I guess I said to you one time that it seems that I have walked those streets at another time. It felt just like I was reincarnated. So that's a good feeling. How about your sons now? Are they interested in the... I took them in 1974 so they would know what it's all about because... All three? All three. And, you know, they're a very impressive state. My one son, they all three graduated from Carthage College, which is our church school in Kenosha. And my one son took Swedish for a whole year. And then he would write letters in Swedish to my Aunt Ingeborg, which is a thrill to see. He is planning on going over. They want him to come over. And the other kids... Well, my one son, his wife is Norwegian. They went to Norway. Well, it would be six years ago because they have two children now. And so it's prior to the babies coming along. And what I want to do is take the boys with their wives now and the grandkids and go to Sweden. And another thing I want to do is for Betty and I to go sometime at Christmas. I want to go there at Christmas time. And they want us to come at Christmas time. They all seem to welcome us with open arms. And I think it's one thing that we don't put too much of a burden on them because we try to be pretty independent if we can because we have our own car, always have our car, always stay at a hotel. And to me that's awfully important. Your parents, did they belong to any other Swedish-American organizations in Rockford? No, they didn't. About the only organizations of any kind, they didn't belong to any of those clubs down in Rockford. The only thing was church groups. Did they have to go far away then at that time, you think, to go back to Tornigatan? Because he was working in Rockford. He worked in Rockford. But they never went in then to the clubs? Not to the clubs. It seems like, no, they didn't get involved in those kind of things. I don't know if it was because of finances or my father had an acre of land and he always had a very large garden because he lived off the garden. He always had chickens. Just about every year he had one pig that he would butcher, you know, and they would have their different things. But no, they didn't do that. One big thing that they did in the old days, these Swedes, and there's no more of it now, but they used to go down the river and get kräfta. Get out and sing for kräfta in Rock River. And now you can't even find one. And by the way, that's a big thing in Sweden too because August 4th or whatever it is, when they have it, I've been there and they've had parties for us where you have the hats and the balloons and everything else, and that's a big deal. So we've had that also over there. But they had disappeared then. They've disappeared in Rock River completely. And even though they tell me or say that Rock River is cleaner today than it was in the 1900s, but in those days my dad, along with maybe Cy Myers or somebody, would get a scene and go in there in the river with the wash tubs full, and we'd have a big group at our house and they'd have those. That'd be big party stuff. But no, I guess my folks maybe didn't belong to that stuff because of just trying to keep things going at home. How about Swedish newspapers? They always had that. Yeah, my grandmother always sent it to my dad, and then after she passed away, well, then he subscribed to it. They were Växjö Tablades? Yes. So they always had that and kept up with it. In fact, my father then, well, let's see, my father even sent the paper from Chicago to my grandmother. Svenska Medikana. Svenska Medikana. Sent that to my grandmother, and she got that all the time. It's amazing, though. I mean, your parents are now 16 years of age, and they kept the Swedish intact all their lives as long as they were living. And then you came along here and also your brother. Yeah, and I have such good feelings for the Swedes that it's a tradition, it's roots that I want to preserve for my boys, and I feel real good about it. Some people are sort of embarrassed by some of those kind of situations and could be maybe apologetic, but not me. If anybody says, You're a Swede, then yes, I'm 100% Swede. I'm very proud of it. So it has been easy to live with them. It's been easy for me to live with, and it's certainly not hurt me because I've been so fortunate in my life, in my work, in my involvement, whatever I've been involved with, so it's been a good feeling. Your wife now, what kind of connection does she keep with her ancestry through Scotland? You said you've been there. Well, we've been to Scotland one time, but we were only there five, that was on my 60th birthday, we were only there five days. And unfortunately at the time we were there, Betty had this walking pneumonia. So she and I were both supposed to play at St. Andrews on my 60th birthday, but because of the way she felt, she couldn't do it, because that was on June 14th. And even though June 14th, here in our country, usually it's a nice, comfortable day, but over there playing at St. Andrews, I had a sweater, jacket, scarf, had a cap over my ears because of the wind coming off the sea, and it was cold, so there was no way she could play that particular day. And also because she wasn't feeling too good, we could not go to Campbeltown, it's where her people are from. So I said to her, well, the next trip we come over, we're going to spend three weeks in Scotland. So our plans were to go in 1986, August of 1986. But she has been so concerned about the terrorists. Now I don't have that same fear, but I will say that in Heathrow Airport, it seems like everybody you look at appears to be an Iranian. It just puts a little fright into you. Well, she's more scared about that than I am. I sort of live by the idea that if it happens, it happens. That's maybe the way it's going to be. I find out now that we can fly direct to Prestwick, which is outside of Glasgow. I didn't know that. So now there's a firm commitment to go in August. The reason we want to go in August is all the heathers in bloom, and that's what she wants to see. Then at the same time, Glasgow is a little bit closer to Campbeltown, but her sister, she only has one sister, her sister and her brother, Betty's brother-in-law, my brother-in-law, they're going with us. So I will be getting a car, and then we will be going to Campbeltown and try to retrace. But to know whether or not there's any people from four generations back, it would be too distant. I don't think we can find anybody. We do know that at Campbeltown, the cemetery, the relatives are buried because her uncle, who was a very wealthy individual, had traveled there many, many times. He passed away two years ago at 93, but he had been there many times, and he had retraced it. He had, like I have from Sweden, a genealogy that traces back to all my people. Can you go back to 1600s? 1500, yes. I'll show you that too when I get unhooked here. But that's eight generations, and that is of interest to me to read about my grandparents, my great-grandparents, and what they were doing and so on. But we don't know that much about Betty's people. I do want to take her back because of her interest in where I've gone so many times that I feel I've got to do this one time. But it's different if you have somebody to go to, like we have in Sweden, or to go just visit what might have been four generations back. There's a big difference in that, and she recognizes that. But we will be going in August this year for certain. And that was the end of the interview with Dr. Anderson, Loves Park, Illinois. 15th of December, 1986. End of interview.