 This is cassette 4. One continuation with Carl Strömqvist in Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 4. Having trouble, or if he wasn't, but just wanted new ideas or something, we had specialty guys that would just go out and show them how to make quality bakery goods. So they came from the headquarters then, or you used to? Yeah, from Chicago, you know. I'd requisition them out and they'd come out and stay a couple, three days or whatever and try to help them put out quality stuff. Of course, after they left, you know, forgot to put the eggs in or they wouldn't follow the instructions. Most of them wouldn't. Yeah, but how about now the Swedish bakers? That's what I'm talking about. Did they get any instructions from Chicago? Do they know how to bake Swedish? Oh, we had a Swede baker in there, Ericsson. In Chicago? Yeah, he was a serviceman for the company. Oh, I see. And he was A1. So he told them exactly how to get to it? Oh, you're damn right. I got a kick out of him. We were in there to a meeting and he was telling us all about, and you know how Swedes talk, but he was a hell of a nice guy and he knew his stuff. But he said, in the fall of the year, when the jokes of the eggs are not so jello, you have to use a little coloring. I got a kick out of that. You know how you get your J's and Y's mixed up. But he was a damn good baker. And he would tell them what to use and then when he left town, hell, they'd go back, make it the old way, you know. But they helped him out then, too. Oh, sure, sure. Get him into business. And more yeast you were able to sell them. That was the idea of it, I guess. There was a lot of funny ones like that. We had one, another Swede was in charge in his bakery. What was it? It ain't on now, is it? Oh, is it? Well, that's a bakery and I won't mention the name. So he'd come out. They had trouble with their white bread. So he had this guy come out and made it. It didn't turn out right either, you know. So this damn dumb Swede, instead of trying to help, he used bread flour instead of cake flour because he mixed up the ingredients for the dough. But that's what he'd done to make this baker from Chicago look bad, you know, that he couldn't do it either. But he caught it that he wasn't using cake flour. Things like that, you know. Here they were just trying to help. So you don't think the Swedes approved of getting help or were they too proud to be told? Well, they'd ask for them. They'd ask for them to come out most of the time. Oh, sure. Once in a while you got the stubborn one. Oh, yeah. Bread flour instead of cake flour, huh? Yeah, see. So hell, you couldn't make bread with cake flour. But he caught it. He married a gal from south of Rochelle, Violet. She's still living. So it was on a Friday night. And, you know, the bakers need extra help for Saturday. And, of course, I was supposed to get them. So I got a hold of Fokke to go to Ridge Avenue, Bontown Bakery, Clyde Noble. And I said, go down to the basement and change clothes and come up and I'll wait. And so he came up the steps and he says, here comes that dumb baker. Ha, ha, ha. That was all there was to that. But he was a character. In your case, now, Carl, you had no trouble to understand the Swedish or dialect or anything? No. I mean, you had no trouble because you were born in Sweden and you were raised here. Yeah. You knew every... Eight years old and I came over. Yeah. So the Swedish hung right in there. Well, yeah. Oh, sure. I think the first word I first learned in English was, I don't know. Ha, ha, ha. It was the first one. I think so. It was a good one, huh? I don't know. I don't know. Two bits. Ha, ha, ha. Oh, yeah. Well, that took you a long way. Over to the west side and back again. The what? That took you a long way around this area, though. Over 300 different bakeries and grocery stores. Oh, well, we didn't have that many bakeries. No, but I mean... Stores. About 26 bakeries. But then you had all the stores. Yeah. A lot of them. Oh, you said it. Oh, yeah. We had two or three trucks here. Could take care of it. Full steam ahead. Yeah. And on the west side, no, you didn't hear too much Swedish spoken over there. Well, no, not too much because the Swedes were on the east side. But the girls, though, they worked up in Auburn on the west side in the wealthy homes. They were on the west side. The girls? The Swedish girls. They worked in homes as maids. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. They were on the west side. Yeah, well, not all of them, but my mother even did. You know where Harlem Park is? Yes. She'd have to take the streetcar and she went over there to, I forget, some big shot, clean house for them once a week or every other week. So there was a nice section up there. Oh, sure. Harlem Boulevard and all that. So if you got money, you moved up there. Oh, sure. Yeah, that was the part of the town that was, and Highland was good, too. There were different sections. Yeah, you might say that. Associated with the class and money and... Italians and Lugans on the west side and Swedes on the east side. Lugans? Yeah, Lithuanians. Oh, Lugans. Sure. They got the club down there, Lugan Club, they call it, on Indiana Avenue in south Rockford. And they're still going pretty good? Oh, yeah, they have wonderful dinners on Friday nights. Anybody can go down there, you know. You can get fish, chicken, or whatever you want. All home-cooked. It's damn good. Yeah.