 We have today the 15th of December 1986. I'm sitting here with Rudolf Benander in Wacken, Illinois. He was born in 1910, on the 18th of April, in Jamestown, New York. Tell us a little bit about your parents. Your mother was Mathilda... Mathilda Carlsen, that was her name. Her name was... Carl Johansen was the name in the memory. But they took the name Carlsen... I mean... no... Andersen, I should say. Here you hang it at the same place now. Was it Andreas Johansen? Yeah. Yeah, so they took the name Andersen. And when did you come here? I don't remember the word. Well, it had to be around... When Magnus came... Yeah, but the mother name when they came from Sweden, about 1908 or something like that? 1908. See, Clarence was born... Clarence was born, isn't it? Oh, yeah, Clarence. So I had a baby before that. Yeah. In the early 1900s, so, see... Did she come alone or did she come with her parents? No, my mother came with her husband. Yeah, my father. So they came together, so they were married? Yeah, they were married and they had five children who were born in Sweden. And you were the only one who was... Yeah, there was one who was born in Jamestown. Yeah, Clarence. But, as I said before, he was adopted in Sweden. So he was almost born in Sweden. And they came to Jamestown, New York? Yeah, for her brother. They took the name Benander. It was Andersen. Yeah, I think that's why they went to Jamestown. Because her brother lived in Jamestown at that time. What was his name? Magnus Benander. Magnus Benander. And these people were from... Yeah, they were all from the high cities. So they came here and all of them were Swedes... were pastors. What was the reason that these three brothers, Benander, emigrated? Was it that they couldn't get any work in... It could be that way, but they went to school in Rock Island. I mean, in Sweden. In Sweden, yeah, I don't know what they did there. They worked in a farm. Yeah, that could be. But I know that their father, he dug a turf. And he worked in Norway, in Kristiania at that time. At a place where they built railroads. What should I say? They were on the railroad. They built the tracks, the cars. Really? Well, I mean, you know, the trains that you ride on. The tracks? No, no, I said the cars. The railroad cars? Yeah, the cars, yeah. I think he was a smith. So he was temporarily in Norway? Yes. And his son, Carl, the youngest, he was there sometimes. But it was very difficult for them, abroad. It wasn't much. You must have died though quite young, Rudy, because of the letters you got from the grandmother in 19... Yeah. See, I have letters from my grandmother. They were from 1893 to 1910. I have them here at home. So Magnus, he was the first to go? He was the first. And then Johan, the younger brother. Yeah, Johan, the younger brother, and then Carl, who came here. So the first one, Magnus, what did he get for working? He worked around Kerrard and... It could be that when he came here to make money, he went to school. Yes. Yes. So they all came together to Rakaiba, in the end? Yes, in the end. The sister too? No, I don't think so. They lived in Jamestown all the time. I'm not sure. So they came to Jamestown first? I think my mother came there because Magnus was there. He was a priest in Jamestown. In that way, yes. So he had... But they came in 1892, Johan and Mathilda. Yes, they all went to the Aristotelian Academy for studies. Yes, and then the college, and then the seminary. They all became pastors. All three. And... The other brother stayed in Sweden? Yes, they stayed in Denmark. That was only one other brother. He stayed in Sweden. That stayed, yes. And when we knew him, then he lived in Mellendal. Yes, he stayed in Gothenburg. So, and the first... Johan Alfred Vennander, his first church... What was that, his first church? Was it Aurora? Aurora? Was it Aurora? Or was it Kiron? I think it says Paxton. Kiron? He was in Kiron. That's the given obituary for... He came to Rockford. But Kiron Odebohm was the first... Yes, Kiron Odebohm. And then he was called to Rockford, and he was in Rockford for 38 years. 38 years? Yes, a little over. Zion Church? No, Salem. Oh, Salem. So he stayed there 38 years. Yes, but they did years ago, the pastor. Like Pastor Lurhin, he stayed for 42 years. Yes, a long time. Pastor Lurhin. He stayed quite a while here too at our church. He's still living. He was born, he lived in Chicago. So you were growing up here in Jamestown then? Well, no, we grew up here because Mother died when I was six months old. When my sister and I were six months. And Dad Vennander, I always call him Father, he was there to the funeral. His wife stayed here, but he went to the funeral, and Uncle Carl was there too. And I guess he had written to Jamestown, you know, what are we going to do about the twins, because there were eight children, and Ruth and I were the youngest. And she, I think I have the letter too, she said to bring the twins here to Rockford, because they didn't have any children of their own. So it's the only family that I know of and my sister, because we were just six months when we were separated from the others. So the others, they were... Yeah, they were in Jamestown, and they're all gone now. They've been gone now, the last one died about nine years ago. So you were the last one then of the... Yeah. But you know, none of the other brothers ever went back to Sweden, and really didn't keep up the language either. For some reason or other, I love the Swedish. So when you grew up, there was Swedish spoken in the home all the time? Swedish was spoken in the home, and that's the only thing. In Sunday school, until I was 14, I mean, until I was confirmed, and then we went the second year, because Dad, Benander, wanted us to learn it in English. And I thought that was the hardest thing ever, to learn the catechism. You had to learn the catechism in both Swedish and English? Well, that's all I had was Swedish, until Dad decided he wanted us to be confirmed in English. So then I had to switch over and learn in English, and I thought that was so hard. He had difficulties now with two languages, because he had to preach in both Swedish and English. Yeah, but he was very good in English. So they had no trouble? No, no trouble. And then his wife, she was born in this country, but of course she knows Swedish from her home too, because at that time the children, well, the churches all had Swedish, so we all knew the language. But it was double duty though for the pastor, if it was like the Swedish, the English. Yes. But... Well, English, in those days, they just had about once a month. English was only preached about once a month. Well, to start with, I don't know if it was preached in English at all, to start with. Because the sign on the church, I mean, the Swedish Evangelical Lutheran Church. So you were confirmed in English? Yes. At the Salem Church? Yeah, because I had to switch to that. But they were still preaching in Swedish though? Oh yeah. Every Sunday? Let's see, when did they change? It maybe changed more or less during World War I. In the early 20s. Yeah. It was during the war then. Yeah, I think so. Because they didn't want to talk any foreign language. Yeah, you know, at that time, foreign language maybe was kind of looked down upon. Yeah, they decided that if we're going to be in America, we better speak the American language. Yeah, but this is, I think it's really nice in a way. I mean, we have our Swedish Lutheran Church, like the Augustana Center, and you got the Norwegian Lutheran Church, and you have the Danish, you know, and they had their churches, and the Finnish and so forth. So many of them, they kept the language of their homeland until later years. And now you don't hear the Swedish very much. The Salvation Army maybe, Franslingsarmen, they hold up all the Swedish. So they're going to die out in a few years. The whole time. But I'm so thankful that I know Swedish, because when we've been over there, that I can converse with them, and then they'll even ask me, where in Sweden are you born? You know, so they all understand, and even those who know English will not converse with me in English, because I speak the Swedish, so they won't do it. So you talk quite a bit of Swedish in your home. Oh, yes, I mean, and then now I go to the bakery, Kalsvik, and when we're together, then for the most part, about 90% of the time, then we speak Swedish between us. So that's how I keep it up. So you refresh yourself. Yeah, I don't want to forget it. And then you talk to your wife, and she has no quarrel about it. No, no. But like I say, I use it when I have the opportunity, because I want to keep it up. As long as people understand me, I mean, you seem to understand my Swedish. Oh, yes. So there were no problems, then, to understand what the priest said in the sermon? No. But there were many of the young people who didn't understand the sermon text. Yes, that's right. When we were in Sweden at one time, then we went to a confirmation, and, well, we also attended the church in Gothenburg. It was so easy to follow, because it was all the Swedish Psalms that we knew, and all the liturgy. So I knew everything that was going on. There was no problem. I felt so at home. When you meet people now, is it as easy to follow what they say? In Sweden? Yes. Yes, it wasn't difficult. I can keep the conversation going. But sometimes it's a little difficult to get the right word. So you visited Berby and Högsved? Yes. And you saw? We saw where my grandfather and grandmother were buried. What did they tell you? Your mother died when you were young. So you didn't grow up with your mother? No, not my real mother, no. A beautiful church, so beautiful. So your parents' home was taxed to the English? Yes. So the brother who was left, he moved from Högsved to... To Gothenburg, or to Mölndal, I would say. But he had a cousin who lived in Mölndal, but they were close to each other. I see. Which year did you go home to Sweden? When we left Sweden? Yes. 1971, then 1976, and 1980. Did you have any contact with your relatives? No. Did you write letters? No, not much. And now there's no one left. Except for my cousins, I think that's all. But in reality, there were people in your life? Yes, we visited them. Who told you what happened? Yes. And then I got, I'll show you when you come with me, the home that my father and mother and brother were worried about in Sweden. I had heard about the inflection here. It was like it was. There was no inflection for me. But, I say, how was it? This man was no relation to me, but his father-in-law knew my parents in Sweden. So then I wrote to him and said, we're going to be in Sweden. Would you be kind enough to show us the farm where my parents and brothers live? Then I wrote in Swedish. And this is kind of funny too. I got a letter back in English. It says, unfortunately, we'll not be in Sweden at that time. We're going to Switzerland where our daughter works. And then we're going to Italy, post-semester. But he says, I'm leaving the key with a neighbor, so make yourself at home. Now, he didn't know me from Adam, but he says, you're welcome, so make yourself at home. But we changed our itinerary because my daughter and son-in-law were living in England at the time. And then they met us, so we went to England. And then came later when these people were home. Then I found out that he had had a schoolteacher write the letter so that we would be sure to know that we are welcome to come. And where did they live? They lived in Holmstad. Oh, Holmstad. Yeah, in Holmstad also. And then... So after you've gotten the records now from your side, then you went on to your mother's. Yeah, and she has cousins still living. She is related to Lasse Gatan, Lars Gaten, yeah? Yeah, that's Ruth. Tell me a little bit about that now. Well, we don't know too much, but the graves are in the crypt in the... Unnsala. Unnsala kyrkan. So did you know all about that before you came over there? Oh, yeah. Here's what my mother had told me here. Read it then. Well, it's right here. It goes back to the 6th generation, evidently. This is... So what did she say? My mother's name here. My grandmother was Benedina Amalia Röse. Now, she was the daughter of Anna Maria Jedde Röse. And she was the daughter of Anders Jedde. Now, he was the son of Eva Katharine Hammer Jedde. She was one of eight daughters. Yeah, but Hammer, was this named Nelson? So then she was the daughter of Hammer, who was born in 1633 on January 3rd. See, on his grave, they got a picture of the... And he... Let's see, what is the name of that ship again? The Kalmar Lykke. The Kalmar Lykke. He was the captain of the Kalmar Lykke. And my mother told me way back in the 30s that the model of his gravestone, this was used as a copy for the monument that was erected in Wilmington, Delaware in 1939, commemorating the Swedish tricentenary. So your mother told you this? Yeah. That was Hammer's widow. Yeah, she used to tell a lot of stories. I wish I had written it down more. Her father was a sailor's name. How were you related to this large garten, Jelm? It's on your mother's... It's on my mother's. On your mother's side. I do. Yeah. So that's how it is. And he was operating, does it say anything, when he was in his prime? Well, I don't know. All she said is that she stole the coffins. I don't know if it's the coffin or the exterior, you know what I mean there. And then he says, if you give them back to me, I'll give you replicas. So these are in the church in Unsala. Yeah, in the crypt. In the crypt down there. We went down and looked down. So he is buried in the... Yes. Yeah. In Unsala. Yeah, in Unsala, Tykkel. For Olof Nelson Hammer. Yeah, but the other, Gottmjøl. Yeah, he's in the crypt. Yeah. He's there too. Mm-hmm. It says here, coffins of Lars and Ingela Gottmjøl. Oh, there's a lot. Yeah, so I said, we got some skeletons in our closets. Well, they are very famous skeletons, don't they? Yeah. So you better prepare not to go to the Wilmington in 1988. What's that going to be, Jimmy? The 350th anniversary. Kalmanikker. Uh-huh. Yeah. You can relate to the Kalmanikker. Yeah, but you know... No, it's history. Yeah, you know, and I wonder... He was a pirate, but I wonder if he didn't steal for the king. Yes, I think he was appointed... Yeah, I really think he was. He was a pirate to steal for the king. It was an early custom. Yeah. Mm-hmm. This is the graveyard of my grandfather and their family. He's got the family grave. He's got a huge separate one, because my mother had a sister and brother that never married, so... But Styrman Anders Mangelsson, he buried him. That was your... Grandfather, my mother's... Morfar. And he stayed in Sweden. Oh, after he... He had come to America when he gave up sailing. He'd be gone seven years at a time. So he gave that up and came to America, and his son had a restaurant in Brooklyn. Mm-hmm. Then he sent a ticket to my mother to come, and she was only 15 years old, so she came to America by herself. And she worked for the rich there. And then a few years later, I don't know how many it could have been. Must have been pretty soon, because her sister is seven years younger than she, so that would make her eight, when my mother came to America, and she came with her mother and was confirmed in America. So it had to be within the next three years that they came. So your grandmother came with the... Yeah, and she lived in Brooklyn, and in fact, in 36, I'm from a family of seven kids, we took a trip out to Brooklyn, which my mother and dad were with, and we visited some of the friends in Brooklyn even at that time that she... So when did they go back to Sweden then, your grandparents? Well... They sold the restaurant in Brooklyn? Yeah, whether he owned the restaurant. Yeah, they went back quite soon. They probably weren't here more, maybe. But see, Louise lived at Unsa, I mean, close to Unsa. She had a home, and then she used to rent out... Well, they went back to where they lived. No, I know. Albert went back first, and he bought a farm. He bought a farm, yeah. In the same place where they had lived as children. Yeah. And so... But Auntie Louise... And they came after that. Yeah. And this is the beach. Were you interested in the background of your parents when they came from Sweden? Well, I never heard much about it to speak of. They didn't talk much about it? No, for some reason. And it was not until really that we went to Sweden. Well, one thing Ruthie said that dad said, that they were so poor up there in Dalsund that the mother even took bark off the tree to... Yeah. But he never talked much about his home life before he came. Yeah, how poor they were. So I never found out really anything about them until we went to Sweden. And then there was, well, the lady, Hilda Westin. She was from the Högstadter church, and her father, or grandfather, he made the wrought iron fence and gate to the Högstadter church. And then she tells about that when they were digging that peat in the ground there, that she fell into it and my grandfather saved her. On the peat moss. Yeah, it was down there. They had to dig it out of the ground, you know, and dry it. And she fell into that, and he more or less saved her life. So those gates, are they still there at the church then? Yes, the wrought iron, they're still there. So did they tell you anything about the church and what it looked like before you came to Sweden, or did you have some idea? No, I didn't really have... Did you have any correspondence with their relations in Sweden? No, we didn't really correspond, except with the cousins. I mean, your parents are not back and forth to remember all that. No, uh-uh. The only letters I have that my mother's parents, but she wrote them because she died in 1910. But the letters that she wrote, well, they date from back from 1893 to 1910. Are they, Ruth, are they down here, those letters? All those letters? I don't think so, Rudy. They're in the envelope, you know, that brown envelope. I think we put it in the attic. I was trying to look to see where... But I've got those letters from 1893 to 1910. And they was from whom in Sweden? They was from Berby. Berby, from Berby. Yeah, uh-huh. That was when she was still living. Of course, I also get letters. When she died. Well, I don't know. She must have died. And they were sent to... To Rockford, uh-huh. So, and I really enjoy reading those. And Uncle Carl used to write. He was the youngest. He felt so badly. He wanted to be here with his brothers. I know you talk Swedish, but I mean, how are you able to read it now? Oh, well, fairly... Well, I had it at school. At Augustana? Yeah, but the funny part... We had it at Sunday school. At Sunday school. We had it at Sunday school every Sunday for six weeks. Yeah, but handwriting is very hard to read, though. Well, the old script, maybe. Yeah, the old script. Like in the books, the German script, no. Of course, I took German, too. But like at Augustana, this is kind of funny. Andreen, Gustav Andreen, of course you know. The old president. And he was president. And, uh, Morgensen was the dean. And when we made out our courses, he had to approve of them. So then when I went down there, he knew the family anyway, as far as that goes. He said to me, this is kind of funny, because he says, now, of course, you're, I'm not scolding, because you're going to take Swedish from me. And I said, well, sure, I've got to have Swedish from you. He says, well, first year Swedish, you cannot get into that course this year, because you've got another course the same time, same day, so we can't take first year. And then he says, well, second year won't fit in either, because you've got another course. He said, we'll start you off in Swedish. And that was all Swedish history written in Swedish. And there's five volumes. I still have them. I may be missing one. Let's see. Who was it that wrote that? Grimbergs fransk historia. Carl Grimberg. Yeah. And I really loved that. That was all in Swedish, so I mean, I had to read Swedish. So you had to read or study Swedish history. Yeah. So I had to learn it in Swedish, because that was part of the course. And I enjoyed that, because, I mean, it was no problem to read it. So that was interesting. Some of the dates I still kind of remember. 830 is when Ansgar, Ludens apostle, when he came first to Sweden, and then at 1512, that's Stockholm's Bloodbond. Yeah, some of them. And Gustav Vasa, he's the one that freed the Swedes from the Danes. So that's interesting history, too. Like the time he was in that haystack, and they stuck their spears in there to see if they could, and then he was bleeding, but the farmer stopped and cut the horse's leg or something to say the blood came from that. So this stuff, which you're in your... It sticks in my mind, you know. But that's, see, that was, I was first down there in 1928, so that's a long time ago. So Gustav Andrén, he was a little bit on the old side, and he was retiring in 34. Yeah. But he was there when I was there. And then one time, this is kind of funny, too, he stayed in our home when the family lived down, well, it was called 14th Avenue then. It was right close to where the bakery is. Oh, on Broadway. Yeah, on the third floor. And Gustav Andrén stayed in our home. And I guess my parents gave up their bedroom. During the night, I got up and I went in there, and he told me, well, I mean, your parents aren't here, but you can get in bed with me. I was just, oh, about three years old, you know. So I kid him about it. When I was down at school, I told Andrén, I said, I know you don't remember it, but I slept with you when you were in Roford. And he said, ah, but we're too old for that now. The only relation we really have much to do with is on my father's side, because we visited them in Småland. Well, your father come from Småland? Oh, yeah. Yeah, Fagerhult. And we take the train, we go get off at Kalmar, and they live in Mönsterås. So after high school here in Roford, then you were off to college? Yeah. But then... How many children were you? I have four daughters. Yeah, but I mean, in your family, you were... Well, we were eight all together. But we were separated. The rest of the family stayed in Jamestown, I think, for the most part. It's only my twin sister and myself, because we were only six months, yeah. But André took us. Did she go to Arvidsdalen too, your sister? No, no, she didn't. She stayed at home. She died during the war, in Minnie, 1918. Oh, the Spanish too? Yeah, yeah. There's a camp grant out here. Did you go to Arvidsdalen, and did your father want you to be a minister? Well, I think he maybe would have liked it, but I never felt called to it. So I worked in the factory here for the most part after school. It was during the Depression years, and it was just impossible. Did you go through four years in Arvidsdalen? Yeah, but it was during the Depression years, and it was just too hard to find anything. So I worked for years. Then I was in the service for several years too. I had two children when I went in World War II, and I had three when I went in the Korean. Oh, I see. I served in the military. I was in the Navy, and then later I was attached to the Marines, because I was a corpsman, a medic. Oh, I see. Do you find those of the... So what did you work at the factory? Well, it was mostly screws and special fasteners, and it was funded by Swedes. LK, what was the standard for the founders? I really don't know, to be truthful, but it was a tool factory to start with, and then they manufactured screws. I think the Svensson brothers were a couple of the founders of it. There was a lot of Swedes manufacturing P.A. Peterson, and Furniture, and Faust, National Lock Company, and the Faust Hotel, and Greenlees, and Sunspan. He was a Swede. They started making adding machines, but now they're so diversified. But during the Depression, you had a rough time to... It was hard, yeah. It was difficult. I worked in a furniture factory part of the time, but very, of course, very low pay. But I think it was different then than what it is now. So many of the young, they want to make good money right away. And at that time, while I worked for 20 cents an hour and 10 hours a week, so I made $10 a week. But I was thankful for that. Their era didn't complain as much as they do today. No, I mean, if you didn't do your job, you were back out on the street. Because there was plenty of them. Yeah, because so many were looking for work. So how about, did you participate then with the Swedish organizations? Well, I haven't done that so much, no. I'm really not much of a joiner, but not like Pastor Moline. I don't know if you've talked to him lately. No, but I know him. Yeah, Ragnar, yeah. He has been president or head for many years, too, or has so much to do with the Swedish Historical Society and with the Erlanger Homes and so forth, yeah. How about Pastor Van Enden, was he interested in joining? Well, he was not one to join anything either. So how about in his church, he was president of the Board of Charities, the Foreign Missions. He was president, yeah. He was president for 38 years, I think, of the Board of Charities, and then I don't know how many years of the Board of Foreign Missions. So he was occupied by that kind of work. Uh-huh. And then you married when? Miss Nelson. Yeah, 1939. June 8th. June 8th, 1939. So that was after the Depression then. Mm-hmm. The authorities up. Yeah. But I feel so fortunate. I mean, I'm proud of my Swedish background, and like I've said before, I don't want to lose the ability to at least converse in Swedish. How about your daughters now? Well, Carol is the oldest, and she went to Augustana and graduated, and she was a very good student. And her husband is a pastor, and he teaches at the seminaries in St. Paul, the northwestern and the east. Is he all Danish or Norwegian background then? Well, Swedish, yeah. He's Norwegian. He's a little Norwegian. Yes, I'm Norwegian in them. And Anna Marie is our second daughter, and her husband is a teacher at Beloit College, and she graduated from Augustana. And she teaches in the schools in the Beloit system. They have one daughter, Rachel. And then we have a third daughter, Joan. She's married to a pastor, and he's in Grand Rapids. He graduated from the Southern Seminary down in Carolina. And then Joyce is married to Kallsvik, and he's a pilot for Sunstrance. She is 33 years of age. How about traditions now in your family? Were they strong on customs and traditions? Well, in as much, I mean, especially at Christmas time, I mean, you know, you have all the Swedish food. He's still good. Yeah, it's just like our men's brotherhood. A week ago, we had a Christmas dinner. So we had lydfisk, meatballs, ham, brown beans, carbs, and we make this all ourselves, and the men make it all. At the church? Yeah, and we really, it's a lot of fun to do that. Yeah. And Ruth's parents, you had dødbærgryta, didn't you? Well, my father did it the rest of us. So the children didn't take custom off as much down in the... Oh, yeah, we had, it's just the dødbærgryta, and we didn't care for that. But, no, yeah. My mother was very... But you don't have it, though, Mrs. Joyce? When we were young, yeah, but when we were young, I think we had dødbærgryta, as I recall. And then, you know, Kallsvik makes krabkåker. But he has the raw potatoes, and he has the potato spout. So did you have krabkåker before you knew... Oh, sure. My mother made them all the time. Squeezing out the water from the potatoes and... I like to make them with cooked potatoes. Oh, I see. Actually, I like those better, because you're brought up with it. They are easy to digest, perhaps. Yeah, but otherwise, they say, I mean, krabkåker, the grey ones, from the raw potatoes, come from Øland. Well, I think, you know, Terry Blix, his relatives are from Øland, as I recall. And then, I don't know, Ivar Dahlgren, you haven't met him, have you? Ivar Dahlgren? Yeah. His family, on his mother's or father's side, they are the, what do you call it, was it the Uggla family? Uggla, yes. Yeah. They're there. Well, it's, yeah, right. Well, there was no building, I think my mother signed the family, too. She said that once. I don't know who, what. Somebody worked for the family. That was the pirate. No one else in Rackford is related to Lassie Gatan, though. No, I don't think so. How about your children, now, your daughters, how does the customs revolve around them? Well, they like the Swedish food, but as far as... Are they able to prepare it, though, or interested to? Oh, I think some of it they've learned at home here. I think it's better if Carol does, but I don't think Joan does. No, not Joan. But now, Joyce would, because of Greg. She's the oldest. Joyce is the youngest. Well, she is the one that's married to the Swede, you know. And Carol, the oldest, her husband, he still loves it, damn, because he had that from home, too. And he's a Swedish background. Oh, yeah. Yeah, and some Norwegian. But Greg is a real Swede, I mean, born in Sweden, and they have been over a couple of times. In fact, they're going to Sweden now, next April, and we're going to babysit. I think he gets more or less kind of a free trip. So you have no trouble to keep up in Swedish? No, but I can thank Leonard Kalsvik for that, because I was in there this morning, and because when we are together, then I speak maybe 90% of it is Swedish. So he corrects me and teaches me new words, and some words I forget and I have to ask him about, you know. There's a lot of odd words that you don't necessarily keep up. But, you know, I don't think there's a day goes by that I don't think in Swedish. I carry a conversation with myself. How about the old timers now? They are dropping off every year, less and less for every year. But 10, 15 years ago, then you had Swedes in every corner of the city. But, you know, some of these older ones don't particularly care to carry a conversation in Swedish. No, I'll speak to them, and then they'll answer in English, and I don't know why. So they are not used to it. Well, that could be that they don't really have much of anyone. Well, except maybe some of their wives are Swedish, and so they speak Swedish among themselves, but not a great deal. You give a little extra effort to keep them going. How about your church now, Salem? Do they have any? No, there's no Swedish. Do you have to see a program for the Swedish? Well, next year we celebrate our 80th anniversary of the church. That's on the agenda. We are going to have, and we are also going to have you look up and have somebody come and preach Swedish. But it's hard to find somebody come and preach in Swedish. Yeah. That's on the agenda. I have a second cousin in San Diego who was in Rockford, and we were talking about it. He taught Swedish. In California. I don't know what classes he had, and I said, could you preach a Swedish sermon? Because he was a pastor at one time. He said, sure. I said, I think I could. Well, Gordon Nelson, too, your cousin Gordon. He was a covenant persuasion priest, and he could teach, too. Yeah, he's good in Swedish. Very good. So there are still some that can carry on traditions. Mm-hmm. Your job now at the factory, they didn't involve any union activities because you were in the management. Well, they had a union there years ago, but it didn't work out. And they tried to keep up with the union wages, more or less. There are quite a few here now that doesn't belong to any union, and they seem to have care pretty good. Yeah, I know they do. I know they do. How did they manage to do that? Well, I don't know. I'm really surprised because we made many things for the car manufacturers. It was Elko. Yeah, and some of the other places, too. And I'm surprised that they didn't insist on it being union-made. I'm really surprised at that. You know, you think that we didn't have a union in the shop. So what we made wasn't union-made, you might say. So other professions could think about it, too. Yeah, some do that. They don't want to buy from anybody that's not union. But the big one in all unions, they're Sundsnar. Yes. They seem to set the pattern. They do, and of course they pay very good, and they have good pension. They really give good insurance and good pension. But most of their production are government-oriented. Yes, very much so. They can afford to pay high wages. Yeah. But how are the other companies now able to follow along? Well, I don't know. It must be a struggle sometimes to be competitive. That's true. But, you know, like I said, I just... I'm proud that you're Swedish. Yeah. Yeah, that's it. Yeah, it's just like... The Irish lived on the west side, and the Swedes on the east side here, and they used to play football. And the Swedes used to beat the Irish practically all the time. And then one year, the Irish hired, or whatever, the backfield from Notre Dame. And then they beat the Swedes, you know. And boy, I tell you, I was a bloodbath after that. Did you have to take a break? It was like a fight. Sure, yeah. Was it high school level then? There were men, really grown men, that were playing, yeah. And then the Italians were on the southeast end here, and we used to have a school on the corner over here. And a number of them came over, but never had any trouble with them. And no problems with school? Not that I recall. You didn't have any trouble with the language? No. But some of the greenhorns, though, they came over, they had probably some setbacks. Yeah, and we had some that came right from Sweden here and went to school. You said more 7th and 8th? Yeah, and I think I may perhaps knew more Swedish than I did English when I started school. And then, like I say, at summer school, from the church, for six weeks, and we used to meet over at the school, that was all in Swedish, the summer school, for a number of years, you know. So you had quite a schedule there, you know, all year. Yeah. But when you come home from school now, your dad, he could help you. Oh, yes. He was very good. He was an educated man, but many of the workers' families, the kids, now they come home, the parents didn't know what was going on. That's right. I'll tell you, I've got that on now. A really brilliant person. And when she came to America at the age of 15, she told herself that she was going to learn the English language, and she did in six months, because she worked for the rich and she just listened to everything. And so my mother never had that brogue, you know, at all. And she would help us with our schoolwork. She just seemed to know so much. She was so young, though. She was so young, though. She didn't go to school here after 15. I mean, she went through what she, you know. She worked for the American families. Yeah, but she got all her schooling in Sweden. But the people that came, they were between 24 or 30, and landed on 7th Avenue. 7th Street, yeah. They probably had trouble to learn, you know. Oh, sure. Because they never heard the English language spoken. But, you know, one thing that I feel is good, that the people from Sweden, they want to learn the English. It isn't like nowadays, you get the people who want to speak Spanish in the schools, and I don't think that's right. If they live in America, earn a living here, they should learn English. It's all right to teach Spanish as a second language, as from what their parents know. But not to force the schools to have their classes in Spanish, I don't believe in that. Well, do you offer Swedish in high school in Rockport? No, not at that time. Well, they said I'm here at East Ravine. Well, yeah, but then you're younger than I am. No, not me, but we had the Central High when Rockport was smaller. But then as it got bigger, we had to put other high schools in the East High. They had Swedish. That's on Charleston. Yeah. They had Swedish. Because you would think the Swedish political impact would be strong enough to tell the school board not to have Swedish in their school. Yeah, but no, they never pushed their teachers. I think the Swedes really felt that they came to America and they wanted to be good American citizens. And they just needed to learn the English language. So then the churches and the organizations that take care of the Swedish club. Yeah, that's why, I mean, like the Swedish organizations, the Vasa and the Smalllands Club and all that, you know. That's how they kept together and kept the language and the customs too, by having these Swedish clubs. There was no Dalslands club in... I don't know, there could be, but I don't think so. For the most part it was the Smallands. And Öland. And Öland, yeah. And the Västgöta Club too. Yeah, that's it. So we're talking about today, the children's club, because they're young. The children's club. I think they have it out there in Seattle too. They do. There are many Norwegians in Seattle. So it wasn't easy for the elders who came. There was no radio, there was no TV. Yeah, that's right. It was the only clubs or churches that could keep up. And when they were going to shop, there was a truck in the house and he could speak Swedish. Yeah, that's right. And he was a milkman. I see. And he drove a milkman. In a horse cart or... In a horse cart, yeah. This was, did you read this? It sounds just like my father, so I cut that out. We used to go buggy riding, because my father still had a buggy and horse. He had his own horse then. Yeah, he had his milk wagon that was driven by horses, so we'd go out on Sunday for a ride. And this was in the paper once, and it was so much like my father that my sister cut it out. In the good old days it was called. Wake up, Nelson. See, that's my father's name. The horse has stopped again in front of another customer's house. These Sunday rides are humiliating. Folks will realize it's just your delivery horse dialed up. Drive through a part of town that's not on your milk route. Have you no pride? Yeah. Well, of course, the horse, he knew exactly where to stop. Sure, that's it. So how many years did he do that? Well, I think it was in 23 when you couldn't peddle raw milk anymore. He stopped in the early 20s? He went out to the farmer and picked up his milk. In the basement we had these big tanks and ice boxes and everything, so people would come to our house and buy cream and stuff for breakfast. But otherwise he would deliver it to the houses. He'd put it in the pan and cover it up, and they'd come out and pick it off. He put it directly in the can and in a small bottle and in the sauce. And it was on the east side? Yeah. So then I think it was around 23, I can't say for sure, when they got the law that it had to be pasteurized. It was that early? I think so, yeah. And then it has to be bottled in a dairy? Yeah, and then delivered. Did he quit? Yeah, he sold his route out to South Park Dairy here, and he worked for them, but he wasn't too happy they made him do too many dirty stuff, so he quit that. Then he went and worked for my Uncle John, who was a cement placer. Cement placer. And your dad's name, that wasn't Edson, the first name? Herman. John Herman. He went by Herman. And he grew up farther up. John Herman Nelson. So they all had different vocations and worked before. It's really cute the way my mother and father met. My mother was going back to Sweden with three of her girlfriends from Brooklyn, and my father, by the same token, he had been back twice already. So he and some of his buddies were going back, and they were on the same ship. And my father, he'd tell the story, so cute, my mother was walking with two other women on deck, and she was in the middle, and Pa was in the middle of the two guys, and he says, Yuska, we taught him, Yuska taught him, and he sent him. I don't know how he did it. He met them. Yeah, he met them. So that's what he did. They grabbed each other, and they just got along while they were on the boat, and when they got back to Sweden, he went and visited her home, and she went to his. And when she came back to America, and he did, and she was still living in Brooklyn, and they were writing, and yeah, in about two years, and they came, got married here in Rockford, and he had the home already bought, and it was so cute. So that's the way it happened. Yeah. Yeah, we thought that was pretty cute. Yeah, that's a... Y'all, y'all can make up, make up. Yeah, plenty of life. Then we went into the train station. I was going to get reservation on the train, the comer, and he just had to tell everybody about that, you know. We came to supper. Oh, yeah. And I don't know, they had a year after. They just cracked up over that. But here now in Rockford on 7th Street, you were not living too far away from it, though? No, we have lived here in this area all the time. Oh, I see. This is your... Yeah, we lived on 14th Avenue, I mean, by the bakery there, only a little to the east of an apartment on the third floor, and the second apartment. Then in 1913, we moved here, and then, well, later bought this place. But I remember when we moved here. So some of the old originals, now, they were still walking the streets when you were growing up as a teenager? Oh, yeah, you heard Swedish all the time, and any store you'd go into, I mean, the clerks, they all know Swedish. So, and some of them, they had a rough time, too, to survive the Depression, I suppose. That was the hardest. Oh, yeah, many lost their homes. You don't remember, during 1970, you were only seven years old in the First World War. There was a group of Swedes that, the Socialists, a bunch were sent to Chicago to Bridewell. Oh, is that right? Sitting in prison. No, I don't remember that. You can't remember that, because you were too young. No, I don't. To do what? They refused to go into military service. So they were riled up, you know, and sent to Chicago for ten months, I believe it was. Mayor Halston was one of them, but he got out of it. Yeah, Halston. You remember Mayor Halston? Yeah, and Bloom. He was the druggist. Yeah, and his wife was a schoolteacher. Bloom's wife? Yeah. Well, I suppose my father was never asked, because at that point we had seven kids in our family. They were married in 1906, or seven, whichever. So we have... There's a Middle Church on 6th Street, Zion Church is on 6th Street, and ours is on 6th Street. They were close together. Yes. And the First Lutheran was the modern church from old. Yeah, that was the original, older church and all. And First Lutheran, they couldn't quite understand why we had to build another Lutheran church. Were they more conservative, you think, the First Lutheran church members? Well, I think they all were more or less conservative to start with, but they couldn't understand why they had to have another church that close by. And there were some that lived right next street, and they were from First Lutheran, and they would never set foot in our church. But they were that strong... They were that strongly opposed to another church being that close. They stayed with them all life, I suppose, all their lives. But we had some wonderful pastors, Seedorf was a wonderful person, and Solnitz, and... Yeah. They were great. And of course, the pastors themselves had a wonderful relationship among themselves, all of them. Yeah, the Lutheran churches, but how about the Free Church now and the Baptists? They were not too... Well, not then they were, but they really have... Changed. Changed now. Yeah. Really have. Because there was a competition then between the Covenants and the Free and Baptists. Oh yeah, we had a neighbor across the street, the Free Church, and Ruthie tells this story, the only Lutheran that was going to go to heaven was Pastor Benander. She liked him, but nobody... all the others were going to go to heaven of the Lutheran. The rest of the Lutherans, they were gone now. But, you know, it's a good thing our churches, all the different ones now, are coming together, there's more fellowship, you know. But it seems to take so many years, though, isn't it strange? Yeah. It seems to take almost two generations before it melts in. The same thing is true, I mean, with the Norwegians and the Swedes, you know, it was all separate. We had the Swedish Lutheran, we had the Norwegian Lutheran, you had the Finnish Lutheran, and the Danish Lutheran, and German Lutheran. They have the same process, it's slow going. Yeah, and each one, years back, had their services in their own language, in Norwegian, in Finnish, in German, you know. But you being an old Augustaner, now graduated from Augustaner College and gone through the religious teaching of the old time, how do you find the service today now in the Lutheran Church? Has it changed too fast or too rapidly? It's changed in as much as our liturgy has changed a lot. See, I'm of the old school, I love our liturgy. And many of the people who join the Lutheran Church now don't have any Lutheran background, so they don't appreciate the liturgy like I do. I mean, I love our liturgy. See, I grew up with that. And then the old Psalms, they are taken away too? The old Psalms, yeah. And I love those, I like our old hymnal, really, almost better than the new one. Yeah. You mean the red one? That's the new one, yeah. Or the green one. We have a green one now. But the old, the black hymnal, see, they had all the old liturgy. Well, there was nothing more beautiful than to start the service, you know, hee-lee, hee-lee, hee-lee. Yeah, I love that. Why do you think they change over, so to speak, they cater more to the young people than the older ones? Yeah, I think so. Why do they do that? I don't know. For my part, of course, I mean... Because you had to learn what your parents... Yeah. But you see, now they feel they got to cater to the younger, and I would rather see them stick with the old because it's so beautiful. Yeah. Do you think it's because there's a lot of crossovers, now they say, from the Catholic Church? You know, divorces and so on. Yeah. They're coming into the Lutheran Church, is this why they cater to them to have a more... But, you know, I mean, as far as the liturgy is concerned, I mean, much that we have from the Swedish, it's from the Catholic, because Sweden was Catholic to start with. Yeah. Yeah. And who was that, Kristina, the one who broke away? Kristina, who broke away, she abdicated and went to... well, she became a Catholic. Yes. Yeah. She was a strange person. And that's when the Bernadotte line came into Sweden, wasn't it? No, she was before, though. Yeah, I know she was, but I think after her... Yeah, they came 1814. Yeah, but I mean, that's later when the Bernadotte line, the French line, came to Sweden, which we still have. They had to turn Lutheran. Yeah. Turn to Lutherans, yeah. Well, I suppose they are changes all the time, but it seems to go faster now than it did 50 years earlier. It took a longer process. Yeah. I think it's because the churches are wanting to unite more. And after all, that's Christ's admonition that they might be one as we are one, Father. That was his prayer when he was going up to heaven, and I think he was talking about us with all our denominations. I mean, we ought to be one. I mean, we worship the same Lord, and we believe that Christ is the way of salvation, and only through him can we ever inherit eternal life. And so I think people feel that we ought to be united. And in this day and age where Satan is so on the loose, we need to band together to straighten out some of these situations we have in this world today. Oh, I think it's such a mess. It's never going to become better until they know the source, and that's Christ. So your family, they were religious also? Oh, yeah. Yeah.