 That's 5th of June 1986 and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Florence Larson, Moline, Illinois. She was born 1904, 12th of February in Lansing, Iowa. If we start off now with your father, John Shoegreen. He was born 1874 in Karlskrona, Sweden. How did he come over here to the United States? I think the family came all together. We never talked, so I don't know, but I think they did. He was 7 years old. So I think the family came all together. Were there more sisters and brothers in the family? That would be his, David and Gus and Hannah. Two brothers and a sister. And what was the reason how they settled up in northeast Iowa? Well, the Swedes all came up there. You don't know if there were any relation ahead of them from Karlskrona or there around that they had told them about the possibility to settle there? You know, we just didn't talk about things. But the way Andrew and his sisters and his brother, well, Andrew, of course, he came over. Andrew and Elma, they had their brother and sister. Two other sisters had come over before them. Three sisters and one brother came over before them. And they were on the farms up there where I lived. It was my home up there. So they all became farmers then? The farmers would send for them, see? They'd send them a pair and then they paid for it by working for them up on the farm. And they had to work to pay their way. And the farmers they came to now, were they also Swedish? They were Swedish, of course. Yeah, and they knew about these that would want to come over, see? And they'd send them money for their ticket and then they'd come over and work for them. So they had to work hard? They had to work on the farm there. Do you think they were satisfied after a while when they came? I heard them say they wished they would have stayed home in Sweden. There was some hardship, so. But I think later years I believe they thought it was better here, you know? More content with the situation. But like with Andrew, he was only 14, you know? And his sister was 17. And there was a husband of them. I'll come again to that one. But your father, now, when he got old enough, he went to school then in the Swedbaden, or what was called Center City, or Center Valley. Yeah, they went a little bit to try to learn the English language, you know? Did they all talk Swedish around there, you think, when your parents came? Yeah, they talked Swedish. How many of your fathers did Swedish? Swedish sermons and Swedish songs, and everything was Swedish except Sunday school. The people that came, how many were they, you think, in the... The first ones that came? Yes. There was just a small little group, a handful of people. I guess so, because the church, you know, it was just real small. You probably want some more coffee? No. No? So if we start with the church, that was organized in 1853. And it was on Erik Sandman's homestead. And you don't remember him, he was dead before you were born. I just remember that old stone house, you know, and it just gradually deteriorated. People used to live in it. And there where the Baptist church was organized? Yeah, the Swedish Baptist church. The Swedes, now, they came and settled there. What name did they use on the community? Was it called Center Valley or Sweet Bottom? All I remember is Sweet Bottom. Sweet Bottom? Yeah. And what were they used by all the people around there in Valkaun and Lansing and... Well, that's the only Swedish church I think that I know. The Baptist church? That was down there. So the people that came then, they were Baptists? In other words, they took the church? Yeah, they were Swedish Baptists. They settled there. Just like with Bishop Hill, you know, they settled like that. And there they stayed, and they worked on farms and to start with, they offered tickets. Yeah, the people that were single. And when your father, now, was old enough, he was seven when he came, so he had to go to school. And what kind of work did he start with when he was old enough to have a father? You know, I wish that we would have talked. We never did. Never talked to him about anything. He never said anything about that? Uh-uh. I wish we had. So, like his parents... They talked Swedish, you know, to each other. But then they used this American language mostly. Do you remember your grandparents on your father's side? The only grandparent I remember is my mother's dad. That's the only one I saw. He was sick, and he didn't last long after that. Did he talk English at that time when you saw him? Or was he using Swedish? I was so little, I don't know. You can't remember? Uh-uh. I just remember I saw him. We were up to see him. He was sick. He was in bed. And I didn't see any of the other grandparents. And they lived in the center township also, in... Yeah....Ellamäki County. Yeah. Your grandparents, now, your father's father, he worked on the farmstead to pay off the tickets for him and his family. I don't know about him. He was a minister, you know. He was the minister. From Sweden? My dad's. Yeah? Probably. I don't know. So he didn't have to work off... I don't think he worked on the farm. I don't know for sure. Was he a Baptist minister from Sweden, you think? Could have been, because I just don't know. I wish we'd have talked things over. So he served in the congregation up there in the... Yeah. He was minister there. And then, I don't remember why, or if he was... I think he went to the Adventist church after he was at our Swedish Baptist, I think. I don't know for sure. Well, he served there, one, two? Yeah, he served at the... Adventist church. Adventist, uh-huh. Was this the seventh Adventist or... Yeah. Mm-hmm. Seventh? Seventh-day Adventist. Not the second Adventist, or the seventh? No, it was seventh-day. Was there also Swedish? Oh, I don't know. But you don't remember him at all? No, the grandparent? Yeah. No, uh-uh. No, he was gone. And the grandmother, too. The other grandmother, I never saw her either. So then your father, he married Mary Sofroni Ahlstrom. So they were probably schoolmates in the school, and they met that way, or in the church? Well, they both went to church there. Same church. Uh-huh. Dad played the guitar, and Uncle David played the banjo. Yeah, they had a lot of good... They had a real good quartet there. That was mother's two brothers, and cousin, and then another man. There was four of them. That was a good quartet. And they had a band, too. It seems to me that they were very musical at the time, years ago. Everybody took part of it. They did things together, you know, and things like that. They didn't do like they do now, scatter all over and run around, you know. They had no place to go. They didn't have any way to drive around. I never had a ride. I had to walk everywhere. It was two, two and a half miles for me to walk to Sunday school. To church? Yeah. Summer and winter alike. Yeah. But I never had a ride to school, either. I froze my feet. I had open sores, even. Yeah. It's cold. Oh, it was different. Now they can't ride, even if it's only about four blocks, they take them to school. And when I see this picture of the church in the wintertime, the creek that is open in the snow, and there was flooding, I suppose, in the spring and the fall. Yeah, it flooded a lot. How did you get to church then? Did you have to go all the way around? It washed the bridge out. I'll never forget one time they were fixing the bridge and we had to walk on a plank like that, you know. I was so scared I was going to fall in. It's funny I didn't fall in. So, yeah, we had to walk. Did you walk alone to Sunday school or did you have somebody to walk with? Well, my brother probably, but I walked alone a lot. Then we'd go home and eat our dinner and in the afternoon we'd play horseshoe or something like that, you know. And then do our chores and then we'd walk again in the evening. So you could do some playing on Sunday? We could do what? Do some playing like pitching horses. Oh, yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So, like your parents, were they strict religious Baptists or were they more on the lean side? No, they were not too strict. No, my dad didn't go, you know. No, we weren't. We weren't strict. No? Uh-uh. But they went to church anyway. Yeah. Uh-huh. But it was different than it is now. It was more, more religion to it than it is now. To me, I think it's more social. They have so many potlucks now, you know. I get so tired of it. And it don't seem to have feeling like it used to. So the old tradition is gone. Yeah, it seems like it. Well, the Swedish, they were strict. We had one down here when it was the time we got married in 1928. His name was Ericsson, I believe. Yeah, Bennett Ericsson. He was really strict, you know. Well, was it good, you think, if the Baptists were strict? Don't you think they scared away people or...? Well, they couldn't do it now. They couldn't do it now? There wouldn't be anybody coming if they were strict like that. No. No, they do things with the young people now, you know, so that they'll have something to do and not get in with all the rough crowd, which they have to do, I think. So they pleased their members more today than they did years ago? Oh, yes. They told you the truth if something was wrong years ago. You believed it, then. Yeah. You had to do it that way. Yeah, that's right. Did you participate in playing an instrument or singing in the choir? No, I didn't. I wanted to play Dad's guitar, but he didn't help me, but I would have liked to play the guitar. So you never learned to play the guitar? No, I never did. And then I didn't get it either when they passed away. I wanted that. My daughter played the guitar. She had an electric guitar. And I just loved guitar music. But you never got a chance to? No, I never... Practice? I didn't get a chance for anything, you know. No money. No? And just work, do chores, and work in the field. I worked in the field. So your dad, he had a farmer? A small farm, yeah. A small farm. And that was his living? Yeah. And your mother-in-law, her name was Mary Sofroni. That's a strange name, Sofroni. Yeah, it sure is. Where does that come from? I don't know where that came from. Her sister was Edelia. That's different too. Okay. But they were both Swedish friends? There was Frank and August, and Robert and Owen, Victor. Five brothers. And she was born on the farm? Yeah, she was born up there. So... And her dad's name, I guess, was Peter Armstrong. I can't remember. They had relatives in Minneapolis, and Mary out of Minnesota, two of her brothers lived there. August, I never saw him. He never came up there. And Frank, I think I saw him probably once or so. But Victor and Owen and Robert and Edelia, and mother, they were up there. Do you know what area they came from in Sweden, the Armstrongs? No, I guess I don't. So your mother's parents didn't have any contact with Sweden then, as you know of? I guess... Oh, I don't know. I think... She was one of the older ones, so I think maybe her parents must have come, you know. Whether they were married when they came or not, I don't know. They got married over here, I don't know. They were some of the early settlers then in the... Yeah, they would be some of the older ones. My sister up there, she knew quite a bit about them. I had a letter here. I wish I knew where I have that. She wrote quite a bit about these Armstrongs up in Minneapolis. They used to come visiting up there quite often. My mother called them Moor, Moor, and Far, Far, I think. Moor, Moor, and Far, Far. Something like that. Oh, you remember that. Yeah, yeah, I remember that. So when they talked Swedish to you, you didn't answer back in Swedish then? No, I wouldn't do good now at all. Oh, but at that time, do you remember if you talked... Oh, when I was a kid, I couldn't either. But it was after I came down here, Andra's family talked Swedish quite a lot. Well, that's how you picked it up. And then the first year when we were married, the lady was claimed she couldn't understand, you know, so I talked Swedish to her. So I got along all right. She got letters from her daughter that were written in English, and I tried to translate them. I did it good enough so she understood. So my brother-in-law, he said he'd like to herd me. So the farm your dad had, how big your farm was? Oh, that was just a small farm. It was all hills. I'm going to get a picture after I get this off. He could make a living on it then? Yeah, we made an awful poor living. Yeah. And you were two boys and two girls. Two boys and two girls. And you had to help out quite early then. What? You had to help out quite early. Oh, yes. Yeah, that's all we did, you know. We didn't have anywhere to go and have fun. We just had to work around the farm and chores, you know, and haying. We did everything by hand, see. Because it was too hilly. Yeah. And you didn't have any machinery. We didn't have any machinery like now, you know. We cut corn by hand. We hayed by hand. Pitched it in shocks first, and then we'd pitch it in the hay load, and I'd be in the hay load. I cut corn. Then we'd husk corn after we had it sitting in the shock, you know. Try to get it husked before snow and cold. We used to be pretty cold out there sometimes. Yeah. So when you do everything by hand, you know, it keeps you busy anyhow, even if it's a small place. So it was only 18 acres that were tillable. The rest was hilly land, pasture land. We did have five acres on top of the hill, but the only one year that I remember that they planted oats on that field. Otherwise, it was used just for pasture, because it was hard to get to it up a steep hill. And your dad had a team of horses, didn't he? He could plow the field? Yeah. But he didn't like horses very well, so after I got going, I did the harnessing, and I'd get the horses, you know, and harness them. I loved the horses. Yeah, I wish I had a horse. I wish I lived out so I could have a horse. So you enjoyed that kind of work, then? Oh, yeah. Yeah, I like farm better. I like farm better than town. How about the milking of the cows now? Did you like that part, too? No, I didn't like that very good. But we didn't have many. We only had about eight, nine, so there'd be probably two each, you know. That wasn't so bad. Now they have 40 or so, you know, and have machinery. Were you selling the milk, then? Yeah, they came and took our cream. Oh, just the cream? Just the cream, yeah. So they were separating every year? Yeah, we had the separator. Every year? Uh-huh. Yeah, and I think of that now. Just think, they didn't have any way to keep it cold. And they'd come with their horses and wagon, you know, take it to the creamery. And now they got to pasteurize it and everything. And I don't know that we had any sickness from milk those days. Did they take the milk up every day? Or every other day? Cream, no. We had a water, we had a tank where we pumped our water through, you know, and we kept it in there. Oh, I don't remember. They were probably taking it up every other day, then? I think probably it was twice a week, probably. Twice a week? Uh-huh. Because there was a lot of driving there on the... Same thing with the eggs. We'd keep the eggs until we'd go to town, you know? Yeah. Go town by horses in hot summer weather and everything. And the nearest town was... The nearest was Lansing. Lansing. That's where we went, uh-huh. That was about eight miles. How big of a town was that then when you were growing up? Oh, that's just a small, that's a small town on the river there. But they had the... They had a grocery store and bank. And that, yeah. Post office. Yeah. And a little dime store and clothing store. Yeah. But there were many people there. So when you went to a really big town, which one did you visit then? I never got to a big town. Well, once in a while we'd go on an excursion up to La Crosse. That was Wisconsin. Wisconsin. Uh-huh. That was the biggest town I ever saw until I got down here. That was 1928 when I got down here. And Waukon has grown quite a lot. I don't think Lansing has grown hardly any. So, but that's where they have Mount Hosmer. You go up on top of that mountain there and you can see three states. In Lansing? Uh-huh. It's called Mount Hosmer. But the Swedish Baptist Church was down in the valley. Yeah, that's in the valley. That's why they call it the Swede Bottom. Why do you think they picked that area when they started it all there? I would say the creek. Village creek. What that must have been the... To get water, you know. Oh, I see. They had good springs there. But whether they have now, I don't know. But we had real good springs. So you had no problems with water then? No, we didn't. I would say why they settled there in that valley. Oh, and they had plenty of firewood. Oh, yeah. For heating. Yes, uh-huh. What kind of forests were growing around there? Mostly... Oak, maple, hickory nut, walnut, birch. Birch also? Oh, yeah. And then we had hazelnuts, but then the cattle would eat up the brush, so we couldn't get hazelnuts anymore. They'd eat up those little bushes, you know. They'd eat them up. So we couldn't pick hazelnuts anymore, but we had hickory nuts. Oh, we had sacks and sacks of hickory nuts. And walnuts and butternuts. And you used them then for... Oh, we ate them. We didn't have a lot of good food, you know. We'd sit there and crack nuts by the gallon during the day. Oh, I see. Yeah. So how was your regular working day now when you started up in the morning? Did mother wake up first or father? Mother was up first. She was the first one. Oh, yeah. And she made the fire in the stall. Yeah. And she'd make probably oven pancakes, you know. And she'd go out and milk. She'd call us kids for school, and we didn't get up. She'd have to come in and call us some more. It was the old routine. Oh, that poor mother of mine, what she... So she was in command then? Yeah. And she used coffee then to wake up? Oh, yeah, she had coffee. They had coffee before they went out, but we kids didn't do that. You didn't drink any coffee? No, we didn't. We waited till breakfast. But did you have coffee when you were in the gurd? Yeah, we drank coffee. So that was the custom then? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah, they were great on coffee. Yeah. And it was boiled direct in the can, or? Yeah. Oh, yeah, and they boiled it on sumpen, you know. Sumpen, yeah, they said that. And that's what my husband didn't like. Too strong? No, there was no flavor to it. And then, after mother had done the chores up in the barn, then father had to take over the separating the milk. What did he do? Yeah, he separated the milk. And when you were old enough, did you help out with them in the barn? Well, we had to wash the separator, of course, every day, you know. That was a job we didn't like. So they was always there to wash all those rings. How many were there? There were 14 different pots? Pardon? Oh, those discs? Yeah, discs. Oh, I don't know how many there were of those. But you had to wash each one separate, otherwise it would get gooey around those little things, you know. Gotta be taking the pot. Oh, yeah. And we had to carry all our water. We pulled the water out of the cistern. But we had real good cold water at our place. It was a sandy hill there. It was real good cold water. Yeah. So in the springtime, then, when you hitched up the team to go out in the field, what time did you start in the morning? The folks got up, I think, about 6 o'clock. My mother, I think, got up at 6 o'clock. But I like to sleep. So you were a slow riser. Yeah, I am. I am yet. This morning, I slept extra late. I don't sleep good at all sometimes, you know. And then when I can sleep, why, I just sleep. So you stay up more at night, then? No. Oh, then? When you were young? Oh, no. We had to go to bed. We were tired, too, you know. We'd go to bed at 9 o'clock. We didn't have any TV or any radio or anything, you know. We couldn't even talk to our friends because there were 22 on the party line, Pohn. 22? 22. So then, you know, we couldn't visit with our friends that way, either. So the kids were not allowed to use the phone, then? How's that? The kids were not allowed to use the phone? No, we weren't supposed to talk. It was only for emergency and... If we talked, we were supposed to not talk very long, you know. Sometimes I'd answer the phone, you know. And how far away... what's the nearest farm now with kids on it? I mean, for playmates and so on? Well, from my place there, there was only about half a mile. And we were over there quite a bit. But my dad, he didn't like kids around, so we didn't ever have any to our place. So he was still in there? Yeah, he didn't like commotion like that. So we were over there, and they had seven kids. And that poor mother, I said she had all those kids, and then we came over there to play. And then they were the closest. We didn't have any on the other side of us. And then from my place to church, there wasn't any. About two and a half miles that we would be with, you know. So seven kids in one family, and you were four. That's eleven. There was a big Sunday school in the Baptist church there. Well, no, it wasn't very big. I guess I haven't got any picture of ours. But it looked like a lot of kids on one picture you have. Yeah? Well, let's see. I guess I haven't got that here, have I? Here's where the old one is. It's 1913. I wonder if I can find myself. I'm way up here somewhere. Yeah. It looks like a lot of kids. My brother's down below right there. And I'm way up at the top in the back, because I was tall, you know, and I never wanted to be out in the front. So at the church, no. Then you had to be strict, I mean religious. There was no playing around in the Sunday school. We couldn't go out after Sunday school and play outdoors, you know. Outside the church. We made too much noise then. We were just a few kids. So the old people didn't like the noise? No, we couldn't be out there. They wanted to be quiet. Right up there are some of the oldest ones. There's Andersons up in here. Most all of them. And here. This is when... And your uncle now. Your mother's brother. Robert. Ahlstrom. He was the Sunday school superintendent for 55 years? 55 years. More than that. That picture was 55 years, and it was longer than that even. And you remember him? Oh yes. I used to catch a ride with him once in a while, you know. He'd come around. The road would come down, so it was about half a mile from our place. And we'd catch a ride with him sometimes, especially like for a Christmas program, you know. Making up a program. So what was his position as the Sunday school superintendent? He was in charge of the whole thing? Yeah, he took care of the whole... The pastor didn't have to worry about that? Uh-uh. Not at all. No, he took care of it all. All the Christmas programs and Easter programs. He took care of it. Nobody helped him with that. And he had like a textbook then for questions and... Oh, I guess he just did it on his own. He didn't have anything special to go by. Was he like a preacher too, your uncle Nordstrom? No, no. He didn't pitch in when the pastor was sick, for instance, or... No, he didn't take his place. No? No. But he was religious... He was superintendent. Superintendent, yeah. So he went to church every Sunday? Every Sunday. Every Sunday at four o'clock we had Sunday school. How about his family, like his mother, but not the wife? His wife? She was Lutheran. She was a Lutheran. Yeah. And she didn't go. And if she ever did go, that preacher would say something and it would hurt her feelings, you know. And I knew it, even young as I was, you know. Why would the pastor do that? I mean, didn't he respect her? They did that. They did that in those days. So they didn't keep to themselves then, the pastor? They'd pick on the Lutherans especially, because I guess it was Lutherans mostly up around there beside the Swedish Baptists, you know. Well, we did have a lot of Catholics. Where I went to school, they were mostly Catholic. And then they'd go to town to a catechism, I guess they called it. And they'd come back, you know, and finish eighth grade. What nationality were they, the Catholics? They were German. German? Mm-hmm. Yeah. But you didn't have any interference with them, I mean, telling you that you were a Swedish Baptist? No, we didn't have anything that way in the school. But isn't it strange, though? The pastor would intimidate his own members. Yeah. I just... Well, they were that way. They thought the Baptists were the only ones, you know. Mm-hmm. At one time there, that's when I was real young, that they were that way. And one minister was real bad that way, you know. So your aunt, then, or your Ostrom's wife, she didn't go to church, then? No, they didn't go. How about the children? Huh? Their children? They had two, uh-huh. They went to church? They went, yeah. And his son was such a good singer, so he's been doing that so much, you know. They were musical, those boys. Participated. This is side two, a continuation with the Florence Larson movie, you know. Side two. So this uncle now, Ostrom, he was also a farmer. Alvin Ostrom? Ostrom, yes. Yeah. The one that was superintendent for the Sunday school. Oh, yeah. He was a farmer. He was a farmer. Uh-huh. So his sideline, so to speak, or his other, what you call, way of... So church life was for him... That was his life. That was his life. Yeah. He put all his spare time into that. Oh, man. Uh-huh. But just think of a farmer, what they have to do. Do their chores. I don't know if she even helped him with the chores. Maybe she didn't. Some of the women didn't, you know. Most farm women up there would help the milking. There were some that were a little bit more reserved for farm work. Yeah. Yeah. Some of the women didn't do any chores. And I don't know whether she did or not. Did they do any milk either? I don't know for sure. Because most of them did help with the milking, you know. But I thought, here he has to do all that chores and then go by team. And it would be about, oh, four miles at least that he drove to church with the team, winter and summer. And I thought, and then he'd have to kind of think of what he's going to do, you know, and say... Plan. Uh-huh. All those years. And you know, he was pretty old by the time. He's been going there for 55 years doing that. He lived to 93, I think. 93? I think he was 93. I have it all written down, but I've got things here and there and everywhere, you know. 93. Uh-huh. And she lived, she hasn't been gone long now. She was quite a bit younger. She lived past 92. Really? And I had one lady, she was 109 up in Minnesota. 109? 109. My mother's, my mother's cousin. Yeah, my mother's cousin. What was her name? Bessie Alstrom. Bessie Alstrom. And she lived up in... In Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Minneapolis, Minnesota. Uh-huh. And I've got a whole bunch of pictures of her that I sent up to my, to Robert Alstrom because he's making that family tree. And I haven't heard from him since I sent those, but I'm sure he got them. It's remarkable, though, the family could be that old. They must have done something right. Yeah. And you would think the Lutheran wife now, she also was a high age, there was nothing wrong with the religion, I suppose. So she didn't help her husband at all then with the church work in... Not the church work, no. Not at all? No, no. Yeah, that would be a hard proposition, though, I mean, to... It would, wouldn't it?...look forward to every Sunday, you know, no? And you never saw him angry or frustrated. He was as cool as could be. Nothing seemed to bother him, you know. He was the same, nice all the time. So he shrugged off anything that anybody said then? Nothing seemed to bother him. It didn't bother him? No, he just laughed. And my mother was a real gentle, kind person, too. They were a nice family. So did you went together with the Ostrom side more often than your father's side? No, no, we were, whenever we visited, it was with my dad's side. That was my dad, that way. He didn't go for her side at all. He didn't? No, he didn't. No, he was, he was anti-social, I'd call him, because he didn't care for being with people, you know. But your mother, how could you and he, she... Well, she had a walk, too, when she went to church, you know. We didn't have any car until 1917, we got our first Ford. And after us, kids could drive, then we, my brother could drive it. But that was quite a while before he would let us have the car, you know. Did you learn to drive, too, on the farm? Not on our car, no. I learned on my husband's. When I was going with him, he taught me how to drive his Ford. It was his first car, too. So when your mother now wanted to go to her side of the family, she had to walk, then? Yeah, yeah, we had to walk. She didn't hitch up the team or... Well, we did sometimes, we'd drive with the team, you know. And then her sister would come down to our place, yeah. So when you went with your mother, you spent the afternoon, then, or the day? Well... It was no use to go for five minutes, you got to sit there and talk and coffee and... Yeah, sure. What were they talking about, then, your mother and her side of the family? Oh, I guess I didn't listen. I was outside playing with the animals. I loved animals. Chickens, I'd play with them. Oh, I see. I had a pet pig follow me all over. Yeah, and I had pet geese. My sister gave me a couple little goslings, and they gave me that little pig because it was a runt. So it would have been pushed out, you know, from all the others. So they gave me that little pig. We didn't have pigs otherwise. You didn't have that? No. Once in a while, we'd have... Oh, we didn't have a big enough farm to have too many animals. We had chickens and cows, you know. But how did they... didn't they slaughter them? We didn't have much meat. We'd have maybe one animal that we'd have for all winter, and we'd can some, you know. But no, we didn't eat much meat at my place, especially in the summertime. So we drank milk and ate eggs, and we'd have chicken once in a while, but not very often either. Not too much bacon and pork? Oh, no. Uh-uh. No. No? So... So they don't have anything on the farm, though? They usually have a couple of pigs to slaughter. Well, they do. They do. But we didn't have a big enough farm, really, to have much of anything, you know. So... So like the cows, now, they were inside the barn in the wintertime? Yeah, we had them in. But they were out during the day, unless it was the weather. In the wintertime? Yeah. Unless the weather was too bad. I see. But, no, we didn't have very... we didn't have very good for the cows either, you know. So while you were growing up on the farm, now, helping out, being 17, 18 years of age, what were your outlook, then? To marry a farmer, or try to get away to a big town, or... Well, I guess I was thinking of a farmer, yeah, because he was on the farm. So how did you meet your husband Andrew, now? He was on that next farm where I told you all those kids were, because they sold out and moved to Lansing when their kids got grown up, you know. He was two years older than you. Yeah. Not quite. So you remember when he came from Sweden, then? Oh, yeah. Yeah, they had him and my brother to try and help them to learn to talk the English language. So we were there, him and... Andrew and his sister, Ella. And he came to your home, too, then, often? No, not until we got going together like that, you know. No, Dad didn't want me to get married, I guess, and I can understand that. They needed me at home. Sometimes I think, I wish I had. My mother was so poorly. Were you the oldest in the family? No, I was the youngest. You were the youngest? Uh-huh. What happened to the rest of the... Oh, they got pushed out, just like the birds push them out of the nest, you know. And my oldest brother, he was such an active, mischievous kid. My dad couldn't take him at all, so he had to get out and work. Other farmers. Other farmers. Yeah. And my sister, she went out and did housework. Lansing and Waukon, she was working. And then they got married, I suppose. Yeah. Did they marry the farmers? Yeah, they were farmers that they married. Yeah. So Andrew now, he came from Helsingland. Do you know what place in Helsingland? Gerso. Gerso. Gerso. Uh-huh. He came in 1916. Uh-huh. And he came with... Ella. With his sister Ella. Sister Ella. She was a little bit older. She was three years older. Three years older, yeah. And did he have trouble now when he came to Ellis Island? Yeah, when they got to Ellis Island, they held him there. For two weeks? For two weeks, I think it was. He was there alone then? No, the sister was with him. Well, she had to stay with him? Yeah. Why did they leave Sweden to visit... Oh, they thought it was better here for them, you know. His mother had died, and his father told them that they should come over here so they'd have it better. They didn't want to go, he said. And I know the one sister, the one that went back with him to Sweden now just a few years ago, she was only 16, and they made her go. And she didn't want to go. She wasn't well either. She was kind of sickly when she was young. And there was another sister. She was only 16, I think, too. Just think of sending those girls alone, and they couldn't talk English at all, you know. And the boys were after them, you know. So when they came, you know, your husband's sister, and he came to Lansing, did they come to a relation then? Yeah, they came up to Iowa there, where the brother and sisters were all up there. They were all up there on the farms, working, you know. But they were on different farms? Well, Andrew's oldest brother was married then when they came, I think. Yeah, he was married. So he went to his place and worked there. Then he worked for other farmers. So he worked to school here or anything? I think he went to school a little bit just to learn the language. I know Calla did. That was the next one to Ella. I think Ella did, too, just so they'd be able to catch on to the language a little better. And it was not easy, I suppose, the first years there to remember it. Calla, she went to the same school as I did to try to learn to talk, you know. I can remember that. But yeah, this one that was, she lived to be, she would have been 90 if she'd lived just a few more months. The one that went with home to Sweden with him. She had a hip operation and she was using a cane, so it was hard for her to travel. But she went home then with Andrew. That was 1969 in June that they went over there. And they stayed only, I don't know, was it two, three weeks altogether? They were gone, you know, for the whole trip. Did they join the Baptist Church, too, your husband and his sister? Yeah, they did. So they were baptized then in the church. And you were baptized what age? Up at Lansing is where I was baptized. What age then? 19. 19? Oh no, 23. It was 19 when I was converted, not 23 when I was baptized. Why that later when you... Pardon? Why were you baptized so late when you came from a Baptist family? Well you do what you like to do. Well it's up to you then. It's up to you. Were you not sure of the Baptist faith? No, you don't do like... Well, like the Lutherans, no. And I... But you would think you would baptize yourself. You have to decide for yourself if you want to accept Christ and then join the church. So some don't even get baptized, I guess, because it's your faith that counts the most, according to the Baptist, I think. You're supposed to have the baptism, you know, to show the world what you believe. But you didn't think about it when you were 16, 17 or 18? Oh yeah, we had evangelistic services, you know. And I was always so disturbed, but I didn't know what I wanted to do. You were restless on the farm. Yeah. Yeah. You don't remember when they baptized the members in the creek below the church? No, I never saw that. That was before your time. That was before my time, yeah. Not long before, though. You would think people would... Well, it was only in the summer that you baptized them, though. Well, they said there was ice in the creek sometimes. Why did they take a risk? I don't know. I guess... Because ice cold water... They wanted to be baptized, I guess. If somebody wanted to, I guess they'd go ahead and do it. And the pastor, he apparently walked on with them in the water. Oh yeah, sure. And I don't think they had any rubber like they have now, you know, that put on. All wet and... Yes, they got wet. I think they still did it when my brother was baptized, because he had inflammatory rheumatism and he didn't want to be baptized in the cold water. So I think they still did it at that time. Your older brother? My youngest brother. Youngest brother. Uh-huh. My oldest brother, he never joined the church. I think maybe he did before... A few years before he died, I can't remember. But both my brothers had inflammatory rheumatism. They were so terribly sick. But you never heard of anybody getting sick from baptism? No. No? Because it... Well, they were so used to cold those days. They didn't have anything warm, you know. Like in our house, in my bedroom, you could see your breath. We didn't have storm windows. We didn't have any heat upstairs. Well my folks did have a stove in their bedroom, and they shut the door. But you didn't get any heat in your room? We had two bedrooms, you know. We didn't get any of that heat. But then, the later years, we got a pipeless furnace, so then we had it warm upstairs too. But that, I wouldn't have known long after we had that. We had a stove down in our living room, and we had no way to put the stovepipe to the chimney. It would go through the bedroom door upstairs, and then over. A big, long stovepipe, you know. So he tried doing it this way, putting it up and then down in the basement. And it just smoked in. It wouldn't work that way, you know. So we couldn't use that front room stove, hardly at all. Called it our front room. We were never in there. We were in the kitchen all the time, where the stove was, you know. And of course, we didn't have no bathroom. We had to walk over a ditch and over to the outbuilding, down below zero, and go out there. But sometimes you hear people say, you know, they walk up in the middle of the night because it's that cool. Oh, yeah. But you never had the trouble, though, because it was cool from the beginning. Oh, boy. I'll say. But couldn't you really sleep then? Oh, yeah. Under the blanket? We had husk mattresses. Save the husk from the corn, you know. And that would be a ditch like that that we'd lay in, and we'd have probably about four quilts on top of us. And I wore my long underwear. I didn't know what it was not to wear long underwear. And my dad had a knitting machine for stockings. He made wool stockings. But still I froze my feet, so they were all open sores. I rode skis to school, and that made it colder for your feet, you know. And I could ride, bring her all the way home because I'd have to go uphill in the morning. And at night I could come home and ride down the hill. And it was snow drift over the fence, so sometimes I could ride right over the fence. I wish I was young now, I'd sure like to be out skiing like they do now. That was my life. But in that time, a lot of youngsters didn't do any skiing. We did, but you see, nobody went together. You didn't have any people either. You just went home. You went up there by yourself, and you went home, you know. And we'd ride at school a little bit. The skis you were using, were they home-made? Yeah, my dad made them. He bought one pair first, and then one of them broke, and he made me, I still got them. Skis? They're just small, you know. They're not a big regular ski, but that's what I rode. And the winters out there in that cold, otherwise cold. They were cold. It was really bad. Oh, you bet. Colder than here. Way below zero. But didn't you catch cold or? Oh, I had terrible cold. That's the only thing that I was sick with. I had this terrible cold, sore throat. Your sinus? Yeah, and I do have that yet. So I'm one that should have had my tonsils out, I think. But later, later, no, I still got them. Later years, at one time, like when my kids were at that age, oh, it was terrible if you didn't have the tonsils taken out. And I know my son would have been better off if he hadn't had his out. He has so much sinus trouble. And my daughter, she had bad ones. When she went to sleep, they'd fall into her throat, and she'd just gasp for breath. So she had to take them? And she had a lot of bad sinus trouble. I was never to a doctor until I had my first child. They never took me to a doctor. I was plenty sick sometimes, but one time I couldn't even swallow water. It ran out through my nose. That was just my tonsils, you know, and bad cold. What kind of remedies did your mother have against that, though? We had Watkins, Watkins liniment. How about Curicor? No, we didn't have that. That was later on. But I've been thinking about that a lot. How in the world I could stand that liniment? I tried it a few years ago. And then would you take outside? Yeah, we took it. Drank it. Oh, drank it? Uh-huh. And then for your throat, you know. Oh, it was strong. And then alum water. That's what I swabbed my tonsils with. And I think that did me a lot of damage, because naturally a lot of that ran down. You know, I couldn't spit that all out. But that was the old way of doing it. Take care of yourself. You had no money for a doctor. And just think of a doctor, he'd had to come probably about five, six miles by team. And the roads were mud in the summer, and in the winter they were snow. And I think of our mailman, that route he went on, that was a long route from Lansing that he went out, passed on. Every day? Yeah. In that awful cold. He'd have something for his feet, but that wouldn't stay hot, you know. Did he walk or? Oh, no, he had to lay in the winter. Yeah, on the horse. In horses. Mud up to the horse's belly sometimes for a doctor to come and see you. You didn't call him unless you absolutely had to, you know. I suppose the doctor would refuse to make a hot cell up there. Well, those days they didn't refuse. They'd come. Yeah, I've been thinking a lot about the doctors, what they went through up there. Yes, but how about your mother now, when she had your children? The midwife came to the house then, or? My mother, she had somebody that came to the house, yeah. And stayed with her a couple of days? When she had the baby, yeah. So most of the babies out there in the sweet barn? They were born at home. My sister even did that with her children. Do you remember if there were, you said you were sick and you had to stay home and crawl into the bed and wait for a better day? Did most of the people do that then? Oh, yeah, sure. Do you remember if many died like 1970, you had the Spanish flu? They had a bad time there with diphtheria. There was a lot of them that died then. Young people or old? Oh, yeah. Young people. Oh, young, uh-huh. Yeah. No, what did I say? Yeah, diphtheria. Oh, there was the Spanish flu, they called it in 1917, 18. Oh, it was longer ago than that. Oh, before that? Before my time. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. Yeah, we had the flu real bad, and I was real sick then. But we never had any doctor. Every time we had a doctor, it was for the boys when they had their inflammatory rheumatism. My youngest brother infected his heart. How did it occur, do you think? There were 12 and they got it, both of them. Was it because of cold weather or dampness or? I think so. And I think it kind of ran in the family, maybe. I don't know. They were the only two, though, I believe, of the whole family that I know of that got it. How about your parents now? Were they healthy? Not my mother. My dad was good. Well, he wouldn't go to a doctor. He didn't go to dentistry, either. He pulled his own teeth. He did? Yeah. He didn't tell us, either. He had terrible tonsil one time, and my mother called the doctor. He didn't want the doctor, but he came and he lanced the tonsil. And my dad didn't like that at all. He said he never got good on that side where he lanced the tonsil. But no, he wouldn't call a doctor. And for my mother, we had very little doctor, but she was sick so much. She had terrible headaches and indigestion, and then she had a hernia. She finally had that operated on when she was 69 years old. No, 67. She lived to 69. So they didn't live to old age like they do now. No, but it's remarkable, though, like your uncle here. Yeah, the uncles. His wife. Yeah. Over 90. Yeah. 109. Yeah. And all their hardship. Yeah. And the food, I suppose, was the same kind of food all their lives. All their lives. They never changed the diet. Yeah. In the morning, did they eat a lot of oatmeal or bacon or potatoes? We ate cornbread and oatmeal, you know, vatling. And a big meal at noontime. I guess we had our biggest meal at noon. We really had a meal at noon and night, both, I believe. And then they had lunch, 4 o'clock in the afternoon. They always had lunch. Oh, they had lunch? 4 o'clock? Uh-huh. Coffee. And rusks or something like that, you know. And in the morning, they'd drink coffee before they went out to do chores. And we'd have breakfast. Mother made cornbread or maybe oven pancakes, you know. And if we had pork, of course, we had pork with that, you know. And at noon, we'd have – we had a good garden. That's one thing we did have. We canned garden stuff. Did you use a lot of raw vegetables like salad and – No, no. And then – Everything was cooked? It was cooked. It boiled? It boiled. It was cooked. And we had to eat raw stuff like they do now. And I can't eat raw stuff. I've got that trouble. Diverticulosis, they call it, you know. You can't eat raw stuff. Yeah. So? It was quite different. But you're – We'd have cornbread at breakfast, noon, and night. We ground our own corn. We ground our own wheat. Even for – For our eating. For the eating. For eating. Yourself? Yeah. We had wheat marsh, you know, wheat. We'd cook it and then fry it. That was real good. We'd have syrup to put on. So that means that when you ground it yourself, it was really coarse then. Mm-hmm. And that's what they eat now. They can eat now. That's what made it good. It was coarse. Yeah. Same with the cornmeal. It was coarse. Mm-hmm. So that's – That's what we lived on. We had very little money. Yeah, the Alstom's family, they were really – Well, they were better off. They had a better farm. Both of them. Both of them. Dad's brothers had better farms. And I think they were more ambitious farmers. My dad was a blacksmith. He did quite a bit of blacksmith work. Carpenter, he helped build the church there. Yes, this church. So he wasn't really – That was the one – That one there. Mm-hmm. Your father helped to build. Yeah. Do you remember that or – Oh, yeah. I remember when they built that. So they all pitched in, then the members? Yeah, they all pitched in and built that. I don't know if they had a contractor. I must have had somebody, I guess. But they all worked on it. And there's the same church that stands today. Uh-huh. Yeah, and I think it's such a pretty church. Pretty location. Yeah, I could name – Burner, all of these here. That's Lindblom there. Did you know him? He was a minister up there, I believe, about 17 years. And all the blade, the wing blade was up there. That was later in 19 – Yeah, that was after he retired that he was up there. And the wing blade. Uh-huh. And, oh, there's Andersons there. Well, there's Della. I wonder – I don't see Gertie, but there's Della, my oldest cousin up there. Uh-huh. And that one there. The two that are living, you know. They're also high up in years. Yeah. So that site now where the church is standing, there – I don't know how many there is there now, members, you know. But I know there isn't very many there. But they're keeping it going. So two of the founding fathers of the Swedish Baptist in America, Pankvist and Lieberg. What was that? Pankvist and – Oh, Pankvist, yeah. And Lieberg. They were there in 1853, they said, when they organized the church. Yeah, I guess so. In Ericsson and so on. Uh-huh. Yeah. See, that's way back, so I don't remember that. Do you remember when you went to Sunday school, if the Sunday school superintendent, like Ahlstrom, if he talked anything about the old-timers that came there and organized the church and so on? Well, they did at the conference. They did that? Oh, yeah. They stressed the history of it? We had conference up there real often. Uh-huh. I used to help serve, you know, wash dishes. Yeah. They'd have different groups. My mother and – well, the children, women, you know, missus on each family, would serve one time and then maybe another group another day. So that was work for those farm women. That's a lot of work. And they have to contribute with their own food, in other words? Yeah, sure. Yeah, we furnished the food. But the people, now, they came from the conference. They came from outside. Sure. They didn't pay for anything or – they didn't expect to be treated by the – I think so. I think it was all free. That's a lot of burden, though, for a small community like that. Oh, I should say. Farm women, you know, hot, no fans, no air conditioning, nothing to cook on a hot stove, you know. Just think how people had it. They didn't have any of the comfort that they have now, and none of the money. And we had a weed that we called Svinemål. Svinemål, ja. Svinemål. Well, they called it up there. Up there. And that's what my mother and her two sisters-in-law cooked for the conference one time. And they were just crazy for that.