 Alnys, that was really way, way, way back. Kamarherristan? Yeah. S-T-A-N-G, Stang. And Alnys was a big goods. This I heard through my husband. And he, there were Grevar and Barona, and you know how they had to have a title years ago. And they, Axel's far, wa, Cusk, took care of red hester and all that sort of fancy stuff. No, I don't think that he was born in Stockholm, he was in America. Stockholm, and came to America in 1924, in the autumn. Today is the 2nd of November, 1986. We'll start with your family. Your father, what did he do in Stockholm? No, I don't think that he was born in Stockholm. I think he was born outside Stockholm, someplace. What did he work with? He was a carpenter. Carpenter. A lady, or... Yes, carpenter. And he was a very good one, they told me. And my mother was from that particular part, some place, which I don't know either. But... They were nice, they were poor, like everyone was in those days. And you had a brother, so you had two children. And he was much older than... And he was much older than you were. An old man. Sure. We have made quite a few trips back and forth. And I think a trip in... In 1952, we got together for the first time and really visited. For the first time? Because he didn't... He was a little different. He wasn't so full of talk like I am. He was more reserved. So you went to school then in what part of Stockholm? I went to Matteos Folkskola in Stockholm. So you went through there every day? Not very long, because, like I said, my parents were poor, and I had to help to... Like my father said, you better start to do right for yourself. Well, I couldn't help that I was there. But I started to work when I was 12 years old. In good school. What kind of work then? Anything to make 50 cent. Could you keep that money then? No, no, no. I gave it to my mother, because... She was... There wasn't any money. And, of course, another thing, too. At that time, it was wartime in Sweden. It was tough. It was tough. We had nothing to eat. And you stand in line to buy a little soup, a little fish soup. You know that I have written to Prince Bertil about a year ago. You did? Because he was born the 28th of February, 1912. And I remember when he was born. And my brother, Wagner, he stood... Does it make any difference if I speak English or Swedish? You can speak Swedish if you want to. He stood guard at the castle when this little Prince Bertil came to the world. Yes. And... My mother, of course... Like all mothers, she went to the castle in the evening, in fact, in the middle of the night, with smorgasbord for my brother. He stood in a little hut, you know, outside. Yes. And she had some hot coffee with her, for him and the smorgasbord. And I was allowed to join. Can you imagine? There's two men and all ladies. We ran around in Stockholm city with a package of smorgasbord. And you remember that? I remember like it was yesterday. And on the way home, we heard the cannons and the salute that the Prince had come. And I wrote to the Prince just about last February. And I got an answer. I see. What did he write? He wrote... I can show you the letter. I can... That letter that I wrote to him was not very flattering. It wasn't? No, it wasn't. I told him who I was, where I lived, and that my brother stood guard at the castle that night, told about me and my mother, how we went with sandwiches to him. And I also said... I should have had a copy of that letter. Then I also said that there was no wonder that Sweden lost so many of its young boys who emigrated just about then. There was no work, no food, nothing. It was poor and bad. We stood in line for... What was the name of that piece of bread we got? It was called... A raw bit. You had to have a coupon for it. I remember I had a little bucket where I stood in line and bought fish soup. You didn't know what soup it was cooked in. There was probably a little bit of everything in it. Did you have to pay for the soup? I said in the letter... The people in Stockholm said it was cooked by German soldiers. This is wartime. You don't know anything about this. Anyhow, I wrote a lot of things that I'm sure he never heard before. What did he say in the letter? He said... Of course, he didn't write it himself. He had one of his big shots to write the letter. He said that the priest Bertil thanked him for the letter and that it was nice to remember his birthday and so on. I don't think he ever got a letter like that. I said it was too bad that all the young boys immigrated. Because Sweden is a good country. But at that point, there was nothing to eat or anything else. Did any of your friends immigrate in 1912, 1913 or 1914? What kind of work did he get after the military service? He worked in a steel trade or something like that. In Stockholm? Outside of Stockholm. It was a small town at the time. It was a big town, but at the time, there was a small village community. It was called Sundbyberg. He drove cars and delivered goods and took care of stocks. He was there many, many years until he finally retired. But your work, when you were 12, was it with families or in a business? A little bit of everything. It's so poor, it's so sad. You wouldn't even want to talk about it. But that's the history. I have written about this in the Swedish paper many, many times. You didn't get food while you worked? No. You had to do it yourself? Yes, I lived with my parents, naturally. The first work I had was on Drottninggatan in Stockholm. In a business for art-made flowers. Now this is all coming back. Now they do things of silk here. They did that in those days in Stockholm. I got a job there, as a carpenter and so on. I ran the fields and delivered flowers here and there. It was very nice. And then, in the evening, once or twice a week, I had to scrub the floor in the store. It was cement floor. It was in the winter. And a little kid like me, how could I do it? But anyhow, so here... They made a pile of it, and I lay on my knees. And closer to the door I got. The more wet I got, and the more I froze on my knees. Now I'm full of arthritis, when I think of it. One day, when I had done it, I ran home. My skirt was wet and I froze on my knees. Oh, God. How could I do it to a child? No one helped you, but you had to do everything yourself? I did everything, and then I came home. And there was not much to eat. I'd rather mother tried to dry my clothes so I could put them on the next day. There was another big water overclosing those days. But... Then from there... I got a job at the Nordic Company. Have you been in Stockholm? Yes, NK. I was also a spring girl there, to start with. But then... I was there for quite a while. Then I had to go and read for the priest. And that's Matthew's confession? I had to go home an hour earlier in the evening, so I could make it to......the church in Stockholm. And you read for the priest in the evening? So that went fine, but... Then I was moved down to the so-called garnering department. They hired carpenters. They cut the stairs. So I heard about it from other girls who worked there. They had gotten a little more pay, so I went to the staff office, the big fat one, General Consul Sachs. And... I was afraid, so I shook everything. I thought I would get a little more pay. I had 17.50 on the 14th day. I thought I would get a few more kronor. But they fired me. And they said, no, they said, I can't give them any more. But they said, the night is yours. I was a little sad, I didn't know what that meant even. And I was stupid enough. So I went... I told my mother about this when I got home. And she said, you don't have to go back there. I didn't know if it was a night job. He suggested it. So... A couple of days later, I always had good luck with work. I always found work. Yet today I can think of it. So I... I read in the Stockholm newspaper that Adolf Heymann's helicopter on the Sveavägen 76 was looking for a contractor. We lived about two blocks from there. So I went there. I got a job. So it was easy to get a job? It was nothing. I must have looked like I could work. And I was with Heymann's until... Just a couple of days before I came here to the country. And then he said to me, if you don't like it here, you're welcome to come back. How did you get your American ideas into your daily life? Well, that's another story. My husband had a sister with a family who moved here in 1921. And that gave my husband American fever. American fever. So you were already known in Stockholm? Oh, yeah. We were married in Stockholm. And... And he... How did you meet him? Well, there was a moonlit night at the Stammestergården. If you know where that is. Beautiful. And we went together and finally got married. But anyhow, I was going to talk about his sister and family. They were here, and of course they wrote to him about the wonderful place this was and all the money they were making. So that's how it started. So he got American fever. So what did you say when you heard about the beautiful... Well, I stayed in Sweden. Yeah, we had a little girl then. And I kept working, and he went to this country, to Chicago, to Andersonville, to his sister. And they were very fortunate. They had a kind of a job, and no... how to do. She had several bakeries in Chicago. And it wasn't Signe Karlsson? No, her name was Anna Andersson. And one of the bakeries here, and her husband was a pastry chef from Stockholm. And your husband was his profession, when he came from Stockholm? Yes, he was... He did a profession when he was just a little boy. When his parents died... He had a sister in Stockholm at that time. And she kind of took care of him. He was just a little boy. And in them days, when the kid got to be 15, 16, he had to learn a trade, which was the great thing. And he became... What was it called? He worked at Resifex. He made bags and purses. A business, yes, or... What? A business, yes. Yes, he was born in Månes. Yes, he was born... Yes, sure. So he got a job in Jod, when he did the business? No, I don't think he ever did anything in Jod. Yes, he worked for... Bonds and things like that. So that's how he got to Stockholm, and got a job? Yes, and he learned this trade. And in them days, they didn't slap things together in Hong Kong, you know. Everything was done by hand, sewed by hand. Every purse, every suitcase was done by hand. He was very good at it. But then when he came here, then things have changed. Then he got a job on the south side of Chicago someplace, in a factory. And they had already... They didn't know anything about this handwork. Everything was slammed together with the machines. So, that was it. So he didn't get any use out of his... So he was out of luck. And he was there for quite a while. Let's say, yeah, quite a while. And after he had shown the boss the new model and things that he brought from Sweden, then he was fired. He was fired? Why? Well, I don't know why. But anyhow, they didn't need him anymore because they didn't have that kind of work that he did. He did fancy work. So it was wrong to show quality? Right. Right. So he had worked in Sweden? Was he in Stockholm, Axera? Maybe that's why he came to Stockholm. So... So he was a guard for the king, too? No, he was... No, no, I don't know. He was with the Swedish artillery, I think, or something like that. I have those papers, too, but I can't tell you of him. So, after he had been here in Chicago for a year, he sent for you and your daughter? Did he send you a ticket so you could buy... No, he sent their tickets to us. And it was tough. I just said, so not talk about it. I understand. Did you want to leave Sweden? Not particularly. I had been alone there over a year. And I developed new friends. And the girls in the shops, in the stores, this man that I worked for had several stores. And we had a lot of fun together. And we went together for... I don't know if you know what this is. – Syjönte? – Yeah. We went to each other's house and had our handarbet. How often did you have it? Once a week? No, I think that was probably once every two weeks or something. And it was very nice. And I wasn't particularly anxious to travel to America at that time. But the ticket came, and so we came to Chicago. How was the trip? You went with the old King's Whale, an old boat from Holland. – The what? – You went with the old King's Whale. – Wasn't it a fishing boat? – Yeah, it was an old fishing boat. – And it was from Gothenburg? – Yeah. But it wasn't hard to get the papers out for the American consulate? No, there was nothing. It was terrible. – Was it terrible? – It was a terrible trip. What did the priest say when you wanted to get a moving certificate? – What? – What did the priest say? There was no question about that. – No? – No. I just got my ticket, went to Gothenburg, got on the ship, and that was it. – And then you had to leave your old friends? – Then I left my parents there. And how I could do it, I can't understand. – What did your parents say? – Well, my husband was here, and they felt it was my duty, too. You didn't write, and did you tell your husband that you were coming back to Stockholm? – No. – No? – No. – He liked it here. – So he wrote in the letter that it was good that you came over? – Oh, yeah. It was just so nice, but it wasn't... It was tough. It was tough years. – So you came to Ellis Island? – Oh, yeah. That, too. What was that first moment like? Did you see the freedom squadron? – Yes. – Did you think of anything when you saw it? No, it didn't mean a thing to me at the time. – You didn't? – Just to get off that ship. – That's all I wanted. – You had no friends or friends with you? – I had nobody. – Just you alone? – How old was the girl? One or two? – Two. Almost two. Two, yes. And on the train to Chicago? Oh, don't even mention that. That was a horrible thing. I have written all these stories about that trip, and... Yeah. Dirty. And I came from that nice, clean Stockholm. I came to this dirty New York. And all these colored folks with the big gunny belt that they were... – And it wasn't better in Chicago? – Yeah. What was the first thing you noticed that was dirty? – The what? – What was the first thing you noticed – that was dirty between Chicago and Stockholm? – Yeah. And dirty. And that train from New York to Chicago, it was horrible. 36 hours. – How was the train journey between Stockholm and Gothenburg? – Fine. We had a sleeper. My mother had spent money on a sleeper for us. – Was she with you in Gothenburg? – No. – But were the trains better than in Stockholm? – Oh, yeah. They were clean. They were beautiful trains. – And you didn't know any English? – No. – So your husband, then? – He met Don Tan at the station. – LaSalle station. – Yeah. And we stayed with his sister and family on 5316 North Clyde Street. – Up here at the station? – Right, yeah. Until we had organized ourselves. – How long did you live with her? – Not very long. I couldn't stand her and she couldn't stand me, so that was all right. – Did you have any different ideas than she did? – I had no ideas. – But she had ideas that she tried to get you to do. – Yeah. – How long did she stay? – She wanted to pay my fare. I could kick myself at the time that I didn't take her up on it. – Why did she want that? – She wanted to get rid of me. She was jealous because I had married her little brother. – She didn't like that. – She said that. But I was stubborn, you know. I wasn't going to do that. But if I had $100, I would have left. – United States forever? – Yes. It took seven years to get over Hemlängtan. – Seven years? – Seven years. – No one understands you. – That's hard. But you're Swedish now. How long had she been here in Chicago? About three years. They emigrated in 1921 and I came in 1924. So about three years. Then she should have an understanding of your problem with Hemlängtan. She was a tough old lady, I can tell you. – I couldn't– – She was about your age. She was quite a bit older than I, and she thought I was supposed to know everything. – So she taught you how to do things? – She never did. If I ask something, well– – So you lived in the same house? – Yes, they had a small apartment. – How long did you stay? – Probably three weeks. That was enough. Then we saw– – You ate at the same table? – Yes. – Who cooked? – She did. I couldn't do anything. – She didn't want to? – No. Was there anything special she warned you about? No, no, no. She didn't. – It was just the presents? – Yes. – Right. That was bad enough. – So you knew that it wasn't– – Oh, yes. – But your husband Axel didn't understand. Oh, he didn't, but what could he do about it? He couldn't do anything either. And then, naturally, he took his sister's– – Advice and everything. So he worked on the south side? – Yes. – So he left you and your daughter alone? Ja. Well, then we finally– We got a nice– Not nice. It was a big apartment. 1426 Edgewater Avenue. Second floor. And it was a big, old-fashioned apartment. And there was three bedrooms. The one that we– The one that we– Oh, there was some furniture to be bought in the apartment. – Which we did. We bought them. – So domar är lämnat kvar förutgående. But this young man, he wanted to stay with us. He was a– He was a painter. And he wanted to stay, rent a room from us, and have his dinner. – What did they call it? Borden– – Borden. – Borden room, yes. – Borden room. – Var han svensk? – Ja. Han var från– Han lever nu uppe här som place, med sin familj. He came from Pito. And so he stayed with us. Paid $12 a week. And then– There was another young painter that came and wanted to rent the other room, which was fine. And you probably know him. There were two brothers. One was Helge Hegberg, who died a few years ago. And Erik Hegberg, he lives here on Belmaral some place. And I'm gonna look him up. And because we bought our first car. – Och inga pengar. – Inga pengar. – Men kunde de betala för sitt rum? – Ja. – Men vi var five i familjen at that time. – En stycken. Och ni hade inga egna ingångar, utan de måste gå in i samma ingång som ni gick in i. Right, right. And they had their breakfast, these two boys. They had their breakfast. And they like lunch sandwiches with them to work. And come home at five o'clock and had their dinner. – Så du var aldrig ledig då? – No, I never been ledig until Mark came in there. – Så det var söndag, lördag, måndag och hela veckan? – Ja, sure. – Så där hade jag 24 dollars. – Extra då? – Not extra. – Men du hade det i inkomsterna? I just had this 12 dollars for each of these two boys. And that is what I had to feed five people on. – Gick det ihop? – Nå, det gick inte. So we stayed there over Christmas. And... And in the spring, I had to take a job as a maid. We boarded up our little girl with the Swedish people and elsewhere. And I took a job. My husband was unemployed. – And... – Var det före depressionen? – 1927? – The what? – Var detta före depressionen? – Ja. I would say that when I started to work in Evanston, it was 1925. – 25. – And I had 12 dollars a week. It was a big old house, 11 rooms and seven beds, three stories high. And seven people in the family. And I was the only girl. – You didn't have to cook, though? – I cooked. I cleaned. – Åh... – Det var ju värre än att ha boarders. Ja, men at least... – I didn't have to pay rent. – No expenses. – You had no expenses? – Rent. We paid– An Eskorder, we paid 45 dollars a month for rent. And then we had to heat it, and electricity, and telephone, for my 24 dollars. It just didn't work. So... – Men, you said now you boarded up your daughter. – Ja. – You couldn't see her then during the week? – Yes. I had my day off on her Thursday. – Det var stående där du sa henne. – Ja. And then I took the streetcar from Evanston down to Edgewater Avenue, which is up here. We visited. We went for a little walk. And I paid eight dollars a week for her. – So you got four dollars left then. – And then my husband rented a room on Elmwood in Evanston for three dollars a week. So I had a dollar left. – And your husband didn't have a job then? – No. – But couldn't he watch the girl then during the day? – No. No, you couldn't have a little girl in a little apartment, a little room someplace. How did it affect her now? Did she remember you every time you came back? How did it work? I've had a tough life, I can tell you, in the United States. – In United States. – How did it affect her now? What is her name? – Her name is May. – May. She's the loveliest thing that was ever born. How long did you continue with this boarding her out, though? Well, let's say that we had a friend, a very well-known man in Chicago, and he gave us a job in a real estate. I was pretty clever in anything I tried to do. I tried to do it right. I showed apartments on Saturdays and Sundays when nobody else wanted to work. And I rented apartment to people. I showed house, and they wanted me to– I lost the name. But anyhow, so that was not very good. – Was he a Swede, this man? – Yes, I think so. I think so. But anyhow, it was tough times. So how long was your daughter at this family's home? – She was there for a year or two, maybe. – Two years. – So– – It was not easy. You see, the people I worked for– That's the funny part. They didn't want an old married woman, you know, because I was supposed to be a French maid, with the little thing here, fancy apron, and yes, madame, oui, oui, madame, and all that. And they didn't want an old married woman. – You were not old. – No, I wasn't. I was 20. – They had no idea you were being married. – Right. So I never told her that I was a married woman. – How did she find out? – Well, that's the funny part. My husband came out from my room one early Sunday morning, and the kids saw him go out. So I had to confess that that was my husband and that we had a little girl. And we dressed– He went down to the edge of the room, picked her up the next Sunday morning, and she was just a doll. They all fell in love with her. She was the cutest thing. The people you worked for, now, they were Americans? What kind of people were they? Oh, he was a bonds and mortgage man. – So they had stipulations. – I was there. 25, 26, 27, 28. I was there for three years. Three years. But it was a hard job that you had to– Boy, I worked like a dog there. So during all this time, you more or less hated coming to the United States? No, I didn't hate it. I loved the work. And I learned a lot of things. But love to work, I mean, there must be a limit somewhere. Well, no, there wasn't any limit in any ways. But it was tough. So now, when you came here then to Chicago with your sister, and you came to Everest, then you didn't have any sylenta. I didn't– No, there was no time for such thing. I had a trunk with me with beautiful handwork and pretty things and that, of course. When that trunk came to my– – Sister-in-law. – Sister-in-law's apartment, she said, she was mad right there because I had so many pretty things. – She was jealous then? – She was very jealous of me. So how was her life now? Was she luckily married or happily married? And good job and everything? – My– – Your husband. – My husband, yes. – I mean, your sister-in-law's husband. Yeah, he was very nice. I got along with him just fine. It seems like I always got along better with the man than the woman, anyhow. And he was very nice. And he took my part many times. And he just died here about six months ago. He lived in– She died many years ago. But he was 92, 93 years old, and he lived in California for many, many years. And we used to call each other. And they have two sons. And one of them, the older one, he used to say, my gosh, I wish you and Daddy would have got together when you were young. I said, then you would be– Then you would be my son, I said. So forget the whole thing. So you don't recommend sister-in-laws? No, no. What was the reason that she had to be so mean? She should have helped you and guided you in any way. If I ask something, then she would say to my husband, don't you know anything? She's here all the time and asking things. So then he came home and bawled me out for being there. So I thought, no, I won't go for a long time. And then the next time he stopped there, she would say, she hasn't been here for a long time. What's the matter with her? So you didn't go back then to office? Yes, I had to, for the– Actually, for the family. Oh. Did they come to your home later on? Well, they were there a couple of times for dinner. But there was not any warm friendship? No, no. You can feel the distance? Right, right. Well, I don't think there was too many people, or maybe it is, that have done what I have done. I don't think so. So it took you about seven years, you said, but then you were in the Depression years, though. What happened then? Well, it was tough years. How about your husband? What did he get? In 1939, we had a little vacation. We got used to things and had a little vacation, which I have also written all about. And one time on the way home from Norton Park, Wisconsin, we went to visit a friend in Minocqua. They were just building a beautiful log cabin for a summer home. Of course, we couldn't talk about anything else for the last year in this beautiful home. And they– So the next time we went up north for a little vacation, we stopped in a gas station in Rhinelander. And of course, we talked to everybody in them days. And my husband said to the kid that pumped gas that, you know if there's any land for sale here? Yeah, he said, my father have 80 acres of land for sale. So of course, he said, I'm through here in a half an hour. He said, I'll take you out there to look at it. So he did. And that was 80 acres. In fact, I just started to write about this again. I had done it many times. And– There was no road in. And no way to get in. No electricity, no post, no nothing. It was wilderness. Urskog, som vi säger i Sverige. And a couple of little deers were hopping around there, and of course, we weren't exactly dressed to go out in the woods like that. But anyhow, I sat down on the windfall. Great big trees, beautiful height. These pines and spruce and a lot of birches. So I sat down and looked around, and I said, gee, this is an awful mess in here. So my husband said, yeah, it sure is, but I think I'm going to have a house built here. I said, you're crazy. I said, I don't want to live here. And there was just wilderness. That's a good word. So– So we told the kid, I said, well, we'll come back. But of course, the next six months, we didn't talk about anything but our land in Vineland, New Wisconsin. And we had then accumulated a little money, not much. So the following spring, we went up. What year was that? 1939. The man that owned us was a farmer. He had a sick wife. And he had taken a mortgage on this 80 acres and was about– ready to lose it. So he was very anxious to sell, and we were very anxious to buy. We dreamt about these big trees. Oh, they were beautiful. And you get familiar with it, too, then. You didn't hesitate then when you– No, it was fine. You were for it. I was all for it. So, now the thing was, at that time, you know, you couldn't build or do anything because you had to have government– Approval. Yeah. In 1939. Yeah, 1939. Because there was just something that was necessary that you could buy a piece of pipe or something. Now, there was tough times. We built at the wrong time. But we had good friends in Chicago. And it cost money. They have good friends. So we instead– There was a lot of companies up there. They would like to sell us– Lumber and plumbing stuff and all that. But they couldn't. They didn't dare to. We were out of the state people, for one thing. So we trucked everything up at night. Started off from Evanston about two in the morning and earlier. With the big old truck with poor tires. You had to have coupon for gas and all that. So the war was already on then? Yes. So– And tires, retread tires. You had a couple of extra on top of the load. Did your husband borrow this truck then? Yeah, he– No, we bought lots of old cars, lot of old trucks. They probably only made one trip. Then we left them up in the woods. Was this house not supposed to be a year-old house? No, it was supposed to be our summer home. Summer home. And it was a gorgeous house. It was a small inning. They built it. Was your husband in the building then? No, no. He didn't know how to do that sort of thing. It was built of logs. Some logs was as long as from this door to the window. Most of those logs was cut on our own property. But some of them we had to buy. So we had a man who went through the woods and looked for a certain tree that had to be so– It was in the butt end, I guess they call it, and so long. And it was very, very beautiful. It took him three years to build. There was no electricity and no telephone there. Every single thing that was done with that house was done by hand. A little axe that he worked with. What was his name, the carpenter? His name was Longquist. From Småland. Joe Longquist. So in 1943, then, you could move in there in the summer. Yeah, but by that time, we had decided to build a few more cottages to rent out. Was that your idea then? Being in the real estate business, showing people around, open house? Right. It was your idea? So– You bought more land or you bought yours– No, I have never gone through all the land we had. 80 acres is a hell of a lot of land. Was there good buy then at that time? You got it reasonable? Priced or– I mean, the land. Well– Because this was after the Depression, though. People were not– were not able to buy anything. We had– No, but we got it all finished. So you got off pretty lucky then, after the Depression. You didn't lose any money in any banks in Chicago or– Yes, we did. You did? I and my daughter took a trip 19– 32 to Sweden, my first trip. 32. And to see my mother and father. And I didn't have much money. I had the ticket, but not much more. And when I was ready to come back here, I wrote to my hubby. I said, I need $50 or whatever. I don't remember. And I got a telegram back to Sweden. And he said, the banks closed. The banks closed. And I thought, well, stupid. He could have gone there the next morning. I didn't know what this banking business was. I had no idea. You thought it was closed only for the– Yeah, I thought it was just closed for the night. So I was laughing and telling everybody, you know, what a stupid husband I had. Why he could have gone and got the money the next day, you know? Here he said, banks closed. I read on the telegram. And I don't want to look stupid, anyhow, you know. Why didn't he wait until the morning and go and get some money? We had a little money, but anyhow, we had it at Philip State Bank in the corner of Moores Avenue and Clark Street. And Mr. Philip himself lived across the alley from us. My hubby had brought in his paycheck the afternoon before. And it was a little shaky, you know, banks at that time. So he said to Mr. Philip, is it anything with this bank? He said, then I won't put this money in, because it wasn't very much, but we didn't have very much either. So Mr. Philip said, oh, you know, our bank is solid, you know. But they did close that afternoon. They did? So he was not telling you– We never did anything. There was very little money we had, but anyhow– You lost it all? Yeah. But wouldn't he as a good neighbor, though, I mean, be honest with you? Right, right. And here we got, you know, we got– You know, before this happened, we stopped in the alley and visited, you know, and kind of friendly like, neighborly. Because it wouldn't have made him a difference, you know, if he had told your husband– Yeah, if he had just said that whole back. Yeah, but no. He didn't. Did you see him again? Did he move out? No, we didn't see him again, because we got mixed up with the Rhinelander and so on and so forth. Well, anyhow, we got to have a really nice resort up there. And of course, I did all the cooking. I always been lucky to have plenty of work. But you were home in Sweden in 1932 when the banks closed. Right. What happened to you then? Were you stuck? I borrowed $50. In Sweden? In Sweden from a good friend, family friend. Did you tell your parents, no, there was rough time here in the United States? No, I never told my parents anything. Everything was rosy. I never complained. I never said I was sick or I never said that I was homesick or anything. Never. You didn't tell your mother that your daughter, May, had been out in the other family? No, I never told them. And she didn't suspect anything? No, she didn't. No, she didn't. And I was glad, because she would have worried about us. So what did you feel then when you came back to Stockholm, near the Vasa kyrkanen, Mariaförsamlingen, and you saw the difference between Andersenville and Stockholm? What did you think then? Well, it was kind of tough, too. Because there was a difference like night and day? Yes. Sure. And my old friends came to see me, and they had little parties and come on over. We want to see you. And, of course, everything was so glorious. I never told anyone. There was tough times here. And they were listening. And you didn't tell them. You didn't know the whole story. No. So you didn't try to find a job, though, for your husband? I mean, to come back and win. He did. He did a job off and on. Here in the– But he didn't try to go back to Sweden, though? No. No, he didn't like Sweden. He didn't like Sweden? Why? No, it was tough times there. But he had a good job, though. I mean, he was a craftsman. Yes, but he didn't care for Sweden. He wanted to be an American. And you didn't see that one bit. No. But I did a lot of work there. And it was a beautiful spot. And by the time– By 1950, we had six cottages to rent. You moved up there to Rheinfelder? Yeah, sort of. We had an apartment in Evelsten. Because we didn't stay there wintertime. I opened up for six years. I opened up for a season, Memorial Day, and closed at Labor Day. During the late 40s, then? The what? During the late 40s, 1940s? Yeah, until 1952, then we sold. The whole thing? Everything. So people were coming up there from Chicago and– Yes. And rented it for four or five weeks or– No, one or two weeks. One or two weeks. Or a long weekend. And they paid off? A lot of nice folks. And they paid off? Yeah. They cleaned themselves, then? No, the cottages cleaned when they came in on a Saturday. And you cleaned after they left? And then, yes. When they left, usually Saturday morning. So you had bedclothing and everything there? Yeah. Mattresses and– Oh, yeah. It was like a motel, then? Yeah. And it was in Rheinfelder? Yeah. So then you stayed all summer up there? Yes. And your husband, you worked– Sure, he went back and forth a few times during the summer. And it was a lot of work, believe me. So your girl was big enough to help out then? Finally, we got the post in, in 1945, I think. So we have electricity. I got a refrigerator, and I got gas. I got telephone. I got everything. And your daughter, she helped you also then? She was old enough? Yeah, she took– She worked for a corporation lawyer downtown in Chicago, but she took the summer off one year. So she went to school then and college? Yeah. College, too? Yeah. So you were able to sell– High school in Evanston. And in Northwestern. Northwestern? Mm-hmm. Oh, they cost money, too, huh? And you were able to– Yeah. There was no throwing away money in them days. She had to work then for her school years? Yeah. To help out? Mm-hmm. And now she has worked with the bank for 40 years. So– She does remember the hard times, I suppose. Oh, yes. She does? When she's here, she come and visit. She said, remember so-and-so, remember when we didn't have any money. Do you remember this? Do you remember that? We could sit here all day and reminisce. She remember all. Oh. And we had a boat for every cottage. Then we had a rumpus house with open fireplace and a bar. Oh, it was great. Why did you sell it then? Was it too much work? It got too much, and I couldn't get any help up there. The girls up there, they went out on a Friday night and got drunk, and they couldn't get to work on Saturday, you know. Saturday was the day I needed them. Yeah, but the girls didn't get drunk. They sure didn't. They couldn't get to work. Oh, you have no idea how Wisconsin and girls and everybody is. So there was– By the way, would you like to have a glass of wine or something? So there was too much headache then to keep it going. So you sold it then in 1952? Yeah. Yes, the whole thing. Was this a good adventure, in other words, business deal? Yeah, yes. So you came off all right. We got so many nice friends. They came every year, you know, for a week or two, and it was very nice. So then you moved away from Rhineland, if you're good, and down to Chicago. Yeah. But not to your sister-in-law. But– No. No, and then in 1950, we had a nice little apartment on Austin in Evereston. And because we went to Sweden in 1952, that's another thing. And your husband was with you. Yeah, the three of us went for a real nice trip. And when we came back from there, we rented a small apartment. We really didn't have any place in particular. But then my husband, he always saw that I had something to do. So then he bought me a tavern in Clintonville, Wisconsin. A tavern? Yeah. I've done everything you can think of. There isn't a thing I haven't done. Do you think your husband saw your need of being occupied so you didn't have the homesickness in your blood or what? Was there one other reason? No. No, he thought that it would be fun to have a tavern. Yeah, but you had to take care of it. Oh, yeah, I took care of it, and I cooked, and I was slinging a lot of food there, and it was a lot of fun. And he makes the drinks then? Oh, yeah. I got pretty good at it myself. Clintonville, Wisconsin. Clintonville, Wisconsin. Right off of– Forty-one? Forty-five. Forty-five. And we call it the Wishing Well. And that was fun. That was an experience. It was really an experience. I learned a lot of things there, too. So the Wisconsinites, they are good customers? Yes. And we were there at the time when the government paid off the Indians. Remember that? You're probably not old enough. Yeah, that was in the 1950s, in the middle of the 50s. So you're 54. Fifty-four, yes. They paid them off. They got a big chunk of money. They did. Boy, there was a Cadillac outside every teepee in the woods there, I can tell you. And then they visited the Wishing Well. They called a TV, and they didn't have a bathroom or anything, but they had their...