 But you know, most of the people who came over here, they did pretty well. Many of them became good businessmen. They went into business and were stock owners, shop owners, but they never really lost their early beliefs, but they weren't as outspoken as they were when they had nothing, you know. When they became part of the capitalistic system, some of these people I talk about, that's right, then they were pretty quiet spoken because they were doing well. They were making money. They were rising in the world. You're like Halston now. What happened to him? Well. You remember him as a... Yes, I remember him. Yes. Standing in a rolling range. Yes, yes, I remember him well. Well he never did. He got connected with one of the big building, road building contractors here in Rockford. Very close friend. I've forgotten the name of that company who built roads and bridges in this area. They were Swedish, a big Swedish concern. And somehow or other, he became so closely attached to them that it seemed like he drifted away from his earlier socialistic philosophy. He became more of a businessman and he started, after he became, after he was through with the mayor, he started his own insurance company. So he finished his life here in Rockford as an insurance company operator. He operated an insurance company. Auto, car, theft, or fire? Oh yes, fire, life, everything. He insured everything. That was... He was successful with that. Yes, he was successful. So his past was not a stamp on him then? No, apparently not, because he made friends. How about his old socialist friends though? How did they look upon him? Well he was... Like your father, for instance. He was an awful hot-headed man. Halström. Yes, very hot-headed. Very rough-like. But, well, they never did discard him, you know. They never did walk away from him. They just accepted him as, well, he probably is more of a capitalist than he is a socialist today. But they never got... disliked him for it. There was never any comment that I remember. It's just the fact that that's the way he chose to finish up his life, and the others chose that way too. But of the groups, I have studied some of the history, you know, and you have the Vasa Vikings, and Liron, and Svea Söner, and IOTT. It seems to me that this socialist club was a very close-knit... Yes they were. Yes they were. They were honest to each other, and very bonded. As much... Yes, yes they were. Yes they were. Probably one of the best of the groups at that time, I mean, family-wise, because the whole family was included. Oh yes. The whole family was included, yes it was. And it's remarkable, though, with children going to Sunday school and learn... Yeah. You probably learned more in that Sunday school than going to the Metric Church, or what do you think? I mean, did you have more enjoyment? No, no, no. I really don't remember so much. I don't remember so much about what we were learned. I probably was just like the religious kids that went to a religious Sunday school. They didn't care much what the minister said, you know. They just had to be there because their folk said. And I was there because my folk said, you should be there, see. But there is something that you remember that stuck in your mind? Oh, I believed in the socialistic principles, yes. I thought what the socialists believed in, and what they espoused, you know, that the world should be this way, I thought yes, yes, I think it's right. But you don't see much of it anymore now. There's no more socialists in this country. They're called liberals, you know. Anyone who is a liberal is really an old socialist. But you can convince people about that? No, no, no, but they believe in the same things that the socialists believed in, but they don't have that banner, no. Were you, did you have to help out to carry all papers and flyers and stickers and pamphlets and stuff like that? No, no, they never. How did they send the papers now, the Swedish socialists? Well, they had a paper here in town, that's interesting that you brought that up, Svenska Posten. That was printed down on State Street, and that was a Swedish newspaper. Well when I was about eight, nine years old, I got a job to peddle that to the stores that sell it. So as a little kid, I'd start out from downtown with maybe 50 or 100 newspapers, and then I'd stop in at one place there and I'd leave five or six or seven, and then I would go up to Kishwaukee Street and I would leave four or five there, and then I would go down on 18th Avenue here, and I'd leave four and five there, and then I'd come around this way and go back down home. That was my job. So for that I got 25 cents and car fare. Well they had an election here in Rockford where Oscar Ogren, he was a socialist. You ever heard of him? No, I haven't. Oh yes, oh yes. I'm going back to about 1916, 1917, somewhere along in 1916. Oscar Ogren, he was a socialist, and he ran for mayor against W.W. Bennett. And we got a request to deliver papers for, amongst the Swedish people, free, just deliver them. And they were printed down there by the Svenska Posten, and they included a lot of nice things about W.W. Bennett, the opponent of Ogren. And my father heard about it, that I was going to peddle that paper, and he said, don't you touch that paper, and don't you bring that paper out. But they gave me 25 cents, so without him knowing it, I went down and I got my papers, and I started to deliver them with a friend of mine. And we delivered just a few of them, and we went up to his aunt's house, and they had an outdoor toilet. And most of the papers we threw down in the toilet. So I felt that I got my 25 cents a little dishonestly that time. But my father said, don't you deliver those papers around, because they're for W.W. Bennett and against Oscar Ogren. But Oscar Ogren got beat, but not by much. But shortly after that, then came Hallstrom, you know, and then came Blum. So they were very... They were active then, yes. Oh yes, you betcha. During the First World War. Yes, they were, yeah. And like you remember, somebody told you about that, that Bridewell, he did go to Bridewell. But like I say, now I don't ever regret that my family was part of that group at all. Because they were decent, kind, fine, hardworking men and women. They didn't in it for what they could get themselves, you know. They didn't look for a job. They figured that this is a system that will be good for everybody. You know, like some people now, they support the Democratic Party. They go out and they work so hard for the Republican Party. But they got in their mind, I want to be down this, I want to get a job. I want to get... Boy, if he gets in, then I can get that job. And that's what many of the politicians promised these workers. That's why they worked so hard to get their friends to elect them, you know. But amongst the socialist people, they voted for the man because they figured that man will look out for not only me, he'll look out for everybody. And that's the way it was. So Hallström, then, he probably got a little... Well, he kind of moved over a little to the other side. Yeah, yeah. So what actually toppled the movement in the 30s? Was it the Depression was too hard? The times were so bad, so there was no way to speak or talk anything because it was completely depressed, the economy and... Yeah, yeah. It didn't... It was not that they were scared to talk about it, but... No, no, no, no. It was impossible to... No, no. Oh, yes, it was never held down. No. There was plenty of freedom here in Rockford to say what you wanted to say. You could print what you wanted to say, too, always. And like you say, they were never looked down upon, oh, by some of these flag-waving patriots, you know. They would say something, but there weren't too many of them. No. Most people were fair-minded. They were fair-minded, yeah. And one of these fellas that got to be a little too outspoken, they would probably say, well, that's enough of that, see? But they wouldn't condemn him for it. They wouldn't... if he was a good mechanic, they didn't care what he felt. I'll hire you anyway, whether you're a socialist or a communist. You're the best doggone carpenter in town. I don't care what your political beliefs are. So they weren't any of them. They had no bearing on it if you were a good churchman, to use the forget-it-goodness. No, no. No, no. They didn't mean too much at all for that. No. If you belonged to the First Lutheran Church. No. No, no. Everybody, most everybody belonged to church in those days, you know. Oh, yeah. Because it was like a study school. Oh, they were study... most everybody. This group that I'm telling you about, I don't think they amounted to one percent of all the Swedes here. No. But that's the way they were, and that's what they believed in, and that's what they... But that's probably the only group that were thinking for themselves, though. Pretty much. The others, they just followed... Yeah, that's right. The others, they just followed along. Yeah, they just followed along. Listen to the sermon and go home. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So how... What happened, they completely died out in the late 30s? Yes, yes. Before the Second World War, it was completely... Yeah, I haven't had no... No meetings. No, the only thing is, I meet some of these friends of mine who were like me, and they were like me. They were like me. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. I met them. They were my best friends. They were the smartest, the smartest. They came in any... They came in any spiritual life. There was no的是 confusion of attire. Burada thoraya- indara- se Ск苦żar n青春 right. To have an open mind. Yeah, that's right. That's what it is. That's right. And they were definitely Democrats in other words, they didn't want to be Republicans. Well, most of those socialists were Democrats. Did anybody turn over to the Republicans for instance? Oh yes, yes, there were some here that later on in life became Republicans, yes. But most of them, instead of when the socialism disappeared, then they became Democrats because the Democratic Party believed in many of the same things that the socialists did. And so most, I would say that 90% of the old socialists were Democrats. Yeah. So when Roosevelt came along, he was a banker. Yeah. How did he fit into the movement? Well, his philosophy was pretty good despite the fact that he was a rich man and come from a very well-to-do family for many generations back. He was a pretty liberal. So they believed in his message then? Pretty much, yes. They liked, yes they did, yes. Most of them did. I know I did, I thought he was all right because you know he ended the Depression there and he brought... He turned it around? Yeah, he turned it around and he, one thing of course, he was with the unions and boy you know that was the big thing with the socialists, unions. Yes, they figured that's the only chance they have. And I remember years ago when the unions were just coming around, how they, like the mine owners down there in Colorado, you know, they had a strike there and the mine owners went in and brought a bunch of henchmen out and almost machine gunned those workers, you know. And they, Joe Hill, did you ever hear of Joe? Oh, you do? Well, that's right, well Joe Hill was a socialist, you know, maybe a communist, but more socialist. But Joe Hill was killed, he framed, you know. But in those days it wasn't what was... They were executed? Yes. It wasn't for murder that probably never committed, but I read some of the things that went on there and the mine owners and the big, big owners of property that hired workmen, they were ruthless, you know, they were ruthless. And if you stood up and you spoke for your fellow man, they would get somebody to put you away. And that's the way, the only way they knew how to quell the rising demand for unions. So they were guilty, guilty of some horrible things. During the Depression, there was hardships for a lot of families, they foreclosed and they had to move away from their houses and the soup lines. Oh yes, they did. What did the churches do then during that time? Well, I don't know if the churches did much. Was the Salvation Army the one that provided more help? Oh, the Salvation Army is the main one, always the Salvation Army. Yes, they was always that way, and they still are. That's the one, of course, now they got the different churches in Rockford are helping with soup kitchens, you know, or giving out groceries and stuff all over Rockford. Now, I don't think they did that the first time. It's just the government started those soup kitchens. But now, today, many of the churches are very active in providing groceries for the people that are in need. Yeah. So then you went into the City Hall. Yeah, yeah. You took the exam and was accepted. Yeah, yeah. I was down there for 36 years. And your job then was? I would say, when I finished up. Detective? No, I was a detective for, well, I started as a merchant policeman and then. Merchant policeman? Merchant, merchant. Oh, well, that is, you were not a regular policeman, but you took care of the business houses in a policeman's uniform by checking the windows and turning lights on and off and checking the doors all night long. I was a merchant policeman. And that was the job, first job you had when you were hired as a policeman. You got that job before you were, you got on the regular department. And then you come on the regular department and then you became a regular patrolman. You, on foot. And then came the squad cars. So I went from, then came the accident investigation cars. So I started out as a merchant man and then I was a patrolman and then I became a traffic accident officer, assigned to a squad car. And we, all we did was investigate accidents and patrol the street for violators of traffic laws. And I was in there for about two years and then I was moved up into the detective end of the department. And then I was out of uniform. I worked in regular plainclothes for a year or two. And then they started a record system, a new record system. And I was given that job to put that new record system into effect with WPA workers. So I had probably four or five people who were on WPA and myself and we put together a new system of keeping record for the police department. And then after that I moved into the identification. And I was in the identification for a few years. Then I became secretary of the department. And then I was in charge of the office as far as correspondence and payroll and all the things that pertain to the office of a police department. And then we had a new chief put in there after I'd been on for about 23 years or so, or 30 years. And then I became head of the identification, of the identification department. And I was there for, until I retired. So you served under many mayors and the police. Yes, yes. How was the percentage of Swedes now being in the police department when you started? Oh my, my, there was a lot of Swedes then. Oh gosh, I would say 25% of the department were Swedish, just about are Scandinavian. But there's nothing like that today. No, there certainly is. When I pick up the paper and see the different police officers, you don't see the Swedish names at all. You see the first chief we had here, not the first, but back in about 1895, A.E. Bargren became chief of police. You heard of him. And he was chief up until 1940, 1942. So you served under him then? Yes, yes. How was he able to adapt to the different time zones, so to speak? I mean, the guy was getting old and the new times coming in. Well, he was up in his 70s, of course, when he died. And he was in his 70s when he was chief of police. But he delegated a lot of work. And he was more like a figure than... Oh yes, but he was quite a figure, I'll tell you. And he got along, he got along beautifully with the businessmen of Rockford. They thought he was the top. He spent much time with the big businessmen. And when he was chief, he didn't own an automobile. The city had a big Cadillac. And he had a chauffeur, but he had to pay for the chauffeur himself. He never drove the car. And once in a while when his chauffeur wasn't around, then he'd ask some patrolman to come in and drive him around town. And we'd often have to take him out to some of these beautiful homes because he had friends amongst the top people in Rockford. And then after he was chief of police, Charlie Manson became chief, another Swede. He was chief for only two years, but he'd been on the department quite a few years. And after Charlie Manson was on, then came Forky Bengtsson. He was a real Swede, born in this country though. And he was about one of the best chiefs ever had here. He was really... You heard of him? Oh my, he was a star. He was an athlete, good athlete, good boxer. And he was just 100% self-confidence. There was no one he was scared of. And the criminal element in Rockford feared him like the devil. And he gave him good reasons to fear because he was afraid of nobody, nobody. And he didn't cater to anybody, the rich or the poor. How about Boos Albin? Oh Boos Albin, yeah. Yeah, that he was quite a guy. I ran into him when I was on Broadway and he was a tough cookie, you know. He loved to fight. So he was a strong guy? Oh yes, he was a tough man, very tough. And very mean when he... Very, yes he was, very ugly. They threw him in quite often. But it took a couple, three men every time almost. There was very few single men could take him in. Yeah, Boos Albin, yeah. So you heard about Boos Albin. Yeah, they always talk about it. Sometimes you don't know if it's true or not, but he was actually a wild person then. Oh yes, yes. But he straightened up in the later years. Yes he did. He began dabbing around and buying real estate. And next thing you know he was making good money. And he moved to Florida. That's right, that's right. Boos Albin. Even the Swedes can be saved. Yes, yes. Without salvation. Yeah, without salvation, yeah. How did the City Hall now react, for instance, when the workers were in uproar, strikes and so on? Did they cater to the management more than to the workers, you think? No, Bargrain probably did. Bargrain, he worked with the big ones, yeah. But he wasn't too bad for the fellow below, but he was pretty close to the top people. But they managed to get along pretty good, yeah. So there was no unrest? No, no, no. Not as far as the police department taking sides. No, no. No, it was pretty much on the level. And there was no horse patrol in Rockport? Never been? Years ago they had some horses, yeah. Many years ago. Not during your time though, in the early 30s? No, there was no horse when I was there. No, no they didn't. So you served under Mayor Hallstrom too? Yes, well I come on when Mayor Hallstrom, oh yes. He was mayor when I come on the department, Hallstrom. So there was Bargrain, no that's the mayor, yeah it was Hallstrom. But as far as the chief of police was concerned, it was Bargrain, and then Manson, and then Bengtsson, and then Bosted, and then Peterson. So you see, Bosted was English, but otherwise there was four Swedish chiefs in there. How come there are so few Swedish names now in the politics of Rockport? Are they not interested to participate in the... What Swedes? Well, like Aldermanns and the Mayors, McNamara. There are not many Swedes representing the politics. There was, there was. No, no, no, there isn't enough of them. There should be enough, I mean there are a lot of Swedes. Well, there's still a lot of Swedes here, but they don't have the connection now, and they don't, as a group, you know. Years ago they had the group, like first you had the Socialist Party, then they had the Progressive Party, you know, and we had another mayor in there, his name was Lundstrom. He came in after Blum, I think, but he was kind of a liberal one, too. He was not a member of the Socialist group, like Blum and Holmstrom, but Lundstrom was very liberal, because he was a very good friend of Blum. So he just followed Blum's pattern. He was a good mayor, too. Which one of those politicians have made the biggest impact on Rockport? I mean, do you... Well, I would say that Blum did. Blum. He was during the 40s? Yes, yes, he was there in the 40s. He was after the war, then... Yeah. Well, he was in the 40s, up to probably the 50s, I can't remember. Yeah. So in the 50s and 60s, Rockport really took off. Well, Rockport was... Rockport was growing every year, every year, every year, Rockport. It's only in the last six, seven years that Rockport has shown a decline. Otherwise, it was... I remember so well when Lundstrom was mayor, which was back probably in the 50s or 60s, I forget, he said it won't be long before the business district on State Street will be connected with Belvedere. Oh, Blum said that. Lundstrom. Lundstrom. Yes, sir. The future looked pretty positive that the two cities would practically grow together, but they didn't. Now, you know, there's not much of that growth at all in Rockford. It goes the other way. Yeah. I'm surprised about all those different shopping centers, though. You have Rockport Plaza, you have New Plaza. Yes, well... Then you move out and make... Yes, but that's the trouble with all cities, you know. That's what ruined the downtown in Missouri, in St. Joseph, Missouri. Yeah, they had those big shopping centers out, and that's where the business went. And you can understand it because it's all under one roof, you know. You don't have to go in and out of stores and in and out of the weather. So it's a big improvement as far as people wanting to shop. And easy parking. And parking, you betcha, that's the big thing. That's the big thing. Yeah. So as a policeman, you can say that the Swedes have behaved pretty good then over the years? Oh, yes, yes. You don't have to be ashamed of being a Swede, I'll tell you that. And I have never had any reason to be. In fact, I was more than willing to announce that I was a Swede. You've been associated with organizations in Rapport as a toastmaster very often, I have read in papers. Toastmaster? Yeah, haven't you been? Yes, yes. To Paris and... Yes, yes. Where did you hear that? Where did you hear that? Well, people talk. Oh, yeah. How did you come into that business? You joined different organizations then? Vikings, Lyran, Vasa, or... Well, yeah. Well, I don't know. Many of my friends belong to these organizations, and that's how come I became... They asked you to come in? They asked me to come in, yeah, because they were kind of my people, and I like to be with those kind of people, and so naturally, you know, you join them, to be with them. Yeah. So you belonged then to Lyran? I belonged to Lyran, and I belonged to... Vikings? No, I belonged to Vasa, and I belonged to the Masons and Shrine, and I've been singing with the Shrine for over 40 years. Did you sing with Lyran, too? I used to sing with Lyran, yeah. But that's not today? No, they don't have any... No. Singing with the Spanish? No, I have a few of the old-timers get together every now and then, but I never... I was with them a few times, but I never cared to stay. Yeah. So... And then you married in the... Oh, yes. In the 40s or 30s, or...? No, I got married in 1928. 28? Mm-hmm. Oh, and there was a Swedish? Oh, yes. Her name was Linden. Linden? Linden, yeah. Linden? L-I-N-D-E-N. Yeah. And her name was...? Her name was Jane Linden. She was born in...? She was born in Sweden. Oh, in Sweden? Yeah. And down in Skåne. Oh, I can't think... Eslöv. Eslöv? Eslöv, Skåne. Mm-hmm. And you had... You have a boy? Yeah, David. Just one boy? Yeah, uh-huh. Did he follow in your footsteps? No, he's... Well, in a way, he's a manager of a security company that contracts to provide security for big business, for business areas. Yeah. With Kent Malmqvist? No, no, no. Does he have one...? No, he's in the egg business. Yeah, but his son? His son is in the egg business, too. Oh, yes. Sure. It was an alarm. Oh, yeah, yeah. I see. Cater to the eggs, huh? Mm-hmm. And now you're married to...? Jean. Jeanette. Jeanette? Mm-hmm.