 This is cassette two, this continuation with Cecilia Crane, Grand Haven, Michigan, August 4th, 1987. Cassette two, side one. So one of your younger sisters went to Augustana? Yes, uh-huh. Did she finish? She was a smart gal. I wish you could have met her because really she... Did she finish the college? No, she only went one year. Why did she quit? Well, there was something in the family that upset the whole apple cart, and so she didn't get to go back. But she studied the Swedish language there, and oh, she loved it in Augustana. She just loved it. But she left then after one year? Yeah. And came back to... Yeah, came back to Kalamazoo. And then she got married. Was you close now, I mean, they were much, much younger. Well, they were younger, yes. I lived in Kalamazoo at that time. I was going to school at that time. And she got, she, instead of going to Augustana, she got married. And then they moved to Cleveland and came back to Kalamazoo again. And she has four children. And they are very... She has one up in Rochester, Minnesota. That's a male? They live up there. And she goes to the Swedish doings there a lot. She sends me a lot of things from the Swedish. And she's studying the Swedish language. That's Carol. She's the youngest daughter of Alice. And she has a son in New York that is in Storrs, Connecticut. He is the professor of arts. And then she has a daughter up in Maine that has traveled all over the world. Her husband was in the service. And then she has a son in Indianapolis. But she is the one that should have gone on to college. I wish I could talk to her. So you all have this strain of art and originality in your blood. Yes, we all have. Yes, we're all really outgoing. Because now when you were in the teacher's college, you have this beautiful album you put together. Yeah. It should be easy for you because you take an art. You also put on operettas. I did. What was the line you were most interested in, music or art? Really the music. The music part. Yes. I did some artwork. I can show you. But they are hard to live with, you said, the musicians. You never thought of marrying a musician? I lived with my brother-in-law. He was married to Matilda. And he was a musician. He sang. He used to sing with the evangelistic people, you know. So and then he played in the band. So he was always playing horns. And I played the piano. And so he had me sit at that piano and accompany him, see. And honestly, goodness, I'd get so tired of it. But I learned an awful lot from him because he was a musician. And then he had a lovely voice, tender voice. So he sang at different places. We lived in Howell, Michigan. And I would always play for him. I'll never forget one time he was going to play for a group of people. And when we got there, it was nothing but just one of those small pianos, you know, so I said, I can never play that. I said, you'll have to sing without me. He said, you can. He said, you do. And so he really, but we got along all right. But he took the lead, see. He was very musical. But it's very hard to live with people that are so wrapped up in music because he led choirs. And he was singing all the time, you know. That was all his life. So it's hard. Wrapped up in their business. You know what they were telling you. Yeah, he was. Yeah. This was a very good friend of mine. She's a doctor in Kalamazoo, Michigan. And when I was teaching school, she sort of took care of me. I worked so hard that she was kind of Czechoslovakian. She traveled all over the world. And wherever she came, when she came back, she had clothes from that country. I don't know where she got this beautiful big shawl. But anyway, she did. Did you take on students, young people to teach piano, give piano? I used to give piano lessons, yes. In your home, then? In your home? Well, wherever I lived. Not in my home, because we didn't. But I did. I gave piano lessons. And as I say, when I taught school, I was always helping the kids with their music. So when you were growing up, now, you had an organ in your home. Yes, we had an organ. Was it kind of unusual to have an organ in a farm home? Well, there were other Swedish families that had organs. We had John Peterson that had the seven boys, you know. They had an organ. And some of the old, and I used to go there and play for them. When they got old, you know, they would, and I used to sing those Swedish songs. How did you learn how to pick up the music? Did you by ear? No, no. I, no, I. Who taught you to play the organ? We had a music teacher that would come in the country there. And played organ? And she would, I would take lessons from her. And I was the only one in the family that seemed to want to do things like that. So I was more in the house than the rest of them are. But anyway. So then you. And then after a while, my father bought a piano. And that was something quite different in that community. See, there was nobody. Did the people say that it was unusual, I mean, unnecessary to buy a thing like that? I mean, there was. Well, Dad wanted to. Now, he loved music, see? And he knew I liked to play. And then when I, after taking lessons in the country like that, this woman that would come and teach me, then I went into Allegan and took lessons from better teachers there. So I should have stayed in that. I should have stayed with my music more than. I shouldn't have gotten married, I guess, and just said. But I had my son. I have a nice son. I wish you could meet him. Wait, wait, wait. Oh, oh, oh. I forget. I have a stump in my hand. How about your son? Was he interested in Swedish things, picking up Swedish? Well, of course, he grew up with us. So he took part in the. Your mother-in-law, did she tell him or taught him some verses and prayers and stuff like that when he was growing up? Yes. In Swedish? In Swedish, yes. I wish I'd done a little bit more with him. Did she favor more Swedish than English when she was getting older, your mother? Your mother, my own mother. Was she talking Swedish at the end? Oh, yes. Of course, we talked Swedish with. Oh, yes. We talked Swedish. Oh, yes. We talked Swedish. She came and lived with my older sister and me. Matilda? Yes. And they talked their Swedish. My mother used to tell all about her life in Sweden. And that was interesting. Sally must have that. Yes, that was written down. I guess you've maybe seen that. So how about the younger they get, now the children that were born here, were they less interested in Sweden, the Swedish background, you think, than the one they were born? Well. Or was the voice worse? No, you see, well, of course, we married into, you know, married English fellows, you know. But when we get, we don't do it anymore. But we used to get together and talk Swedish when we got together. But there's not the one, more or less, for the emphasize on the Swedish background, like the one that were born in Sweden. Were they really Swedish compared to you that were born here? Well, they were more Swedish. They were more Swedish. Did they speak Swedish with an ease than later on in life with your mother? Well. How did they marry? Did they all marry non-Swedes? You mean the? Or the 10 kids, no? Yeah, none of them was married to Sweden. They were all outsiders then? That was a little bit unusual, too, you know, really. So the kids now of you, then, your son is not that much interested, but your sister's children, they're taking Swedish and belong to Swedish groups, like in Russia, as you mentioned. Well, she, there's so many Swedes up there. I don't know if you've ever been up around there. Well, you know there's so many Swedes there. Yes, because of that. And so. Nearness also got interested in it. She just wanted something extra to do, I guess. And so she's been taking these Swedish lessons from a girl right from Sweden. She and her husband live there. I don't know what it all is about. But anyway, I sent her my Swedish songbook that I had, my Sunday school book. And I think she's going to go back. You see, they've had a vacation now. I think she's going to go back into it again. And she's enjoying it anyway. I don't know how much. Well, they get together and they have their, they sing together, I guess, in the Swedish. Your sister, Hilma, she went back to Sweden several times. Yes, she visited our cousins over there. When she was older. Yes. Did her husband go with her? Oh, yes. He did? And he couldn't speak any Swedish. But Hilma speaks it very well. What did he say about the Swedes? Oh, he loved the Swedes. In what respect? You see, there were three cousins, three cousins of Hilma. And when Hilma and Wesley went, they visited that Hilma cousin. And she was married very well. Beautiful home. And they entertained. Do you know anything about the sp채tkaka? Yes, sp채tkaka. Well, they had a special sp채tkaka made for them when they came. Then, in later, a few years after that, my sister Matilda and I had a birthday on the same day. She was 10 years old when I was born. So we always celebrated. And Hilma, our sister, made two cakes. I had the black cake, and Matilda had the white cake. And the cousins from Sweden sent us a sp채tkaka for our birthday, which was a real night. Really interesting. So your mother, she told you about the background of the special cake for special occasions. Yes, mother knew about it. But she never made one here? No, no, no. She didn't have the tools to make it. That's it. You know all about it. Your brother, Donald. Yeah, well, I was going to tell you about him. He couldn't understand anything. But he just enjoyed it. He said, if there's ever any place I'd like to go back, he said it would be Sweden. And he told about how royally they treated him. Had seven courses for the dinner. And they had different wine with each course. So it was really high stuff. But he enjoyed it. Then we had other cousins on father's side. No, on mother's side that were artists. And they visited them. And mother had a cousin by the name of Rosendahl. And he was a painter, just a natural painter. So he sent us all a picture. When they came back, they all had a picture that he had painted. I have one. He painted the Madonna. It's a copy. But that's one he wanted me to have. And then his daughter. Oh, gosh. Yes, his daughter. They were all painters over there. They had nothing to do. So they had to do something. And she sent me a picture that she had painted. How did your sister, I come back to that again, she dropped everything Swedish in cooking and housekeeping when she became the wife of Mr. Lee. She had to be all English then. Tea in the afternoon, in the morning, whatever you have, and all English. No. No, she didn't. Did she bring in me all in Lutfisk? Yes, she did. Oh, yes. Absolutely. Oh, they loved Lutfisk. They did? And she used to entertain a great deal. She always had people there. So he adopted all those strange ideas. This and that. With herring, too. Yeah, yes. He likes him. Yeah. Yes, he just loved everything. He loved everything she made anyway. She made, you know. So no, she didn't go into that way of English. More, she just kept it. We had the rice pudding and things like that, you know. But anyway. Going back to Christmas again, if I remember now. Did you have Santa Claus coming when you were a little girl? And Christmas presents under the tree? We had presents. We had presents, but we didn't have Santa Claus. He never came then to the hospital, do you remember? No. You couldn't find Santa? We, I don't know. We were more connected with the church, you know. We had our Yuluta. And you had the Christmas tree in the church, too? Oh, that was one thing. They had a beautiful big tree. But they were all the real candles. It was full of candles. But it was the real candles that were lit. And were they lit, too, during the Christmas? They were all lit during that Christmas program. And my father sat down in the front seat and watched that tree, watched those candles. Because if anything had blown up, it was a little church. And there was only one entrance, you know. So he sat there and watched that Christmas tree all the time we were having our program. It was lit only once then, during that time? Oh, yes, just that time. We didn't have it lit at Yuluta. Did you get presents then at that time in church? Do you remember? Yes. They handed out, I think it was just candy or something like that. And how old were the people when they were all of that? After confirmation, you didn't go to that service, particularly as a kid? Well, you see, many of them moved away. After they, after they, I know our family did. My sisters didn't. But now when you were confirmed, then you were regarded as a woman and a boy like a man. He had to take his work and he couldn't get married or whatever it was. I mean, wait a few years. How about the kids now that they went to church? When did they get their manhood and womanhood, so to speak? In other words, you took the confirmation and then you were an adult. Yeah. And you didn't. Well. How did the rest of the people that didn't go to church, how did they differ from the people that went to church? Do you remember that? I don't know. Seems to me that. Did they have a more free life to the people that didn't go to church? Well, there weren't enough people there. They were around. We were all, as I say, we only had one Catholic family, one English family. Well, maybe. Where did they go to church? Oh, the Catholics. They had their own church. In Ellington? No, no. Way up in Watson Township. They had to. And they were faithful. Believe me, they went to church. But there were others that didn't go to church at all. English people, I don't know who they all were now. But it was a Swedish community. But when you had the bond dances, everybody joined together. Then they got together, yeah. They had a great time. And they used to have colossus, if you remember that. Colossus, yeah. And we would entertain, and they would entertain. Maybe two or three families would get together and have a dinner in one place. And they were not necessarily relation? No, they didn't have to be relation. They were just neighbors. And they were all poor, really. They were all working people. When something new was bought now on the farm, which one had the preference, your dad or your mother? I mean, she wanted a new stall. You said you were talking about a new ranch she got. How about your father? He wants a new buggy, for instance. Maybe he should buy that before this. My father was a farmer. All he thought about was land. And he had to work awful hard. And he bought, this farm was for sale. And it had belonged to a colonel in the army. And he had all kinds of trees, plant fruit trees. It was just full of apple trees, pears, and all kinds of trees. And that's the farm that dad bought. So we were raised on fruit. And all the good things, see? But he never had any consideration for what mother should have. So it was a big event when she got this ranch. So the outdoors on this? Yes, it was all outdoors. And he was with his horses and his farmland, of course. And he was a wonderful farmer. And what did he do? And he would put his foot down. I've got to have something now, like a washing machine she didn't have. Oh, no. They weren't, you know those Swedish women that came from, they weren't used to having things like that. So she had to, then she, mother had a loom, an old loom that she bought from some, got from some old man from old Sweden, a man by the name of Larson from Kansas. He was his, oh, my mother took care of so many people, sick people. She took care of his wife. And after he died, why, this man with his children used to come to our house. And mother would, oh, she had borders there all the time, you know, but there's no money coming in. And one of those men had a loom. So she bought this, she got this loom. And made rugs. And she loved that. But. How did they get the ideas, all the neighbors, they were in the same situation. There was no washing machine. No. There was no convenience of any sort. How did they get the ideas that there's got to be some better things? Well, mother really was advanced. She was more than. Did she read a paper? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. They learned to, oh, yes, they learned to read the paper. Do you remember if she had Kvinnan och Hemmet from Cedar Rapids? The what? A Swedish paper from Cedar Rapids, Iowa. No, I don't think. She had a Swedish paper from Chicago. There was a monthly magazine that came out with new things. Oh. But you don't remember that. Isn't that a Chicago paper that she got? No, that was the Swedish. Svenska. Tribunen. Svenska. Amerikanaren Tribunen. Yeah, that's the one she had. She had that one. And you know, she found a letter in there written by a man right from her own vicinity. And she corresponded with him. And they exchanged ideas, you know, like the old times. That was quite interesting. Was he living over here? No, he was still in Sweden. In Sweden? Mm-hmm. But, yeah, oh, yes, they read the paper religiously. They couldn't read English when they first came. But Dad, and he was a good politician. Was he interested in politics? Oh, yes, he was. He was a Republican. Very much so. Was he running for? No, he didn't run for anything. But he, I don't know how he heard everything. It must be through the papers, because we didn't have television in those days. But he could tell you about Taft and these presidents, you know, and he would read about them. McKinley, Taft, and himself. Yeah. Uh-huh. There was a line on them. So they were very well, of course, they were made American citizens as soon as they possibly could, because Dad said, this is our country. He wanted to go. Yeah. He never wanted to go back. He never talked about that? Never wanted to go back to Sweden. And not your mother, either. She never discussed it? She didn't want to go, no. She had to. It was an awful trip coming over. I guess there were six weeks on the water. So they scared her off. And they never went back for a visit? No, uh-uh. But didn't Sally bring you some pictures from Sweden, postal cards? Yes, I saw those. Well, I still. How about now when you got older now, your kids? Did you have any? I didn't want to go back. I didn't want to go to Sweden. No, you never went back. I know that. But when you were growing up down in Elgin, didn't you tell your mother, you need this thing now? You need a new ranch. You need a new pencils and so on. Did you have any pressure on Dad, instead of him buying a new colt or a new buggy? Oh, we couldn't do much with Dad. What did he buy in machinery, for instance? Oh, he was very fond of horses. And a nice buggy? Oh, yeah, well, yes. And we had a single. Wasn't this some kind of a status to show off a nice horse, beautiful horse, and a new buggy? Yeah. He had that? Yes, we had a double buggy, and we had a single buggy. And we, of course, in the later years, we drove back and forth to Elgin, you know. You mean you had a team, then, instead of a single horse? A single horse. Oh, yes, he had a team, too. For the buggy? Oh, yes. Yeah. Oh, yes. Oh, gosh. Wasn't that necessary, though, to have a team in front of a buggy, if you were going into Elgin? Yeah, he had two horses, yes. We had a white horse and a black horse. I remember that so well. And a double buggy, where we sat in the back seat. Oh, gosh. I don't know. Those must have been crazy days. I wish I had a movie of them. And you were all able to drive a team of horses? Yeah. You, too? Oh, yes, yeah. And there was no runaway. Their last horse, the dead head, was a racehorse. And beautiful horse. And I tell you, you got him on the road, and you couldn't stop him. I never drove him. But one of my sisters did. I don't know if that was Alice or not. But he, well, I'm telling you, just you get. I know one time, I was going to school in Allegan. And we had a cousin, Axel Swante, from Sweden that had come over. Dad had helped him to come over here. And he was working in a meat market in Allegan. And his name was Swante, too? Yes, his name was Swante. No, Sturm, S-T-R-O-M, Sturm. It was dad's nephew. And so I was going to ride in with him to go to school, and he was going to go to work. And he had a little race buggy, you know, rubber wheels. We got in that buggy, and I'm telling you, he just sat just like that and hold that horse. And it just went like a streak until he got to the place and stopped right there. It was the fastest trip you ever had to Allegan? Never had such a fast trip in my life. Well, he's a beautiful horse, and dad just loved beautiful horses. So mother had to go without a lot of things. So she was content to work. Yeah. And I don't know how she did it, because she worked outdoors as much as she did inside. Did you try to tell her to do things in a different way? Well, we always helped her. We were always working with her. My oldest sister, Matilda, her mother was a dressmaker, so she could sew. If she just had the material, but my gosh, you know, they didn't have anything in those days. So my oldest sister did a lot to help my mother. So my oldest sister did a lot to help my mother with clothes, sewing and so forth. And she was taught by her mother. Oh, yes. And then my next sister was good at sewing, too. But now, like Hilma, she was in school most of the time. But it seems to me, you know, nowadays, the last few years, the people are, you know, sloppy clothes, you know, they are not ironed or anything, and dripping dry and everything. In those days, you watch the photograph, when they were in Sweden, she made a beautiful dress, the frock or whatever you call the dress, and all those creases to be ironed. They made a lot of trouble for themselves to stand there and iron the clothes. They made a lot of trouble for themselves to stand there and iron for three hours. Was that really necessary? Did you ask her many times or sometime, is this necessary to do all this ironing? Oh, well. What did she say then? Well... That was the way it was done, and that's the way it should be done. Sure, there was just no let up at all. No shortcuts? No, they had to do it just that way. Because pillowcases, towels, everything had to be ironed. And those linens. Oh, when I think of it now, I don't know how our mother did it. It was not really necessary to have ironed towels, you know, when you dry your face with it, but they would never think about putting something in with not iron on it. They didn't feel good then. Well... You never just slept with her? No, I don't know, we just got along. We all worked together. She had us working. And we were always busy. There wasn't a lazy bone in the family. No spare time trouble. Yeah, we didn't... And we got along all right. But I don't know, we just had a small farmhouse. I don't know where we all slept. And my father was the kind, he invited everybody in. Strangers, oh, come on in, sure, you know, just like that. We lived right... We had a railroad track back of our farm. Yeah, by the way, you got a lot of trams to hop in. Trams, yeah, they would stop in. They would stop in and Dad would feed them. And, well, we had... He never said no? He never said no to anybody at all. Do you think he wanted to have some news from some other part of the country? Well, he was interested in people. He wanted to know what they were, what it was all about. And they were, some of them were real tramps, you know, and they were all right. They weren't there to... All they wanted was a meal. And you were invited into the house? And they were invited into the house. And one night... Did they have a nice and everything with them? I mean, they never slept at all? Well, I was going to tell you. There were two men that came one night and they wanted to know if they could... if they could have a room for the night. So he said, well, we haven't got a room in the house, but you can sleep in the barn if you want. So they went out and slept in the barn. Next morning, of course, Mother had them in for breakfast. Dad was always asking. Dad was kind of slow in talking, but he wanted to know what they were doing. And... They were missionaries. So he said, oh, he said, what denomination? And they were Mormons. So he said, get out of here. He said, there's the door. He said, I don't want anything to do with you. They had had experience in Sweden, the Mormons. They had come there and taken some of their wives away. And he said, there's the door, just get out. So, but they were the only ones he ever... We would come home sometimes at night and there would be somebody sleeping on our couch. But wasn't there a risk, though, that those people brought lice because they couldn't have washed or anything? No, they were tramps. They were tramps. And this little, our little sister, she was only seven years old, and she was alone. She came home from school and Father and Mother were somewhere else. He was at 2, he was at 2. Yes, and he was sitting down to eat then? Yes, sat down to eat, and then he left. But they didn't harm anybody, you know, those tramps that came along. Did they offer to help out with something? I mean, cutting wood or... I can never remember that. Has anybody ever offered to? I can't remember that at all. Anybody's stated. It just seemed they wanted something to eat. I can't remember anything. I don't remember anything. Anybody's stated. It just seemed they wanted something to eat and then go on. It's a bad habit, though. I mean, how they could... I mean, if you really think back on all your parents, they raised ten kids. And today, not one of you could live and survive longer. It would be impossible. Yeah. But they did it. Yeah. That's... So, anyway. Like your parents now, did they discuss that with you, that you have it much easier than we had or anything like that in the later years? Well... No, really. I don't know if we discussed it so much, but... Now... I went home, see, to live with my parents, take care of them. Down at the farm? At the... Yes, down at the farm. You had a boy with you and... Yes. And my father... Well, he had sugar diabetes, so he... So he wasn't very well, but he wanted to ride. So I would take him for... in the car, and we would ride and ride around all his farms, you know, to look over everything. And then we came up to Grand Haven a great deal. He loved to come up here and visit Hilmo and Wesley. And so we made a lot of trips up here. And... He was so interested. And he said he loved the woods up here where my sister lives. She had a home right across from Duncan Woods. This is Duncan Woods. And their home is right across from that. And nobody's supposed to build anything over there. And my father used to go through those woods and just walk through there. And he said it's so much like Sweden, like his home. And he loved the hills out here in the... around Grand Haven. So that was a treat to him. So he wanted to see the... Yeah, he......size of his farms also. Yeah, yeah. So he was able then to keep three farms. Yes. And pay for them and... Yes, and he worked... Well, he always had what they called a hired man. There was always somebody that was with him. And they worked the farms. And there were three of them. And that meant many times we had to pack dinners and take it to them or... Oh, it was... We were busy. So he was too old then when he came into the tractor age. He didn't... He never bought a tractor. No, never had a tractor. There was always horses. No mules. But this cousin of ours... Well, they had tractors. They really made... You know, they were more... Well, they... They were more advanced, yes. But when Dad worked those farms... And my brother either. They didn't have tractors at all. By horse and by hand. Yeah. How old was he when he died? He was only 72. He died young. He had got sugar diabetes. And we didn't know. In those days, we didn't know what it was all about. So he never got a treatment for diabetes. Well, he did go to Ann Arbor to the last. And he was supposed to be on a strict diet. And in those days, you know, it was terrible. So it was awful hard. It's surprising he could survive up to be 72. Yes, yes. But then finally he had infection in his toes. But they didn't have to amputate. He died before that. But he... He loved, you know, to be on the farm there. And he watched the hired man. And watched things that were going on, you know. And he was able to... With his cane, he walked out around the farm. And then I had to take him to the other farms to look over that. So... So you were one of the kids then that had a chance to be with them. Yeah. The numbers that they had. Yes, I did. Oh, yes. That's why I have... That's why I have these albums, see. When I was there, I collected all their old pictures that they had. How about your mother? What age was she when she passed away? She was 82. She should have lived longer too. But... I was looking after her. We were living here in a small apartment. But it was getting too much for me. So I got sick. And I had to go. I went to Kalamazoo to be with my sister there. And I was there two weeks. We put mother in a home here in Grand Haven. To a Swedish lady. Mrs. Carlson was her name. She was a real Swede. And she and my mother had the best time talking and singing Swedish songs. And my mother had a regular vacation when she went there. She had lots of fun. Well, I had all her medicines and her vitamins and everything. And I had it all written down. Now you're supposed to take this. And gave that to Mrs. Carlson. I said, now she's got to have this. Because she had had shingles. And so I said, she's got to have this to keep well. When I got back, I had to stay three weeks because I was so sick. When I got back, there was just nothing to her. She hadn't taken any of those vitamins and things to keep her going. So she was just worn out. And she just died like that. You know, it was kind of because she was strong. Was she clean in her head? Oh, yes. All her mind was good. And so was my father. Yeah. Yeah. That's one thing that, even with my sister that was 90 in Florida that died, Matilda, her mind was good. She knew. She was homesick and wanted to come back to Grand Haven. And then I had one sister that died of cancer. Her mind was good. She suffered. And then one sister, Marie, she had pleurisy. And it went into tuberculosis. So she died young. And she had a little girl the same age as my boy. And she is living, she's living up in Minneapolis where all the Swedes are. So you were taught to eat meat and drink plenty of milk? No, I never drank milk. Why? I could not stand it. Never? Never. I don't to this day. I know I said to my... Who told you that? Well, I just couldn't, I couldn't drink it. It just went against me. And to this day I don't drink it. So you never had milk then? Oh, we had cows and everything. I could milk, I tried to milk a cow. I put a clothespin on my nose. I couldn't stand it. You didn't take care about the smell of the milk or of the cow or... No, I couldn't, I couldn't stand the smell of milk. So that meant that you were not looking for a farmer then to get married? I say not. Far from it. But... How about the rest of your brothers and sisters? Did they drink milk and... Oh yes, they were all healthy. Everyone, they were healthy. How about meat? Do you... Well, I... Of course I've studied health so much because I was crippled with arthritis at one time. I couldn't even raise my arms up over my head. So you started a special diet then? I'd exercise and I went to Arizona for the winters. To your brother? I bought a trailer out there. And my sister Matilda and I went back and forth. Alice went out there too. So she bought a mobile home out there. But when Matilda couldn't go, I had to sell my trailer. But Alice lived out there much longer. So it's just a few years that she's come back to live in Kalamazoo. She was so used to it out there and had a lovely home out there. So it was quite a change to come back here and live. So she lives in Kalamazoo. What did you change now in your diet? Because there was not only the climate and the exercise that get away with arthritis. Well, I had to... I took an awful lot of vitamins. And I doctored with chiropractors and osteopaths. They helped me more than... Did you cut out the meat then? Well, I... Yes, I just... I eat a little meat, but not very much. How about bread? I love bread. But I try not to eat too much of it because it does put on weight. I'm just careful, so I... And then I take plenty of vitamins. But now you walk like a 20-year-old. I don't... I know it is surprising that I'm as good as I am because... I mean, you are born in 97 here. No, I'm going to be 91 now in January. So I've been... God's been good to me. I don't know. But they always say, you know, if you like to be old, you got to eat like your parents and the grandparents. But you haven't done that at all. No, I have... No. And not too much meat. No, but I... How about lutefisk and herring? Well, I like it, but I don't eat very much of it. Very seldom. It's just a general diet. But I take... I'm great on vitamins. I was just in the hospital a while ago. I take pneumonia... I get pneumonia very easily. And I got pneumonia before... the walking pneumonia, you know. You don't know you got it. So I got down and they discovered I had a blood clot on my lung. So I was in the hospital, so... But since then, I've just been fine. Now you are looking... So I hope I can keep on. But if I can't, I'm ready anytime. Are you going down then to rest in elegant at the Sandhym? Oh, no, I don't get down there anymore. I had a Swedish... There's a Swedish man that worked at the Challenge by name of Dahlstrom. He and his wife took me down a year ago. And oh, they just loved it, you know. He can talk Swedish and he knew the minister and every... He knew so many of the Swedes. He's from, well, up north where there are a lot of Swedes, you know. But otherwise, I don't have any contact with any Swedes at all. But... So Sandhym is just a memory? Yeah. Good memory. And we had wonderful parents. We really did. And we all stuck together. And you had your experiences and ups and downs and all the tensions? I had plenty ups and downs, but I never gave up. And I worked here and there and everywhere. And I had to... See, I had... It was Hillman-Wesley, see, they took in my son when he was only a year old. And so he grew up with Sally and Alice and Jim. Oh, they just took care of him, you know. I'm telling you, they had... So they had him for... Well, he was just like one of their brothers, you know. But then when I went to teach, then I got him where he went, stayed with his... So you were able to get him through high school and college and continuous education? Yeah. And he was on his own and he was born 1927? Yeah. And he went to... He's a smart boy. And he went to... He went in the Army. So when he got out, he went to Colorado Springs College. And when he came back here in summer, he took different kind of jobs. He was very... He has a wonderful personality. He got a job down here at the hotel. And that man was so... Liked him so well and saw how efficient he was. He wanted him to go into the hotel business. But my son wasn't ready for that. He wanted more experience, I guess. Another summer, he went with a man and his wife on their boat. And they went up north and everything. So he... That was his job for the summer. He didn't like that either. Well, then when he got back here, he got into the challenge machinery. And now his uncle Wesley, he was so crazy about my son. They both were. Hillman, Wesley. They would have adopted him. But he had too much of his father in him, I guess, because he wanted to do something for himself. Yeah, but it sounds like he had to drive on the swampy stuff. He wanted. Your son. Yes, he did. From your side. He wanted to get ahead. Well, he did have a chance when they took him in the challenge. And my sister, Matilda, worked at the challenge at the same time. And she said she was so thrilled the way Wesley took a hold of things. Out there, she said, well, he just seemed to know how to do everything. And there was a gal that worked up in the engineering department that got her eye on him, and she was going to have him. So now is this on record? Is it really? Oh, gosh, I don't know if I should tell you all the personal things yet. I don't know about this. You should. It's interesting to see what happened. Don't ever let it. Don't let the family read it here. Well, anyway, she was she got a hold of him and got him away from the challenge machinery company. Well, it's pretty broke my heart because I know how he could. I just knew how he could have made good in the company. And and my sister and brother in law, they were so they were so crazy about him. And then for him to get away like this, to break away from everything. Well, it it was such a shock to all of us. Why did he do that on his own? Well, he wasn't strong enough, I guess, to to this gal. It's a regular. Well, I don't know if I shouldn't say this. So she manipulated him. Yeah, she really did. She she was a Christian scientist and she had her father was she had a hard life. She was the oldest girl in the family and she was a very quiet girl. Pretty girl, but very quiet. And Wesley knew her in school. See, when they were going to school, he had taken her to one dance in school. So he knew her. But then when she worked out there, he got more acquainted with her, you know, and he saw what an unhappy home she had because her father was a he was a brute, really. And I think he just felt sorry for her. I really do, because. But after she got him, it just seemed that they got right away from here and just kind of divorced in themselves from our family. So it's been kind of hard. So they left for California. They did. Well, they traveled all over. I don't know where they were. How about your husband? Did he get contact with your son? No, never. There was a break completely. He just. There was no, you know, you can't imagine anyone like that being. We didn't know where he was. He just wanted to be for himself. He's very selfish or just for himself. Now, you didn't look for any company after that, did you? It didn't make any difference to me. I had all I could do. But he's still living. He married again. So and I when I brought up my son, I never he did once and once in a great while would come to see. Your son, my son. But he never bring him anything or we didn't know where he was half the time, but I always had my son send him birthday cards and send him Christmas card. We wouldn't we wouldn't even hear. But I always I didn't want my son to get the idea that that he was a bum or anything like that. Because he really wasn't. He was just a spoiled brat. And I don't know what you're going to do with a man when they get so spoiled that you can't do anything with him. So we didn't know where he was for a long time. But my son was bound. He's going to look him up. So he now it's a year ago when he came home from California to see me. He went around to see his father and his father. He lives in Wisconsin. His father has been out to California to see where my son lives. And of course, he's an engineer. And when when my son bought this new house, beautiful big home. It was an old, old place, but it had to be rewired and everything. He was there and helped him and did all he could for him. But I I bet it was kind of hard for him because I think he I think he saw what he what he had missed out. Because as I say, my son is my son is an awful nice boy. And it took them many years for your former husband to grow up. It did. And I don't know. Of course, he's married again. And I guess and they had two children. So my son has got a half sister out there and they get together. She's a very fine girl. But as I say, I always had my son respect his father because he was he was, you know, decent. He was just a spoiled brat. That's all he was really. And so my son had seen it. So he was what they call in Swedish mammas pojke. Yeah, he was. You heard that expression? Yes, you bet I have. Mamas pojke is right. Did your mother comment like that when she knew what was going to happen with your husband? Well, when he was a little bit spoiled and you probably told your mother, did she say that expression? Well, I can I can remember her, you know, but I can't remember just all those things. Oh, I I wish I could remember more about it. As I say, this this these sisters in Kalamazoo and Hilma, too, they can remember my life was here and there and all over. I had to just think about something like this all the time. So I guess I was kind of mixed up.