 In this case, in the case of ornamental brass, he wasn't what you call a good administrator. He concentrated on sales, early and late, and didn't have the time or energy to check in the production. And our costs were too high. So he never walked personally down the shop floor? Yeah, he did that because in spite of all his other work, he took it upon himself to be the one to be a cost estimator. And he'd have a paper and some of the employees would kind of smile about it. He'd walk around and ask each firm, well, how many can you do an hour? And so on and so on. Mr. Carlson, who was superintendent, he noticed that and naturally was wrong, so he gave me that job and it was interesting. But you couldn't expect the manager of a factory to have that detail work. So in other words, my dad—and it was the reason for the, you know, we got new inquiries for new items. What's the price going to be? I had to make a cost sheet. And that was a part of sales, of course. My dad concentrated on sales and he really put ornamental on its map. We sold in Rockford and down south and all over and gradually increasing. And then the Rockford factories, we had no trouble. They'd almost automatically buy from ornamental because a lot of them didn't like Mr. Hoagland out at National Lock. And I remember I'd go around, oh, any business you get it, your ornamental's going to get it, you know, just like that. Just a minute. But at that time when you started, there was also a new kid on the block, as they say, Aldine Brothers. That's right. Amrock. That's right. They were an offshoot from Lock Company and they knew the business from A to Z. Now there's a good comparison. Those boys knew the business and they put it over. And they might say my dad didn't, but that doesn't mean they knew the business. My dad went into something, of course, a lot of people say, well, he shouldn't have gone into it, and that's probably right. But anyway, the Aldines were successful. Yeah. So they continued under the— That's right. They started maybe their business just about the time my dad went into ornamental. But that's right. One advantage they had over us, though, they knew the—they got one of the Lock Company's best salesmen, Mr. Lou Bernats, he automatically went over there, and others. And of course we got a few Lock Company men, but they knew—the Aldine Brothers knew the best ones, you know, and they got a hold of them. Because a lot of them, although I admired Mr. Hoagland, he was kind of tyrannical. And a lot of them didn't like him because he was really tough. And so the Aldines, they had the advantage there. So over us, I remember during the Depression, the purchasing agent at Amrock, he'd call me up. Later on I took care of the purchasing and, oh, production, a lot of different things. Mr. Stan Lindroth, he'd call up. You know, we had a lot of cold-rolled strip steel and coils that was more or less—or for hinges that maybe we didn't have too much need for. So Stan would call up, if you got this or that or that, and we'd have it, we'd sell them, give them probably a slightly better price than if they had to buy it direct from a mill. So they appreciated that. So I got along good with Amrock myself. There was no jealousy there, although I think the Aldines—I remember one time, see, Amrock was then over on South Main Street. We had a superintendent and we needed—but for some reason he left or maybe we let him go. We went over to Amrock and asked Mr. Yitter Aldine, the older one, well, who can we get for a superintendent? Mr. Lindroth and my dad and I went over there. And I remember so well, Mr. Aldine—I think he was a good fellow, I didn't know him too well—he kind of, he said, well, Mr. Lind, I know you and respect you. And he kind of slightly—and I think a lot of them felt, well, why should Mr. Brolin go into that? He doesn't know him, but a lot of people felt that. But there was a certain fellow by the name of Boyson, he was a Danish fellow, Leonard Boyson, that was a prospect for superintendent for us. And Aldine said he didn't approve of him too much. He didn't. But anyway, I guess, yeah, we did hire him, but he didn't pan out too good. But your then, or this Ornamental Brass Company, it was started before Amrock? Oh yeah, Mr. Lind started it. I suppose Hawaii started something. But you see, he was at the Rockford Chair and Furniture, and it's surprising how much hardware they would buy, stuff like this and hinges. Well that ought to be—and I want to get them for my own factory. I don't think he—and I don't see how you expect to get them any cheaper. The price we sold him was the same as anyone else. But maybe he didn't like Mr. Hoagland maybe, or something like that. But anyway, he started this, very small scale, it didn't amount to much. My dad immediately—and so Mr. Lind said, won't you come in? And so my dad went into it, and he went full force. He didn't put in $5,000 or $2,000 or $10,000, he put in $250,000, you know, in a period of two or three years. So your father was the president of this company too then? Yeah, yeah. This Lind now, is his daughter, Julia Lind, still living? She was working with the Post Lucretia for many years as a librarian. Well, now Robert Lind, he didn't have any children, but he adopted a girl by the name of Eileen Lind. So Judith, I think, might have been a niece, but he wasn't a daughter. I don't know, was she living, I wonder? No, this is Julia Lind. Is she living, do you know? Yes, she is. I don't know if I know her. Oh, I know one of the Lind women, who was a niece of Robert Lind, who still lives on North 2nd. She goes over to the Erdlinder, home to the Swedish Historical Museum. I see her over there occasionally. And she was, where did she—oh, she was a librarian at the main library for many years. She knows a lot about the industry. But I think that Julia—I don't think it's the Julia Lind that— Is that the same Lind? No, I don't think so. I don't think so. National Lock Knot, they were well or bigger prepared to do a lot of different things, more than you did. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. So their main thing was not only to make ornamental brass stuff. Well, they made locks and they made screws or fasteners. It was their biggest business. Oh, yeah. Lock Knot, at one time, was considered, I guess, one of the biggest in town. You got to give Mr. Frank Hoagland credit. He was a fighter. He had a lot of trouble with everyone, but he was a fighter and he did a good job, I think. He came down here from Sweden. That's right. And he and my dad were good friends. In fact, here's a side of a side light. When my dad got married, Mr. Frank Hoagland was my dad's best man at the wedding. And the wedding was at my mother's folks' home on 9th Street, kind of a small home, and a pretty good size bed. It was in June. And somehow the minister didn't show up. And so naturally, you know, everything was delayed and I suppose everyone was nervous. So Mr. Hoagland was the best man he thought of. And he was a resourceful. Oh, I'd go and get another one. He got in his horse and buggy and drove over and got another minister to take care of the wedding ceremony. So he was not married by the first minister, you're dead. Evidently not. Now, who the minister was, I don't know. And I never did hear the reason why he didn't happen to show up. I never did hear that. But that's the type of, oh, he was resourceful. And I often think I must have made my mother awful nervous because she was a little on the nervous in a big crowd of people. And they never talked about it. I forget who told me someone did. So like I mentioned yesterday, Hoagland, they were trying to get rid of him, get a new manager in there. And Oscar Landstrom maybe was after the job. So there was a fight among the stockholders who to vote for. So my, actually Hoagland wanted to control the stock. So well, no, maybe, anyway, they owed a lot of money to the Mississippi Valley and Trust. Hoagland said, I've got to have $75,000 or we're going to have to close up. So three fellows, each put in $25,000. My dad was one of them. And then not only that, after my dad got the stock, in order to get, so Hoagland can control it better, my dad just sold it back to him with no profit. See? It was the national lock. That's right. Just to help. Just the way they were wheeling and dealing. That's right. But a lot of fellows will say, well, I got $25,000 of stock and you're going good. I ought to get at least $35,000, but my dad just gave it back to him for $25,000. So they were real brothers in business then. They trusted each other. Yeah, but Hoagland got, he was, he didn't like it because we were taking business away from lockup, you know, but from the local factories mainly. That's right. Your dad, did he think about anything when he went into the ornamental brass? To hurt his best friend? Well, my dad was the type that could make decisions, and if he had to choose between Lind, he thought the world of Lind, Robert Lind. He probably figured, well, if I'm going to help anyone out, I'd rather help Robert Lind and do him a favor than Hoagland. But Hoagland, like I mentioned, when my dad was 65 years old or more or less, he went entirely out of a job and he just had to work. Hoagland gave him a job as a clerk up in the office, and my dad appreciated it. So you know, you know how it is. You can have a good friend and you might be a little mad at him a while, and then you come back. When they closed those deals, though, and there was a lot of money involved, did they use a lawyer to write the contract or was just a gentleman agreement between Hoagland and your dad, for instance, buying the stocks and he was giving them back? I think it was just between the two of them, yeah. Nothing was written on or anything. I don't think so. They trusted each other. Oh, yeah. I forgot to ask you earlier about the Arkansas deal, 14,000 acres. Did they use an out-of-state bank, that Mississippi Bank in St. Louis, to do that deal? Mississippi was one of them. It was used quite often, though. Why did they have so much business to do it? Maybe it started through Mr. Hoagland because when the law company was expanding, maybe he heard about them and got started with them and they gave him money. Maybe Mr. Hoagland said, well, if you ever need any money, go to the Mississippi Valley. But they had probably other banks, too. It was in St. Louis? Yeah, yeah. And then this People's Bank, no. They always said that the Swedes, they stayed on the east side of the Rock River and the west side were the— That was the tendency, yeah. Yeah, there was the Irish and Italians and non-Swedes. Yeah, this People's Bank, now that your dad was a big stockholder, it was on the west side. Why did he go over there? Well— Why didn't he join the security bank on Broadway with Engstrom, Truman Johnson, Engstrom and Gustafson? Well, I think early in business, when my dad was early in the game, I don't think the Broadway bank had even started. I think one of the older banks was the old Third National Bank, which is now the First National. Mr. Spafford was the owner or whatever, and he probably banked there. And he banked at the Manufacturer's Bank. In other words, but I suppose—and exactly how he got, made up his mind to go over to the People's, I suppose he tried them. They said, all right, we'll give you a loan. He won another loan, paid them back, and he got acquainted. Frank Wormwood was the president of the People's. Frank— Wormwood. Wormwood. And he thought the world of my dad. And they were good friends, and I remember so well, in the Breschen, maybe it was 1932 or three, there was a phone ring from my dad. And it was Mr. Wormwood. See by that time, my dad was in bad. And naturally, the bank can't allow that. You have one of your directors in bad shape. So Frank, in a gentle way, oh, my dad says, that's all right, Frank. I realize I'm—you just take me off the board of directors. That's all right. But Wormwood thought the world of my dad, and probably that's one reason that he was given credit and so on through the years, because Mr. Wormwood thought well of him, see. But then, like Mr. Linde would say, there's a day of reckoning come where your loans may come due and maybe you can't repay them, and so on. And that's what happened during the Depression. My dad was the type that if he had money, he'd pay you immediately. But I've heard people say in a roundabout way, well, Mr. Brolin was slow paying. He was slow paying sometimes. They were big money, too. Yeah, that's right. And but, yeah. Was he the only Swede connected with the People's Bank? They had the head cashier—remember him, short stocky fellow. He was a Swede, Södergren. And he was—I think he was the head cashier. My dad, I think, worked through him. And then later, I think, he got another job in Milwaukee, but he's dead now. But that bank was mainly the Westsiders, Mr. Burpee and all the people out at Gunite who—anyway, there were Westsiders, but a lot of those Westsiders—I remember I took my dad down the station one time and he met Mr. Ingersoll, or was it Mr. Brenningham, or the Emerson Brenningham. He said, hello, Will, how are you? How's everything going? Pretty tough going or something like that. In other words, I think a lot of them had a lot of respect for my dad. They really did. When people were talking about the Westside, what was your thoughts then? Were you thinking about the English side, the Irish, Italians, or non-Swedes? How did you receive that statement? Well, as I remember when I— Because there was still a lot of fights going on between the Swedish workers there. I remember when I went to grade school, I don't know why, there was a St. James, that was a Catholic school right across the halley, so we'd have fights. There was one Italian fellow, Joe Cassiope, and he and I—you know, there was a certain amount, oh, the Swedes are tougher than the Italians, or vice versa. So we'd kind of mix it up, and there was a certain amount of that, I think. And then from around 19—I'd say 10 or 15 or 20, we had two athletic clubs, the Badger Club on the Westside, Irish mostly, maybe a few Italians, and the Rockford AACs on the Eastside. They were all Swedes, and they'd have a football game, Badgers versus RAC. And oh, boy, was there a lot of rivalry and a lot of enthusiasm and interest. That was—everyone would talk about it. And I'm not saying this to brag, but the Rockford Eastside generally won those games. They beat the Badgers. One year, the Badgers, they loaded up. They got three fellows from Notre Dame—Rockney was their coach at that time—to play with the Badgers. I can't think of their names now, but anyway. So there was a lot of rivalry. There was a certain amount of animosity between the Westside and Eastside. And probably the Westside businessmen probably figured, well, we're smarter and we know more than those Swedes over there. There was a certain feeling. In fact, they say the original idea of the Faust Hotel is we want to have a good hotel on the Eastside. And I don't know if it's true, the Westside has figured, well, we'll call our bluff and put one up first or something like that, but they never did. And yeah, there was a certain amount of that. Then they used to say that on Saturday night, the Irish from the Westside and the Swedes from the Eastside would meet down by the river or by the bridge and have a kind of a fight. Now how much there's to that, I don't know. That was before my— You were never with the State of Arizona? No, I was never there. That was before my time, yeah. But you were born on 1905. You were about 15 and in your 20s. That's right. You don't remember hearing anything about this parade the Swedish Socialist Club had in the First World War? Yes. When somebody was arrested? That was what you call, I think they called it the IWW. And I remember that. And I think— Mayer and Hosner was with the— Well, no, I think he came in later. Later. As a mayor, I mean. As a mayor, but he was— Oh, yeah. I think he was. And I remember that, yes. And I think it gave Rockford a little black eye or the Swedes a little black eye. And I remember when we lived on Hall Street, where the Sunbird Pruner—we had a pretty good-sized garage there, a two-car garage. And the election committee asked my dad, well, can we use your garage for registration for the draft, World War I? Sure. And so I remember there was probably—they had put several long tables out there and had maybe six or more at each table. And then the people would come in to register. And so one morning, or one day, it was about the middle of the morning, one of the clerks in there came into the house and said, well, is anyone here can talk and understand Swedish? And some other, I don't know why, we didn't learn the Swedish language. We had a—but anyway, we had a maid, Alfie Nelson, big husky lady. Oh, sure. So she went out in the garage to interpret, you know. In other words, some of these—oh, I don't know if it was typical of the Swedish at that time, but maybe maid off they couldn't talk English and just to try to get out of it, see? But anyway, Alfie, you know, translated back and forth. Yeah, I remember that. And some resisted. Well, now, how much they resisted? They probably said, well, I don't want to go. Maybe if I don't—if I can't give them the information, maybe they'll forget about me. But I don't think it amounted to—I think it did give Rockwell a little black name, though. Some of them went to Bridewell in Chicago. Oh, I didn't know that. They sat there for about ten months. Oh, I wasn't—I'm really not— You didn't know that they were there because you were too young then. Yeah, I think so. I think so. And you don't remember a newspaper mentioning anything about it either? I don't remember that, no. How about—if I go back now to this Swenson, the anarchist, the hell of an anarchist, I mean, he shot himself. Was there any local news here at the time? Do you remember reading it? There must have been some notice of it, but I don't remember reading it. I really don't, no. I really don't. But they came out, I suppose, because they spread with— Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. It must have. It must have, yeah. But I don't remember it, though. But I do remember that my dad had to write back and forth to Sweden. He went and took care of all those details. And of course he had to confer with the pastor of the First Lutheran Church, Mr. Seedorf, Reverend Seedorf. Were they engaged to Swenson? They were engaged and were soon to be married. And I remember reading several letters where Mr. Swenson was writing my dad, well, I want to get some nice furniture and will you help me get it, and so on and so on. Yes. So what happened with Seedorf's daughter then? Was she down there, you think, or was she in Rockford? She was still in Rockford. She might have been on a visit down there at one time or another, but she hadn't been living there. And how she would have liked it there, I don't know, because a lot of blacks there and so on. But anyway, I think they were, you know, going to get married. And all I can remember is that Mr. Swenson got in some financial deals on the side of his own that he couldn't pay or something. Oh, I remember one thing, another thing. See Mr. Swenson at that time was a young man. He was eligible for the draft. And so my dad in Lundell wrote the judge down there, can't we have him exempt because it's a more industry, they need lumber. And I guess the judge finally helped Mr. Swenson to be exempt. And I remember Swenson, he says, he didn't seem to be in favor of it, I saw several letters. But I think my dad insisted on it. He said, well, Mr. Swenson, you send someone down that's a good talker. My dad wasn't particularly an orator or articulate type, and probably maybe that's the inference I got that Mr. Swenson thought someone else could do better on that line. But anyway, he was exempt. And then some people down in Helena thought Swenson was a slacker, and I guess they jumped all over him, maybe insulted him one way or another. And then one time I remember, I don't know how it came up, I asked my dad, well, how come, why did you ask for Mr. Swenson to be exempt from the draft? And my dad just said like this, I didn't know any better. And I suppose he thought it was the thing to do at the time, but probably would have been better if he hadn't. But there was the possibility of a young man if he was needed in the business. Oh yeah, absolutely. They needed a manager down there. Yeah, that's right. But it's strange that they sent this green Swede down there, because was he able to converse in English if he came directly from Sweden? He must have had some education in the book work. I think he, yeah, he was probably primarily an accountant or a bookkeeper. From Sweden you think? From Sweden, but as I recall, he taught good English and so on, but just how long he had, whether they got him direct, I don't think they would have got him direct from Sweden, they must have known about him around here someplace, but he was, you know, hadn't been over long anyway, but how long, I don't know. So there was no Swedish colony down there with other people. No. There was no people employed down there. That's right, that's right. So he had a tough time. Yeah, I imagine he did. Imagine he did. And they were, you see, in spite of the fact that the lumber company was started by fairly well-known businessmen in Rockford, none of these Swedish businessmen probably had a terrific motto. They were in the furniture business and struggling themselves. So the mill down there was always short of working capital. And at the last moment, either Lind or Lundell or my dad would put in ten or fifteen or whatever to keep them going, and that kept on for years and years. It's strange how they could do that. Yeah, that's right. That's right. But you see what, now, but Mr. Lundell, by sticking it out, not he personally, because he died in 36, maybe that mill, I don't know, I'm just guessing, maybe that mill down there was sold by the boys, Lundell boys, maybe in, we'll say, let's see, we'll say maybe they held it through the World War II. Maybe they sold it in 1950, I don't know. But they could tell you. But anyway, they finally got something out of it. They took a chance on it and came out on the lucky side. Going back to the Depression, when did you or your family get the first impression something was coming on? You're old enough to understand what happened. You could read the newspapers. But the Swedes now, they came from Sweden in 1926, 27, 28. They could hardly read the English newspapers. Did they understand, you think, or understood what was supposed to happen? What did your dad tell you, for instance, when this crash was coming, tumbling down? Well— The Black Wednesday, 29. As I say, my dad didn't go into the stock market, so maybe he wasn't particularly hurt there. But then I remember, I suppose, maybe the first few days it didn't sink in, but maybe a week or two later it did, and everyone began cutting wages. But my dad says, no, we won't cut. Because Midsomer may only last six months a year. He was optimistic. So we just continued on the same way, maybe retrenched a little bit, and that naturally not increased wages. But then the furniture business would have stood still, so we didn't get any orders. And I remember my dad, when I started there, he was pretty good about paying salaries. He gave me, I thought, more than I should. Maybe I told him so, but he—well, we'll leave it that way. But after it got so bad, we couldn't meet the payroll. I think after the Depression started, the first year I got collected $75, and then for the next two or three years my dad didn't collect a nickel. And for two or three or four years, he and I, we didn't draw a penny. Not a penny. What did the workers say then? Were they mad at you and the management, or did they understand there was really— Well— Take them to sink in. I remember, you know, it got to the point, couldn't meet the payroll. This is something I've often wondered. We'd figure the payroll, make out the checks, hand them out, and the checks would bounce. A lot of them, not all of them, most of them. So the checks would bounce, and some of them were already cashed by a grocery store or something. And actually it got well known around, but they didn't—I suppose my dad, he was, well, got to do something. I'm going to do all I can. Mr. Lindell and Mr. Lind, they were supposed to be wealthy. They had already done what they could, and it couldn't depend on them. It couldn't go to the banks anymore. So that went on. So there was no cash around then? That's right. Well, maybe a week later enough money would come in to cover the checks. But that happened almost—you see, in those days I think we—did we pay every week or every two weeks? Every two weeks, I think. But some other—no one did anything about it. My dad was sort of a—they figured, well, he'll make it. He'll come back, and so on and so on. And I remember I personally, you know, I had a little money saved up, not much. I had a little. I remember Knut Bjorkman, he was our two-room foreman. He still—one time he was up against it. I gave him $75. He never—and I think he never paid me that. I see him on—we're good friends, but he probably—the fact that I was a son of the owner, that didn't mean—I mean, I couldn't help it. I mean, I did what I can, and Knut, I think, right way should have paid me back, but he didn't, and the others that way, too. But I didn't really get concerned about it, really. And so—oh, I remember one time I went down through the shop, and here are the—here are the plating room foreman, or the whole plating room and polishing department. They were just standing there. And in other words, they were—what would you call it? Down strike, I guess. So I walked through, and I suppose—I don't know, I realized how, but I said—I kind of told them, oh, you get to work, and not in a—I won't say in a mean way, and they listened, and they did go to work. Maybe they realized that there was nothing else to do. So—but— And the creditors, now, they didn't pay in what they bought from you, I mean, out in New York, Chicago, or—there was no money coming in. The collections were slow. There was one of my jobs, I'd go around to— Oh, personally? Yeah, and around to Rockford, like Dewey Lundquist. He owed a lot company. He—oh, I can't pay you. I'll pay you because he said my brother Ben, Ben Lundquist, was a salesman at Lockheed at Scandia, and he went into World War I, and when he got back, your dad gave him a job again right away. Of course, I don't say anything outstanding about that, but Dewey thought that was wonderful. So he says, whenever—I can't afford to pay anyone, but I'm going to pay Ornamental, you know, kind of like my dad, see? So—oh, excuse me. Funny, some of those people at Ornamental, oh, Mr. Gerber, though, he was quite put out because of course he was making, what, five or six hundred a month, which would be three times—and he was an older fellow, but I suppose he said, well, you hired me from the lock company, and you were supposed to be a well-known businessman, and we depended on you to put the thing over. My dad, oh, how hard he worked. And I'd say he did a good job, but, you know, mistakes were made, of course. But as a whole, as I recall those people at Ornamental, of course a lot of them are gone now, and they were always friendly to me, and so on. Well, I suppose when something like that happens, it feels better to blame someone. Oh, yeah, that's right. But in this case, though, I mean, your dad or your company didn't get the money coming in from where you sold the products. In other words, they couldn't pay—they were in hard shape. That is true. And that, you didn't pay the workers. That's right. And the grocery man, he didn't get any pay either, of course, because if the shape was bad. It was more like a panic, though. Oh, yeah. How did you see that? Were people talking about it openly, or were they quiet? Did they discuss it on the street, for instance, how bad it was and what the heck happened here? You mean our particular case or the depression as a whole? Well, I mean, you were a collector, so you could feel what the people actually said. What did they say when you tried to collect? Well, like Dewey Lundquist. No, he was all right. He was one exception, though. Yeah. Well, let's see now. Who were some of the others? Well, we sold a lot to Rockford Chair Furniture, and that was where Mr. Lund was, so he'd always send a check. Oh, and then once we sold Scandia Furniture Company, and Al Carlson was the one who took my dad's place. Either I or most of my dad in that case would call him Al. In other words, I guess Al and my dad were in good terms. Al, can you give us—oh, yeah, we'll try to. In other words, I think they realized that my dad was against—and then the Empire Furniture, Mr. C.J. Lumberg. I remember my dad went out there to see old C.J. Lumberg. He was a well-known business furniture man, and I don't think Empire owed us anything, but my dad explained, well, we're short of money. So C.J. Lumberg, all right, well, here's a check for—it was just small amount, a hundred dollars. See, that's—in other words, they realized the predicament, and I'm surprised that we didn't run into more trouble, I suppose. From a legal standpoint, they could have gone after my dad, but he didn't seem to worry because I suppose in his own mind, his conscience didn't bother him because he was doing all he could, doing everything he could. But then finally everything got to a stop. Yep. Thirty-two, thirty-three, and thirty-four. Well, now here's another angle to the ornamental. We were—let's see, how was it? Now our attorney said, why don't you file bankruptcy under Section—what was it? 11B or whatever, where you get a moratorium and then you pay off. So we got a mortgage loan, and this was done through John Lindell, a mortgage loan of $30,000, and John Anderson was the one that loaned the money. And at the end of the first year, we paid him the interest on the loan, plus I think the original principal payment was supposed to be so much a year. I think it was only $2,000 or something like that, but we could only pay $1,200. John Anderson would not take it, and that's all we could do. He should have taken it. Times were bad. And then, so John Anderson went to his attorney, N.P. Nelson. You foreclose. N.P. wouldn't do it. In spite of that, he was the attorney for John, and John Anderson ran a coal and lumber—originally he ran a meat market, one of these fellows that saved money, a very religious church. Sometimes that kind of turned me against the church. I'm a good Christian, but a lot of people who go to church every Sunday are hypocrites. So N.P. said, John, just think of the times are bad, and just think how Mr. Brolin has helped out and so on. You shouldn't foreclose. And then Nelson, he fired N.P. Nelson, and then he went over to Shelby Large, and Shelby Large was one of these—he was tough, I guess a good lawyer, but very heartless. So then he foreclosed, and then John Anderson took over the plant, but he didn't have much luck with it. I don't know how long he had it, but—and, you know, just think. I think what happened, and maybe John Anderson said, well, I'll make myself a lot of money on this plant, because he got it awful cheap with a tremendous amount of equipment in there. On paper it was worth machinery and equipment, and land was worth maybe a couple hundred thousand dollars. And his mortgage was only thirty, see? But he didn't have much luck with it, and finally I forget what year, maybe 19—what did happen to it? 1940, I guess he just quit, and oh, then some other type of machine shop went in there. But— But at that time also Amarok was in full swing. Oh, they were going good, yeah. Yeah. How about your father, of course, he was a thousand percent optimistic, always had a silver lining in his heart. That's right. That's right. How about the rest of the people? Were they gloomy or did they see any— No. —betterment coming in the sky there or— I think Mr. Lindell probably was somewhat optimistic. Mr. Lind, although he was more on the pessimistic side, I think. In other words, he saw clouds in the horizon. But he would come—you know, see, the Rockford chair in front of him, he was secretary right next door to RML. He'd come over. My dad and he'd talk things over a little bit and so on. And I think—but Mr. Lind, and I think my dad realized it, and he didn't blame Lind for it. Lind couldn't do anything. He had his problems of his own. Oh, I remember, you know, maybe John Anderson, he asked Mr. Lind one time, well, how do I know that Mr. Broleen is going to pay up? And Mr. Lind said, well, I've been in business with him as a partner for years. I never saw him do anything dishonest yet, see, and so on. But—and I think if John Anderson had let us go, we could have pulled out and—because we were improving all the time. Oh, Amrock, they would have—we wouldn't have ever got as good as Amrock, I know that, but could have made it. There was no organization or any church that offered any assistance, you know, to keep the people at work, because it was not only for the management. It was also for the workers. Well, well. They needed assistance. Did the churches do anything at that time? Do you remember that? Did they have meetings and talking, the pastor talking to— That I don't know. You know, I was confirmed at the—my dad—I mean, my folks sent us over from the—I mean, they were in the First Lutheran. They wanted us to go to Emmanuel, so we were confirmed at Emmanuel Lutheran, and I went to Sunday school and all that. But after getting out of school and so on, I sort of dropped out of the church, but—and maybe during the big depression, they had soup lines, but maybe just like some of the churches now, they have meals for elderly people and so on. But this paid by the government, though. Huh? Oh, yeah. This paid by the government, though. Yeah, yeah. During the depression, I have the feeling there was only Salvation Army that had the soup lines. I think maybe you're right. I think you're right. Mm-hmm. So— I think you're right about that. They assisted the people. Yeah, I think so. Mm-hmm. The thing, after I got out of the Third World War II, I happened to go over to the Faust Hotel. Someone was going—I was looking for a job, and I was to see someone. And there was Mr. Oscar Landstrom, who was quite prominent in business. So he—we were talking, and I told him—I was looking for a job. He says, you go over and see—you go over and see Dave Johnson of the Rockford Screw Products. And I did, but nothing—so anyway, the point of what I'm telling you—and I didn't open up on it. Oscar says like this—maybe he just did it to make me feel good. I suppose that's something. He says, your dad has done more for his friends and family and the business society and the community than any man that I know of, but got less credit for it. Then he says—let's see, what was the other—oh, yeah. He says, your dad has been the most sinned against man that I know of. And he says, I don't know why. And I think that's true to a certain extent. Oh, my dad never got bitter. Never did. I don't think he got bitter. Oh, he didn't like—I think he got a little bit disappointed with old—with Hugo Olsen of the Sunstrand. So my dad really got Hugo that job over there. Hugo was a bookkeeper, and I guess a good one. And one time, I think maybe it was in regard to the Benet Organ, my dad said, you go over to Hugo Olsen and pick up a check. And I think just before that, my dad got on the phone, and he really sailed into Hugo about—Hugo, I guess, hadn't paid his subscription. So I went over there, and Hugo did write out a check. I forget how much. But then—and I didn't like—I didn't say anything, but Hugo said something about, well, your dad should get a—someone over there to run the business or something like that. Then he says, why does your dad write his letters longhand? Why doesn't he dictate? And I thought that was awful foolish for Hugo to say that, because my dad's system there was the very best, I think. But I didn't really say anything, because my dad was really—I remember one of the things they used to say about him, he was very innovative. He was supposed to have gotten one of the first—when he was at Scandia, maybe in early, one of the first adding machines or typewriter ever. And also, my dad used to mention this occasionally, Mr. Atwood of the Atwood Vacuum Machine come over. You know, they started making vacuum cleaners. My dad was the first one to buy one or something like that in Rockford, you know. So he was innovative. But I didn't think it was right for Hugo Olson to criticize my dad just because his system of correspondence was writing longhand and then having him type. I didn't think that was right. But— So he wrote all his letters then to the secretary. But it was better, though. It was— It was better for him. —a misunderstanding, I mean, for the secretary. That's right. He could spell it out. Much better. You know, I've heard of other big men—or who was it? Was it General MacArthur did the same? Anyway, that's a minor matter. But I mean, of all the men that—and my dad helped, I remember so well. Hugo Olson, when I was a kid, he'd come over to the house. At that time, there was—what was it? Elliott Fisher or some big out typewriting concern, adding machine concern, were suing Sunstrand for patent infringement. And Hugo Olson was worried to death. So he'd come over and maybe—as my dad would say like this, well, it's tough, all right, but I guess we better stick to it. And fine. And Sunstrand won the suit. See, they weren't—so my point is that Hugo Olson probably could have helped my dad more than he did. Oh, another thing. Barney Flynn got off the mat. Barney Flynn of Seidman Seidman, he was—I think he handled the audits over there. My brother Willard was working at Sunstrand as—he went to MIT, and he was a good—a very thorough engineer. And the Depression came on, and Hugo Olson had to retrench. And I think—I give Hugo credit for that. He pulled that company through the Depression some way or other. But he laid off my brother. And Barney Flynn, he didn't—he says, all that Mr. Brolin's done for you, why should you lay off his boy? And, you know, jobs are hard to get. So I agree with him. He should have—Willard was good. My brother's name, Willard. So he never came back? He—then he was laid off, and then he got a job with Ernie Swenson of the John S. Barnes. So—but that was—but Willard didn't know if he could get a job. I think he was out of a job for several—three or four months. But finally, then he got the job with John S. Barnes. But Hugo should not have laid him off. And there was Ernie Swenson was the boss there at Barnes. Yes, yes. At that time. That's right. He was a tough cookie, too, wasn't he? Yes, he was. I remember Ernie so well because he came over from Sweden, got a job at Sunstripe. That's how he got to know Willard. Willard was over there. And, you know, he was all by himself. So Willard or my dad or someone would invite him over for Christmas Eve. We had all the relatives over at our house over there. And it was quite a gang. And Ernie always appreciated that. But Ernie was tough and sort of— So you remember when Ernie Swenson came over from Sweden? Yes. I see. Yes. And Ernie was—you used to tell us he was a gymnast. So he could—we'd go out in the yard and he'd turn one of these cartwheels or something or other and— I see. So he became very successful with— Oh, yes. Sure, he did. And he gave Willard a job. And Willard did good work. Willard worked early and late. But Willard was the only—Willard was slow in his work. Was he a tool and diamond worker? No, he was what you'd call a mechanical engineer. So he went to school and MIT? Right. So he worked there for how many years for Ernie Swenson and Morse? I imagine Willard must have worked for Ernie—let's see—40. I'd say 30 years. Do you know Carl Lindy? Yes. Oh, every time I meet Carl Lindy—do you see him much? Oh, yes, sure. I know him. Just for the fun, ask—do you remember Willard Brolin? Ask— So they worked together? Yeah. Oh, yeah. You ask him just for the fun of it. And let me see. I don't want you to think that my dad made mistakes and he probably had his faults, too, but another fellow I remember, a businessman, Art Nordstrom, he was—oh, Art Nordstrom, he was in business, in real estate, and there were different things. He says, I used to work—he told me when I worked for Scandia Furniture and I went in to your dad, I was a shipping clerk, he says, and I didn't think I was getting enough money. So I went—the superintendent said, you go and see Carl Swenson, the superintendent, you go and see Mr. Brolin. So Art says, I went in the office and talked to your dad, and your dad said to me, well, maybe we can give you a raise, but you've got to produce more, something like that. And Art got a big kick out of it, but I guess they decided on an increase. And then Art said, you know, he said—and he used to come over and visit occasionally. Art said, your dad was the gamest man that ever hit Rockford, you know. He got into some—and got in deep trouble, but he never gave up and so on. During the holidays, now, did those people, business partners, did they get over to your dad's house and could relax a little bit, or was it all business all the time? Business for instance, did your dad take any vacations? Very little, if ever. He never took the family or the kids? Oh, well, on Sundays, I remember when I was a kid, before automobiles really came in, my dad had a horse and buggy. The barn was down on South 6th Street, or South 5th, I guess it was, and what was the name of that horse? It had a really nice looking horse, and we had a nice buggy or cab or whatever you call it. Did he drive it himself? He'd drive it himself, and we'd go on a little ride someplace. So he was—in other words, probably, it must have been tough—probably my mother figured that my dad spent too much time on business, but they worked it out. But my dad on Sundays would devote it to the family. But those old-time businessmen, I don't think they were too, you might say, socially minded, but I do remember Lindell and Lind and Wester, Knutson, maybe Holklin, they would meet—for a while they were meeting over in our French porch in the summertime. It was a nice big front porch. And then later they went to Scania Coal and Lumber office on a Saturday night and just talked things over and maybe socialized. And then later to the John Wester drugstore. But they didn't seem to join the country clubs or anything like that or play golf. None of them—Hugo Olsen didn't begin to play golf at all. And Desiree Swenson, he was a gymnast. Yes. Did he practice even later, I mean, joining the Swedish gym? Did he go into the Swedish gym? I don't think so. I don't think so. No, I don't think so. But oh, now as to—you know, I don't think—let's see now. My dad was—he didn't smoke and he didn't drink. I won't say—I remember one time John Lindell was over on a trip to Europe. He was over in Germany. And I was looking through some old correspondence and Lindell wrote to my dad maybe in regard to a business matter. And he said, Willie—or was it Billy? Willie, I wish you were here to join me in a glass of beer. And so I suppose when—in his younger days, but at home, he was death against liquor. Yes. He didn't like liquor. And I don't think any of—oh, but I remember one thing. John Wester, he was a good fellow. He ran that drugstore. And he wasn't a drinker, but every Christmas he would make up some glug. So I heard about it. So just for the fun of it, I went over there. Mr. Wester, I'd sure like to have a little glass of your glug. And he kind of hesitated a second and finally says, all right, but don't tell your dad. So he gave me a good glass of glug. Did he belong to the temperance, your dad? No. My dad wasn't one to join—I don't think he even—oh, when my dad passed away, the under—Mr. Olson come over, the Olson mortuary. And he wanted to know all—he asked a lot of questions and wanted to know all the different places where my dad had worked and so on and organization. And I said, well, my dad did belong to the Svea Sona, but Mr. Olson kind of pooped. He said, well, you don't put that in there or so. But I think early in the game, my dad probably—but he wasn't—you know, Svea Sona, they liked to drink and nothing. But my dad didn't like that. So I don't think he really did much in any social organization to speak of. No, I don't think he did. How about in the political side now? Did he hold close with Hallstrom and Blum and— I remember when Hallstrom was elected, you know, he was a union man. And I guess he was a socialist, wasn't he? Sure. And Mr. Well didn't live next door to us, and he'd cut through our driveway to where a short cut to going downtown. And as he was going by, my dad happened to be out just after Hallstrom was elected. And my dad, in a kind of joking way, said, well, Mr. Well—well, and his name was Will, too. Well, I think we better move on to Rockford. We've got a socialist mayor. But later, my dad got acquainted with Hallstrom and kind of complimented him, because Hallstrom changed. He became more of a businessman. And his ideas were—my dad said he was at several meetings. And I think Hallstrom was connected with the Faust in a way. And my dad would say, well, Hallstrom, he was kind of quiet. He didn't say much. But when he did say something, it was worthwhile, you know. So I think my dad liked Hallstrom. But he was all—my dad's always been a strong Republican, yeah. Always Republican? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Did he come to your house at any time, Hallstrom? Don't know if he did, no. Because he was a much younger man, yeah. How about Bargrain, now, the police chief? Oh, my dad knew Bargrain, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I think he liked Bargrain, yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. I think he liked Bargrain. Did he cater for the big guys in Rockford, you think, the police chief? I wouldn't doubt that he did to a certain extent. But still, I think he did a good job. In other words, I suppose some businessman got into kind of a scrape, and he—I think Augie Bargrain was the type who would kind of help him out a bit. I think he was, but still not to extreme, I don't think. I think—but I think Bargrain was more—I think he did a little drinking, I think. I don't know. But I think my dad kind of respected Bargrain. That's my impression, yeah. How about the rest of the police force, Lindstrom? Oh. A lot of stories about him. When I went to grade school, hall school, Emil Lindstrom was a janitor. And I think they gave him the job purposely so that he could learn the English language better. And I remember him so well. And I knew his boy. His boy's name was Thorwald. I don't know what happened to him. He was sort of—or Thorwald was a short, stocky, redheaded. But yeah, Lindstrom I remember very well. And oh, I remember, you know, in my young school days, we had two Lincolns. And my sister, younger sister, she had a bunch of girlfriends. And so once in a while she'd say, can't you pick us up over at the park where maybe they were playing ball and take us someplace? So yeah, I did. Maybe three or four or five girls. And one of them, just to have a little fun, one of them said, let's go through town and ask the policeman where we can get married. So it was on West State, on East State. So and it happened to be Lindstrom. We stopped and the girl says, hey, we want to get married. And Mr. and Lee will listen, he reckoned, you go home to 215 Hall Street till you see your dad. Yeah, I remember him. So he was a real old Swede. Yeah, I was very old. Do you remember any of the old origins, like Bruce Albin was one that...