 Then we have October 6, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Cesar Johnson, Omaha, Nebraska. Your parents, now, they had, did they have a farm outside Stratford? My father had farmed earlier, but he had a sunstroke, very bad sunstroke, and that meant that he couldn't do that heavy work, so he went down and studied pharmacy. Actually studied, it was a combination medical and pharmacy course, and he thought for a while he was going to be a doctor, but almost froze to death in, I believe, in 1899, I think was, was that very severe winter, and switched over to being a pharmacist so he could be inside. Where did he go to school then, in Des Moines? At Drake University. Drake? Mm-hmm. Drake was, at that time, had a medic school, which later became a part of the University of Iowa, and he had also had a, obviously a pharmacy school with it. So he became a pharmacist then? Yeah. Mm-hmm. And he started his own, or did he work for a pharmacy? Well he first thought he would practice medicine, and he started out with the first year after graduation at, at Spirit Lake, Iowa. Spirit Lake. So and then he married your mother? Yes, well not until after, he'd been married first. He married a lady by the name of Minnie Lush, L-U-S-H, and she died of tuberculosis in, I believe in about 1903. And then they didn't have any children then? No, my father had one child, and that half-brother of mine has been dead now for ten years. His name was Gerald Johnson. And then your mother, she comes from Stratford, Iowa? She came from Stratford. And there was farmers in her background also? Oh yeah, very much so. Also with farmers. Yeah. And before I go on, then your father, he was born in Andover, and his father was enlisted in the, for the Civil War. His father? Not, not my father's father. No, this, this is my grandfather, the father of my mother. Oh, that was the one that enlisted? Yeah, yeah. Oh, I see. And he came back then and took a homestead in, in Iowa? Well, he, he, I think he got 80 acres somehow, and then he bought, arranged to buy some more land to make it about 240 acres. What was the reason he came up to Iowa at the time? Was it because of the homestead act, you think he could? Well, I think partly that, but it was partly because it was Swedish. Oh, they came there early? Yeah, all the people around there were Swedish. It really, along with the people at Madred, Iowa, is about the earliest Swedish settlement there is in Iowa. But there's Sweden, New Sweden, of course. New Sweden, too. Yeah, it's earlier, yeah. 1845. But then they, so you were born then in Stratford? In Stratford, yeah. Did your father move back then to? He moved after, after he'd, he went into drug business at Iowa Falls with a partner of his that he learned to know about in school, and that seemingly didn't, it wasn't enough income for both of them to make a good living, so then he acquired his own drugstore at Stratford, Iowa. And he stayed on there then? Yeah, and well, he didn't, he died quite young when he was 56 years old, so, and I think he, I don't think he practiced pharmacy after, oh, about, about 1907, somewhere there. And what was he doing then after, he just bought the drugstore then, or? No, he tried to do a little real estate business. He was not well, he had a heart condition. So there where you grew up then and went to school. What church did your family belong to, Lutheran or the? Well, my family was in that group that didn't like the fact that the Lutheran church was being moved to Stratford. When the railroad came through in 1865, I believe it was, they decided that the congregation ought to be at the little town of Stratford, and so they decided to move it. There gave the trouble to my grandfather on my mother's side, and he was a staunch believer that since he'd helped build the church, why he wanted the given area for it to be built on. And the cemetery was closed by at the time too there? Oh, there's two cemeteries there. One of them at Sweet Bend, and one of them at Oakwood. And how far away from church was that Oakwood cemetery? Oakwood is about two miles and a quarter. It was strange they located a cemetery so far away from the church at the time, wasn't that the ground? Well they had a cemetery right close to the church to begin with, and my grandfather didn't like that at all that they were going to move the church away from the cemetery. I see, so that became a split then. He dropped out of the church, or what happened? For a while they went to the rural church at South Marion, Iowa. It was a Methodist church? It was a Methodist church, and then later went to Stratford. His funeral was held in the Methodist church. So he was one of the founders then of that Lutheran church out there? Yes. He was a deacon and trustee? I don't know what all he was. He was a man with a lot of ability, and I think he let somebody else do it when they were doing it well, and when they weren't doing it so well, he objected. The covenants they had the same trouble in their congregation? So the reason why they built the church out there away from Stratford is because Swedes were living there on the farm, close nearby. So he had to travel a few miles into town then? Yeah, two and a half miles. But it was bad in the wintertime of course. But they didn't mind the winter, they came from Sweden. Yeah, I know, but they wanted the convenience of having the church nearby. Well, they all had horses and sleighs, and it worked pretty good. So you were born right in Stratford then? I was born in Stratford, just on the edge of Stratford. Did you stay with your grandparents on your mother's side for some time? Did you learn to know your grandfather? I learned to know my grandmother very, very well. She spoke Swedish only? Yes, no, she spoke English too. She was a very wonderful lady. Did they use much English when they were talking to each other? The family used a lot of Swedish. They did, among themselves? Yes. But the war came on in 1918, or 1915, and it was not the thing to do to talk Swedish. Especially in Iowa, there was a law then from the Governor Hollers, or what was it? Yeah, that forbade the use of any foreign language. And they came into the churches too, they couldn't preach Swedish? No. So they affected the... Well, they allowed them to have a Swedish sermon once in a while, like at the Covenant Church. They had Swedish, I think, one Sunday out of the four. I see. So that rule was obeyed then? Oh, very much. But after that, completely? Very much. So that's when the Swedish disappeared more and more then? Yeah. So you didn't speak Swedish? Oh, I spoke it a little, but it was frowned upon. There were some English people in our little town of Stratford, and they took over. In fact, the town of Stratford was established pretty much by an Englishman. It was, what is it called now, Stratford on the... Avon. Yeah, that's the one. So how come he settled out there on the prairie land? Because it was back to 1840s, 1850s? Well, actually the... My grandfather on my mother's side, they were good at lumbering too. The town that they come from in Sweden is right close to quite a lumbering center. They had synagogy at one point? Yeah, Jostunavukkulan. So they got a job at the lumbering camp in Wisconsin right after they came. Actually they were employed to come there so that the cost of coming over here was borne by the company. There was a law later on. Yeah, right. There was no indenture, no servitude. That's right. Carnegie used that type, you know, from the Bohemian people. And the steel mills in Pittsburgh. So did they talk much about Sweden like your grandpa and grandma? Well, my grandmother did. She did? My grandfather was dead. He died when I was two years old. I see, so you never... No. But on your mother's side, though? On my mother's side, my grandmother on my mother's side died when she was about almost the same time as my other parent on my father's side. What kind of sickness did they have? I think it's hard for me to know. I don't know what the illness really was. My grandfather on my mother's side was wounded in the Civil War. Yes. Wounded in the chest and was fortunate to be able to live. He was taken a prisoner in the Civil War by the Southern forces. And so he was never a very well man. Did he reveal any of his living down south during that time? Well yeah, he was sympathetic to the Southern cause in a way. But he didn't like the idea that people didn't work. And he felt that the workers were not the blacks. Although he was very sympathetic to the blacks, too. So he was an aggressive man? Yeah, he was a big tall man. You mentioned something in your memories there that you showed me that he was mad when he found out somebody got $25 for him. And this. Yeah, down at Ridgeport. You know where Ridgeport is? No, I really don't know. That's between Boone and Stratford. Mineral Ridge is one town. They called it two names, Mineral Ridge and Ridgeport. So it's not there today, though? Well there's a little, there's an old store or two that, and a church that was there back there. The church is not the one that was back there. There's a Methodist church there and there's another church there, too. And I don't know what that is. That may be a Baptist church. But there were quite a few churches around there in Boone, Madden, Mongona. And there was a lot of coal fields around. Well there were three coal fields at Boone, West Boone. Boonesboro, they called it. So a lot of Swedes worked in the coal mines then? No, not any of my people. So you didn't have any connection with any of them? No. But did you go to the Covenant Church at any time in Sweden? I've been there. But I grew up in a period when there was a lot of antagonism for moving the churches and so forth. So I'm a self-educated Christian. So you didn't belong to any church there? Were you confirmed at South Marion? No, I never was confirmed in my life. So how about your sisters and brothers? My sister was... we all went to the Methodist church in Stratford. But they were not confirmed either? No. My sister and I were baptized at the same time by my Uncle Warner, the Methodist minister. And he was a United Brethren? Well he was first a United Brethren, but at the time we were baptized, he was a Methodist. And he was a Swede? Yeah. Well, he was my father's brother. He was your uncle? My... yeah. Farbror? Did you use those expressions at any time in your home? Murfar och farfar och moster och faster? I don't remember them that way, but there were many Swedish expressions. My parents got the idea sometime when they didn't want us to know, they'd talk in Swedish. Did you hear the expression svenska kroken? Yes, svenska kroken, svenska pojken, a lot of the other terms that are common to the Swedish language. But they died out then more and more? Yeah. In the 1920s and the years to follow. And you went on through high school? Yeah. And then you went to higher learning? Yeah. Well I didn't go immediately, I started one year at Ames, Iowa State College then. And it was a land grant college. The college had started, you know, in the Abraham Lincoln period. The land grant act was an act that Lincoln fostered. Yes, it was the homestead. 14th of May 1862. Yeah. That was the year. And they brought many Swedes to the farmland. And got them a good start. You came right into depression though. Oh in 1933 it was a terrible depression. And there was a bad depression in 1819 there too. It was also a bad one. How was your father able not to send you to school? He didn't tell you to go out and work or he was for education? No, my father died you see when I was only 15 years old. He was 52 then, I see. So it was your mother and they had to bring you up. How about your two brothers and sisters, did they also go to college? My one brother, he enlisted first in the army and then in the navy. And my sister did not go to college. My dad died and there was no money. We were in poverty. You had to sustain your living then through a college of working then? Well I worked some and I worked with the government when I finally got my law degrees. It was in 1938? 1933 to 1938. 1933 to 1938? Well, 34 to 1938. So did you come from a republican household now? I came from what some of it was republican but I was a democrat. You were a democrat? And am yet. You are one of the few in Omaha then? Yeah, well. Everybody I meet here are republicans. No, but I'm a democrat. So you could see then that Roosevelt's idea that you really believed in him? Oh yeah, well I was chairman of the republican committee to elect Roosevelt in 1932. The republican committee? No the democratic committee in 1932. In Ames? In Ames. Yeah. So and he won there too, Roosevelt? Sure, that's when he first won. He won in 1932. But he ran against an Iowa boy though, Hoover. Yeah, well that didn't matter. They didn't like Hoover. They didn't? No. So he was a... Hoover came from West Branch. Yeah. Not too far from, well a little bit far from Stratford though but... Oh quite a ways. It's probably 150 miles east. That's right, yes. On I-80. Oh but, so you were actively employed by the politics, in other words the workforce? Well ultimately I got a job in Washington, D.C. and that's where I took my law. It was at the end of 1930s then? Well I started, I started to go to law school early in the morning at 7 o'clock in the morning until 5 or until oh about 8.40 and I took law every day for, until I finally got my first degree and then my second degree and then a third degree and finally a fourth degree. So you came out of what law school? I came out of what was then known first as Southeastern University, run by the YMCA. But during the war it couldn't get pupils so it more or less consolidated with the Washington College of Law and George Washington. And then I also got a law degree from the Catholic, my master's degree I got from the Catholic University of America which was then known as Columbus. They now call it Columbus College of Law Catholic University. And this located where? In Washington, D.C. So you spent law years then in Washington, D.C.? I spent nine years in Washington. Were you interested in politics then during that time? Oh very much so. I used to get up to the hill almost every week and get to the Supreme Court building oh whenever there was an important case that I thought I ought to listen because I was pretty much on my own. I had discretionary privileges. You could pass through the gate station? I did very well in law school and in other school, in the business school. So I don't want to brag but very few equaled me. You were able to sustain your living then? Well I was on a government salary. So apparently you feel pretty good then about the Roosevelt? Extremely good. It was really good for the people, especially the young people? Oh, he was a great man. Because there have been some complaining about the CCC and different programs. Yeah, well I don't know what it was all about. It was necessary to keep the young people off the street and get them to work. Sure, sure. But it was a wonderful thing, the youth administration and the whole business was designed to help people. So after the Washington years did you move to the Midwest? I moved first to Kansas City, Missouri with the government. I was an officer of the Farm Credit Administration. We supervised the Farm Credit Organization all over the United States. I was the assistant to the governor of the Farm Credit Administration. In Missouri? At Kansas City. Oh Kansas City, in Kansas. And you were married during that time then? Yes, we had children. You had a family with you moving over? Yes. And how long did you stay in Kansas City? Two years. And then on to another? Then I went to Chicago with a law firm and practiced law there. I was there almost seven years. And then you came back to where we are today in Omaha. Well, my wife was very ill with multiple sclerosis and she died of it. And so she had to have special care and it was a question of where we ought to be. So she liked to be with her mother. Her father was dead. So we settled in Webster City, Iowa. And you practiced law there? And then I practiced. I was a member of the Iowa Bar and the Illinois Bar. So I moved from place to place, week to week. So when you passed the bar exam in Washington, D.C., then you had to take a new one, whatever you... Oh yeah, I passed the bar in Iowa, wrote for the bar, 1956. 1957 I passed it in Washington, D.C. And then I did other law work too. And then when you came to Nebraska, you had to take another... No, because they admitted me on what is known as comedy. On my experience. So you had to transfer all your credits. And the same way in Illinois. Oh, it's the same way? So what year did you come into Omaha then? What is that? I started here in Omaha in about the mid-40s by coming here from Chicago to do special work for the Swansons. For Carl A. Swanson? Carl A. Swanson. I was his legal advisor. In the 40s? Yeah, the late 40s. Yerbe? Yerbe Commission. What was their name from? What did they come from? Well, he was a Swede. Yeah, he was a Swede. Yeah. And they came from Sweden and they hired Carl when he came over as a young man. So it was an American company? Yeah, it's an American company. It was called Yerbe Commission? Commission Company, yeah. What kind of business was that? Basically they were dealing in poultry. And also cream. They made butter and they had a big dairy. At one time they had the largest butter making outfit in the United States here in Omaha. And how did he get involved in the top position after a few years? Well, he was very shrewd, very sharp man. And it was hard to beat C.A. He mentally was outstanding. So he started from the bottom? Yep. And grew up and then he became co-owner of it? Yeah, well he finally became the owner of it. So he bought the whole thing then? Well ultimately, yeah. In the Depression he bought it and he paid too much for it and it almost had to be taken back. But they made a special deal and Yerbe didn't want it back. So there was an adjustment of the selling price and he stayed on and it was finally handled so that he was the big man. And he hired you then? Yeah. How did you know him? Did you answer the ad in the paper? No, I knew him from Washington D.C. days when he needed help down in Washington. He came to the Department of Agriculture and I was working in it. So I helped him and he became friendly with me and encouraged me to do things, even to move to Chicago to help the company when they needed help from the federal level. So he was national, why then with his business? And then he came into this TV dinners? Well that was one of the many things they made then. Actually the TV dinner was not brought out by Carl. Was he gone then by that time? Yeah, he was gone. He was gone to Campbell then? No, the TV dinners was brought out by his two sons basically. They carried on then? Gilbert and Clark. Clark is spelled C-L-A-R-K-E. So you were his chief advisor then in legal health? Yes. For how many years? He was alive for about three or four years after I started in for it. When he died, I carried on for the family. You were the executive secretary? Well I was the lawyer and did a lot of things for it. So you had to talk for the company? Many times. So how were the sons? He was a very shrewd businessman you said, Carl A. Well the sons were very able too. One son was very able on marketing, that was the younger one, Clark. And the other was very able on processing. And they both attended college then? Well no, Clark had had I think two or three years at the university, no one year at the university at Nebraska. And Gilbert had three years at Dartmouth. That's one of the top... One of the good ones. So the old man, how was he then? He was born in Sweden. Was he Swedish in his way of living? Yeah, he never lost his accent. He never did? No. But was he respected among the American businessmen? Very much so. He was a big man, I think about six foot three, and he was respected for his honor and integrity. And he was able to let his company grow up and to be a tremendous organization or company? Yep. And he became a wealthy man, the whole family? Were they supportive of the Swedish doings like the Emmanuel for instance? Oh, they were quite supportive of Emmanuel. So that's how you came into the board? No, my wife was... When I came here, she ultimately was put up in the home up there. She moved with you then? Yeah, so I could go back and see her every day. And I used to do it sometimes once a day, sometimes twice, sometimes three times. Depend upon how she was feeling. There was one that was at 36th and... And Meredith. So that's how you get acquainted with Emmanuel then? Well, it was because of my wife's illness. And then I was put on the executive committee and then later on on the board and... You became the president of the company? The president of it to build a new one. And that was in 65, 67? I think 65, when we bought the land. So you were the top of the board then? Yes. What happened here? Did they like the hospital to be moved with most of the people or? Oh, some of them didn't. The neighbors I suppose didn't want to lose the... The blacks were taking in and they thought that ought to be their place. Well they were coming in at that time? Yeah, a lot of them on the north side. The interview with Cecil Johnson continues on next site. Next site. So how were you able then to lead this operation of moving the hospital and build a new one? And you didn't... You were still in business at the old place. Yep. Meanwhile you were building a new one. How did it work out? Was it possible to... Well, nobody has worked harder for Emanuel than I have. And got nothing for it. You had to work with the community leaders and the... Yep, yep. How did you get the... I was chairman of the finance committee. To raise money. Yep. I raised a million and a half dollars in one week or two by putting personal telephone calls in. Well you had to visit them personally to... Sometimes I did. But not... those I called I knew I could get the money from. Who were the most supportive? And there was a wealthy Swede here. You had the Swansons and the Blooms and you had... Well the Blooms didn't help much. They weren't too wealthy. And... They were in the manufacturing of cabinets and... Cabinets, yeah. But the other Swansons, the Clothier, was he... Clothier, he came later. He was not a... He was wealthy though. Well he married a Swedish girl and she was wealthy. Can you pour me a little more coffee? I get tired pretty easy and I'm going to have to quit here before too long. You open this up? Yeah. Do you want... That's fine. Okay. And so you had to go out also to the Americans then? Oh yeah. What was your sales pitch to the Americans? What did you say? I can't tell you that because I talk differently to everyone. I'm dependent upon... I thought... There was no formula sales? No. So you changed pitch... Yeah, as the need required. But when you needed half a million, you didn't ask for five dollars. You asked for the top? I asked for half a million. And they were supportive of the banks and... Well, most of them were. Corporations. But how about the Swedes? Were they stingy with the money? Well some of them were stingy. I didn't do too much on that. I let others do that. I felt that there were others that could do it better than me. You went to the big ones? I went to the big ones. The ones that were hard to get. A million and a half in a short time of the week? I think in about a week and a half. I raised a million and a half dollars. So then you were ready to get the foundation in the upcoming? Well, there was lots of other things. We had to get it re-zoned. I had to put through an act in the legislature at the unicameral to get the long-term financing arranged which was tremendously successful. So I got downstairs showing that SID district number one was for Emmanuel. And that raised... We raised 21, almost 22 million dollars in one bond sale. The interest was very reasonable in bonds. So you also acted as a lawyer and advisor in this capacity of chairman of the trustees also? Well, I did quite a lot. I'll tell you, nobody's worked harder for Emmanuel than I have. And I mean it. Well, but it came out to be a wonderful place though. Well, this is a wonderful place. It's amazing how you in such a short time have been able to... And there was also a foresight of buying so many acres because you could... I was out there on that Saturday morning where it was bought. I got the word from Spence Brader that Mr. Sorenson, who was a Dane, had agreed that if it was ever offered for sale, the sisters of the deaconess would have the first right to buy it. So I got a call on the Saturday morning and I assembled two other men. Let's see, Cliff Nelson and the other's name was Carl Falk. And we went up there and between Cliff Nelson and myself, we agreed to buy it. And this Sorenson, was he a farmer? He was in the dairy business. So he owned that land up there? Yeah. And he was selling about 140 acres. How much did you pay for it then? Well we offered the equal of what he was offered. He was going to sell it by Monday morning unless we took it over. So you had to act fast. Yeah, so we didn't have time to ask for money or ask the board of directors anything. Cliff and I decided we'd take the risk on ourselves. So you stuck your neck up there? Almost a foot long. Yeah, but then you needed a lot of thank you then because there wouldn't be anything up there. There wouldn't be a thing up there. What did the people say though? Was it too far away for the... Oh, they all raised objections that had an objection to it. Others were happy about it. But this not getting things worth, do you think this is Swedish trade? They don't want to admit somebody did a good thing. You think there's something peculiar with the Swedish people? Well I think that they're somewhat jealous. And in being jealous they sometimes have their own flag to fly. And that's the way it works. But I'm sure you got some recognition for it. But I don't do things for recognition. That's why I don't like to give statements because they might be lifted out. But now when you have the 100th anniversary here, you... Well we're going up to the anniversary dinner on Thursday night. Then you can see the great part in it anyway. Well no one has more to give credit to than myself on the manual. You know the history behind it. Very much. And I've written all that up too. So if you know... There's about a 20 page article on that. About what happened. Yeah. That gives a very good... I'd rather not get too much involved in talking with you about it. OK. If you had stayed now in the old place, would there have been a 100 years anniversary this year then? No. You don't think so? No. There was no way to expand? Well there might have been something, but otherwise it might have been dead. They would never have been able to modernize it and make all the... No, no, no. There wasn't room enough. So there was a vision that Erich Alfred Vogelström saw in 1887. Well he didn't have the vision of where it is now. No I know, but I mean... Well, but you see an old picture of it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And then you have also a little garden. And the children's place. Yes. Oh, he was a very fine man. And he died very young. He was only 52. Something like that. So he probably would have been proud if he could see it today. Well, if he has eyes and ears yet, he'll see it. And then he got other Swedes like Cecil Johnson coming in and taking the... I didn't know Vogelström, but I sure learned a lot about him. Did you... Well, you met some of those old deaconesses, though, Boutinia and Felsen? Oh yeah, I knew most of them. And the old... Yeah. Nurses and directors. Yeah. Sirenius, Melia. Yeah. And past the Sirenius there was... Yeah, I knew Sirenius very well. He's still living, I understand. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's still living, I understand. Yeah. He's coming here for it. On Thursday? Yeah. Yes. He might be over 90, though. Oh, he's about that, I suppose. So he's still being strong. He wasn't a great leader. He wasn't? No. Yeah, how was it now, if you read through the history... I've seen the papers, I know roughly about it. They were all pastors of the Augustana Lutheran Church. They were leaders. Were they good thrifty or what do you call it? They were too thrifty. They were too thrifty? Yeah. They didn't have the vision like the beginning of communism? No, no. Yeah. It was better to have people like Hans Link, for instance, when he... Well, Hans was... it took some years for Hans to mature in it. He was a young guy when he came there? Yeah, relatively young. But he seems to have the drive, though, to be an administrator. Well, he had a good judgment as an administrator. So the pastors, they were too much in the leading back then? Yeah. And Cyrenius wasn't very good. How about Miller? Miller? Well, I think he was... he was before Cyrenius, you know. I didn't know him, but he wasn't... he must have been pretty good. So, well, when you see the history, a lot of pastors. Yeah. They served different years, like the presidents or the trustees, from different churches in Rockport and Omaha, of course, and Des Moines, Red Oak. So you stayed with the Swansons then for a long time in the 60s? Well, I almost died with them. What do you mean, died with them? They sold out then to Campbell's? Yeah, well, I arranged to help do all the negotiating on it. Was that what you did? Yeah. And the Sons, then they quit? And then they started doing other business, and I did that for them. We bought Paxton Gallagher Company, which was a coffee company, and that turned out quite successful. And we... they had a brand name, Butternut Coffee, and we changed the name of the company then to the Butternut Company. Well, they were the owner of that company? Yeah. I see. And they were here in Omaha? Yeah. And they were doing well? Yeah. And quite well. But it's a part of Coca-Cola Company now. Because when Gilbert's brother Clark died very young, I think he was 61, had a heart attack and died, then they went into trying to get out of the... so they made a deal with Duncan Coffee Company, and finally Duncan Coffee made a deal with Coca-Cola Company. And so that's why it's... Butternut is part of Coca-Cola. They had a lot of... acquired a lot of companies all over. Yeah, yeah. And I had a lot to do with negotiating those. Were you able to get the Swanson family to give a lot of money to the manager when you needed, for instance, when you came for this thumb drive? What did they say then? Was the old man still living there? No. No. How about the sons? Were they behind? They were pretty good. They didn't see anything wrong with what I was doing. They could have stopped me. They could? Well, if they would have told me, we need you doing business, the day-to-day business in the office, instead of me going around and seeing people. Yeah, but as long as it doesn't interfere with their business, though... I know, but... I said they could have stopped me. Because there was a good public relation on their part. I know, but... With the man out there. I know, but I wasn't known so much then. I was sort of a newcomer in the area. Because now they have United, Appied, and all kinds of different... The company seems to like that public image. I did a lot of finance work for the Swansons and other things. But I told you, I don't want to get mixed up into that too much. And you are still a Democrat in Republican Omaha? Yep. How many Democrats? Well, now there's quite a few here, though. It's a fine organization. You have a committee here, or a club? Well, I'm not a member of it. I've served my term. You believe in the Democratic ideas? I sure do. I sure do. So why do you think so many Swedes became Republicans? Even the worker became a Republican. Well, because it was a thing to do. Swedes follow. And if one Swede decides to change, some of the others change with him. But there's got to be a certain number, though, to be sure that they... Well, they're good followers. And the Swedes are easily assimilated. I tell my wife that the Swedes never blow their horn very much. Instead, they do the work and wait for instructions. So the Swedes you have met here over the years in Omaha, have they been interested in... in civic affairs, in politics? Oh, a little. Enough, you think? Or could they have done more in that field? Some of them could have done a lot more. But they're fine people. They're fine people. I don't want you to feel that they're not good people. So, in other words, there are other nationalities with more drive. Yeah. And the Germans were growing strong in here. And to some degree, then the Irish. The Irish and the Catholics. It was hard to compete with them. Yeah, yeah. Well, there were more of them. Only the Swedes that came to this area, they were small in number in comparison to the others. And then the language barrier, of course, changed in the 20s and so on. And in later years, you have also been a member of the Swedish Council of America. Yeah, I am not now. You are not now? No. But you were a member. I was on the board, too. So what do you think about that organization for preserving history and blowing the horn, for instance? Well, it's still fractured. What do you mean fractured? I mean, they're strong enough to... People think it ought to all be in Connecticut or New York or somewhere else. So they have provincial ideas when they come to the Middle East. The East likes to have everything out here. Yeah, right. So it's hard to make your voice heard. What did you put into it when you came there as a board member? Well, I put in a drive for... There was nobody from Omaha. And I had to holler loud in order to make myself heard. But like old Carlson, Curtis Carlson, he's a very able man and a very wealthy man. And I knew Curtis quite well, but I haven't tried to influence him in any way except when I was on the board of the Swedish consul, why I tried to do a lot of things. And Edward Lindell was also on there. Well, I think they enlisted him, but there was a chism that grew the way the Swedes were running it. The Detroit Swedes were very anxious to have the charge, and then they had a fellow by the name of William Olson that wanted to be the big fellow. Ed isn't that way. He either is or isn't. Ed is outstanding. Yeah, and this William, as you know, he was the founder of the Swedish consul. Well, he thinks he was. But he is more or less retired now, I suppose. He's down in Florida. Yeah, Winterhaven. Yeah, Winterhaven. So you are not a board member anymore? No, I haven't been on the board for, I don't know, four or five years. So there was a group, I believe they have about 35 board members now. There's more than one on the station. It's a noble idea, but it's hard to work with it in real life, though. Yeah, you have to have, and of course the Minneapolis chapter is the big chapter. The Swedes up there are much more united. So they, but each region have less understanding for the other region. That is right. So if they gang together, the weaker ones will disappear. Yep, yep. So that's, there you got the Swedes again. Yep. Do you think other nationalities worked more together in the idea? Like for instance, now the Swedes here, did they cater or patronize the Swedish-owned clothing store? They were, I told you, they were assimilated easy. And they lost their identity fast. They did? Yeah. Because the Italians, they go to the Italian store owner, and the Jews go to their shop. And then the various churches took Swedes away from the old, original Swedish Lutheran. Over in this country. Some of them become Baptist, some of them become Free Church, some of them become some of the other churches. And the church is a place where you get together. But there's an interesting part, because we have the Polish people, they are usually all Catholics. Yeah. And Italians, it's the same thing. They are a few. Yeah, but they've got the Pope behind them. Yes, there's the leadership. Yeah. But the Swedes, they became everything. Lutherans, Covenants, Baptists. Some of them even became Catholics. Yes, oh yes, in later years. But you never had in your life, though, that your mother, when she died, no, she was still living when you started to date girls. Did she tell you to pick Swedish ones? As far as dating? Yeah. You didn't have to tell them about that? I think my grandmother might have. She was the one that might have influenced me some. To stick with the Swedish. Yeah, we thought, I think both my aunts and uncles thought it would be fine that we sort of stay together. That's my first wife was Swedish, basically. And her father came from Sweden. And they came to Webster City. Yeah, he came to Webster City. And she was born there. Yeah. You also mentioned that you had an aunt, Eddie? Eddie, yeah, that was in Brussels. She was the head of her time also, though. Well, she was in style. She was an attractive looking woman. And she married a fellow by the name of Celie. And she's buried over at the Dayton Cemetery. But she wanted to be big. And she lived accordingly. And she died of tuberculosis. So she dressed according to the ladies fashion then? Oh, she was the fashion plate. She was the leader for it? Yeah. You remember her then? Very well. Very well. It's strange, though, you know, how one person can... So she had the guts then to go against the wind, so to speak. Well, the wind got her. That's what brought her tuberculosis. You know, she didn't pay attention to wearing heavy clothing and the like. And she got by with the style rather than the weather. So her wisdom didn't pay off. She was high on fashion and low on wisdom then, in that respect. And she was also down in Oklahoma. Yeah, she died down in Oklahoma. She died in Minneapolis. But she married this Celie, and Celie was in a manager of a clothing store and so forth down in Tulsa. And that's where she caught tuberculosis. I think got it from the Indians. The Indians were very prominent with tuberculosis. And she wasn't able to withstand the rigors of the disease. So, and the children from that marriage with Celie? No children. No children. So she came back then to Iowa. She came back to... To Dayton. Well, she was buried in Dayton, but she was dead when they brought her back there. So and there was in... she died in the 30s or 40s, or? Oh, must have been... I don't... it's on the tombstone. I don't remember that. But it's interesting how she could follow the fashion so much faster than other groups. Well, she was not with children, and she liked to look nice. And she arranged herself so that she knew she was quite good looking. So she didn't do anything to dispel the idea. In... So, like Omaha North, did you belong to any Swedish organizations there, like Vasa, Viking? Noonday Club. Noonday Club. Yeah. You joined there one... Yeah. Well, not right away. I... after I had time to do it, I joined the Noonday Club. And there was a businessman association. Yeah. There were no workers or any women in there. It was only for men. No, but the Noonday Club later on worked with women, too. They do? They have an auxiliary, or? Yeah. Well, I... They're all members, women and men. They're still going. But it was for professional men? Well, for businessmen, I'd say mostly. You met once a week or once a month, or? Once a month. For lunch? Yeah. At Noonday. That's why they called it the Noonday Club. Oh, yeah, that's... Of course, I didn't think of that. So, but what was the function of it? They just go socialized, or did you have... Well, basically, yeah. Ideas of presenting any Swedish programs, or... They had nothing to do with Sweden, no? No. There was something like Kiwanis. Well, not like it, but there's comparison. There was only one local club here. Yeah, yeah. There was nothing in Auckland, or? No. Or Haldritch, then? No. Did you associate with any other Swedes in Haldritch, Auckland? Oh, I got to know Swedes all over the United States, but not very well. So you met some politicians out in Washington, D.C. when you were there? Oh, yeah, quite often. You were not interested to be active involved with politics? Well, for a while I thought I'd make a good judge. And I knew if I was going to be a judge, I'd have to be active in politics. Then later I changed my mind. I didn't want to be a judge. Well, that's a requisite to be a judge. You got to support the politician. Well, generally you have to... To be nominated. Well, you have to be approved by the Senate. They're approving Bork this afternoon. What happened there? Is he out? I think he's out. He was supposed to be on. If you hadn't come, I'd been listening to it. Oh, boy, I'd spoil the weather, even if I didn't know sooner or later anyway. He was probably off, what they said. He's a sharp man. I don't know what his nationality is, but the name sounds a little Danish to me. But it sounds controversial, though, when he talks about it. Yeah, he talks so much, he doesn't know what he's talking about. He has too much in the text. And he condemned the sitting Supreme Court to some of the decisions. There was probably no jury there. He dug this grave. His understanding of the doctrine of stare decisis is against all general law. How would you judge people? You have lived your life. I depend on their honesty, pretty largely. It's pretty easy for me, through intuition, to know whether a person is honest or not. How do you know that? You've been a lawyer. Well, it doesn't take long for me to find out about them. You can fish it out quite fast. You bet. Some are clever, though. Some crooks are clever. I stay away from them. But you never had any law cases in the court, or with defending somebody? Well, I've had some, but I always had a... See I tried cases all over the United States, to a certain degree, but I always used a local attorney to do the trial work. But you're talking about crooks, even if a crook hires you, you've got to support the guy that paid you. Well, I always reserved the right to determine who hired me. You can put that off. But if it's a lucrative offer, though, I mean if you... Well, I wouldn't take it. You wouldn't take it? No. Because sometimes you wonder when you read the papers, how can you defend a guy like this? You know, you can see long... Well, I wouldn't. You wouldn't take it? No, no. But it can be a very tight case, though, you don't know. I mean, if you're halfway through, what do you do? I know, but I always investigated the thing pretty well before I turned it down. So if Omaha, Sweden had come up to you the last 20 years, you didn't have to make any investigations, you would believe he's a good Swedish guy, you've got to be honest? Well, I got to know some people pretty well that would help me. The banks always help, and they know who's kiting checks or not doing right. Because there's a saying in all this, but sometimes to be in business, you've got to be true, you've got to be on the... you know who's right and wrong. The scale can tip very easily in a way. Because to be a hard-nosed businessman, you probably have to be on your... you've got to know all the different... I lose cases once in a while, too. And I think I'm right, and shouldn't lose them. How do you see the law system of today? Is it too lenient? Well, no, it's been pretty hard to remake it in line with the progress in civilization. It's pretty hard to understand how it can be brought up to date without lots of agony. You mean they've been a little bit too lenient the last 20 years, perhaps? Some of it, like abortion, I don't go along with that. The right to abortion. Oh, you don't believe in that? No. I think there are some cases where abortion is certainly indicated, where there's been rape and some of the other things that... It's necessary to have. Yeah, I think that we should be lenient enough to know that those are not to be the person, the woman, to suffer the rest of her life. So in other words, you have a feeling for a human being at the same time as... Absolutely. And the same thing with the prayers in school. It can also be a very hard case, too. Yeah. Because there are so many different religions. Yeah, prayer in school. Prayer in school, yeah. And then you had the death penalty, of course, another tough one. Well, I don't like that. But I guess I'm worse on that than any. I don't like that a little bit. Because there could be a mistake done. Yeah, you bet. And it could never be repaired. Never be repaired. So that's a tough one, but a lot of things have happened, though, during the last 50 years. Yep, yep. More chances than the previous 500. Yep. How about your wife now? You see?