 recorded this and that, you know. Some years ago, yeah. You maybe met them. Uh-huh. They were visiting Edith, um... Hmm, I forgot. We have 30th of June, 1987. I'm sitting together with Mrs. Evelyn Schell, Rockford, Illinois. She was born 31st of December, 1904, in Scandinville, St. Peter, Minnesota. So, your family now, on your mother's side, was Torson. Mm-hmm. Andrew and Anna Torson. Andrew and Anna Torson. Uh-huh. And he was the founder of Torsby, Alabama. Yes. Can you tell me a little bit about now what happened? And Gustavus Adolphus College, also. He was one of the... He was one of the founders. They had set up a scholarship fund in his name, because he was one of the three men that were... So he was instrumental of moving the school then from Vesa or St. Paul over to St. Peter. From East Union to St. Peter. Mm-hmm. It was called the St. Ascar's Academy. And then they were in financial difficulty. So whoever could get the money together could get the school. This is the way the story goes. And he was registrar of deeds in the Nicollet County at that time. And he worked with the businessmen and gathered the... I think it was 10,000 and 20 acres of land, which is the campus now. And I've read a great deal about this spring. And Dr. Norelius, who was the leader then, would rather have had the school go to Red Wing or Vesa, you know. But it remained at St. Peter. He didn't have the money, I suppose, Norelius. No, Norelius didn't have the money. I didn't realize that there was so much contention when you read different stories now. What about your grandfather now? How come he had the means of holding school? Well, he didn't have all that means. He had a homestead of, I think it was, 360 acres or something. In Scandinville? In Scandinville. Where did he settle there? 1855. He came from Sweden then? He came from Sweden. They came to St. Peter October 6th or 7th. 7th, I think it was, in the fall. They left in the spring. He was from the congregation of Fairleaf up near Crescent. But he was born at Junquay. That's southwest of Crescent. But he was of a big family. I think mother said there were nine children in the family. Was the name Torson also in Skåne, or did he change the name? Do you know anything about that? It wasn't Torson. I'll have to look that up. He was born in there, Skåne. There, out in the country, is a church called Junquay, beautiful church. I have been there. Hans Fjeld, a wooded bone folk. Although his father was also a shoemaker, according to Larry. So he was not only a farmer. And his father sent him to work in... In Krifannståg? In Krifannståg. And then near, I think it was Silvesborg. And he worked there from the time he was 14 until he was 21. Then he, together with two other friends, came to America in 1847. He was just a young guy then. Yes. Did they have any share or no relation over here? No, no, no. They had some kind of a storm along the way and landed in Charleston, South Carolina. And he tells this in this story at Prairie Bleu Monde. What year is that? 1909. 1909, Prairie Bleu Monde. He had in his pocket a letter to a businessman in Charleston by the name of Wickenburg. He was a businessman from Sweden in Charleston. So he gets to meet this man that he has message for, just because of the storm, I take it. Then he, the three of them went down to New Orleans and they found work, what they could get. And there were a lot of signs around about the gold rush. So Grandpa decides to go to California. And he goes down by boat to the Isthmus of Panama, walks across the Isthmus, and gets on a boat for San Francisco or Sacramento. Stayed there two years. And he says in his autobiography that those two years were so terrible he doesn't even want to think about it. But he gathered some gold and came back and went back to Sweden in, let's see, 1949, I think. Oh, he was there two years. I suppose it was 1949. One of his friends, there were three men and the one died of fever in New Orleans. Grandpa got a job in a hotel. And he wanted to enter the Army because there was a Mexican war going on. But he was a man of very short stature, so he didn't get into the Army. But I guess his friend did. I'm not sure of that. Let's see. It says, Gripen of Himlank, Langton, Scafoda, Hansi, get Engelskrigsforte, pass it via Jamaica and Cuba to New York and then to Gothenburg. He doesn't mention anything about his luck, though, in the gold digging? Not very much. My mother regrets very much that she doesn't, didn't pay attention when he did say anything about it. But it was a hard life. They lived out in the open in little tents. And they had pork and flour, so they made pancakes and that was about what they lived on. And I suppose whatever they could scratch together. That story is exciting. I have done some research on the times at that time. I wrote a paper on that. And really, you just wonder how he ever survived. But he went back to Sweden. He went back to Sweden and he must have gone up to home again, up to Junghü and there. And then he meets Anna Nielsen. Anna's married at Färle. And they are farming. They're not farming on their own, but it seems as if they can get living quarters and work for a man. And they worked for a Hamilton who was from Scotland. There were many Englishmen who came over to Sweden, became wealthy and owned the land at that time. And my grandfather wasn't a farmer in the first place. But he saw how life had been in America and he wanted to go. So he got a company together. His wife, of course, and his sister and grandmother's two brothers and his in-laws, Nielsen and Elna. And their name happened to be Anderson. And they went the way of Hamburg to... And they suffered some kind of a shipwreck at Dover, England, where they lost their little girl, Anna, the baby that they had at that time. Now it's 55. So I don't know how long they could have been farming there after the marriage. And she was buried in Dover in a nice little cemetery, mother says, that grandmother had said. My sisters told me this summer that it was the sails that broke down of the boat. I'd never heard that. And so they were there for several weeks before they got the ship in order again to come over. And I suppose they came to New York and went on over to Princeton from Chicago. Now how they traveled from Chicago to Princeton, I'm often wondered. And that was in 1855? 55. This is getting to be toward fall. Well, they'd had another girl was born in the meantime. And I don't know how long they stayed in Princeton. Couldn't have been very long. But that little girl was named Anna also after her mother. And she's buried in Princeton, Illinois. Did they start a farm in Princeton? No. He had a brother in Princeton, Nils, Nils Thorson. I've seen his name in the church book at Princeton. So he joined the church and in Princeton? Well, I didn't find my grandfather's name in the book, no. But his brother's name was there. He stayed on then maybe for a short time. And Grandpa goes to get my grandfather and his brother-in-law, let's see now, Pear Benson. My great-grandmother, Eleanor, had been married before. So she had two sons before she marries Anderson. And Pear is older. So Grandpa and Benson get on a boat up the Mississippi to St. Paul. And then they're on their way to St. Peter by way of the Minnesota River. You know the geography there. Well, it's getting to be fall and they stopped at Henderson. And they met a man by the name of Schoenbeck. Now you might have heard Emory tell you all this. I don't know. Well, some of it, yes. And Schoenbeck said there's good land out there near St. Peter. You don't have any idea why he went there. There was no relation up there or any friends. No. Why did he go? Why did he go to St. Peter? Yes. Well, they were just out exploring. He was an adventurer. He never... So he was not satisfied with Princeton area. No, no. But they have heard... The thing is, they have heard that the Traverse de Sioux Treaty has been made in 1853 at St. Peter. So there's open land. They sold these thousands of acres of land to the government. And you could get homes set up in that part of the world. Well, the whole Mississippi River area all west of the Mississippi opens up after that treaty. And let's see now. Where are we? Yeah, but the Homestead Act was made in 1862, the Homestead Act, a little bit later. But maybe there was a talk about it that was going to be opened up. Well, the Indian Treaty was in 1853. Yes. So they have a... If you go to St. Peter, there is a... I thought Lincoln was the one that... Well, I'm not sure about that whole thing. But there could be some rumors about it, though. But the Indians are still there, of course. Yes. Well, Grandpa is tired of all this traveling when he gets to Henderson. So he's just heard that there's land at St. Peter. So he sends Vincent ahead out to St. Peter and turns back and goes back to Princeton to get the family. And they're going to go. He goes on land unseen. And they get on the boat again and go on up to St. Paul. And in St. Paul, he has money because he had gotten about $2,000 from that California deal. And I don't know how much he had spent. I said, go and quiet the dog. Somebody maybe sees a cat or something in the back. And they... He buys 20 heads of cattle in St. Paul. And they go by boat to St. Peter. The Minnesota River must have been higher than it is now. However, they could get a boat down that river. And I don't know if they had the cattle on a boat or if they herded them along the way. But they get out there in October. I wonder about the date. Settlement. Mothers said that they lived in a house that belonged to the Tollison family. But they got busy and built a log house. And that log house, if you have been... Have you been out in Scandinavia? Yeah, I've been, but I can't recall... In the church park is this log house. This log house right there, yes. That log house is the one that grandfather built. Was that moved in then? Yes, moved in from the farm. And... Let's see now. They have a history as if they had built it that fall. But mother said that really wasn't so, but we won't argue about that. Because it was just about that time anyway. But the family was with them then, and they had the cattle. When they had the cattle. And the first thing they have to do is try to harvest some hay for feed for the winter. Well, if you've been out in Scandinavia, you can still drive down that road past grandfather's place. And it's just trees and the same little body of water still there. But there must have been open spaces. So grandpa's farm was all along the woods there. How many acres did he have? I think it was 360. I won't... It was at least that, because it was divided up into three farms afterwards when grandpa died. How were they able not to keep the cattle together? Well, that's a mystery. Because they were not chained on to anything? And those Norwegians who were there, the Tollefson family, they lived very close on the little farther over on the side, what is now the side of the woods, we always called it. It's a virgin forest. It's never been cut down. What kind of forest was it? Was it hardwood? Hardwood. What I see now, and I walked through that woods to school. We lived near there. My brother, my younger brother, had the farm right on the edge of the woods. That's our farm where we lived. My mother got a part of the land when we were... Of the original farm? Uh-huh. It was a lot of oak trees and basswood and ironwood and elm mainly. And that woods is really something to walk through. And they was never touched then by anybody? No, no. You can drive from Norseland past the East Cemetery and through that woods and you can just get a feel of what it must have been like. There were some little lakes in the woods. And there was a little lake by Grandpa's place and they named it Torkals Lake. Because they were Norwegians? Torkals? Torkal was Swedish. Oh, it was Swedish? Yes. I think his name should have been Torkalsson. I'll have to look that up. Larry has written, Larry in London has written about this. So he has looked up the records over there in Sweden. But that Torkals Lake has always had water in it and it's just like a little slough, if you know what I'm talking about. Where did you grow up? In Sweden. In Sweden. In what place? In Dalsland. Dalsland. Vaxadalsland. This big version of wood now, why wasn't that touched at any time? Was it always firewood plenty? As long as I can remember, and I'm going on 83. So the next generation and the next generation obeyed their own not to touch this forest? Well, I think one reason was that they needed wood for firewood and people bought little pieces of land in there. They owned little patches so they could cut trees as they needed it. A storm went through a couple of years ago and blew down a number of trees. So my brother-in-law says it isn't as nice as it used to be because and nobody's gone in there and cleaned up. But it's really, really virgin soil. And Indians lived near that little lake. So they were nearby then when they came there? Oh yes, they were there the first, at least the first two, three winters anyway. So what did your mother say about that, what her mother told her? Well, yeah, if I can remember all the things, my mother was the youngest of all these children. So she didn't get to know as much as they might have said to the older, her brothers. See, there are two Annas that have died already before they get there. And then a third Anna, who is the grandmother of Marlon Hedberg, went to Alabama as the pastor's wife. And then there were four boys. Theodore was the one that named, he was the oldest, and he was an adventuresome man also. He goes to Nebraska to, and was a pioneer in Nebraska. I cannot recall the name of the town offhand, it'll come to me. And then he got together some people to start a colony in Thorsby, named after the Thors, a name I'm sure, Thorsby. So that was his son then, Theodore? Theodore is his son. He was the oldest. I think he is maybe one of the first white children born in Nicollet County. I can't vouch for that, but he was one of the first. You don't remember him? No, I was five years old, and my grandfather died in 1908. I was born in 1904, at the end of the year, so I'm not as old as it sounds. And grandmother died in 1910. And when grandmother died, that's very vivid in my mind. I remember my grandfather died, this is all I know about him. He is sick and... This is Andrew. Andrew. And he's walking across the floor in their home, and my mother is leading him on one side and my grandmother on the other. I saw that, I remember that, that's all I remember about him. So he died in Scandingroda? Yes, he died and he's buried in that so-called East Cemetery, the oldest cemetery, on the east side of the little village of Norseland. And grandmother died in 1910, two years afterwards. So then the family gets together the next spring, and they're going to divide up the land, close up the estate. I remember the day that they are drawing lots of who's going to get what. It's always important. I guess so. There's Uncle Sam, Uncle Hedberg. Uncle Hedberg is there, and my Aunt Anna has died in the meantime. So Uncle Hedberg is the pastor? The pastor, and Uncle Nathaniel, and Uncle Peter. Samuel, Theodore. Theodore is there. He has come from Alabama. And I can see these little slips of paper that they're drawing, they're going to draw. They put them in a hat and each one takes a slip. Well, that's the way it was done. That's the way it was done. This is as I recall it. Now, if somebody... I can see that. Were they all happy then after the drawing, or what happened? Well, my Uncle Peter had a headache that day. He was so afraid he wasn't going to get the home place. I know that's been said, but he did. He got the home place. So he was lucky. His son is living there now. His son Edward is living on the home place. So the rest of the land, there was parcels divided up, and there was no houses on the rest of it? No. No houses. So the one that drew just a regular piece of land, he had to build houses there? Sure. So that's very vivid in my mind. My father was a butter maker up in Northland. And in the meantime, my little sister had died that spring. She died. She was about two years old, almost two years old. And my father became ill. He got, I suppose it was arthritis from the dampness of working in the creamery and so on. And then he gets this piece of land our mother inherits, you know. And nobody wanted the land that mother got. No? Well, there was low land and a big meadow and so on. And now that turned out to be the... The best? The best in the long run, yeah. So you never know. You never know. What did she say, your mother? When did she die? When she got this piece of land. Was she here for you? Oh, I guess, I suppose they must have been happy because right away they make plans for building a house the next year. There's a cornfield. I remember the cornfield and the building of that house. The folks rented a neighbor's house for the summer nearby across the meadow. And it was exciting. They had, well, 1911, you had to haul everything by horses, the horse-drawn wagons, cement and sand and lumber and all. Now, when I try to tell my brothers about this, they're much younger than I am. They hardly believe me, you know. They talk, look as if I'm not telling the truth. Who was Wittenau when this drawing was executed? Was it an outsider, as a judge? That I don't know. I don't know. They must have had some authority to do this. But it was probably the best way, though. Well, oh, sure. Uncle Theodor, who had started the little town authority. He came back, then. He came back, yeah. And Reverend Hedberg came back. Reverend Hedberg lived at this, then. That's another old settlement you might have been at. Yes. He came back in 1904 because his wife died. And all the kids who were with them were. And he lived at Uppsala, Minnesota, and Vesa. And he remarries a deaconess. And she was a cousin of his first wife. Yes. Mother's cousin, Cecilia. And you picked up a little card. Yeah, this was, let's see. From Omaha, Nebraska. Yeah. This tells about Uncle Hedberg's death. I haven't find it yet. What does it say there? It says, My dear loving child, it is my sad duty to inform you that my dear husband passed away today at Emanuel Hospital. Funeral service will be held at our church at 2 o'clock. On Wednesday the 4th, he suffered much for the last two weeks with cancer in the pancreas. He is now at home with the Lord. Your sad Aunt Cecilia. So she survived her husband then? Yes. We got to know Reverend Hedberg very well, my husband and I, because he was serving in a parish next to our first parish in western Minnesota. And Uncle Hedberg and Aunt Cecilia come driving along. He always had a very nice rig. He always had either good horses or a nice car. And we were with them when they closed the household there and went to Omaha to retire. So they're buried in Omaha. And his wife now, she was educated in Sweden at Eszter. The Japanese started in Stockholm. Yes. In 1890, in the 1890s. And she was a deaconess at the Emanuel Deaconess Hospital? Yes. Well, I kind of think we had a deaconess training school in St. Paul also. I would rather think that she was from Omaha. Well, the reason they went back there was because the St. Paul place is closed up. That doesn't continue. So she could still help out perhaps in Omaha? Yeah. Well, that was the idea. Side two, continuation with Evelyn Schell, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So going back now to this Theodore Thornton coming back then from... Now they're dividing the land. Yes. Let's see. Uncle Peter stays at the home place. And Uncle Nathaniel moves the old log house from the home place over into the woods, so to speak. You know, we'll call it the woods. And then he moves another old house from near the church. And they lived in that house for a number of those two old houses put together for a number of years. And my cousin lives on that place now, my Uncle Nathaniel's son. So the one that got the housing then, he got the best deal, I suppose, at the moment. At the moment. He didn't have to worry about the construction. No. He got the bonds and the whole thing. Yes. He didn't want the old log house because they built a house for grandmother right next to this log house. And so he, Papa, if he bought the house or how in the world he got the right for this old log house, so he sold it to Uncle Nathaniel. And it's a two-story log house. Yes. That's where my mother was born. I have no idea when it was built, 1856, 1857. Well, I think Amory has it in his story as if it were built 1855, but I don't see how they could get that together from October into the winter. Who helped them to build it? Did they do it themselves? Well, yeah, there must have been a few men. There were some Norwegians there, and how they had saws because it's all hand sawed. There's no power but hands. And when you look at those logs, they are big. And the trees must have been tall, and how they dragged those trees from the woods, we'll say, over to the place where they're building the house. That's quite a story in itself. So they must have been there a few years later than it was built. Well, that's what mother said, that there was another little shack of some kind that they stayed in that winter, but it's built, we'll say, 56, it's quite safe. So the upper floor now, was there for sleeping quarters then? Yeah. The top floor. There were two little rooms upstairs. And there was no heat there, I suppose? No, there was no... Was there an opening in the ceiling? I remember the chimney. Uncle Samuels had this for their kitchen. And there was a... I remember the chimney and a narrow stairway going upstairs. And there was more to the house than the log house by 1910. You see this... Was there a lakeline too? Yeah, there was a big kitchen and I suppose there were two little bedrooms there in that part, and all that was torn down. So Papa got some of that lumber that he used in building his house, you know, flooring or whatever. Well, let's see, where are we now? Well, that's the house in 1910. Well, then there was a matter of building a barn for us at our place. And the same with Uncle Nathaniel's. We always sat over in the woods. The barn, did you have the dairy cows inside all winter? Did you walk outside? You took them in for milking only, or were they inside all winter in the barn? Oh, they were outside part of the time. They built a temporary barn of just some walls and a straw roof before we got the real barn built. But I have to tell about the barn, much of the lumber for our house and for the barn was sawed by... They had men that went around and sawed lumber in the woods. So there was no crick around that gave water power to anything? No, no. So you had to rely on somebody coming in then too? And I have pictures of the horses at home over in the woods and they're sawing lumber for them, especially for the barn. Well, then it's a matter of keeping up this after once it's been built. And the disappointing thing is that my brother didn't take care of that barn. He had it torn down here a couple years ago. Uncle Peter's little girls were out one day, this was around 1920, they'd been raking, so they'd started fires for the raking in the spring. And the girls, Uncle Peter had three little girls then. And they thought they were going to start another fire up under the hay load by the barn. And the barn went that day, the old barn that Grandpa had built across the road from the house. So that was... so much of that original home, the only thing that's left is that house that's been moved, let's see, two times up to church now. And it's really something to step into that now. We've had family gatherings by it, and the church has a pageant, has an anniversary every so many years, and then they have a pageant in front of the house. So every plot of land then, that was divided up at that time, 1910, are they still the same relation, own each one of them? No, different people in the neighborhood bought land also. So there's nothing in the Torson relation then? Yes. My cousin Edward has Uncle Peter's, and my cousin Ellis has what Uncle Nathaniel had, and Uncle Nathaniel I think must have bought... and they bought out each other. Excuse me, I don't know if Papa bought more. No, we never had more than 120 acres on our farm. But he must have bought some because if it was 360 divided by... By four. By four. Was it four? Theodore, Peter, Fanny. No, by six, by six, whatever was divided by six. Children that are left. Well, the Annikstads, children of the Talabsons, bought some of it, and the Hansons bought some. So that's what happened to the farm. Like your farm now, where you were raised, where your father built, is this still in the... My youngest brother is there. Oh, he took it over? He took... he bought it from the folks. He came home one day and Mother says, well, we have sold the farm to Hubert. And I was a little bit dismayed in a way. I would like to have, oh, about one acre of that land because I only lived in the parsonage all the while, never had a piece of land of my own, or our own. And I thought if there ever was a chance, I'd like to have that little corner by the woods. But that's a thing by itself. So you actually look back then to what happened in 1910, have a lottery on it to give you a chance on it? Never got a chance. You never got a chance. Well, Hubert is doing well. He is pursuing... my father was... had not had much education, I don't think. You know, children went to school during the winter. That's Emmanuel, Nelson Emmanuel. And when springtime came, they had to get out and work. He was of a big family of five, I believe it's five or six brothers. And so they couldn't sit around in school. But he did get away to take a short course at the University Agricultural School in butter making. And he learned an awful lot that winter. And he was always interested in plants and seeds. So he used to gather seed corn for himself, and then they had seed shows, and he'd go in and bring some corn into the state fair, or to the county fair, and compete with the other seed growers. So he was able to produce and sell the seed corn perhaps? Yes, he did. And my brother is still doing that. And my brother has... he's going to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the seed business now. This summer, my sister tells me. So the land now that your father or mother acquired, was it mostly open land tillage? Yes, it was all open except a little bit of the woods. Did you have any water on it? Running water? Not running water, but lowland, sluice. So sluice was wet. Just water, you know, if there's big rains, there'll be just water standing. But then they began to build ditches, county ditches, and tile. So now you wouldn't recognize the land. We drove through it the other day. Jonathan took me up to St. Peter for his class reunion at Gustavus, and we went stopped by my brother's and drove across the old farm. It isn't anything like I remember it when we first were there. There was a natural meadow. The meadow was just wild grass, timothy, and there were so many wild strawberries. I know we went picking wild strawberries a Sunday afternoon. My cousins came. And all that is just gone now. And the flowers. Well, by the time I started school in 1911, and so here my father is alone about planting trees and fencing and everything. He always got help. He always hired help. But anyway, he was a hard worker, and he had to make his own pastures. As soon as I could hold a pair of reins, I know I helped in the hay field, on the gathering the hay and raking hay. Did you have mules or horses? Horses. No mules? No mules, no. Well, we had one horse that was called Dolly. It was kind of a cross section of I don't know what that we drove to the store with and so on. Well, this is horse and buggy days, you know. So this lowland, your father, was he able to plow there? Well, there were fields around the low places, but now you... So he left there for pasture, then? He did a long time, but out there now there isn't a pasture in sight. It's all tile. There's no lowland anymore. It's all plowed up. The countryside looks so different now. I wondered what it was that had changed so much here one time when I came home, and I realized there are no pastures. So the wildflowers are gone? The wildflowers are gone. Oh, I can see the brown-eyed Susans and the chaseracuna, the lily that is the official flower of Saskatchewan. You know what I'm talking about, the chaseracuna? Chaseracuna. Yeah, it's a lily. Of the lily family. There was plenty of that. And the flowers in the woods. It was so much fun in the spring to pick, gather blood roots and anemone and Dutchman's breeches and so on. Were you using any of these growing things in your household? I mean, like mushrooms were never used at that time. Beg your pardon? Like mushrooms. No. They were not used in the households at that time. No. It was unknown. They were there, though. I'm sure there are mushrooms in that old... Did you use something else that was growing out in the fields or in the woods? My father, it seemed as if he was such a man, he could see plants and discern different kinds. He gathered ginseng and you gathered those roots and sold them, you know, dried them and sent them off. You were not using anything in your household? No, no. And I asked the boys about the ginseng. You know, that's quite a thing now, the Chinese. And there is ginseng in that woods. I know there is. There was. It couldn't have all disappeared. So your father, he was familiar with it? Mm-hmm. How to pick it up and... Well, Papa was quite a naturalist. Yeah. Well, Mother was a great helper and manager. I think she helped Papa a lot that way. She helped him with milking and so on. So we had cows and chickens and a good garden and a nice orchard. And there isn't a thing left of it now. I wouldn't want my brothers to... What's the apple and the... We had apple trees, plum trees, Italian plums, grape vines, raspberries, blackberries, currants, gooseberries, strawberries. So we had a big supply of fruit. Do you remember if you had to spray those orchards in the spring or in the spring? Nowadays, you know, everything is sprayed. No. There was no spraying. Not such a thing? Not that I recall. I know he... If there was a tree that wasn't bearing good fruit, he would... What do you call that? Grafted? Grafted. He grafted branches. So he thought it was fun to see more than one kind of fruit on a tree. Just for fun. So you had the season and going on all the time? Oh, yes. And flowers. Oh, peonies and roses. He liked flowers. So you were what you call self-sustaining. You didn't have to buy more than salt and coffee. No. No. Drove to the store with the eggs and sold them and bought... And the butter, you made yourself on the farm then, I suppose. Your father was... Well, the... He was the official butter maker at the creamery. And while we were there, he had a big garden and gathered things in the woods. I think that's where he got started gathering ginseng. He'd see the ads in the farm paper. You know, he did read the farmer. That was the official paper for the farmers in Minnesota. I think it's still published. But he learned a lot through reading. Did he continue with the butter making after he became a farmer? No, not after. No, no. That was a full-time job. The butter making was, when I think of it now, it was very difficult for him. The farmers, they had no separators, so they hauled the milk in every day to the creamery. And he churned the milk for the butter. Did each farmer bring his own milk, or did he pick up from other farmers at the same time? I don't know. They hauled... I suppose they could haul each other's milk, but first, when he first started out, he had to churn the cream, churn for the cream, for the butter. So, and then he had to wait for the skim milk to take with him back? Mm-hmm. That I don't know. I wonder how they did that, if they had a tank for that and picked that up. My brother told me something about that skim milk. Some of them... Maybe they left it for the next day, then, to pick it up. They'd cheat on them, milk businesses. Well, I suppose there was... They'd want more home than they brought in, you know. My older brother in St. Peter told me that last time I was home. Well, I can remember the smell of the creamery, the damp smell. It was kind of a good smell. He tried everything in planting up at Norseland. He planted peanuts, tried to grow peanuts. He tried to grow tobacco. I can see the tobacco hanging up in the ice house. They had to have a day of hauling ice from the little lake for the summer, you know. The ice had to be put in sawdust and kept to keep for the butter. Did you use it in the household, too, or only at the dairy? The ice? Yeah. No, no. There were no ice on the farms? No, no. Just the cold storage. Yes. We had a well to keep the cream in. You lower it down? By the back door. Well, it really was another life. So the ice cream had to be eaten right away? Yeah, if there was ice cream. They made ice cream at church a couple times a year. Well, that was the first place they made ice cream at the church doing, rather than at the hall. Unless somebody had, some progressive farmer maybe had an ice house. I don't know of anyone that did. But they had these old-fashioned, all these ice cream makers. Yeah, there was a winery on location. We had a church school, summer school, Swedish school. That's where I learned Swedish was beside, at home. At the Scandinavian Grove. Scandinavian Grove had six weeks to begin with. They had six weeks of Swedish school after the public school. Who was the teacher then? Was it the pastor or his assistant? No, they had women teachers. And two of my cousins were teachers. They'd been to St. Peter then before? Well, they'd gone to the academy or something. The Scandinavian Grove had three schools. They had Rutar, Östra, Västaruten, and Kyrkoruten. That's where the church was. I never went to any Swedish school but the one at the church. It was Kyrkoruten. But I did walk, that was three miles. And I know I walked sometimes to Swedish school. That walk through the woods was really something to remember. I remember a patch of moccasin flowers, a state flower of Minnesota, the moccasin, in a certain little corner by a little body of water. And I'd never seen it any place, seen them any other place. But you know what the moccasin is? Yes. I get there all over along the Mississippi River. They were in this old virgin forest. And the last day of Swedish school, my uncle Nathaniel, his daughters taught. And he would come with the ice cream freezer where he got the ice, I don't know, maybe at the creamery, I don't know. And he would be cranking the freezer for it. That was special, the last day of school, of Swedish school. So that was the graduation gift. Yeah. How many were you then? All the kids in the neighborhood then went to school? Yes. It wasn't, by the time, let's see, maybe 25, 30 children. I'm just guessing now. Boys and girls together. Boys and girls. And they learned to read Swedish. I have the books. You must have them in your... Oh, yes, I've seen them. The Abyse-boken with Tuppen, Voxy down there. And Tuppen, those are the ones. And Morgenstern, her golden one. Yeah. And Tuppen, Lothar, Montagala, Tillborn and Wilhelm Lixenthaler. Morgenstern, her golden one. Your parents now, they were both born in Minnesota. Did they talk Swedish? Yes, they did. Often? Yes, I think they did. My mother had attended the Gosevith Academy, so she had a little more to go on that way. But Papa always read a devotion book every evening. In Swedish? In Swedish, oh, yes. So my sister and brothers did not learn the Swedish. My brother was born in 1913, and my sister 17, and my youngest brother 20. Well, by 1920, Swedish was just on its way out in the church. There it was. They still held on to it farther west in Minnesota. When we first came out, my husband was called to preach Swedish twice a month. We did service twice a month at Benson, Minnesota. Yes. Just near Kirkhoven and London? We were at Benson, and he had fortune to Starbucks, Benson, Murdoch and Bethesda. So we were on the road most of the time in that first parish, but it was a wonderful parish. We were there nine years, and we went to Buffalo, Minnesota. The man that started the church at Buffalo, his wife was a sister of my grandfather, Bengta Thorson. She died, and it's her mother, the first Mrs. John Nelson, was the mother of Cecilia, Mrs. Hedberg. At Buffalo, this Reverend Nelson is buried at Buffalo or out in the country at Marysville. You may have heard of Marysville. The church is still there. I have the picture up on the wall over there. Marysville became, as I said, of Hubert Humphrey. The church is not used, but it's a historical landmark now up there. From Buffalo, we moved to St. Cloud and then Spring Garden at Cannon Falls. Have you been there? Have you been out there? Cannon Falls, yes. Old Noradius dumping ground. We had a centennial home. We were at Cannon Falls. It was 100 years old then, and that's a story, another story. It's a beautiful area. It's holding up. Well, Scanning Grove is too, and Spring Garden, we were there 14 years. From there, we went to Chicago, of all places. Then we went to Augustana Hospital to be a chaplain for a few years. So there was another homestead. How about your parents? Now, were they religious, both your mother and father? Yes. They were strict religious? Oh, yes. Yeah. They had a rich spiritual heritage from their parents. Do you have a table prayer in Swedish? Yes. Oh, yes. Yes, and I go to the board, and the evening prayer. We had some halberd brought in, too. Did you say thanks for the food, too? No, I don't think we did. I think we just had the cum lardis apart. How about coffee? Did you have a prayer for that, too? Would you sit down for a cup of coffee? Oh, sure. By 9 o'clock in the morning, it was coffee time. Even for the kids? Well, yeah. I suppose they could get some. And then the big dinner, that was at noon? A big dinner at noon, and afternoon coffee, and then supper. We called it supper now. The thing to say, I guess, is dinner at night. You were growing up, though, with your grandma. She died 1910? Ten, yeah. You may remember her quite well. Well, I don't remember that she spoke to me. I cannot. She must have. Because she was born in Sweden. She was born in Sweden. She had learned the English by reading a bilingual New Testament. Swedish on one side and English on the other. So she was able to speak English, then? Yes. Well, you know, she'd come in 55. That's 45 and 10. At 55 years, she was here. And she had a lot of friends. They were very... They had... Grandpa and Grandma had always had company and went to visit friends. Grandpa would say, we'll go to town now and we'll visit so-and-so. Businessmen. They had... And the pastors were always good friends of Grandpa and Grandma. They did a lot of... Mother said, Grandpa used to say, the pastor is just a human being. We must be kind to the pastor. They always looked up to the pastor. And I think that held in my... I know that held in my home. My father was... He was Sunday School Superintendent there one while and on the church board and so on. On committees in the church. I don't know how he got time for all this because he was a busy man. They were helping out. Yes. And your grandfather, now he was very supportive of Gustavus Adolphus, of course. Was he very eager to send his kids to... They all... I think they all had the chance to go, but they did not see the opportunity. The boys could have... They maybe went for a year or two or something, but they didn't finish school. But I think most of our... Many of our cousins at least came to the academy. We had an academy. I finished...