 We have January 8, 1987, and I'm sitting and talking with Glennis Viola Blix in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 1910, the 10th of December, in Rockford. We start now with your grandparents, because you were born here, and your mother was born here. My mother was born here. My father was born in Erland. Erland, yeah, that was... That was Anton Larson. We start now with your... But my mother......my child, Augustus, and my grandpa... Yeah, they were parents to my mother. Where did they come from, like, your father, grandpa, or not? Grandpa, Otto. Can you help me? What? Where did my... Västergötland, I believe it was. I think that's what it is. They both came from Sweden. I don't know what age they came here, but I do know that my grandma was a nurse, and my grandpa was ill, and was at the Lassvet, is that what they called it? Lassvet. Yes, and that's how they met, because she was his nurse. You don't remember the town or the... No, that's what I was trying to find, but I couldn't find it. I think it was ten years ago. I think so. So they came over here to Rockport. I don't know what age it was when they came over. I do not remember that. Were you married when they came over? That I don't remember. I almost think so. Yes, yes, yes, and they had nine children. I think she always spoke Swedish. Yes, she never could speak English. So you remember her, then? Oh, yes, very well. Yes, she was a heavy-set woman, very kind. She looked like all the old grandmas. All looked the same. Had a braid around her head, and I specifically remember her standing by the old cook's stove, and she would brush her hair and brush it. She would braid it, take a little hair from the end and twist it so it stayed, and then she'd put it around her head. And she was very lovable. My grandpa looked like General Grant, and he always wore one of these. Oh, he had a full beard. Full beard and a derby hat. Of course, he would have been right in style nowadays with a full beard. You always had a derby hat? Yes, and a full beard. He wasn't the only one who dressed up for Sunday and the holidays, though. No, he wore it all the time. Well, I don't know about work. I don't know about going to work, no. No, that I don't think he did, but I always remember him with his derby hat. See, I went to grade school. That's how I met my wife. I told you that story. So I knew the grandma and grandpa. They lived only a block from where I grew up. So my grandpa would like to ride, so he would go over to Terry's house, which was just a little block away. Now, this is coming more to the present-day age. Well, 52 years ago. And he would go to Terry's mother and ask if Terry was up yet. And his mother said, No, but I'll wake him, and then he would have Terry take him for a ride. So he had to call him? Yes. So he had to call him? I didn't want to leave the coop, and he'd come over and want me to drive. He just wanted a ride. That's what he wanted. So he would go for a ride. And then at one time, I have a cousin, Donald Carlson, that's a few years younger than I, and my grandpa, Otto Gustafson, and Terry, they went out to visit an uncle of mine in Montana who lived on a ranch, wide open spaces, and they had Grandpa Gustafson with. It was always the thing that when my grandpa went anyplace, as soon as he got there, he'd sit down about two minutes, and then he'd say, You go your him. But there wasn't often. Yes, so that's what he did when they were... I didn't even get to go to her. He wanted to go home, but Terry says, Well, you can go home. You can go with him. So he liked to ride then. Yeah, he liked to ride. But they made him stay the whole while. Of course, naturally, they weren't going to leave Montana right away. You had the shame to know them for a few weeks. Yes. See, we were him and myself and her cousin. We rode, the three of us, in a Model A Ford coop. I drove the whole time. They had cut her cousin was younger. He was about 14, 15, I don't know. Anyway, he didn't have a grandpa. He was a pretty big guy, and he'd sit there all sprawled out. He had hardly room to drive in this old Model A. It was a good little car, the Model A car. When we come out to Montana, there was no road. We followed a... When we left South Dakota and went into Montana, we had to open up a gate that was just where other cars had gone, with no specific road. We had 150 miles there to drive with no signs, no nothing, through fields to come to her uncle. So what kind of work was he doing there? He worked in the glue pot. He was a... Well, I knew where he was. He worked in the furniture factory. Furniture factory for my father. And evidently, he took care of the glue pots where they... No. He ran a machine that glued pieces together. Oh, I see. Well, see, I don't know too much about that, but that's... So his work then from the beginning, before you were born, there was in the furniture factories then. Were you one of the last of the nine children, or...? No, that was my grandpa. Oh, that was your grandpa. That was my grandpa. All his children... See, my mother was about the second child I had. They're all dead. The family out of Gustafson now, all the children are dead. All of their children, of course, they are all dead. Were they all born in this country? No. No. Only your mother. No, they all... Only one was born in Sweden, and that was the oldest boy, Otto, his name was. So my grandpa must have gone back to Sweden. Because my mother was born here, and she was the oldest. She was not. Otto was the oldest. Okay, all right. You see, I don't know too much. Otto was the oldest. Maybe you should take the microphone, because you know more than I do. So, remembering Grandma now... She was a darling. You said she was braiding her hair. How was she dressed, you see, in...? In a black dress and long. Always black. Always, most of the time. Why was they, do you think...? I don't know why they had black. Well, I mean, no, she used to have kind of a gray gingham dress on every day. But the church was a black, black with a long dress with a little, maybe a little lace collar here. And then they had this apron when they were working in the kitchen. Yes, oh yes. But I think she had kind of a gray dress. I remember her every day, I think. And then I also have their dining room table here. And my uncle, when he was living, he came over and he'd say, he'd sit over there and he'd say, oh, I could just see Ma sitting there reading her Bible. In this house? No, in this table. In this table? I have the table. It was given to my mother, but then I got it afterwards. And so it's sort of a historical piece for me. You sat there? Yeah, so I took my other table upstairs because I don't... But like this, you have a tablecloth, only there's a lot of variations of colors. Yes. And you would never see her dressed like that? Oh, no, no, no. Why was that? I don't know. And there was a little hat, a little straw round hat that sat just down. Of course, you never, never went to church without your hat on. Now, you were dressed in a blouse and slacks. You would never see a woman at that time? Oh, no, no, no. It was sinful? Oh, sure, and you would never go to church without something on your head. Or the women never had robbed hair either. They always had long hair. Nobody ever had their hair cut. And no rollers? No, no rollers, no promenades. When did that start? Do you remember? I don't know. I don't know. But I can remember my mother cut her hair before my aunt did because my aunt was a little more... I don't know if she called it old-fashioned or more religious or what, but she didn't cut her hair as fast as my mother did. Was she unmarried? No, no, they all were married. No, all of the children were married. Did you think your mother was a little bit more... I don't know....smart than your mother? I don't know. She just was, I think. So living with Grandma, you remember her than there was... We didn't live with Grandma. I had one cousin that did live with my grandma. But you were close enough to... Oh, yes, we were a very, very close family. And you had to talk Swedish to her? Oh, yes. Did you ever learn English? No. I always talked Swedish to her. Grandpa could understand English because he worked out amongst people. But no, she was always Swedish. Do you remember anything specific she told you, warnings or... No, no. About dating boys in school or so on? No, I can't remember that. My grandpa was very strict to his family, very, very strict. My mother would tell me different things, how strict he was. So naturally, as you grew up, you had the impression of Grandpa being very stern. But as he grew older, I would crawl up on his lap and I would always stroke his beard. And he mellowed a little bit. But I think they had to be so stern and strict because they didn't have much money. And I know my mother said she worked at the stocking factory, and one day she bought five cents worth of ginger snaps on the way home because she got in pay. And he was very, very cross with her that she had spent five cents on ginger snaps. And that always stood out in her mind, and she would tell it to me, how savvy they had to be. But he was kind to the family. So your mother, in turn, was she a little bit more lenient? She wouldn't get mad at you, for instance, about anything? No, no, no. All the children were very modern. They changed then, one generation after another. Oh, yeah, yeah, they changed. But we all went to Salem Lutheran Church, and my folks were charter members there. So we always were church-going people. And this one uncle that moved out to Montana that I was telling you about, he found—will you shut this off? Okay. So your mother, now, she was born in the 1880s. King, did I not? Yes, near Stillman Valley, out there on the farm. Did they farm then the first year when they came back? They did a little while, a little while, but not long. So you don't remember being out there? No, no, no. I only remember my grandma and grandpa living on 6th Street. And then at that time, I don't even remember my grandpa working, but I guess he did. But to me, grandma and grandpa, that was just to come over to their house and sit in their lap, or at Christmas, of course, we always went to grandma's house. So they were looking older than you at that time? Yes. But they probably were not older than the 50s. No. So his beard now, did he trim it himself or did he go to the barber to do it? Oh, no, he would do it himself, I'm sure. With scissors? I would imagine. You know, I never saw him trim his beard, now that you say it. No, not long, no. Just like they wear now, he'd be right in style. A lot of people of the older generation, did they have beards? Yes, yes, a lot of people with a mustache. Terry's father, he had a big mustache, like they say, a handlebar mustache. Your father? Oh, yeah, a handlebar mustache. But then when he went out to Montana with my husband to visit my grandpa's son, he rode a horse out there. Here he was riding a horse out in the open spaces with his derby hat. And it looked real funny. But I can't... Here's the picture about 1910. We always spent Christmas at my grandma's because my father's folks were in Sweden, and so naturally, being my grandma living on my mother's side, we always spent Christmas there, where the rest of the relation on my dad's side, they always got together on Christmas. So I don't remember Christmas Eve or Christmas Day at my father's relative's house, though we always got together afterwards. Both sides of the family were very, very close, and we still are. As I said, we were out this morning for breakfast, and that's the cousins on my father's side. So we still get together, the cousins. Now, they're all children of my dad and his sisters. Take a good look at that. We were always taught to be very... Never to buy anything until we could pay for it. Who told you that? My father. Your father? He was the boss in your family when you were growing up? Oh, yes. Yes. Yes. He was... Well, he was kind of stern, too, but I respected him highly. But he had this work that had a lot of responsibilities to it, and when he came home, he was pretty tired, but he always, always, always said, now don't buy anything until you can pay for it. Well, nowadays, that doesn't hold true so much. Better if you don't pay for it sometimes. Now, don't charge it. No. No plastic cards at that time. No. Your father, he came for Sweden when he was in his 20s. Yeah. Oh, he was earlier than that. He was 15 when he came. But he came not with his parents, though. Oh, no. His parents never came over. They stayed there. But what's the reason for him coming over? Because they were poor in Öland, and he came to this country because it was a land of opportunity. And I always would ask him, I said, wasn't it hard for your mother when your children left so early? Well, sure, he said, but they were happy that their son could go to the land of opportunity. And of course, they were poor, too. There'd be one less to feed. But your dad brought all of the brothers. But then it ended up my dad brought all the brothers over. So they all came after. And he got to be superintendent of Landstrom's, and he must have worked there for a few years first. But when you were here the other day, I was mentioning that on my birthday, then he was made superintendent of Landstrom's. When I was born. How old were you then? I was just born that day. When he was superintendent. He was made superintendent that day. For that factory. Yes, it was Landstrom's then. And that was the day the doctor told Ö at least my father said, I'll bring the horse over to the Landstrom. We had a horse named Dolly, Ray one. He said, I'll take the horse out of the barn, bring it over to the factory, because I wasn't ready to come yet. And so the doctor stayed overnight. When my dad came back, the doctor said, Okay, Mr. Larson, you can get in the car and drive around with me to your barn. So that was the first ride my father had in the car also, an automobile. So you were not delivered by your midwife then? No, no. Dr. Oxner, his name was. Was that unusual for a man who was Ö I don't know, I don't know. No, Dr. Oxner. And he stayed, and then he said, when I was born, he said, how hard you in streetcars. Yeah, my mother always said that to me. And so that's the day my father got to be superintendent and the day he could ride in the car for the first time. How old was he then? He was 15 when he came over. I don't know how old he was. Yeah, I don't know. Maybe 5'30". Possibly. I think he was a very intelligent man. Of course, being as my dad and I was a kid, I didn't realize it, you know. So he started at Lannister to work, or how did he Ö Yeah, he was at work. Well, he must have been working there before, because that day he got to be superintendent. Well, then he got to be general superintendent afterwards, because the factory grew. It got to be consolidated industries after a while. Consolidated. What was the name of it? Consolidated Industries. And what kind of different divisions? It was sewing machines? Well, it took in Ö They combined the Heddorf Piano Company, the free sewing machine, they made sewing machines, and the Rockford Cabinet, and that was the furniture. There's a minute. Consolidated Industries now are free sewing machines, Heddorf Piano Factory, and Rockford Cabinet, and then Lannister. You can also, in parentheses, Lannstrom Ö Corporation. Ö furniture. It was the main Ö The bodies of the people. Well, not necessarily, but it was the furniture end of it. And then it was the Ö I guess Lannstrom got to be the top dog, wasn't he? It was Rockford Cabinet Company first, then it was named Lannister Furniture Corporation. Then after that, then it was named the Consolidated, and that included the three. Rockford Cabinet was Lannister, but Rockford Cabinet was the first name. And who was the president? Lannister was Ö Oscar Lannister. Oscar Lannister. And her dad was general superintendent and vice president of the company. So they meant a lot of responsibility, also. Oh, her father, he carried a lot of respect. I mean, you didn't monkey around with him. No. Did you still work with Ö I worked, yes, I worked, but I worked at Heddark mostly. That's where I learned hand carving. I worked with a lot of old hand carvers. There was a saying once that somebody was visiting Ireland and there wasn't any men on Ireland, and somebody asked where all the men were. And then they said, oh, the arbiter for Anton Lauriston for Cabinet, he Rockford. And it was true. A lot of people came over, and my dad gave them work. There was a bunch of Irishmen working out there. Yeah, there was two, I guess. So how could this three sewing machines, they made the cabinets, temporary machines, I suppose. That I don't know, but they made the sewing machine. The sewing machine too? I don't know, I really don't know. You mean the mechanical works on the machine was Ö The sewing machine made Ö They made the sewing machines. That was right next door to Ö I don't know who made the cabinets. I don't know who made the cabinets. I should think that they would have it after they got consolidated. We're not sure on that. But they were Rockford Cabinet, it indicates that they were. Yeah, you would think so. Then see, this Rockford Cabinet included another plant, they called it Bookcase, that was taken in on that group too. That was just another big building, it was evidently Ö I don't know who owned that to start with. So your father, now, then, Anton Lauriston, he became a stockholder too, and of course, being more Ö Yes. Being at the top. Yeah. I guess that you became one of the more affluent families in Ö I guess so, but at the time, we children never, never knew it. Never knew it. Before he did that, he became the superintendent in 1910. Yes. Between 1910 and 1930, he was able to make a good living for his family. Yes, yes. But he was still instilling in you to be very Ö Oh, yes, yes. Ö frugal and Ö Yes, yes. Ö saving things and don't buy anything. And he was very kind, he had a sister in Sweden that needed help, he was always Ö well, all the brothers helped that sister. But I didn't realize it until he lost so much money when the banks went out Ö Your dad did a lot, you know, well, you didn't say it, but your dad helped a lot of people that nobody really knew about. Yes. He was a tough customer, I mean, when he went business as far as work, he had that business, but he helped a heck of a lot of people. You mean lending them money? Lending them money, yes. He cancelled it. Yes, he borrowed to Ö They had nothing, so he just Ö So instead of foreclosure, then he helped them out Ö Well, he just cut it off. He lost a lot of money himself, I mean, plus these people that he held mortgages and stuff, he just crossed it off. Well, he did, he was very kind-hearted. So what did he have as money then, in the security bank? On Broadway. He had stock in there too, you see, you know what that meant. There was Truman Johnson Ö Truman Johnson, yes. That's right, and Engstrom Ö Wasn't there an Anderson too? Engstrom Ö I remember there was a true Ö Because they went belly up. Yes. You remember this though, I mean Ö I remember. Yes, yes. Yes. No? No, no we were not. No, we were not. Did you have any money in there? No, uh-uh. Did I have any money in? At that age Ö What did your father have though? My father had, yes. He was a stockholder. He was a stockholder, and he didn't know that if you were a stockholder, say you had $100,000 invested, and they broke, that he had to pay Ö he lost $100,000, but he also had to put in $100,000. You had to put in the amount that you had stocked him. That was so that they could try to pay back the stock Ö the depositors. He lost double. So instead of insurance, he was penalized. Twice. Double amount. Besides whatever he had in his bank accounts. I think a lot of them didn't know that. No, my dad didn't Ö Well, it hadn't happened before, so there was no question he was. No, no. That's right. So that's where he lost a lot, I guess. It was hard on him. It was very hard on him. So what happened to you? Did he have money in the Swedish bank? I don't know if he had money in more places. But we survived. I don't recall that we suffered. Everything just Ö He held his own, so he Ö I didn't realize at that time what he was going through. Did he leave then for Jamestown during that time? No, not then. That was later. Then pretty soon the furniture business in Rockford started to go down. The people that would make the furniture makers. Well, a little after Ö Well, a little after, yes. But when they did make furniture in Rockford, it was known for the best furniture in the United States. And Landstrom had a very high, high Ö Well, they were the biggest in town here. Yeah, they had a high reputation, good reputation. They had a lot of furniture factories in Rockford, you know. Several furniture factories. They made excellent furniture. But then all of a sudden everything started to go, and then there were people from the South that came and bought out these factories. And I suppose they were hard up, that's why they had to sell them. They were loose lands. Somebody came in and took advantage of the Depression and just cut it down. So then my dad went to Jamestown for a little while and worked, and then he went to Duluth and worked a little bit. Did he move with his wife? You were all grown up then, right? Yes, I was grown up. Just her dad and mother, they went to Duluth for a while. In fact, they kind of enjoyed that. I mean, it was almost like a vacation for them. And then we rented our house out here. We lived there all our married life and went out to live at my parents' home on Spring Creek Road because they were living on Spring Creek Road then. Spring Brook Road. Spring Brook Road. And we felt that it would be better if we would live out there to have somebody living there, so we rented this house out. I don't know how long you was in Jamestown. We went there specifically because you had your own disposal for your toilets and everything. And you had your own water because it was outside the city limits. And you had to take care of that so you wouldn't... We rented our place out and moved out there just to take care of it when they were gone because it needed so people wouldn't abuse it. You know, you could... You don't get those facilities, you can kind of mess the place up. But they moved out. They did live on 2610 East 8th Street, but that was right on 8th Street, so they moved to Spring Brook Road, and they really enjoyed it out there. They had a little stew gun that my dad built, and they called it Little Red Stew Gun. In fact, it was a regular house. Yeah. And they really enjoyed it. It had lots of trees. But this bank closed, you know, they never opened up again. In other words, they lost that money. Absolutely. And he had to pay in them double to... Besides whatever he had. Was he able to pay them on time? Evidently. Evidently. Maybe if he had some other stocks or something, maybe he had a... I don't know. What did he say about the banking system after that? Did he trust them? Did he go to the bank and put in what he wanted? All I heard, I remember my mother saying, well, Dad never knew that you had to pay back. A lot of people never knew. And, of course, I was young then. It didn't mean much to me, you know. I didn't realize it. Where now I think, gee, if the bank had closed, it would be terrible if we lost... Did they warn you, for instance, all you kids about this? Well, you were grown up then. No, I don't remember them warning us. If you see anything specific, don't put anything in until you know what it's all about. That's right. I think with the Swedes, most of them, if they couldn't pay for something, I mean, they didn't charge that much, most of them. They wanted to pay cash. I know my dad even, I mean, he never wanted to charge anything. It was in the system. Yeah. But now, putting in savings here, they were taken, in other words, they didn't know what they were doing, and it never happened before. That's right. Like the Swedish bank never closed. What was the difference between the security and the Swedish bank? That I don't know. Why did one bank start... Well, the Swedish bank, which is an American bank now, was in business a lot longer than the security bank on Broadway. There might have been some greenhorns over there, I don't know. There was a man, Truman Johnson was president, and Sandy England. Well, they both got sent to prison, didn't they? Oh, I see. So they had to serve time. Yes. So they lost a share of the money. At least Sandy did, didn't he? I don't know about the others, but they got some kind of a monkey business. And that is true. That was one reason, too, I think. Want to turn this off a minute? I can't remember what it was for, but I can remember how crooked people can be. Somebody had witnessed something for my father. So at the time he had to verify this, this name was on, that it was a witness. So he lived in Chicago then, so the bank or the lawyer, it was about, wrote to this mister in so-and-so in Chicago and said, would you verify that you've got your name on this document? He writes back and he said, for $50 I'll verify it. Isn't that awful? Do you remember they said that there were people going around buying bankbooks for people? I never heard of that. You never heard of that? I never heard of that. They said if you had the bankbook for $100 they paid $10 for something, but you never heard of that? I never heard of that. Some people were forced to. For heaven's sake. Goodness. They could make some money off it, you know, a few dollars a book. Yeah, sure. People were scared, you know, to lose the whole thing, so they take the lower sum. Sure. Side two, there is blitzed, rougher than mine. Side two. My dad had a sister here and three brothers besides himself, and then he had a sister in Chicago. So they all kept in touch with each other and they were very close. And then they were close too, the ones in Sweden, they always kept in touch with them. They did go back and visit. You mentioned earlier, you know, that you remember the Christmases over at Grandma's. Yes. What did she do then for Christmas? I can definitely remember the first course was that Vita Gröt, and we children hated it. Got a big bowl of this white, well, rice is what it was, sure, rice. You hated it? I hated it. Why? Rice, you know, Gröt. And some people always had an almond in it, but we never did in our family. And then I guess whoever got the almond was going to get married or something, but we never had that. But I was so glad when that Vita Gröt was through, then they'd have a lot of cinnamon on it. That's good for you. Yeah. Yeah. But that was not the first course that you had. That was the first thing that was put on our plate was a Vita Gröt. Did you have that too? For Julafton. Yep, Julafton. We never made much of Juldag, well, we went to church, Julet, of course. For Julafton, that was the big day. Yeah, it's the first. So she had a Christmas tree in there. Yes, a Christmas tree, we'd cut a mallet on them, I remember that, and live candles, I mean lit candles, that snapped on. And they were lit? Yes. And then we had a Kranz too. You know, we'd have a white Kranz that hung and it was wrapped with paper. On top of the tree? No, no, it hung from the ceiling down. And what kind of Christmas tree was it? Was it a spruce or a fir? Well, I don't remember that. Now you're getting technical. Well, it was a... I don't remember how they got... it never was big. Well, it was a big shirt, I mean it was as tall as you were. In fact, I think they had the Kranz first, then they got Christmas tree later on. Yeah, but the Kranz was white. And it was homemade? Yes, I think they'd re-wrap it, you know, with paper. With silk paper? No, it wasn't silk, and then they'd cut it so it had fringes on it. Haven't you seen pictures of those any place? And one more thing, Mother, they always used to get these little Christmas bells, you know? They'd hang them on the shelves. Oh yeah, from corner to corner. But you don't remember any candles in the windows? No. I can't say that I do. But in the tree, Mother, they were lit after the dinner was eaten, before Jultomten came. Would you hear right then that you had eaten? I don't know if we call them Santa Claus or not, I think so, because we would call them Santa Claus. Grandma, well, I don't know. I suppose she would have called them Santa Claus too, but... Maybe in Sweden they'd call them Santa Claus. So after you had eaten, then you were ready for the presents? Yeah, we had presents. I don't remember too much about the presents. You don't remember? Well, that's the way we did it. You must have done the same thing after you got through. I'm thinking of my grandma's house now. You got the dishes done and all of that, then you'd go in and we'd give out the gifts. Oh yeah, and we'd sing, New Year's Eve. Santa Claus didn't come through the door, did it? No. I think when we had Santa Claus, when our kids... Well, that's different. I'm talking about my grandmas now. We'd sing New Year's Eve. New Year's Eve. You didn't go out and have some pusska or whatever. I forgot it now, but I know we sang that always. And we never would stay too late because we went to Yuletide and that started about... And that was in Swedish. Five o'clock, I think, in the morning. So you had to go to bed early then. Oh yes. I can remember my folks... My grandma and grandpa lived about 1,600 blocks on 4th Street, and we lived on a 2,000 block on 4th Street. And my folks would pull me in a sled to Yuletide. And it was the same. Yep. If I go back now to the Rispius, which you like very well. Yeah. So what did you get after that? Well, we had meatballs, I know that, because my grandma made such good meatballs. You had carbs. But we had carbs and all the Swedish traditional. Oh, fix up. It was a dessert. Yeah. How about coffee? Did you as a kid drink coffee? No. I still don't. I don't care for coffee. How about the rest of your sisters and brothers? Did they drink coffee at a young age? No. No. No. We weren't allowed to drink coffee at a young age. No. Milk? Milk, yeah. That too. My folks said coffee was not good for us, so we weren't allowed to have coffee. So you didn't drink it? No. No. My dad, I don't know if we get back to what they did years ago. You know, nowadays everybody smokes. Well, years ago, when Dad was in the furniture factory, everybody chewed snuff. What's the say for the coffee? Had schmooze to do some. So your dad had that too? Yes. Yes. All his life? You never saw it? I don't know when he started. He had it so neatly that you never knew it. I mean, he didn't walk around spitting either. I mean, you know, some of them, you know, they got it spit all the time when they got schmooze and tobacco in their mouth. So you remember that in the church, spittoons in the church? No, I don't. What? Do you mean spittoons? Oh, no. I don't. No. No. No. We didn't use them in church. No. No. No. No. You'd have to swallow it. It was often. Yeah. No, because we don't. So after the service, then, you remember people coming up with schmooze to do some outside the church? No, I don't remember that. No, I just remember that at home. I remember it at home. My dad would kind of tap it like this, you know, or something. And I can remember, and he'd say, we'd kiddle about it, schmooze to do some. How about your grandpa? Grandpa Gustafson? Did he have a... I don't think so. I don't think so. I don't remember. No. So nobody smoked then in your family? No. In my grandma's family. Grandma and grandpa's family. I don't know that, if his children did. Yes, I know Arvid did. Yeah, but when they were small, I'm thinking, well, of course, when they were small. How do you think they picked it up? In other words, your family didn't use anything. Was they in school then, or after school, or starting work, or how did they pick it up? I don't know if they started that early as they do now or not. I suppose they did. My dad never used any tobacco. No? But how did you start? I was 30 years old before I started smoking, and then I smoked a few years, and then I quit. Why did you start at 30? I don't know. I worked in a pattern shop, and everybody else around me was smoking. So then I don't know why, I just picked it up. But then my son told me to quit, and I quit, and he still smokes. Crazy. But you quit. I quit. You had a character. I quit when he told me, right then. Never touched a cigarette after. A father who obeyed son. A son who would do what he obeyed father. He said to Tim, you quit smoking, Dad, and wrote to him and his wife, too. Dad, will you just go up in the attic? You know, we got a lot of pictures, right? As you come up, see if there isn't one of my grandma and grandpa up there, because it's a cute picture. So it's... Today. When grandma couldn't prepare the Crispus, then your mother. My mother's sister lived there then, and her husband, and they always had the Swedish tradition, and I still hold to... But the risk is great now. You didn't particularly like that. No. Did you change in your family then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. You didn't have it then? No. No, not after grandma died. No, we had rice pudding. I see. But no yogurt. No. The English. No. I don't remember when we stopped it, but we had it for a long time. You were the only one that didn't like it in your family? No, I don't think any of the kids liked that. It was kind of dry. You pour milk on it. But, now like, for many in the foreign countries, when we were there in England, Terry wanted some rice pudding, because he wasn't feeling well. Oh, no, that was a dessert. But for the Swedes, rice pudding was never a dessert. But you didn't have white rice pudding, though, in the daily... It was Crispus only. It was Crispus with its white and fruit. What was the holiday treat? They called it la vita gruot. You still didn't like it, because you got it once a year. I didn't like it. And you hated it. Yeah. How about lutefisk, now, though? Oh, we love that. We had lutefisk last night. So you continue with that tradition? Oh, yes. But you dropped gruot. Yeah, we dropped gruot. How about korv? Korv, sure. Flask or potatiskorv? Do you remember if you mixed with the potatoes? Flask. It's that salt pork. You know? I imagine, because I remember talking about flask a lot. But what did you carry on, though, in your family with your husband, too? Oh, and my husband... Did he bring something in that you didn't have, or...? Yes, his mother made a certain kind of a sausage they called sudkorv. They dried it. It was real hard, very good, but I often wonder how come it didn't spoil. Because his mother would make it and they would hang it, I don't know where, by their furnace? I don't know where they hung it to dry. And then they fried it, and it was real tough to get through the skin, but it's very good. Was it for breakfast and for dinner, or...? For breakfast, or any time, I guess. So they were conserved and hanging in the...? Yeah, and nobody in the family's got the recipe, and nobody knows how to make it. So that's all? That's all. Lost. Yeah, that's lost. Yeah, otherwise we always have Christmas Eve and have this traditional... Was this a Christmas dish, or was it everyday year of the year? Then I can't remember. Then I can't remember. I can't remember that, but I definitely know that was something... I had never tasted before until I got into Ray's family. Do you remember if any other families had it, or was it just a special...? I don't remember. Not on our side of the family, if I can recall, but this was something special. I know that Terry and his family and his children, they loved it. He speaks of it so often. He says, I can't understand that somebody doesn't know how to make this. You never got to hang out with them? No, no. No. How about Krup Krucker? Well, Krup Krucker was very, very much in my father's family. We don't know where they are. Okay. Yes, Krup Krucker was very much in my father's family. How did you eat on a special day of the week? Oh, whenever my dad wanted Krup Krucker, he taught my mother how to make it, and she got to be very expert on it. So even as she lived 91 years, she still was making Krup Krucker. So your father taught her to make it? Yes, yes. When our son was just a little, teeny baby, my dad would say, Gladys, you've got to feed Krup Krucker to him early. And I said, Dad, he's just a baby. I know, I know. And then at night I always remember he'd have on the fork a cold Krup Krucker, and he'd walk around and enjoy it. Just walk around eating that cold Krup Krucker on the fork. Things you remember, isn't it funny? So he wanted him to learn the taste? Yes, be sure he liked it. He loved some. His wife makes it too, our son. So he didn't have to worry about that. But my sister and I, we never made them. We never made them, and everybody would say, how come you and your sister never made them? Well, my mother was such a crackerjack at it, and we felt that we didn't want to take that away from her. I mean, that was just something special that she did, and she did it well, and she had lots of parties. And now I'm going to have my cousins over next Thursday, and my husband's going to make them. So this is like a holiday treat then for you to make Krup Krucker when somebody comes over? It used to be, but Terry makes them so often now that it's getting to be quite common. Did you like them from the beginning? Yes. Yes. With lingonberries or without? Well, with lingonberries. We have cranberries now, but it was always lingonberries. So you didn't have them, like your son, you said, had it on the fork? No, that was my father. He didn't use any lingonberries then? I think so. I don't quite remember, but I can remember lingon, so maybe I put that. My dad enjoyed that very much, the Krup Krucker. And of course my mother made them, and she had such big parties when she would have Krup Krucker. And I think how she used to sit with her salt pork, you know, and cut it all up. Well, now Terry, when he gets it, he gets a sweet pork, and he gets it frozen, then he can cut it much easier. But he's got to be almost a fanatic on Krup Krucker. The minute we make Krup Krucker and there's no more salt pork in there mixed up, he says, now I've got to get some more. He's always got to have it all set, all the meat and the onions and everything, all set and frozen in the refrigerator. And we've got to have potatoes home, too. Sometimes the potatoes get, you know, sprout. And I said, Terry, you don't have to, but I'm so far ahead of time. But he seems like he's going to do that. I don't know why, but he makes good Krup Krucker. So now he's getting to be, you know, kind of Krup Krucker guy. And when our children were home on Thanksgiving, the day after Thanksgiving, then we made Krup Krucker. But his wife learned how to make it. My mother went out there and she taught my son's wife how to make them. Now, their whole family loves them, so they have them. And my son thought it was pretty good when his wife would make them. That was his second wife. His first wife, she wouldn't have been so inclined. So you had the privilege then to grow up with your grandparents. Yes, yes, and they were very dear to me. And your children had the same thing. They grew up with your mother. Yes, definitely, because she lived to 91. But my dad died 61. He was working at another furniture factory then, and Terry's brother was working for him. And he just came in in the morning, and he was, wherever he came in, he had to walk down the aisle. And so they'd say, Good morning, Mr. Larson, or good morning, Anton. And how are you today? And he said, Just fine. You want a couple more steps? And he dropped. So Terry's brother was there, and he gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, but it didn't work. That was when he was 61. I thought he was old, you know, but it wasn't old. I can remember so well, how dumb a person is when you think of it. When my dad died, of course, we had to go and buy the most beautiful wooden casket. What kind of wood was it, Terry? What? My dad's casket. Mahogany. Mahogany. Beautiful. And the first thing I did was feel of it. Just whenever my dad went anyplace, just a matter of, he couldn't help it, he'd feel how the finish was, you know. It would be almost embarrassing sometimes. He'd open the drawers to see how they went, you know, because something about Lanster Furniture, they had something special in there. He said they wouldn't come into the house. Yeah. So when he died, of course, the first thing I saw was this beautiful casket. My mother, too. But we had to get this casket because it was wood and the finish was so great. And now as the years go by, I thought, how silly. You know? But at that time, you're so taken by the death, and you're going to have everything, better take that money and give it to some child to go to college or something, or a down payment of college or something. Like this casket, did your father pick it up before he died? No, no, no, no, no, no. But your mother, she had a sense, too, that they got to be just right. Who picked out the casket? Well, see, the mahogany, the late blinds. I don't know. I suppose she was with us. I mean, it's all pure old business. I suppose she was with us. I can't remember, but she was in the state. People fall for this, though. Oh, sure they do. Oh, sure. It's like they're being promoted. They have the most expensive caskets. That's the last thing you can do for them. You're not doing anything for them. What they say, the feudal is not for the dead, it's for the living. Yeah, that's right. And they have the, when you get into an undertaking power, the most expensive caskets are on the front. You go farther, you go cheaper. But people don't like that. Come in there and see all those caskets, if you've never been in. They're afraid the war is going to get out of hand. Sure, well, sure. Actually, what it should be, it should be just a plain wooden box. And if you want to spend some more money, give it to some poor kid or somebody. I mean, this idea of putting it all into the ground, it's really nuts. And this did go on, though. Oh, sure, it goes in. Yeah, I don't know. I think. But even years ago, I mean, when you all died, I mean, like you say, I mean, there was other ways to put the money in. Sure, when you think of that now. You could spend thousands of dollars on caskets. Yeah, of course. I don't think my dad would have had even lived, I think, because he would have saved that strabbing. Some people do go and take care of their funeral before they die. I mean, go and pick up what they want to do. But you see, that's where they got it. It's for the people, the survivors. My dad died of a heart attack. It was a shock. And we were just, to them. And at that time, there was no cremation that was popular at that time? No. I have a brother-in-law, though, that died a year ago. He was cremated. Now, that was a shock. That was hard for us to accept. But my brother-in-law and his wife, which is my sister, they live up in Wisconsin, they were there two months before to his brother that died. They were here for his funeral. And my sister said, on the way home, they both decided that they would be cremated. So that makes it easier on the people coming by. But it was such a... I don't know. I can't kind of accept that. I know, but when you think of it, I mean, go and look at a dead person. I know it. I know it. I don't know. It has always been like that if you have the body. Oh, they look so nice. Why is that? That's what they say. He looks like... How ridiculous. You have to make sure it's the right person that you're in. I don't know. Maybe you got a point there, but... I don't know. It's probably not a policy that you see. When you have this viewing of the body, then you can see the casket. Yeah. Otherwise, you'll be too far removed from it if you have it in the church. Yeah. Well, but then, too, if you've been real... All right, say your partner, mother, whoever it is, a near member had been real ill. He looked terrible. Okay, they fix you, so you look pretty good. Looks like a movie star. Yeah, so then you say, Oh, he looks pretty good, or he looks pretty good, you know. I don't guarantee this coffee, so it's more like mud every... Casket, I can remember when my grandpa died in Sweden. They had them outside, and they opened. I can remember I have a picture of seeing my grandpa laying outside, people were around looking. I suppose he went to the church, but maybe this was before the church. And then I think they kept him home if it was winter. How about when you hit all? They were unable to dig the graves. Oh, well, they used to have a little chapel that used to put him in. And waited until the very... Yes, until it was the day. But now they have an electrical steamer. Have you ever seen it? It's spooky, that smoke is going up high, you know, and there's some machines digging. So they dig the graves now. Did you go to any funerals when you were a little girl? There was only for grown-ups. I don't think parents took their children, no. So you didn't go to any wake or anything? No, no, no. No, the only thing I can remember is... I can remember my grandma and grandpa dying, but I can't remember the funeral too well. Were the funerals larger at that time than they are today? Did people take off from work, for instance, to follow their funeral? They used to hang a... On the front door they used to hang a... Trunks or something? Yeah. It's kind of a drink. Yes. Kind of like this, and then a drink. Out of the front door. On a deceased family? Yes, because your... Many years ago. The neighbors didn't do anything? Well, some kind of... I'm sure they had coffee after, but they always had a casket at home. They didn't, on the street, for instance, somebody died, they didn't do any decoration on their home? No, no, no. No, no, no. No, other than that, on the door, you always do. Did they have screws with broken top? Outside the home where the person died? I don't understand that word. Spruce, you know, like a Christmas tree. Oh, I... With broken tops. No, no. Now, the good Templars, they always have a little spruce to give to everybody around their lapel. When you go to a funeral of a good Templar, you get a little twig, uh-huh, from a pine. Each family gets one. Well, we've been to several good Templar funerals. Do they have a separate service than the church service? They have, no. They have the speaker there. It isn't necessarily a church thing, is it, Father? No, they don't have... Well, most of them have a minister and the one that's head of the good Templars. But I know that you get a little twig to hand you and a pin on you when you go. It's a little different. But then, of course, you talk about people coming. Well, I think it's just how well-known you were. Did they take off and work though? Because they were not paying you for that. No, that I don't know. I think neighbors would. I think neighbors would, yeah. I don't remember that. I really don't. But I always remember my mother. She'd go into every funeral. Well, she felt she had to go. And I know when she died, Fred Olsen, he said, yes, we've seen her here many times, he said, because she went to people's funerals. She thought she... She knew in just a little bit where she thought she should go. Did they treat you to... Oh, they had coffee and cup after. They never had dinners though at the funeral? Yes, they had that. They had, depending on the funeral. If the funeral is 11 o'clock, then usually they'll have... They had a lunch. Yeah, not a big meal, meat and potato or anything like that, but cool stuff, you know. And it's always the third day after they die. The third day after you die? No, or the day... Oh, there's not any specific day. Today, maybe they'd have it, not tomorrow, but the next day or the next day. Depending on if you have relatives that have to come. And my mother, she was quite a few days we waited because we had a relative from California. So your mother, she was out driving at 91 years of age? Yes, yes, yes. That was an accident. No, her foot slipped and went on the gas pedal, so she hit the car in front of her. I guess it was a three-car reaction, but thank goodness the others didn't get hurt badly. They had a little stiff neck or something. Weren't you afraid of having your mother 91 years of age behind the steering wheel? She was an excellent driver. She knew more than we did. She was out all the time. You hadn't told them to be careful. Oh, no, no. Some of her relatives had no locking, a few locking bags. So she drove all the time. And she had ladies with her all the time, too. And I know there were some friends of ours, and this friend said that if my mother was going to drive, then her husband would let her go. But if she was going to go with any other lady, then he didn't want her to go. But he knew my mother was a good driver. She was. She was a good driver. And it's nice when you get the flesh. The funeral directors, then, they are wealthy people, then. Very, very wealthy. Well, the one in town that is really the funeral director, as far as the Swedes are concerned, is Olsen. Fred Olsen. Fred Olsen. He's a big one. Yes, yes. And he's been in the business for years and years. I mean, this guy has it now. His father had it, and then his grandfather had it. And they've got a place on 6th Street and what is it, 2nd Avenue? Mm-hmm. Yeah, they have a lot of funerals. Very nice man. They've had a lot of sadness in their family. Oh, yeah. He had both of them. A daughter was suddenly killed in an airplane accident. And so they've had sadness. But what about during the Depression, though? People couldn't be that... I don't know. They were very down during that time when it was... No, I don't have... Years ago, you used to... Well, I suppose, like anything else, according to what they could say or put it on the books, so they could. Years ago, though, they used to have these kind of velvet caskets. That was the cheapest casket. Can we look? Now you move. I'll take another one. You look in the wrong one. So you took this... Well, years ago, most of it was these velour caskets. That was the cheapest you could get. Kind of like plush, you know, velvet. And it was just as good. No fuss. But now you hardly ever... We went to a funeral that was right outside in the graveyard, and she was on Social Security, so it was one of the government ones. And it was kind of in the wind. When Minister Olsen lifted up the top to it, it was just like a piece of paper. Just paper. Paper. All it was was paper. Yeah. What? Truth? What? That's the cheapest I've ever seen. Yeah. Do people talk about it after the funeral? Like, do you think? Well, I don't think they talk about it, but it didn't make that much difference to them. Well, they still go to a church and have their coffee, and it gets to be quite a social event, it really does. People you haven't seen for years, you know, you say, oh, you see them at a funeral. And you talk, and then... So I guess it's all right. It's one of the highlights, though. Yeah. Oh, some friends of my mother's, they would go just for the coffee. My, my. They didn't go to a funeral. They figured they'd get a little dup, you know, and coffee and stuff. But I don't know. It was cremation. Kind of hard. Then my sister came afterwards. Oh, well, they had a service. And then about two weeks after she wanted to come, and she had her little basket, and Terry was going to lift the basket out of the car. No, she wanted the basket. Well, in the basket she had some more of his remains. She wanted to go up to the cemetery to his folks. So then I saw the little box, and it was a little golden colored shovel, and she took out and brought his initials with his ashes. It was just like a line. She had her husband's ashes, and she put some in a flower garden. And then he also, she went out to my folks. In your flower garden? I asked for some, yeah. Oh, he was so dear to us. But then she went to my folks' grave, too, and put some ashes. And then she had gone way up to Door County. Do you know where that is? Yeah. Me and my sister and her husband always went there. So after the funeral, she took our five children, and they went up there, and she spread ashes in the lake.