 Oh boy. We came in 1910. And we lived in Duluth for five years. Did Tilly, did she remember that? No, she doesn't remember it. No, I'm the real one. I'm the real Sweden in the family. No, we from Sweden, we came to Duluth. But you were only 15 months older. Oh, no, no, I was about three years old. See, my father came first, a year before, I believe. Then I'm mother, poor mother came dragging on three kids. I think I was three, Tilly was about two, and my brother. What I meant was that you were 15 months older than Tilly. Just approximately. But do you remember more than she did? Oh, yes. She does. I think I do. Because it makes a little bit difference if you're older. Yeah. So what do you remember now from Duluth? You don't remember anything from Sweden, though? Nothing. No. All I do remember, maybe I remember the boat ride. That's all. Or you know, over the ocean. Over the ocean, that's all. You remember that? Kind of remember that, yes. Well, anyway, yeah, we lived in Duluth for five years. See, then there was a sawmills and stuff in Duluth. And then, of course, my father's sister and a family lived there. And their name, they were road contractors in Duluth. They were the one that made all the roads in that year. And they were quite prominent people. Their name was Badeen. Your dad, now, did he work for them? You know, he worked around the sawmills and stuff. Oh, he probably worked for them, too. I don't know. You wouldn't think he would get a good job there with the... Well, and then our grandmother, father's mother, they have all moved to Rockford here. So a lot of factories and stuff like that. Why did they move from Duluth to Rockford? More work here, factories. In Duluth, it was only the sawmills. And then the road work that our relation had. So you were eight then when you moved from Duluth? Yeah, approximately. You started school out there? Yeah, we went to kindergarten in Duluth, too. We went to kindergarten in Duluth. We went to Salvation Army in Duluth. I remember all that and our picnics and everything, you know. Uh-huh. And then we moved to Rockford in 1914. The whole family? The whole family, yeah. Then a sad part of it, because then it was five of us, because two of our brothers were born in Duluth, Minnesota. So then we were five. Then we lost our mother. In 1916, she died. My teacher told me about that. Yeah, in 1916, she... We had an awful struggle then. And my father, and he remarried, and we were pushed around all over. Yeah, I think that... What? We had house... He advertised for housekeepers, but they only stayed a week, five kids, you know. But how was he able, though, your father, to take care of you? Did he try to keep you together the first time? Yeah, well, he... We got food and everything. Yeah, sure, he kept the family together, because it so happened, my father put an ad in the paper. And then some woman had just come from Sweden, from Öland. What was her name? And her... Rundberg. Rundberg. Rundberg. Uh-huh. And her husband was quite a prompt guy in Sweden. He was an artist. She had it so swell. She had maids. She had maids and everything, but he fooled her here to Sweden. So she was halfway here to America on a boat, and she got a telegram. And he... She had four boys. With him? With him. And then when she was halfway across the ocean, then she got a telegram, telling... He promised he was going to come after, take the kids with, but then she got a telegram that he didn't have no intention. He had another woman on the string, and a baby was born during that time. You mean he sent her on a trip to the United States? To... Yeah, to visit her aunt. Well, just to visit. Yeah, she... Just to visit her aunt. But then he said she liked that he was going to come, too. But then she was halfway on... in the ocean, and then he got... she got a telegram, and he was not going to come, no nothing. He had another woman on the string. So she came to rock for him. Yeah. Then she saw... She was staying with her aunt, but her aunt was so mean to her and everything. Then she saw that in the paper, so she... See, my father had it in a paper that a Swedish woman come into the house, do anything she wants, just take right over. So that's how she came to the house. So you remember her then? Oh, yes, yes, yes. Oh, yeah, we had her for many years, our stepmother. So afterwards, you know, she took over, all right. Then her... Then he... started sending her boys. He sent two boys, two at a time. From Sweden? From Sweden. And they stayed at your house too then? And then... Well, yes, certainly. Then she took and washed them days. Them days, you know, the laundry men used to come and do family wash. She took and washed and saved money. So when the boys came, she had the money. No, when she came in, she sent my sister and her brother to Joliet Children's Home. Your aunt Tilly went there? Mm-hmm. No, I was too old. I was nine years old. Oh, I was a girl. I could stay home and work. I was a slave. I was a Cinderella. You know, I really had to work around the house. They wouldn't send you away then because... No, because she had to have help, you know. So this Mrs. Rundberg now, did she marry your father then? Yeah, they got married after that. I see. Mm-hmm, they got married then. How long did they stay together before they married? Well, that's a story in itself, too. They got divorced, then they remarried, then she died, and my father married a couple times after that. I see. So she died and... Yeah, she died....stayed at your house. Mm-hmm. So how long did you stay home now? Oh, I stayed home since I got married. Yeah, let's see now. I was about 19 when I got married. How did this work out now with the stepmother? Did she feel right in your home? Oh, she was nice. She was often nice, but she had to work all the time, you know, do all the housework, you know, and everything. So you had your chores every day, then you had to make certain they were done. Oh, sure. She told you to do that. Uh-huh. How about your father now? Was he pushing to you or in any way to... Oh, he was kind of good. Ah, I tell you, it was just drinking all the time. There was a lot of booze in the family. So that's why I got married so early. But that was only your father or your stepfather that you were drinking? Well, towards the last, towards the last, yes. Was it kind of unusual that women started drinking? Well, you know how it is. It was quiet in your home then? Yeah, yeah, uh-huh. Oh, I see. Of course, I wasn't, I got married, so I was out of the house then, you know. But you stayed home then until 19? Uh-huh, and then I got married thinking just to get away from that booze family, even her boys. He, her oldest boy, he was quite an accordion player. Oh, he was like, what you see on TV, Lawrence Welch, you know, beautiful accordion. He could have gone far. He had the Rock River Barn Dance there for a while in Chicago. But he drank too, drinking, drinking, so, you know, he didn't get no place. Well, he finally died of cancer. So he stayed in your home too then? Was he about the same age as you or...? Well, one of her boys, she had four boys. One was just about my age. And they all stayed in your home? Well, when they came, they all stayed until they got married. There was a big family then. Quite a big family at that time. Well, no, what's her four boys, and then me, and my... And the rest of your sisters? And my sister and them, they were, they were... At the children's home? At the children's home, and then, uh, then my aunt in Duluth, my father's sister, she had lost a boy the same year as my mother died, and he was 12 years old from diphtheria. Then she thought she'd take Tilly and raise her, but then she was going to have another little baby, so she sent Tilly home. So Tilly got home too. Ah, we were pushed around here and there. So Tilly came home and stayed in your home? Yeah. With you too then? Yeah. But then you felt better, or you had a sister, so you could talk to her? Well, yes and no. You could talk to her. Uh-huh, yeah. So it was easier, I suppose, to live with the stepbrothers and stepsisters? No, uh-uh, uh-uh. Well, you know how they, how they, them, they, you know how they, they favored different ones. I know one of the boys, oh boy, he was just terrible. He used to steal. His mother was, went out working too, in the laundry stuff, and he used to steal. And then we, we would see him, and he said, if you tell Ma, I'm going to kill you. So we were on edges all the time. He used to steal, and then he used to blame it on us. So we had a, we had a heck of a time. But we lived through it. We had to work. Work never hurt anybody. So her husband, or the other? Oh, he was a painter, decorator. He was. No, he never came over here, though. He stayed in Sweden, Runeberg himself. Oh, yeah, well, her husband, you mean my stepmother? No, he never, never came over. He never showed up again? No, no, no, he, you mean you're talking about my stepmother's husband? That's right. He never showed up? No, no, no, no, no, no. They got divorced. Then he remarried, and he's got quite a family in Sweden now, I understand. Of course, he's gone too. They're dead too now. And your stepmother, she never went back to Sweden? Oh, no, no, uh-uh, no, uh-uh. So there was a well-to-do family, she came to that order. Uh-huh, yeah, yeah. They went sour. Yeah, mm-hmm. No, I never had, I kind of kept in, she was all on my father's side here, our relation only from Sweden. And our mother's side, nobody came. She had a brother that came unexpected, but I don't know, he just disappeared. I remember the last time she came, he came here was when he died, when she died, but he didn't come to the house at all. He went to the funeral home to look at her. Then he disappeared, and even my aunt, I went to Sweden 6 years ago to visit my aunt. That's my mother's youngest sister. You know, she's 101 years old now, and she's just as sharp as your priest. When I went to visit her in 19, I had kept, now isn't that funny, I had kept track of her, writing to her and everything. And then I got to go to Sweden 6 years ago now. A cousin of mine from Duluth went with me. Two girls I couldn't get them to go with. What makes me mad, my oldest girl and her husband... Who has your children? I have two girls. Two girls. Tillie don't have any. And they didn't want to go with you? They wouldn't go, and even the officer paid, they wouldn't go with. And then what made me, what I felt bad about, you know, my husband died very suddenly. He died in his sleep. I just had to wake up 2 o'clock in the morning, it was ice cold. That was in April. Then I found, see my sister, I wish I was as close to my girls as my sister is. A lot of things are going on, I don't know, but my sister knows everything. No, then I found out after he died that my oldest girl and my Tillie were going to make a trip to Sweden in April. And see, my man died in April, but they were going to make a trip to Sweden, and they had gotten, they had joined a pioneer in Chicago. Are you familiar with that? You know, they used to get cheaper tickets, if you remember. But I didn't know anything about it until after my husband died, until he was going to pay the fare. But do you suppose, and of course my oldest been, we've been having company from Sweden on my husband's side. He's from Halland, Sweden. The last year he lived, he died 1971. The last year he lived, he had a niece and nephew that came here for five weeks, that stayed here. So you had contacts with them? Oh, yes, indeed. But this one is one of them? But my sister and I were going to go visit them, not up north. But the one up north on Harrison? That's on my mother's side. There, she is 101. Yes. And she's your? My aunt, my aunt, my aunt, my aunt, my aunt, my aunt. My aunt, my aunt, my aunt, my aunt, my aunt. Yeah, I was going to say now, I went, I was three years old when I left Sweden, and can you imagine, I walked in on her on my 73rd birthday. That was the first time she saw you? First time she ever saw me. So you never remember her, though? From when, no, I don't remember, you know. But she remembered you. Yes, uh-huh, yeah, and she was so happy that I could talk to her, that I could talk Swedish, you know. She was so happy about that. But you should see the beautiful letters that woman writes yet today, in her age. No, I called her, her birthday is October the 3rd, I called her by telephone and talked to her. Now, she's going to call me Christmas Day sometimes, I imagine, so I'd be on the lookout for her. I had to stay over. Yeah, well, she generally calls, let's see now, we generally call, when I call her, I call about 12 o'clock, and then it's 7 o'clock in Sweden, isn't it? So, yeah, she would. But your daughters now, why wouldn't they be interested to meet this aunt now? Because they never saw their grandmother. Because she was dead when you were only... You mean my girls to go with? Yeah, because they have never seen any of your relatives. No. And your mother, they never saw. No, no, I've never seen her before. That I can remember. Well, they can't because she died in 1916. You were not even married then. Who knew, 1916. Wouldn't you think your daughters would be interested to meet someone on your mother's family in Sweden then? My sister, she's the limit. Of course, you know, her eyes, of course, you heard blood on my eyes, I don't see nothing. Well, that's true. She don't see the right, no nothing. But she won't try to help herself at all. Why? I have one word for her, lazy. She's on the telephone, oh. Yeah, but how about your daughters now? Why wouldn't they go with you to Sweden to see you? They wouldn't go, uh-uh. They're not interested. They go with Tilly though. They do? Not their mother. I said the other one, they were going to go. I don't know. I had two girls, but they've been taking my children away from me in that way. Money talks. Money talks. You mean Tilly got more money? Yeah. I mean, she's not rich or anything, but she's got a good pension, and she's generous, and money talks, yeah. But to tell you the truth, I'm glad they didn't go with, because I don't think I could have had more fun with any of my girls than I had with my cousin from Duluth. She was not too bad though. She died a year ago last May with cancer, only 67. But I had an awful good time. And let's see, have I got here now. Yeah, that's my cousins. In Sweden? In Sweden. I stayed with her in Stockholm, but she had a car, and that's her two brothers, and they're living in the sun. This guy lives in Nora, Hennesson. So you keep in contact with them? Oh, yes, yes. Yeah, I have. And your moster, you call on the telephone? Oh, yeah, yeah, I call her. So you have no trouble then to talk to each other over the phone? Yeah. The distance makes no difference? No, she understands me, and she's so happy to hear my voice. Did you tell your moster now about your problems when you were growing up and your mother died? Oh, yes, yes. She knows what happened? She knows exactly. And I don't know that, yeah. It was not easy for you then. You never had the opportunity then to go back to Sweden to your aunt over there? I would like to, but I never had. Yeah, but I mean when your mother died. Oh, no. There was no talk about sending someone back? Oh, when our mother died, then it was just, everything was dead then. So your father didn't say maybe you want to go back to Sweden? No, no, no, no. There was never any talk about that? No, never, no way. How about your aunt now in Sweden, this 101? She knew that her sister had died over here. Oh, yes, yes. And she left five, how many kids? Uh-huh. How many kids did she leave? Five. Five. And she didn't offer to take any of you back? Oh, no. No, no, no, no. That would be logical. They were so far away. Them days, you know, it had a lot of monkey business, boat and everything. Your father probably didn't have the means to do it either to send somebody back. No, no. So, tell me now, your sister, she spent over a year at Joliet? Approximately, yeah. Then my daughter, then my aunt on my father's side in Duluth lost her boy. He was, I don't know, died of diphtheria. Then she took over till he went and got till he. But then my youngest brother, he stayed there. Oh, my goodness, I think Eva, he's gone too. Eva was about four years old. And can you imagine? That's a sad story. He stayed there. And, you know, my, oh, I don't understand people. Well, my aunt went to get till he. She came in the middle of the night, sometimes in the middle of the night, and took till he out. And my poor brother woke up, no till he. He was so close to till he, and they didn't get enough to eat neither. So till he used to save a little bit for him, cookies or something. And till he was gone. He didn't know where. He didn't know what happened to her. Can you imagine? And like I said, my father, he married that Rumberg woman. And I don't know when she got here. Them days, it was different in the neighborhood, you know. We used to, them days, we used to have the milkman and the iceman coming to the house. And I think she got in, that stepmother of mine, got into some wrong company. So one woman talked her into divorcing her father. So then we moved away, and then we had to be housekeeper for our father, you know. You mean the Rumberg woman? She divorced your father? Uh-huh, uh-huh. And then we moved away, and then we were... Was it because of the milkman, you think? Well, I don't know. Well, she got in the wrong company, you know. And some woman talked her into divorcing. I remember. How many years did they stay together, though? Your stepmother and your father? I couldn't exactly say. Four or five years? Maybe at least, uh-huh. And then she divorced him. But, you know, she was awful sorry. She sat and cried after. Why did I do that? And then he went out with other women, you know, only that I could just... I couldn't... You know how that is, you know. And then he remarried another woman. So you had two stepmothers then? Uh-huh, three, four. Well, anyway, you know, that stepmother, she was awful nice to us kids. And she came to your home, too, then? Oh, yeah, uh-huh. You know, it's so hard to side with either one. How could you live with him? Because you were old enough then to tell your father that he... You can't talk to a guy, you can't tell him nothing. A father, you know, they're doing, what in the world? You can't say nothing. Well, anyway, she was pretty nice. So us kids told this woman about our brother in Joliet. And she had three boys herself. But two boys, they were... One was growing up, the other was gone. So then he said, then she said, Well, you better see so that boy comes home here. He has just as much right in this house as my two boys. So then what did she say? I think my oldest brother went and got him. And he didn't know his brother. He didn't even know his father. And I remember I was 16 years old. I was working, and when I come home from work, there my father, them days, you know, just stood over the sink to shave, you know. My father was standing there shaving poor Ivar, sitting in the corner in a chair, so lonely. Oh, Ivar said that I felt like open up the door, run back to children's home. He didn't even know his father. But then he got accustomed to the family, and everything turned out. It must have been hard on him to come in that way. Yeah, yeah. He was 12 years old. Isn't that something? So how were they affected, though? Were they shy, your brothers and sisters? When they came back, were they spread for the winds? No, when Tillie came in, then he lit up. Oh, he did? Then he felt better. When Tillie comes walking in. So he didn't know you either? Oh, no. Because you were grown up. Yeah, yeah. So but this Rundberg, the first stepmother, she had how many boys with her in the home? Four, four. Did they immediately move out then with her when she divorced? No, they were grown up. They were grown up? They were married. They had gone out of the home. Oh, so they were living with you. But one of them, he stayed home. Mia! You know that one, yeah? But stepmother number two, she brought in two new ones. So how long did they live together now with the... Anyway, that poor woman died. That second one, she died. Oh, about two years only. Then she died. Then my stepmother... How did she act as a mother for you? Was she good to you? She was good, but we had to work. You had to work? Yeah. But I don't know, our father was kind of... He was meaner and everything. We done anything wrong. He beat the daylights out of us. Oh, he was. Oh, he beat the daylights out of us. Oh, she had... Oh, just anything you wanted? Well, I know one... I was the only one home then. That was before her boys came. And stepmother, she had the cousins and stuff. And she used to entertain every Monday. Big dinners and everything. And then from there, they used to go to Kornata's show. Used to have matinee. And I was only about 10 years old then. And then I was stuck with all the dishes. I had to clean up and do all the dishes. And they were just going to go... I was doing the dishes, and they were just going to go. We lived upstairs, and they were down the stairs. And I don't know, the pan of dishes... I had some dishes slipped off the sink there down on the floor. Oh, then she heard it up. Boy, this is comedy for street. You know, the guy, isn't that terrible? Got the lick, and so you just saw stars. You know, he had the habit of that. When he used to lick us kids, he used to have the habit of grabbing hold of us and put up there and down on the chair. Oh, he was. When I think of it, oh, boy. Couldn't ever get by with that anymore nowadays. Was there a custom, you think, in many homes that they scolded the children like that? Do you think there was a custom in many other homes, too? I imagine so. Maybe it's when the Swedes did it. I don't know. But you said they were partying on Monday or Tuesday, whatever day it was. Yeah, she used to have the ladies over for big dinner. For dinner? Yeah, she had great big dinners. Sure, three, four, you know, how they do. And you had to take care of the dishes then? Oh, yeah, I had to do the work, certainly. I broke a couple dishes, and I got held for it, too. But your father, now, did he have a pretty good job then? He was a machinist. Rockford. Well, he worked at Barbara Coleman's last. Yeah, he was a machinist. He had a pretty good pay then. I imagine so, but you know how it is. When they drink up, they only rent it, and they drink up their money. That's all they got. Did he bring any of his friends with him home, I mean, the male friends, your father? Well, they used to be in couples. They used to have their company and stuff. Sure. But he didn't bring any guys with him home, so they could sit and drink in the kitchen? No, no, no, not sit around like that, no. But when they were drunk, not every day of the week. It was only on Fridays and Saturdays. Of course, I was never in their house, and at that time, that was after. My father drank, my father drank all the time. But never had any trouble with the police, though. Oh, boy. Stayed away from them? No, I tell you, I wouldn't want my childhood back again for all the money in the world. And after I got married, yeah, he was a heck of a nice guy, but he had drinking problems, too. So I thought I'd get married and get away from him, and I fell in the frying pan anyway. But you didn't know that when you... Huh? You didn't know that when you met him when you married him. Well, I knew he drank a little bit, but not that much. Uh-huh. But I lived through it. Before we move on to that one, you said you were working when you were 16. Could you keep that money you earned then when you had... Well, I had to pay room and board. Oh. Bet your life. You still had to do housework. Pay room and board and do the housework, too. I did that many times, but then she cried and begged, and then I fell, fell, stayed on. So you were the oldest girl then in the house? Yeah. You were like... Yeah, you know, you could say that if you want. So wife number 2nd, she died. She died. After a few years. Then he remarried the first one. The first one? Rumburg. And then they got married again. Yeah. Had she been married in between there, too? No, no, she had not been married in between. Just my father. She just moved into the other house with him. Yeah. And she was sorry and she came back. Yeah, sure. Glad to get him back. So were they married by the minister the third time, too? The second time? Where did he go? But then my father went out, you know, had a tavern to drink, so he met women there, so he married again. But they were all Swedish? All, oh sure. Seventh Street was one big Sweden. I know my grandma used to be so calm. I'll call my grandma, my father's mother, you know, she lived, you know, she talked nothing but Swedish. So everybody on Seventh Street talked Swedish. And I know when she used to come over here and we talked a little bit of Swedish. I speak Swedish so I understand what they say. I speak Swedish so I understand what they say. She was calm. So your grandma, that was your grandmother? That was my father's mother. What did she say about her son's wheelings and dealings with women, like they married and divorced and take them back again? What can you say? Nothing. She never lived with you? No, no. She had mortars on Seventh Street. She had three boys at home there. They were nothing but drunks too. She had a heck of a time with them. And her husband had died early too? Her husband died in Sweden. In Sweden? I see. And she never remarried though? No. But she had room with a boy that they used to have on Broadway. That's how she kind of... And her name was? Her maiden name was Anderson. Her first name? Oh God, do I remember that? I do not remember that. Grandma Anderson. Because we just called. When you spent time with your farmor, what did she tell you about to be careful not to marry someone that was drinking? No, we never. We never talked about that. Never discussed anything like that. She was very fond of my husband. My husband was a very kind, good guy. He always said, and I'll say that, he'd be good to old people and be good to animals. Always made that remark. No, she was very fond of my husband. We used to go there quite often to visit her during the week and Sunday. And she used to come over here all the time and have meals and stuff with her. She loved to talk. They could talk for hours. And he was kind of a green-Swede too. Halland, he was. But how about preparing foods and so on, how did you learn that? Through your stepmother or your farmor? To prepare Swedish food. My stepmother, my stepmother. Erlending. She was a good cook. Beautiful cook. Oh, she cooked meals by the galore. And all that Swedish food, you know. Aha. Doppelgryta and all that. No, I got all that from her. Kroppkakor and everything. So you from Helsingland had to prepare kroppkakor? Oh yes, I make that too. No, I've been more in that way more than my sister. She's been more like like not at home. Like when she was home, you know, my stepmother tried to make her work around the house. Me, she told me I did it. I love housework. You know, it makes a difference. But my sister, she'd rather take a lick and then do what she was told. Very, very independent. And that's the way she's acting now today. I think failing her, but she won't try to help. She feels so sorry for herself. It's pitiful. So you are completely different then? Night and day. But you actually had to take most of the licking then because you stayed in the home all the time. Oh yes. With all the stepmothers coming in. No, no, she had a very No, my stepmother, she had very good quality. She was very good. And she was comical. She was not, you know, if you did what you were told, you would get along fine, sure. So your father and he married a third time? Yeah. First, second, and then we married her a third. And then he married another woman. She was up a nice two. She had a son. She got killed. She went out and got killed. But after her father died. Oh, I see. Yeah, she got killed a year after my father died. She was crossing the street on 11th Street there. Got off the bus. You know, that four-way. Got off the bus. And the craziest part of it, my sister and her husband was just coming home from some place. And of course, there were ambulances and everything. And Tilly's husband said, well, we're not going to stop for this. Look at this. And he said, that's Anna laying out in the street. Her name was Anna. It was Anna laying out in the street. But she died a couple days after. But your father was already dead then? Uh-huh. He was already gone a year then. But your father never had any more children than with any other people? No. No. Because they were older when he married them. That's right. So what happened then in the house that you grew up in? And you moved out, of course. You married when you were 19. Yes. How did you meet your husband now? Well, like I said, my stepmother was an accordion player. He played at the Swedish dances. And you went with him then? Oh, well, we went to the dances at Natcho. Not with them, you know, but we went to dances. Yeah, that's how that came about. And he was a painter decorated by trade. Your husband? And he had come from Sweden in the 1920s then? I think he came in 1924 or 1925, something like that. But then he ran back to Sweden. That was during the war when they were being drafted. Then he ran back and forth to Sweden to avoid that drafting business, I understand. Oh, I see. And he was able to come back again? I suppose, yeah. He had the money. He was not with that group that was arrested in 1917? There was a lot of Swedish guys that resisted draft and they went to Bridewell. No, no, no. Not at all. No, they weren't. I don't know, Conrad Lindquist, well, of course you wouldn't know anything, but there was another accordion player. Conrad Lindquist it was. He played with my stepbrother too. Not that you mention it. You remember that group? I remember that group. No, he wasn't. No, they weren't. So he went back to Sweden and avoided the war and came back? Yeah, that is my husband and his brother, my sister. You know, we married brothers, see. Which was a dumb thing to do. But, I didn't have no chance. They went together about 10 years before they got married. And they stayed under my roof too. They lived with me. They lived with us. But they never married? For 10 years they lived with us before they got married. I thought it was unheard of years ago to do like that. I thought you had to get married as soon as you started. Well, they ruined, you know. Well, to tell you the truth, I think my husband really got married just to get a home for his brother, really. I'll go as far as to say I think they loved each other more than they did their wives, really. I'll go that far to say. When I think of it. I never had it so good as I got it now. Yeah. Terrible. When you were going to those dances, were there only Swedish boys there? Or were there Italians or Irish or Polish, Lithuanians? Yes, yes. You know, them days, that was permission then, remember? Yes. No, but I heard about it. Yeah, yeah. Well, I tell you, them days, see, the Italians made the booze and the Swedes drank it. Which was so true. Oh yeah, I used to remember how they used to cart around with that booze and jugs and stuff. They say the Italians made it and the Swedes drank it. That's probably true. Very true. But how about the Italian boys now? Were they drunk like the Swedish boys? No. They were not? No. They were drinking, but they didn't behave like the... The Swedes gets like pigs, I think. I don't know. Something... So you could see the difference there, though. Very much. But didn't you have in your mind the thought then, I would like to marry the nice Italian boy. He doesn't drink. Did that come to your mind? No. Why? I just didn't think about it. Were you told by somebody, don't associate with the Italians? No, no. Why did you stay away from them? They were good dancers, they say. Well, within the family, you know how that is. Yeah, they dance, we love to go dancing. They were good dancers, though, I think. Yeah, sure, sure. I tell you, though, I'm so proud and happy. I got two daughters. There's no booze, no nothing, maybe social. And I had... Yeah. And I have six, seven great-grandchildren, and I'm so proud of my family. Such a nice, reliable family. I mean, they go to church and everything. No, I'm very proud of my family. I have one of my oldest boy, oldest grandson, his wife, boy, they're getting up into it. His wife is a weaver. They weave high-fashion style. And my grandson, he has, they're all college graduates, which I'm so proud to say. And my grandson, he himself had his own business. He had his office in Freeport. He had 10 people working under him. I don't know what you call that. He deals with all that, sewers and stuff. You know, when they build new homes, they have to know where to locate all that stuff. So he had about 10 guys working, about a $45,000 job a year. But then his wife, of course, he and his wife graduated from school and college together. Then his wife, she loved to sew and weave. She even, living out on the farm, she had 12 lambs, and she used to share the wool and make cloth. Now, she's one of the top designers of the whole state. They, and my grandson, he quit his job. He's been taking up that weaving too, and they're partners. They have a studio there by Five Points. So your daughters-in-law? That's my daughter's son, my grandson. Did they marry, though? Were they Swedes? No. Isn't that funny? Both of my daughters-in-law. No, my daughter's husband, you know, his mother was Swedish, my son-in-law, and his father was German. And then I think of my youngest daughter. His mother is German, I believe, and his father, just the other way around. He's Swedish. Uh-huh. So they have them, have them. Yeah, and then my grandchildren that were married, they're Italian and Polish, both of them, and they're just the opposite. So they worked out fine then. Yes. It was a nice combination. Yes, indeed. So they really need, now, your grandchildren. Would you have to go through, though, to establish this family? Not the grandchildren and great-grandchildren and so on. I got the inkling, getting the inkling that you, your marriage, you have to... What do you mean? Well, in other words, it was not easy many times for you. I mean... In other words, you married now your husband. Yeah. Did it work out exactly the way you expected? You wanted a good marriage. You didn't want your wife to... No, but they, yeah. Wasn't that nice? Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. But I will say my man was an awful good... Everybody loved that guy. He was a... And, oh, they had great respect. That's excellent. But he wanted a drink, though. And my man used to be so nice to him, you know. He hollered about the kids and had a please. We happened to have a little dog. I took over from my daughter, because I didn't want just a little... And she was so old, you know, and I used to let her out in the morning before I went to work. Well, that guy, he was up at 5 o'clock. But then when the dog would go out, he'd whine and whine, you know, and he called me. I knew who he was. He called me about the dog, too. I said, what in the heck are you hollering about, man? I said, you're up, ready to go to work. So then, oh, yeah, he had a petition out. Oh, phew, that was... That was a good neighborhood. But you mentioned something about the drinking problem your husband had. Yeah, yeah. Couldn't you do anything about that? No. You couldn't do anything about it? No. Well, that's what kind of bothers me, my oldest girl. I thought maybe the kids could do something about it, you know, and, you know. You see, isn't that funny? They adored their father. They were just, oh, how they adored him. Oh, God Almighty, the way he used to come home every night, every night when I went to work. I worked 22 years at Wooden Brooks. It wasn't for me working. I don't think I would have what I want, what I got. So you had to work, too. Oh, God, he got in trouble with the police all the time. $400, $500 that I lay out. And they even took his license away a whole year. Then my sister used to drive them, and she drove them to his job, so they used to pick them up. But that didn't help. By golly, when he went out of all the new cars, and still he had to have a car. It's just a sickness. So you mean he was able to drink during the work time? Well, I tell you, I'm going to tell you the truth. It really wasn't a drink to me. One drink and a beer. You know, he fell asleep at the wheel. That's the problem, he fell asleep at the wheel. And then he had accidents. Oh, I'm going to tell you, one time I came home from, I went home early. I was one of these, still used to ball me out, too. You know, God, he worked at a lot of companies, too. Then when I got in my head, I used to have the family over for meals, and I got in my head that I'm going to, I had things done around. I just told a white lie and went out, that's all. Then I came home on the bus. Oh, boy. What I saw then, it was terrible. He wasn't working at that time. It was in November. Was that during the Depression that happened? No, that was about four years before he died. I come home, well, I was on the bus, and the bus made a turn. And then I was sitting in the middle of the bus there, and I thought, oh, my God, I bet that guy got killed. I thought, oh, shall I look? When I look in the corner of my eyes, I recognize that guy. And I think that guy was putting a raptor on the telephone post. How he ever came alive for him. But the good thing was, cold, he had a heavy jacket on, and then, of course, that eased when he fell over the bus. Well, he was in the hospital. I came home, and I called my oldest girl, I said, Aina, I said, I think your daddy's been in an accident. Oh, you just imagine, oh, are they? I couldn't get no place for them. All right, if you want to, I'll call the police and find out. Yeah, she called back. Yeah, it was him, all right. So they took his side? Every time. And your sister, too? Every time. Why did they blame you? I don't know. Just the way they react, he should be honored for his behavior. Instead of go bring him to some place where he could get some treatment. So how old were the girls now when you went to work? Oh, I worked 22 years at Wooden Brooks. What year did you marry? When I got married, 1926. And what year did you go to work then? Oh, I'd been working right along more or less, yeah. Even when they were small? Yeah, even when they were small. I stayed home. I stayed home until the kids kind of grew up. My oldest girl, they are about four years between. My oldest girl, she was in high school, and the youngest girl was seven years old. When they got into the school. Then you started to work? Then I worked at Lock Company. I worked from 3 to 11 at Lock Company. Because then my youngest girl went to elementary school. So then when I went to work, well, then my oldest girl would come home from school about that time. Otherwise, I stayed home when they were small. So at your husband's, what kind of work was he doing? He was a painter and decorator. He was a painter and decorator. Have you ever come across a guy that didn't drink? That had that line at work? It seems to be with the... It goes with the painting, I think. So how about during the Depression? Was he suffering then for lack of jobs or anything? Depression time? Depression? Pension. Depression. Oh, Depression. Oh, no, he didn't have no work for two years, put it in there. So you had to work then? No, nobody had work. We were both working and we came home, we both got laid off at the same time. I was working at Wooden Brooks then. During the Depression? During the Depression, but we all got laid off at the same time. So he wasn't working at all for almost two years. He got a few jobs now and then. Then we ate up all we had saved and they were even the kids' money. I think I only had that girl then. And he had about $500 in the bank. We ate that up and everything, and that's why I went out working. The first thing I did, I put that money back in, in her savings. Oh, yeah. You didn't lose any money at any other bank? No, we didn't have nothing. No, no, we didn't have nothing in the bank, no nothing. And you were renting then? We were renting, uh-huh. We were renting. And then finally we ate up everything gone and we had to go on relief, you know. And then they paid the rent. Because you were married, so you could get relief then. Oh, yeah. And he could get some WPA work or... Well, that was altogether different in them days than what they got now. Yeah, but the married man, couldn't he get this, what they call WPA? Well, that got after. You know, we were on relief. That came after the Depression. We were just coming out of it then, see. And that came afterwards, sure. So he was on there then? Uh-huh, he was on there. They were putting in for the soldiers, our camp grant then, the barracks, the hut. So he worked out there? Yeah, colder than sin. In the winter months, snowing and everything. Gee, that was terrible. But he made good money, so we got along fine. How about, were you attending any church at that time, or where did you get married? I got married in Belvedere. Why everybody went to Belvedere? You never married there? I should have gone to church. Well, no, we weren't church. He was not much of a church-going guy. In your family? Makes a difference. Uh-huh, not much. Because I went to church myself at least once a month. Were you confirmed? Yes. In what church? Sion Lutheran Church. Sion Lutheran. But you didn't go there regularly, also? I go now, but not then. Because I was too busy working to take care of my house. But I managed to go myself once a month. So who married you off in Belvedere? I don't know. I had to look. Don't tell me. And he was not a member of any church either? He was a member towards the last, yes. But not at that time were you married, though? No, but I was still a member. I was a member anyway. Of Sion? And Sion. So your girls... But isn't it funny, though? Like now he didn't believe in church or anything, but isn't it funny, though? He could quote the Bible in Swedish. He could? Yes. He knew the Bible from the start to finish. And he said that's all they taught in Sweden was the Bible when they went to school. He said, if I ever could get out of this, he said, I'll never go to church. I'm sick and tired of the Bible. But every day, every day he would quote something from the Bible. And he said that every day, and he made a remark that everything that was happening today is happening exactly what the Bible says. So he could quote everything from the Bible. But he said he was so sick and tired of that stuff, he would never go to church after he got through school in Sweden. But he never read the Bible at home, though? No, no, never. How about your girls, though? Were they baptized in Zion Lutheran Church? Oh, yes, yes, yes. And confirmed? They all got married there. Oh, all confirmed and all got married there. Yep. And they all belong there. Well, of course, one of my granddaughters, they joined another shepherd of the valley, but that's their branch of it. And then other organizations like Vasa, which your husband didn't belong to the Temperance, I know I understand that. No. They have IOGT. No, no, nothing like that. The only thing wrong was that Boos Club. The Boos? What do they call that? It's on 7th Street. The Mutual Club. The Mutual Club? Mutual Club. Was there a Swedish club? Yeah, Private Key Club is still there yet today. Is it S-M-O-S? No. No, S-M-O-S is in back. But the Mutual Club is right on 7th Street. It's called Mutual Club. Mutual Club, uh-huh. Right on 7th Street. You know where the jewelry store is? Yes. Then used to be a tavern on the corner. Well, it's right in between there. So on 7th Street, back at that time, there were as many bars as restaurants. There were bars all over. Yeah, yeah. I think it still is, isn't it? I don't know. Like I say, everything is closing up, but you don't see those joints close up, which could just as well. They are still going. Those joints, I mean, you don't see the bars close up. But was it worse drinking during the prohibition than it is today, for instance? I think so, yeah. They still got it? Oh, yes. Even if it was prohibited, they could get it from the Italians? Yeah. But during the Depression, that was different then, you know. So when you met your husband, was he the only guy you dated? What, the only what? You dated the only guy you met and dated? Did you have some other guys? Oh, I had others, uh-huh. I had others. But they were only Swedes? Mostly all Swedes. Did you go with any Germans and Italians? No, no, no. But they said the Italians, they were the good dancers, though. I know that. I had a girlfriend, Scandrolli. We were very close. Her husband was a painter. And she married? And we were over, and they were here with the tattie, yes. And they married? Oh, yeah. How did that work out? Lovely. She got a nice marriage. No, one thing about the Italians, and I respect them, too. They look up to their wives. They have respect to the, yeah. And they don't drink as much? But the Swedes, doesn't that come from the old country? The Swedes, they, when they get married, well, their wife is supposed to be the slave? I don't know. I don't know. But the Italians, they have a good, uh, moral? Yeah, they are very respectable to their woman folks. Yes, indeed, they are. So your girlfriend, she married an Italian? Yeah, she married, because she herself was Italian. She herself. Oh, you were both Italian? Yeah. But you don't know any Swedish girl that married an Italian? No, I don't know any. Well, I know a lot of them, but yes. But they have a better marriage than they have with the Swedes, that's for sure. I don't know. I won't say. It depends on each and every one. But wasn't the problem, though, with the religion, that one was Catholic and the other one was Lutheran? Well, I think, don't you think that's something they work out before they get married? Like now my granddaughter here now, the oldest granddaughter. Well, they work it off, you know, but it usually never works out the way you work it off. I know my oldest granddaughter now, her mother-in-law is Italian, and she goes to her own church. And her husband is Polish, and he's a Lutheran, and he goes to his own church. And it works out? Beautifully. Beautifully. How about the kids now? What happens? Well, they're raising the kids Lutheran. They're working beautifully. I've never in my life seen such refined and respectable people as they are. And I know my grandson there, my granddaughter and her husband, they come over here for a meal. He's so refined. He wouldn't sit down at a table without saying grace. And he ends up with a grace. So I have to watch and sit down with him. So you all do the same thing then? Uh-huh. You respect his... And I love that, yes. And even the two small children, they got one boy, three, and the other one is the girl, one. But it's so cute. I know I take them to Stockholm once in a while, and my granddaughter picks me up, you know. Even when we get to Stockholm and get seated, his name is Adam. He'll sit down. Okay, Grandma. Then he'll say, he'll mumble a little bit. Okay, now we eat. No, I'm very proud of my grandchildren and their family. How about in your family now? You've been raised by so many different mothers. Did they use grace at any time when you sat down for a table? Never, no. Never? No. Not one of them? Oh, no. Well, like I say, that was just... You mean rape? No. That was... That? I didn't believe in that stuff. And after the dinner was eaten, they called on you or used to do the... Like now, look at how sad it was here. Well, we hadn't gone reading or anything. Yes. I know my stepmother, she wasn't going to let me go reading, but her boys had. You know, in Sweden, going confirmation is a big deal, isn't it? It's just like getting a college degree. That's the way I looked at it to my stepmother. That's important. No matter what kind of a drunken family you come, that's important. That's just like getting a college degree. Them days, to be confirmed. Was that Mrs.? Rumberg. All her boys, all four of her boys got confirmed, because that was very important. But how did they turn out later on? Then I thought, well, I want to go reading, too. So I was living with her, and she had a job at a hotel, Nelson Hotel. So she took a two-week vacation, and I took over. I was only 15 years old, and I took over her job. I saved that money and bought my confirmation clothes. So I went confirmation, too, but I had an awful time. I had no business going there. I got work to do at home. And, you know, when we went confirmed, nobody came. We were low. Nobody came to our confirmation at Zion Church. Not your father? No. Not the former Mrs. Rumberg? No, and that went for my sister, too. And I put my clothes, dresses, and I saved that for her, so we had our same dresses. But, no, I know through the Erlanger, confirmation was just like a college education. It was that important. But why didn't she honor with her presence then when you were confirmed? Rumberg, you know, your first stepmother. Why didn't she come to the Zion Church and see you? She was going to have phremmane. She was going to have a big dinner for her family and friends. And she was mad because I couldn't stay home and help her. Not your confirmation day? Confirmation, and none of the family came to either my sister's or our confirmation. What did you see on your confirmation day or day, or education? What did you see on it and look upon it? Did you have respect for the confirmation? Absolutely. I'm very much religious in that respect. What did you get out of it? Oh, I got a lot out of it. A lot. Which, I got a lot out of the way to raise my children. Were you able to come home then from the confirmation presence and sit down and read the table prayer before you? Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, not at all. Forget about that. You never tried? Never. But you know, isn't that funny? I was in Sweden and Hennesson now. Isn't that funny? Here, all the Swedes in Sweden, you know, they take you over to all the churches and show off those churches. But they never go to church. The churches are empty there. The only time they go to church is Easter and Christmas. But I know when I stayed with my people, come Sunday, the church was not mentioned. And then they show off the churches all over. That's one of the main things. Beautiful churches. Was it a double standard or did you discuss it with them? No, but I mean, it's kind of strange. Did you ask any questions why they didn't go to church? Well, I asked them, but they didn't talk too much about it.