 This is cassette two, a continuation with Julius Ahlström, cassette two, side one. So you were on the... you went to high school, boys and girls, except Ruth. Except Ruth. But she became... she went to nurse's training in Swedish American Hospital, and she became supervisor of nurses for many years, without a high school education. She didn't have to have it, though. No, but then the times were that you had to have an education, so she couldn't hold that job. Then she went home and took care of my mother anyhow, until she passed away. And she did some private duty. So what kind of work did you... Well......do with your dad? No, I used to hang around the meat market for the boy, but I... One day I went to the bank to make a deposit for him on a Saturday. And Bert Johnson, who was one of the tellers there, whom I'd known for many years, asked me what I was doing. I said, well, I just finished high school yesterday. I think I'm going to go to Wisconsin University with a friend of mine, Willard Waisner. He said, how would you like to work in the bank for the summer? I said, well, fine. I don't have a job, so I went to work for the bank on a temporary job, and I stayed there for 50 years. So... You're still looking for a job, then? Yeah. 50 years I was there. So I have a pin from the Illinois Bankers Association, a 50-year pin, and we... We meet in Chicago, and we meet once a year, but I haven't been now for a few years. Too old to go. I haven't kept it up, but I do have the pin and the membership. So you were lucky enough to join a pretty solid organization. Oh, yeah. Swedish American Bank. Now it's the biggest bank in... It's Amcor Bank now, and that's the biggest bank in Illinois, outside Chicago. It is. One billion totals. Over a billion dollar totals. And here at the Swedish American Bank, when I started with 11 employees, we had a... Oh, I would say around $300,000, $400,000 totals. And... Was there a First World War? There was during the First World War in 1916? No. When I started, there was 1920. The First World War was over. I was too young for the First World War and too old for the Second World War. I was right in between. And some boys walked out of class in high school and joined, which enlisted. I know Wing Angle and Bill Fisher went out, walked out one day and enlisted. They weren't old enough, but they got in. They were about 16 or 17. I remember this Wing Angle came back minus an arm, and Fisher, I don't know if he came back or not, but Angle came back to school after the war was over. Do you remember seeing any parades in Rockford? There were some Swedish immigrants, you know, that came in and they didn't want to be drafted. Some of them were sent to Brightwood in Chicago. Oh, there were some. There were socialists, weren't there? Yes, yes. Do you remember seeing the parades? No, but I remember hearing of it that they did have some, and that was too bad it happened that way. But they were opposed to, well, they were opposed to being in the war, I guess. I don't know. You know, the funny thing, when I went to school, grade school, you read about the English who oppressed the colonists, you know, and you got so that you didn't like the English. And when the first World War was on as a kid, I was more or less interested in Germany winning, but of course you soon changed your mind on that after you got more knowledgeable about it. But that's strange. You read about, oh, in the revolutionary days where all these heroes, you know, and they would, the Redcoats are coming, they have defeated, you read about these battles where the Continentals or the farm boys would, poorly equipped and everything, would beat the British troops, you know, they'd march and file the Redcoats, you know, and they'd just hide behind trees and pick them off like pigeons, you know. So the King of England and the troops didn't have much chance, so they were defeated eventually. But at that age, you didn't, I don't know if others felt that way, but I didn't have much love for the British because of that. But I also read somewhere not long ago that this country come within one vote of not speaking the German language. It was that close. It was that close, between one vote and about 250 years when they formed the Constitution, or I don't know, I'm not well-versed in that as I should be, but within one vote of English won over German. But there was not too many Germans here at that time, though. Well, evidently there was quite a few, and the Germans, you know, though the Germans helped the British, didn't they? The British and soldiers in the Revolutionary War, they were hired by the British to come over and fight for them in America. And they were, they called them the Hessian troops, and they were hired soldiers from England. England, I suppose, was a powerful nation in those days, which we know, and they had colonies all over the world. And they hung on to Canada, but they lost the United States. The Yankees won over. The Yankees won over, yeah. And they stole, you might say we stole this from the Indians. Well, it's a long story. It's a long story, yeah. But it makes a lot of difference, though, how it's written and how people are writing it. Yes, yeah. I mean, when you're young and you have to pick a side. Sure, sure. To have something to hang on to. So the Swedish immigrants, they were socialistic in climate. Yeah, a lot of them were. Even Herman Hallström, now, do you remember? Herman Hallström, sure. He made a good mayor, though. He was a good mayor. He was a good mayor. Yeah, he was. And my cousin Alf, he was a lawyer, Alf Hallström, he was a bachelor, and he became a judge, a police judge. And he worked hard for Hallström. And then, I guess Blum was one he worked hard for, who was mayor after Hallström, yeah. Blum and Alf were real good friends. He had a drugstore on 7th Street and 6th Avenue, too. And he was a good mayor, Mayor Blum. Hallström and Blum were both good mayors. I don't think Blum was socialist like Hallström, but Hallström was, he was a carpenter, he was a socialist. Bricklayer. Bricklayer, that's right. He was a socialist by... But he changed later on, though. He got his insurance business and... Yes, Hallström Insurance, oh yeah. He became quite a businessman, yeah. So he became more or less a Republican then, no? Yeah. That I don't know. Or maybe not... Well, he turned out to be capitalist anyhow, I suppose. Yes. And even in Russia, I guess, they're thinking about capitalists and what you read, a lot of... Yeah, Gorbachev might become a Republican after a while. You never know. But it's interesting, though, how this... Herman Hallström, he came in 1908. And he was here 13 years. I see. And he became the mayor. How could he get so many votes, though, from the Italians and Irish and Lithuanians and Polish? Because he had to have more votes than the Swedes, though, to be elected. Oh, I'm sure he did. I suppose they're socialists among other races, too. You know, they tell me that the Irish came in the potato famine in Ireland, and they were here in the 1860s and 70s, just a little bit before the Scandinavians came. They got the better jobs. They got the policemen and firemen jobs and a lot of these political jobs in those days. Then the Swedish came after. Don't you think it was because of the language, though? They didn't have any barrier. That's right. The Irish spoke a form of English. Then after a while Lindström came in and Borggren and... Yeah, that's right. The heavyweights. The heavyweights. You remember that about Lindström? You remember Lindström, though. Oh, sure. Imo Lindström used to stand on 7th Street and Charles Street. There's so many stories about him. One was a doctor came by, and he was speeding or something, and Lindström got up and stopped him. Where are you going? He said, I'm a physician. I don't care if you are going fishing. You're arrested. Another story was he arrested some horse drop dead on Kishwaukee Street on 3rd Avenue, I think, on Kishwaukee Street. He was going to make out the report, and he couldn't spell Kishwaukee Street. So they pulled the horse over to the 3rd Avenue. He couldn't spell that. I don't know if all these stories are true or not. They're awful good, though. They're awful good. I remember Imo Lindström. He was a policeman in Stockholm, you know, and he was a beautiful building, big and heavy and strong, and walked direct. You could tell he had training in Sweden. So he was comical, but he drank too much, too, I guess. A lot of Swedes like the liquor. Yeah, they do. That's why we have so many clubs here. The people are either very church and religious or they're club people. And there's so many people out, you know, the Svea Center, the Liran, the Voss, the Viking, and Svithjod, and there's some more. Then they had, in Norway, they said the Harmony Club, and there was others, too, on the other side of Broadway. I can't think of the names of some of them. But that was their church, the Lodge. So your family didn't join any other organization? No, no, no, never did. No, they were very opposed to that. Yeah, they were very opposed to that. They were strictly church people. The Swedes seem to be very individual, you see. Like you had the Irish and Italians, they were usually Catholic. Yes, that's right. Maybe it's a stereotype a little bit too much, but it seems to be almost uniform Catholic. That's right. But the Swedes, they were everything in between, and Lutherans and Covenants and Freemen, Pentecostal and Liran and Viking and Vossa. It's interesting, they never go to one group. No. It always is different. Some like to drink a little bit too much. You know, about 20 years ago, we took a trip to Scandinavia on a tour, and a week we were in Norway, a week in Sweden, a week in Denmark. And of course, Norway was the most beautiful with the fjords, you know, and you'd see some names along there. It may be McDonald or some English or Scottish name, and they would explain to us that over the years, a group of Scots or English would come over and attack the Norsemen, and maybe another 50 years after that, the Norse would go over there and attack Scotland and England. And a lot of them were captured and then they'd stay there and they'd marry in the country there. So that's why you would see names from England and Scotland, Peterson and Carlson, names like that, you know, and same as you see from Norway, their names were the Scottish and English names. And also in Sweden, there was a girl who was the guide for that week. She was going to the University of Gothenburg, and she was very interesting. She talked with a cute girl, talked with a Swedish accent. She'd sing and tell about the wars, you know, just about them, just about some, when there are battles, you know, with Russia and Germany. And she'd get through with all the history. She was a history student, by the way, which was very interesting, because I've heard my uncles talk about those things too. And once she said, you know, that Sweden is 90% Lutheran. We have other churches. We have free churches. We have a few Catholic churches, and we have Methodists. We have several churches. There's a little baptized church right over there. Her pronunciation was so cute, you know. A little baptized church. Yeah, that was a nice trip. And Denmark was fun too, and Copenhagen. You'd walk on Estrogert. Have you been there? Yes. Was this your first time then? The only time I'd been to Sweden, and Pearl and I, we took trip over. So you saw your parents? We saw hers, but not my parents. The story didn't take us to Skåne. Sorry about that. How about your father's Høvde? We didn't get to Høvde, but we did get to her home, which was in the same province, West Jutland. Fristad. Fristad, yeah. And her parents, or her relatives, cousins, came from long distances to visit us one afternoon at her cousin's house in Fristad. Your cousin Gunnar Davidsen, who had a store in, what was that town north of Stockholm? Nice, very nice town. Uppsala? No, not Uppsala. We were there too. Well, anyhow, he owned a store selling mostly American typewriters and adding machines and that sort of thing. And he spoke English very well. And he just died just a few months ago, and he was about 95 years old. He was a real nice man, Gunnar Davidsen. He never got to this country. He always wanted to come here, and he never did. And his sons run the business now, and we have pictures of his home. And one son lived in a regular ranch home like we have here, very similar to what we have here. And each had a nice ranch home, and it's about the same block. And they're a very handsome family. So do you have contacts then with people in Sweden or cousins? I don't anymore. All my relatives have come to this country, I guess. I had one cousin that I called on a telephone. His two brothers lived here, David and Ivar, and his last name was Andersen. I talked to him on the telephone, and he was very interesting to talk to. He was too far away and couldn't get there, and he had no way of picking us up. He was on a farm quite a ways away. But I would like to have met him. So you came into the bank life then in Rockford almost immediately. Yeah, for 50 years. And then you met your wife. Met my wife, married her. So you started from the bottom, so to speak. I was a messenger, yeah. I was a messenger for a couple of years at $40 a month. That was the going salary in those days. That's less than $10 a week. Of course, I lived at home, so I had no problem. But there was no union dues. No union dues. No income tax. So how was the times then at that time when you got married? Was it a pretty good economy in Rockford? You heard that she was going strong? No, it was 1936. Oh, you got married in 1936? 1936, yeah. I see. But you started to work then in 1920. 1920, yeah. I see. I worked. I had been working 16 years. You waited through the whole Depression then before you got married. Yeah, that's right. But did you know of each other before? We went together two years. Oh, I see. I suppose by 1934 I met Pearl. So then... 51 years. Yeah, then you learned the banking business during the 20s. That's right. And you came right into the Black Wednesday on 1929. Yeah. So what happened then? Can you explain that? Well, during that, it was interesting. A fellow, one of my co-workers, Franklin Pearson, lives in California. And they were out here last year. They'd been married 50 years. And he married a Rockford nurse, Helen... Kirkpatrick. Kirkpatrick, yeah. And she was of Scottish descent. She was a Swedish-American nurse graduate too, and my sister had her as a pupil. And so we reminisced a lot about the bank closing in 1931, some of that. Who was it, Roosevelt that closed the banks? Who was the president at that time? I don't remember. It was almost the same week you were selected. Yeah, it was a bank holiday. And I remember we had to go to work and report. But it was a nice summertime. The boys, there was about three or four of us or more, we'd go outside and we'd race right around the block. And we'd see who had made the best time. To pass the time, we'd just run around the block. And then I suppose after an hour or two we'd go in the bank again and see if there was anything to do. But we had to be there. And I remember the bank run. I was a teller at the bank at the time. And we were told to just pay out the money. Anybody want to drum me? They could. My father was in the meat business there just a half a block away, and he was also a director at the time. Of the bank? Of the bank. And he would come in and deposit, and some of the other merchants, most of the other merchants, would do the same. And then the crowd in the lines, they would see that, well, they knew. The businessmen on 17th, they knew them. How fast did you know about it, what was going to happen? The day before? Well, it hit pretty suddenly, this bank run. The times were so that people were scared. They were afraid the banks were going to fail. And some of the banks did fail. Did the newspapers say anything about it? I'm sure they did. I don't recall, but at the time there was eight banks in Rockford, and the only two that stayed open was the Third National on East 8th Street and the Swedish American. All the other banks closed. The security on Broadway, the commercial on 7th and Charles, the manufacturers' bank, the Rockford National downstate in Maine, the Forest City National, Illinois National, it was called People's at that time, People's Bank. On the West Side? On the West Side. Six banks closed, and the only two left were the Swedish American and the Third National. And you still paid off to the depositors? Keep paying them off, and that slowed down, that withdrawing after. They saw that the merchants on the street were still at confidence in the banks, were still bringing money in the bank. So I think the run was more or less stopped. Well, or did it stop? They closed the banks for that purpose, that they were draining the banks because they had too much money. So they had this bank holiday of a week, and then when they opened up again, then things were calmed down. That's when things started to go back to normal again. So the facts are that the day before the inauguration of Roosevelt, 5,000 banks closed in the United States. That's how it was. And then two weeks later, he had to call the holiday to straighten things up. Yeah, that's right. But he was blamed for it, and he closed all the banks, of course. I suppose, yeah. He got to get somebody. But it's amazing how the Swedish-American could have the confidence to pay off. That's right. They did that. And the Third National also. Yeah, that's right. But Truman Johnson, Engstrom, and Gustafsson on Broadway, they closed the doors. Yeah, they did. Do you remember them? Do you know them? So why did they have too many bank loans out, I mean, house loans? They had too many banks, for one thing, I think, for the size of the town, eight banks. They don't even have that many a day, I don't think. Well, they do with the drive-ins, I'm sure, but that was too many banks. And, you know, the stock market kept going up in 1929, and when the stock market crashed, that's what started the panic, I think, more than anything. As far as a bank man, did you invest slowly in the stock market in the 20s? I mean, by scale. Yeah, I never bought too much, but I'd buy most utilities, because they were, I don't know of any utilities that closed, because people got to use gas and electric and water and different utilities they've got to use. The story goes that Kennedy should have said that when the shoeshine boy buys stock, then it's time to get out of the stock market. That's right. Well, that speaks for something, too, that, you know. If it's true or not, I don't know. But the bank was open. Oh, yeah, the bank stayed open. And people never lost any money. Never lost any money in these two banks. And no houses were foreclosed on either. No, no, no, none foreclosed. You know, a funny thing, you mentioned Rupert Chusterson and Truman Johnson. I had some stock in the City National Bank, the security bank. Why did you buy it there? Well, there was none available in the Swedish American. My father had stock, and I did buy some stock when I could, but I thought that the security bank would be going also, because I was way up on Broadway. That's a good name. And so I didn't have much, but I think I paid about, what was it, $300, $400, I guess, for the stock. And Rupert wanted to buy it from me about a year before the bank closed. He said, No, I think I'll hang on to it. It was good enough for you all. It would be good enough for me, too. So I could have, but I had to pay back. Whatever it was I had in there, I had to pay that back. Why? Well, that was the law. You had to, if you owned stock, you had to pay in the equivalent to what the stock was worth. So it wasn't bad enough losing the stock, but you had to pay back the equivalent of it. It wasn't too much, but I think around $300, $400. Yeah, but at that time, there was a... It meant more at that time, yeah. That is true, yeah. So how did the people... Did you receive an unusual number of depositors then after the rest of the banks closed? Because, or did they trust the banks, the people? Oh, I suppose it come back slowly. You know, I had a cousin, Dave Anderson. We used to call him Big Dave. He was a big husky guy. He was my father's nephew. And he worked for Rockford Drop Forge many years, like so many of my relatives did. And so many other companies were started as an outgrowth of Rockford Drop Forge. Rockford 49, too, I had some cousins that were still in that. Some were retired now, but their kids had taken over. And he worked nights rather than daytime because he got five cents an hour more working nights. And he would never trust the banks. He would buy properties, and always when he cashed his check, he'd take it in cash. He never carried a bank account. And I remember him coming in and buying some property. He owned, oh, quite a few places, or homes. And he'd pay, maybe have, peel off $4,000 or $5,000 out of his pocket to pay for what he purchased. Never a check account to pay the bills by check. But that was his way. And so many, that's not characteristic of the Swedish people. The Italians used to do that a lot, hide their money under mattresses and not trust banks. But I think that's gotten away. They've gotten away from that in many recent years, yeah. But there must have been some feeling, though, after the 30s. Yeah, I suppose. I suppose there was some, I just don't recall. Especially if they lost houses. Yeah, that is true. I also heard that some of these big mortgage companies owned some properties, like apartment buildings on Auburn Street and mostly on the West Side. And some of these frugal Germans in Freeport would come over and buy up a lot of these properties from the mortgage company. And the Swedish people in Rockford didn't have any money, I guess. They weren't as frugal as the Germans. Didn't save their money as well as they did. Whether that's true or not, but I used to hear that at the time. So Freeport is a German? Mostly Freeport, mostly German in those days. Back in Rockford it was mostly Swedish, but now it's different. Now it's Italians and Latinos and everybody coming in. 7th Street isn't like it used to be. You walk down the street and everybody was speaking Swedish for many, many years. So your father, he had the meat market there for many years. Yeah, yeah. Did anybody else other than your brothers take it over? Well, my oldest brother stayed in the meat business with them. And my younger brother did for a while. He managed one of their stores on Chicago Avenue, Armour, until he went in the real estate business. And Walter quit too because they could not compete with the chain stores. Wigler was the first one to come in on 7th Street and 5th Avenue. Then the others started creeping in. And the funny thing too about most of the big stores in Rockford, like L'Ogliesse and Highlander and Pacemaker, they were Italians and their fathers mostly were bootleggers. I remember a guy, an attorney friend of mine used to say, it's remarkable how these second-generation Italians, how well they've turned out, lawyers and doctors and merchants. Where their fathers were mostly bootleggers, which is true. Like the Castrodigliani family done so well in the Highlander stores. L'Ogliesse, same way in their stores. And Pacemaker, I know the fellows, I can't think of their names. And there's others. You see, the Irish came here first and the Swedish. And the Swedish were mechanics. They worked in furniture factories and a lot of them brought their jobs in Sweden. Mechanics furniture factory about during the Depression of the 18... 1901 or something like that. It was that Depression that went through, I don't know if it was the World Depression or just in this country. Or 93. 93 was it? Yes. Oh yeah. It was during the McKinley days. McKinley days, yeah. And he, so then he had a chance to invest in Rockford Screw Products when Thornhillman and OG Nelson started that. He had a chance to invest in Elko. It was started by E.V.Lagerholm. They named the company after him, EL Company, E.V.Lagerholm. And the Swanson boys, Harry and Paul Swanson, and I'd said Adolph Peterson and his brother, August Peterson, too. And my father, if he would invest in those, he would have made a lot of money because Screw Products, you know how that went, and Elko, too, at the beginning. They were terrific money makers. And there was others that started, too, at that time, Mechanics Machine and... And Sun Strands. Sun Strands. And they'd boast terrific opportunities, but he missed out on those. But there was one man, though, P.A. Peterson. He was, I remember him personally. I was delivering meat to his house on 7th Street by Broadway, and then they built a house on East 8th Street, and they donated that to the Swedish Hospital years ago. I used to walk to work. I lived on 4th Avenue and 9th Street, and I walked to the bank to work for many years before I was married. And on 9th Street and 4th Avenue, I'd meet P.A. Peterson. And there could be zero weather. He'd walk down the street with just a little silk coat and never wore an overcoat. He lived on a farm in Cherry Valley until he moved to Rockford. Do you take the Rockford Magazine? Doc, yes. There was an article. I don't take it, but I buy it. There was an article of him. You read that. I read that, too. That's how I remember that. And we'd wave and speak to each other. He'd be on his way out to Union Furniture Company, or as a matter of fact, he owned so many of them or involved so many of them. And he would, most of the time he'd go ahead of me because he used to go to the bank or to the factory earlier. But very often he'd go there about 7, 7.30, but now he'd be on his way to the bank. I'd meet him on 9th Street and 4th Avenue. He'd walk, at that time he lived on State Street. He'd walk all that way out there. He never drove. He always walked. A little short fellow with kind of stout, with fast gait. He'd walk fast. He was one of the builders, and he and O.G. Nelson, Swan Hillman. Swan Hillman I remember very well. He was the director in the bank, and he would stop at my desk before the meeting, and he'd say, he'd start with, Do you see me in a be-shimmer-horror? We'd start talking in Swedish a little. He didn't like that. He didn't intend to talk Swedish very much. He'd love that. But that's the way he always started, Do you see me in a be-shimmer-horror? And, of course, alongside him I didn't have any, you know. I was just an employee, and he was in charge of his factory and other factories too. We were to his daughter Margo's wedding up there on East State Street in that nice home they have up there at the time, and we were to his son-in-law's funeral in Norberg. And they're much younger than me, and he died so long ago. We had a time, because he was quite a boy. So his daughter's still living though after that. Oh, Margo's still living. Where she lives now, I don't know. I don't think she lives in that old homestead there. Possibly she does. I don't know. She lives down in Springbrook or somewhere. Oh, yeah. I imagine she lives somewhere else, yeah. But the remarkable about P. A. Peterson is that like Swan Hillman, Ernie Swenson, and Lieven Faust, they were all inventors more or less. But P. A. Peterson, he was an investor only. That's right. He didn't work with his hands. No, he... How could he foresee? He bought up a lot of stocks. That's right. Ten cents on the dollar in 193. Sure, sure. Where did he get the money though and the know-how? I don't know. He just... Because it was unknown at that time more or less. Yes, yes. But he did. He certainly did. They had confidence in him, and if he bought into something, the others would have the confidence to follow him, I think. He was a leader. What kind of a guy was he? Was he like a Jew, for instance, or a Jew with Don, everything, when he made the board? No, that I don't know. I never had any dealings with him that way. The only thing I ever did was deliver meat to his home. But he used your bank, though, the Swedish American. Oh, yes. Yeah. He was one of the directors. No, he never was a director. No? But he was... I would think he would be in the... was in the manufacturers' bank on East Stage Street at the time. He was never a director in our bank. So he didn't see the bank figures. He died in 27. Yeah. So he... I never saw him in our bank. But he... He was quite a guy. There was others, too. Of course, O. G. Nelson was instrumental in the National Law Company, too. And Hoagland. Hoagland. And Stranney, Stran... Chris. When I... During vacations from high school, four of us, my cousin Alf and my cousin Arnold Peterson and Wilbur Johnson, the lawyer, we went to work out there in the stockroom. We worked ten hours a day. At National Lock? At National Lock. In the shipping department, we worked at 20 cents an hour. I remember we had... we worked... That would be what? I remember we got checks of $12 a week, I think. And at 20 cents an hour, yeah. We worked hard. But at that time, Strandquist was more or less office boy for Nelson, who was in the office, in charge. And that O. G. Nelson was a fellow named V.B. Nelson. He was in... managing the National Law Company, I think. And he became president of the National Law Company, became a big shot, Strandquist, starting as the office boy and worked his way up to the presidency of the National Law Company. So they were all original people, eh? Oh, yeah, yeah, that they were. But Arthur Nordvall, he was a character, he was a real estate man. And he was the only one that... they say he was the only one that would dare to sit in Hoagland's office with his feet up on the desk. What kind of a position did he have? He was just a real estate man. I see. But he was a nervy guy. He always had a cigar in his mouth, but he never let the cigar remember. But he was a talker, and he was a man around about town, so I suppose Hoagland got a lot of information from him, I suppose. I don't know if it's true or not, but they used to say, Arthur Nordvall, the only one that could put his feet up on the Hoagland's desk and visit with him. Did they get together, like... Well, today you have the Forest Hill Country Club and the Rye Hill Country Club. But in those days, did P.A. Peterson and Hoagland and David Oscar Sonstad, did they join hands in a club like that? That I never knew. How did they do that? All independent. Yeah, I think Victor... not Victor, he was the fellow who had the livery stable. His... the 11th Fost. I think he belonged to the lodges. He was never married, and I think he was a lodged man. And he... he, of course, founded the Fost Hotel, and... I remember my father bought stock. He said he's buying it to be... to be civic-minded. He said, I'll never expect to get any money back on it. Never did either. Where did he have his money invested? In what bank? My father in Swedish American Bank. I mean, your 11th Fost. 11th Fost. In manufacturing? I think... I don't know. I remember him coming to our bank. Because he was completely broke when it... Yes, yeah. The Fost Hotel went broke. Uh-huh, and then it was repurchased, and then it was put on a going basis. Whoever bought it, I don't remember. But he died a poor man. I think so. I think that story goes that he did. In 1936. Yeah. He was kind of a liberal guy. He was quite... He was quite a nice man, I think. I remember his brother Victor had this... had the livery stable, and I used to drive the horse in the summertime to deliver meat. And we'd deliver on North Main Street for some of the Cherté relatives of my father, Strump and Nelson. Nelson and Company. Yes. I'd deliver meat to William Nelson's, and who were some of the other Nelson boys. William was the oldest. And... Frank. Frank. Frank was... He was married to my father's niece. I see. The story there was that he, my niece, my father's niece was a Swedish girl, and she was working for the Nelson family. And Frank got her in a family way. And my father and my Uncle Alfred and Uncle Frank went over and called on him and said, You marry her. So they forced him to marry her. So you married into Welton? Yeah. So she, Frances Newland, she was married twice. She lives at Fairhaven now. And then Edna Danielson married Axel Danielson, who was a wild Swede that was in the real estate business, made a lot of money. He still lived in California. And, in fact, we bought our first house through Axel. He was a man of action. It was on Oakland Avenue, and this house was for sale, and the deed was held in Minneapolis. He got in his car and drove up to Minneapolis and came back with a deed from the owner that lived in Manning, Minneapolis, and beat out one or two sellers here in Rockford because he acted so quickly, you know. We bought our first house from Axel. And that was fun. I think we paid $6,500. We lived there about 10, 15 years, sold it for 20-something. We rode the inflation with owning the house. So that's about the best thing we could have done in those days, buy a house. It was a good investment. Yes, it was. Well, I suppose a house is always a good investment. Well, I suppose so, yeah. Although there's times when... One never knows. When the prices deflate, yeah. You know. And you're in his shirt, Anthony. We were helpless, Anthony. Helpless. When you were young, did your parents take you on any trips, on vacation or camp? Well, yeah. We used to go up to northern Wisconsin to Deerskin Lake. My father had a friend that had a farm up there, Swanland, who used to live in Rockford, and he bought some land on this Deerskin Lake. It's a chain of eagle, eagle chain of lakes, very pretty lake. And he never built a home there, but we used to go up there and rent for a while. And that's about as far away from home as my father ever wanted to go. He was kind of like to stay home, but my mother liked to visit. And I always had promised her, someday I'll take her to California, but I never got to do it. I got married before that and never got to take her. Did you go much more than up to this lake? I did go up there, but that was, very often that was a 2-day trip, back 70 years ago. So you had to pack some baskets then? Oh, yeah, and then we'd stay in a hotel someplace halfway up there. Now you're making about 4 hours, I guess, 4 or 5 hours. Well, the roads weren't so good in those days. You'd drive through woods, very poor roads. So in the banking business, there was mostly men employed in the bank in the 20s? Very few women. That's just reversed today. Why were there men? I don't know. There were supposed to be men in the bank, I guess. And facing the public, the tellers? Yeah, the tellers were all men. And there were one or two girls that were in the booking department, one a stenographer, I guess, one in the booking department. So then after the war, more women came into the workforce? Yeah, that's right, I think so. Women were supposed to stay home and take care of the family, I guess. That was the common rule, so to speak. When you married, that was it. It seemed so. They stayed home. And they were supposed to be homemakers, yeah. So you stayed with the bank then, and you became an official of the bank then, after a while? Well, my first promotion I had was... You were the owner of the bank, God? I was an assistant cashier for some years, then I was made... Vice president? No, never president. Vice president. And about the last ten years, I was senior vice president. I was about the number two man for the last ten years. I was never number one. Like I had Pearl de Kwanes yesterday. We had a picture of Iceland. That was a very interesting movie on Iceland. And I showed her I had badge number one. I said, this is the only place I've ever been the number one man. That's because of my name starting with A, you see. So you had control then of the loan departments and everything? Well, I was mostly in real estate mortgages. And I remember we worked long days on Fridays. We'd start about... Well, we opened at 9 o'clock and opened until about 9 o'clock at night on Friday. And that's when we first started closing on Saturdays. We were glad to do this. We'd get Saturday mornings off. And then I would have maybe five, six, seven mortgage closings on that day. And I remember I never had to have a hard time sleeping the night before because I was worried about the next long day with all these closings. So that was the hardest part of it. But otherwise, it was fun. We enjoyed it. We had a good bunch. So you were at the bank in a time where Rockford really was growing? Yes, that is right. 60s and 70s? Uh-huh, yeah. It was the expansion. Yes. I retired in 69. So I was not there in the 70s. I've been retired now for 18 years. So you see, I'm a gammal gubbe. Uta Bishumrish was also an Irwin. E. E. Gammal Bishumrish, as they used to say. I still enjoy Swan. He was a good guy. And now it's called Amcor. Amcor. The second largest bank in Illinois after Chicago. The first largest bank in Illinois outside Chicago. Outside Chicago. The largest bank. There used to be a bank in Springfield that had all the state funds. We passed them up quite some years ago now. So we're the number one bank with over a billion total deposits. So that's pretty good though, Swedish beginnings. Yes, when you think of a little Swedish-American bank that was down just a few hundred thousand deposits. Started in 1910 to be the biggest bank in Illinois. That's really some achievement. How about the Swedish influence now on the bank? Did they float away over the years? More or less so, yeah. Now we have Italians. We have all nationalities. And we took over the Illinois Bank on the west side. It used to be that some of these real old Yankees that lived in Rockford would never come to the east side to bank. They'd always bank on the west side. It'd either the Illinois or, of course, the only bank left there. So they would bank the Illinois. Now we took it over. They've got to come over and bank the Amcor. And we still have a branch at the Illinois Bank on South Main Street. They'll keep that. They call it the drive-in, but the building's open too, and they have some officers left over there. In fact, I go to Kwanzaa Park and there's a ramp there right across from the Metro Center. So Rock River, it was like a Dixon-Mason line then. Yeah. The Yankees didn't want to... It was years ago. And the Swedes didn't want to go over to the west side. That's right. And I didn't hear as much about that, but I used to hear my Uncle Alfred tell about the Irish and the Swedes used to fight on the Morgan Street Bridge. They'd come halfway and have their fights. In those days, the Irish lived in South Rockford, which the Italians had taken over in recent years. But the Irish first settled down there and they used to fight on the bridge. I don't know if anyone ever won, but they'd have fights. It was the only way to settle. The only way to settle disputes, yeah. You know?