 I was born in April 15, 1986. I was born in Moline, Illinois. She was born on June 5, 1905 in Moline. Wouldn't that be hard to trace? Well, that's the way she spelled it here. I've never seen it written any other way. But she was Jonsdottir. See? I've seen it in a church book. A lot of them, when they came over here, they were Jonsdottir or something like that. But then they changed it to Jonsson immediately. And they came from the same place in Utrecht? Yeah. They knew my grandmother was a teacher. And she would have to teach the kids to read before they started school in those days. I don't know if they don't do that now, surely. That was your mormor? Yeah, my mormor. She was a teacher. And the kids would come to her and learn to read. So your mother told you that, and you never met your mormor? No, no. Because she came with you? No, she never came over here. She died in 1922, I think it was. But I used to write letters to her. I still have some. In Swedish? In Swedish. Well, first I think my mother wrote them and I had to copy them. That was a good practice. Oh, yeah. And then we had Swedish school in church. We had Swede school in the summertime for about a month, I guess it was. So you attended that? I attended that. We had history and spelling and reading. I attended that since I was a little girl, every summer, until I was confirmed. You had a long school year then? Yes, yeah. Swedish public school and Swedish summer school. And that was just morning, from 9 to 12. And then we had, most of the teachers were seminarians. From the college? Uh-huh. Oh, I see. And some were some school teachers, I know. So you had some religious teaching too then? Oh, yes. Bible history and catechism too, along with it. And you had to remember? And I was confirmed in Swedish. Did you have a choice? Could you go to English if you wanted to? Yes, because half of them in my class were English. Why did some choose English and some Swedish? Was it the parents? It was the parents. Like your parents now, they want you to? I go to Swedish. But we had both in Sunday school. I know my youngest brother, when he was going to be confirmed, then they turned all to English. And so he had to learn the whole catechism over in English when he went reading that year. So he had a tough year then? Yeah. It was not easy though. No. A little over, just like that. So your parents, they came from Östergötland, the same parish you said, Ödersög? Yeah. Did they write her? Although my father, he went to one church and my mother went to another church. Well, she was living closer then to another. I suppose. I suppose. Do you remember mother's church? Yeah, I've been in both of them. I've been in both of those churches. What was the name of the other church? The other was... Stora Obby. Stora Obby. It was just out in the country more. And Ödersög was right in Ödersög. But they both lived in the country. If we start now with your father, he came from a farm community? Yes. So how old was he then when he left? He was 19 when he came here. 19. So he didn't have any military service when he left? No. And what year did he arrive here? 99. 99? Uh-huh. My mother came in 97. She went to Chicago because her one sister was there. So she went to Chicago. But she knew my dad, see. My dad happened to come over to this country with Ö Is that on? No. It is? Yes. He came over with an aunt of my mother's sister. But then he had relatives here in Moline. He had two uncles here, so he came to them. And then when he came over here, his name was Axel Seth. Seth? Seth. S-E-T-H. That's a soldier name. That's a soldier name because his father had been a soldier and he got a Ö He had changed his name from Larsen to Seth. Well, when he went to Ö Then he went to Nebraska. He had two more uncles there. And they were Ö Their name was Servine. And I'm sure that was a soldier name too. If one of them had gotten the name and the other one took it, I've never been able to find out. So he stayed there a year with them. So they said, Why don't you change your name to Servine because you're our relative, you know. So he changed it to Servine. How did he know about that? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I never did find that out. He didn't have to change it on the driver's license or anything like that? No, no. No social security? And I guess he wasn't registered anywhere, you know. He was Ö There was only when he came through Ellis Island though. Then he was registered as Seth. As Seth. Oh. So then Ö Then he came back to Moline and he lived there all his life here. So when he first came to Moline, did he join the 1st Lieutenant? I don't think he joined it right away. Because his name then is Servine in the shipwreck record? Yeah, yeah. So he kept Ö How about Nebraska, his two uncles? Did they live in Holdridge or Ö No, they lived in Oakland. In Oakland. Yeah, there were two Servines there. And they were farmers? Yeah, and I think they went there when Ö Well, what do they call it? When they get the land from Ö Homestead? I think they were Ö I think one of the brothers was a homestead. He came really early then? Yeah. And do you know the name of the two uncles? Yeah, one was Alfred Servine and Ö let's see, what was the other name? Well, it was Alfred that my father stayed with. So they lived close together then? Yeah, they were both farmers. And they were married in the families? Yeah. So he joined them as a farmhand then for a year? Yeah, but then he came back here and he started in with carpenter work. And so he was a carpenter all the rest of his life. So, and your mother now, she came in 1897 to Ö Uh-huh. Ö in Chicago. In Chicago, and she went right to work there. In the families? Yeah. Oh. Uh-huh. And she worked for Germans and English people. She worked for a Swedish family once, but she says there she didn't learn very much English. So she really preferred to work for other people. And I think that's how she learned how to Ö because she didn't go to school at all. So she was about 19, 20 when she came to then? Yeah, she was a little older than my dad. So she came in 97. Did they come from large families, your parents? Well, my father, let's see, he had two sisters and a brother. And my mother had two sisters. I see, so they were small families. Uh-huh. And they didn't have to leave them for cramped living room? No, but Ö But they wanted to come out and Ö Yeah, I guess they thought Ö they used to say that streets over here were paved with gold, you know. Well, they have heard that too. Yeah. They heard it said. Yeah. Did they talk about the lives back there in the school years and confirmation and Ö Oh, well, my mother Ö my grandmother was a widow. My mother was 8 years old when her father died. He drowned in a lake there. And so my grandmother had a hard time making a living for the three girls, you know. But bring them up Ö They were too necessary then for your mother to get out and Ö Oh, yeah, my mother went out to work on farms, you know, when she was Ö I don't know how Ö Probably before confirmation. Yeah, probably. Because I know she worked at one place for 5 years before she came to this country. But she was just like a member of the family there, she said. They treated her so nice. In fact, we visited them there when I was with her. So she kept in contact with them all the time. They were her best friends. So then she knew about your father Ö Oh, yeah. Ö that he was a very good man. So they visited each other then Ö Oh, yes. And then she moved here to Ö Well, then she spent a year in Washington, D.C. This family that she worked with were in Washington. He worked for the government. Oh, I see. In fact, he'd been a consul to Greece. So their little girl was born in Greece. And then they came to Chicago. And my mother was kind of brought that girl up those 5 years because both of them worked on the paper and they were both editors. Oh, I see. And her name was Dorothy, so I got named after her. Oh, I see. That's the reason you were named. Yeah. And she kept in contact with this Dorothy all those years. In fact, I even got to meet her before Ö Oh, about Ö let's see Ö in the 50s. And we met her and she came and visited us. But my mother had kept in contact with her all the time. It was kind of Ö it was real Ö So they were in a relationship forever then? Yes, uh-huh. So after 5 years then your parents married and Ö Yeah, they were married here. At the first Lutheran? Yeah. And then they rented a house first or did your father Ö No, he built a house. He built a house. They rented for, I guess, a year or so. And then he built a house. And so we all lived in the house that he had built. Was it on Thornmoor? No, it was up on 15th Street. Oh, I see. So there was Ö the building was going more south and Ö Yeah. More and more. Uh-huh. And he kept his level of building. Was he in his own contract to rent or Ö? No. He always worked for somebody. But Ö Oxford Council Construction? Yes, yes. Uh-huh. He was a neighbor of ours at one time too. Uh-huh. And C.E. Petersonís if youíve heard of them. Yes. Uh-huh. Itís not a big construction, but theyíre all on the business now or Ö Well, the boys do some. Of course, itís the boysí sons that are taking it over. I see. So thatís Ö I mean Ö well, it was Mr. Peterson my dad worked for. Then his sons took it over. Theyíre all gone now. So itís their sons. But they donít have that much. I know theyíre working over at the hospital and they have some other jobs, but it isnít like the Ö Years ago. The years ago. Uh-uh. Then it was booming business when Ö Yeah. Quartz Cities was being built up. Uh-huh. So during the Depression then was a slack time then for your father? Oh, yeah. A lot of times. It was Ö Uh-huh. But he never worked at John D. or Moodyís? No. No. Always kept Ö Uh-huh. Oh, I know his uncle tried to get him to work down at the plow shop or something, but he thought that was terrible. So he didnít want to do that kind of work. Then, then, then, thatís when he went to Nebraska thinking maybe heíd like farming and all, but Ö Then he came back here and he liked building. So he had Ö got out of practice in Sweden then to be a carpenter or Ö No, because he Ö No. No. Because, you see, he was just young. He just worked at farms in Sweden. So he learned the trade actually over Ö He learned it over here. Uh-huh. And your mother never worked then after she got married? No. How many sisters and brothers Ö I have two brothers. Two brothers. One is dead. Uh-huh. The other one is Ö So there were three children then? Uh-huh. Three of us. Oh. My brother is Dr. Stanley. Heís a retired dentist now. Over here in Måne? Uh-huh. I see. Uh-huh. So you went through high school? Yep. And are you the oldest or Ö? Uh-huh. And also the other two, they Ö Yep. Went through high school and Ö Uh-huh. Then you went to Teachers College? Yeah. Uh-huh. Or Augustana? Oh, I did some summer work and night work there, but Ö Otherwise, I went to Macomb down Ö Western Illinois. And then I went to Evanston to Ö To Ö National College of Education up there. Special for kindergarten. I see. Uh-huh. So your brother now, he became a dentist? Yeah. So he was almost the same age as Ö No, he was probably older than Milford Nelson? Uh-huh. Heís younger? Milfordís Ö They were in the same class together. So they were about the same age then? Yeah. Milfordís, I think, a year older. Milford Ö Yeah, Milfordís a year older. Milford was in my confirmation class. I see. Uh-huh. But they graduated from Illinois Ö Champaign. Ö together. No, it was Ö the dental school is up in Chicago. In Chicago. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So they chose to Ö So you talked to Milford, too? Yes. Uh-huh. I imagine thereís not too many Ö They went that route, to be dentists and doctors Ö At that time? No, at that time. No. But more later, they Ö Uh-huh. So your brother, now, what kind of work was he doing before he went into Ö Ö further schooling? Did he take another job during the summer, or Ö Oh, yeah, I think one time he worked up at Ö worked up at Ö in Chicago. That was between Ö between high school. Between high school and his college. He was up there for a year. Lived with my aunt up there and Ö But otherwise Ö So he didnít go right from high school. Was it easy for Ö teenagers to get a job during the summer at that time when you were Ö when you were out of school? No, it wasnít. You had to know somebody before you could Ö Yeah. I donít know how he got in there. Uh-huh. I donít remember if it was somebody up in Chicago that Ö got him in there or not. But it wasnít easy. Today I think Ö kids have more chance of Ö getting a summer job than Ö I was always going to school, it seemed like. I never had a job like kids do today. Oh, I worked down the Ö down the New York store Ö I guess on Saturdays. And earned about a dollar and a quarter. Juniorís gambling. Yeah. At that time. So you remember in the 20s then Ö Yeah. That the Swedes came to the church for classes and Ö Uh-huh. They had programs Ö Uh-huh. And they were coming quite often and Ö I guess almost every week Ö Yeah, yeah. Some newcomers. Did they go to the church right away then usually to Ö find friends and companionship? Well Ö I remember a lot of them Ö a lot of them did come to our church. Whether it was because it was a downtown church or what. It was right in the middle of it. Uh-huh. Of course I think in those days Ö I think most of the people that came from Sweden came from a Lutheran church in those days, donít you think? Yeah, they probably did. It was early, there were Baptists and Ö Yeah. And Methodists. So they left the Frittingskritiket at First Lutheran. They dismiss a letter. Well, I suppose. They usually did that and Ö Uh-huh. And joined the church. I know there Ö a lot of people have written to the church, you know, to get information about their relatives and Ö I know a few years back we had a Ö minister that didnít know anything about Swedish, so Ö he got me to look over the church books and Ö and it was really interesting because Iíve been there ever since I was a kid Ö and to see some of these names, you know, that Iíd heard of and knew their descendants or something. And thatís when I would see Ö every once in a while it would be Ö somebody Ö Jonsdottir. And Ö it surprised me to think that they came over with that name. But they must have changed it right away to something Ö to Johnson, I guess, or something like that. Well, they probably said it on the dismissal letter, you see, so Ö Yeah. Ö you can copy all the same things. Yeah. Uh-huh. So Ö so you were very active in the church then, your father and mother. Yeah. Yeah, Iíve been very active all my life. So your mother belonged to Kvinneforeningen or Ö Oh, yes, yeah. Ö and your father in the brotherhood or Ö Yeah, and I know he was on the council Ö Council too? Ö too, uh-huh, uh-huh. And Ö And Iíve been Ö Sunday school teacher Ö Ö notary Ö organist Ö everything. I see. How did you Ö your mother Ö was she a musician or Ö No. Ö you picked up on your own Ö Uh-huh. Ö to play the Ö the big organ down there? Yeah, I did, uh-huh. Well, I started with piano, sang Ö played for the choirs and so on. I really Ö I really started being organist even when I went to Swede school. All right. On the old one? Yeah Ö No, on the piano in Swede school. I see, but you didnít have the old organ on Ö Oh, yeah, I learned how to play that, you know, trumpet. Yeah, trumpet, yeah. Uh-huh. Trumpet on the pedals. Yeah. Ö So, how did you get into church at that time? Did you take the streetcar or Ö Walk. From up here? Yeah, we lived farther Ö we lived over on 9th Street and 16th Avenue, then Ö there was nothing to walk in those days. Uh-huh, uh-huh. Or Ö or a streetcar, but then youíd have to go two blocks the other way to get it. Oh, I see. No, we walked, walked. We could walk very easily. Even if it was Ö to you lot that Ö in the Ö snow and Ö that didnít make any difference. Today we Ö Well, if we talk about Ö We still have Ö we still have you lot Ö Oh, yes, I have been to some of the Ö Have you had Ö Yes. Uh-huh. So Ö Although theyíre half English and Swedish this time. Yeah, they have to Ö Uh-huh. Ö give their people half and half, I think. Uh-huh. Well, itís surprising Ö people come Ö and theyíre Ö and they donít even understand it, but Ö just Ö Tradition. Yeah, tradition. They just like to come because their parents used to come. Uh-huh. The preparation for Christmas now Ö Who Ö Who took care of the Christmas tree? Did Ö Dad Ö pick up a spruce or a fir? Uh, the Ö last Christmas trees weíve had Ö some of our members have given it Ö Yes, but I mean in your home now. Oh, in the home. In your own home. You had a Christmas tree. Well, Iíll tell you Ö when I was a kid Ö we were always Ö my dad was afraid of Ö of candles and fires, and you know Ö in those days you had Ö I remember. We had Ö a Swedish jussakruna Ö that my father made. And weíd hang decorations on that with our candles. That stood on the table. That was safe. I see. But, you know, years ago you used to Ö clamp the candles on the Ö Well, we didnít have any Christmas tree until Ö I bought a tree and had Ö electric lights on it. So there was precaution then for fire. Yeah. My dad was afraid of Ö of things like that. He just Ö Because there were some accidents with the Christmas trees. Oh, yeah. Called fire and Ö Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And blew up almost. Yeah. So, that was what you had then? Uh-huh. We had jussakruna. So you helped them to decorate that too? Yeah. Uh-huh. He had made it Ö and painted it Ö Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And Christmas Eve then Ö did you have a jultomte? Uh-huh. No, we never had any Ö We never had any come to our house. Oh. So you had Christmas presents on Ö Oh, yeah. On Christmas Eve? No, but I think it was more morning. Morning? Uh-huh. So did they tell you then that the Christmas Ö the Santa Claus been there during the night Ö Yeah. Ö and come in the morning? Yeah, weíd hang up our stockings and Ö Uh-huh. So you had a Christmas stocking Ö you were very small then? Yeah. But Ö I soon knew that it was Ö But I Ö How did you learn that custom though? You know, like your parents know Ö they never had the stocking in Sweden. Well, I guess Ö I guess they learned it from people here, I Ö I suppose. Because they didnít have that in Sweden, did they? Uh-huh. So the other Swedish families had it too then? You think Ö Oh, yeah, I think so. Ö you had a stocking at the Ö fireplace or Ö Uh-huh. Yeah, uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And then the Ö the dishes for Christmas, was that Swedish? Yeah. Yeah. You had to prepare rye bread and Ö Oh, yes, uh-huh. Head cheese Ö Yeah, uh-huh. Sylta. Yeah, sylta, yeah. Uh-huh. Lutfisk. Lutfisk. And you all Ö I, I donít Ö I never, I never cared much for it. You didnít care for it? Uh-huh. But my father always had to have it at least once. Uh-huh. Only once though? And döpa i gryta, they would have Ö Yeah, they would have to give Ö Yeah, uh-huh. I was a little bit Ö But I Ö How about sausage now, green curve or potatoes curve? Potatoes curve. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Your mother made it herself? Yeah. Uh-huh. Did you help out now with all this preparation of Ö Not too much. Not too much? She didnít want you to get involved or Ö Well, I Ö I think I was too busy. With what? School and all that. Yeah, but for Christmas Ö Oh, well, I, I helped, I helped some, but Ö And now there were two brothers, they didnít Ö They didnít get involved with the Ö No, they just ate. With the cooking. They cleaned the table. Did you have chickens in your backyard? No. No? But they were Ö Only, only two times. Only two times, I, I, once I had a pet, pet, some pet chickens, but Ö Uh-huh. No, no, we never had kept any chickens. No egg-legging Ö Uh-uh. Creatures. But there were people who had Ö Oh, yeah, we had, we had neighbors that, that Ö And when they go away, well, Iíd go and help take care of the chickens. Oh, I see. Well, thatís the only thing I ever Ö You had to Ö Did with chickens. Gather the eggs then and Ö Yeah, they just had a few. Uh-huh. It was kind of nice though in the springtime when the rooster was coming in Ö Yeah, yeah. And Ö But there werenít too many. Oh, well, I suppose Ö Well, I, I think the Belgians more had chickens, because we had a Belgium area up near us, and, well, they had gardens Ö their whole Ö of course, they were used to using every bit of ground, you know, I think from Belgium. And I think thatís why they did it here. So they had Ö Big, big vegetable gardens. Uh-huh. They didnít have any lawns then. No, no. Itíd be all garden. All garden. Yeah, uh-huh. Even the sidewalk maybe was garden outside. Well, no, but theyíd fill up the whole yard with gardens. With salad, the carrots and Ö Yeah, cabbage and all that stuff. And they also had pigeons. Oh, yes. Uh-huh. So you didnít see any Swedes with pigeons. Saito, were you Ö did you have any friends among the Belgians when you were a teenager that you were playing with, a schoolmate? Or did they Ö Well, they went to the same school as I did. Maybe some of them went Ö because the Catholic Church over here, they had a school. And so maybe some of them went there, but Ö So most of the Belgians, did they go to the Catholic school, you think? An awful lot of them did. Uh-huh. But also some went to the Ö Went to the public school. So they had to pay tuition then to the Catholic school, the Ö I guess they did in those days, they do now. Oh, now they have to, but Ö Yeah. I guess one Ö I donít know. Because how could they afford that to Ö Yeah. If they had four or five kids to pay tuition for them. Uh-huh. I donít know. There must have been a lot of Ö Well, of course, those days, in the Catholic Church, it was only the nuns that taught. No male teacher. No. It was all nuns. But today, there are very many nuns, and theyíve got paid teachers there. Regular teachers. Yeah. They donít get as much money as they do teaching in the public schools here. Uh-huh. So I think maybe Ö In those days, maybe they didnít have to pay. I donít Ö I wouldnít say, but I know they do now. Did they go the whole time, high school too, in Catholic? No. They would go to our public high school. After they came out of the Ö Yeah. Of course, now they have Aleman in Rock Island. Itís Catholic. And thatís Catholic. Thatís a high school. Only for Catholics? No, anybody can go there. Anybody can go there. But you pay tuition. Oh, I see. Uh-huh. But I donít Ö I donít think Ö I think it must be all Catholics that go there. But I know Catholics didnít have kindergarten here for many years. So I had a lot of Catholics Ö I taught over here at Willard School, and I had a lot of Catholics would come to kindergarten, and then in the fourth grade they went to Catholic school. How were they prepared now to enter the public school, the Catholic school? Were they better prepared, you think, than the other students that go into public school? Well, I think they even went to our Ö Well, letís see. I think they went to our Ö I think they used our manual arts building here, sewing and cooking and some type of woodworking, you know, for the boys or something. I think they even did that for a while. I mean, were they better prepared in geography and mathematics and history than the regular Ö Well, of course, they had their religion, always. They stressed their religion. Yes, they stressed their religion. But they had no use for that when they came into the public school. No. Well, I donít know if they had all the subjects equal to Ö How about the discipline? Were they better disciplined, you think? Oh, they were more strict. They were strict. And they wouldnít have to. They could dismiss them from their school if they didnít behave. But didnít they care what happened to them after they just left the public school? Well, I donít know how many cases they had like that or not. But I always understood they were more strict. I suppose the parents backed the teachers up through the war, Iím sure. Yes. You see, the parents wanted them to go to that school. And I think I always found that the Catholic parents were more appreciative and more cooperative. They cooperated with the teacher more so than some of the others. So I reallyÖ I enjoyed having them as parents. Those that I dealt with, I found that way. Were those Belgian people then usually? Not all. Maybe they were of Belgian origin, butÖ Second or third generation. Yes. Of course, today I donít think itís allÖ Itís not all Belgians in the Catholic Church. I think there are all kinds ofÖ I think there are even some Swedes there. Well, they became Catholics too? I think so. I thinkÖ They marriedÖ Intermarried and then they have goneÖ I think theyíve got someÖ Theyíve gone astray. Yes. They came to Luther. SoÖ Well, I suppose in your time there wasÖ Well, they had Catholic churches in Sweden. Oh, yes. Sure. Especially now when they have more influx of immigrants. Yeah. But before it was not too much known. Yeah. And you go to Stockholm now, you see more foreigners than you doÖ I knowÖ That was aboutÖ I think it was in í72. I went to a big park in Sweden. Skansen? Skansen. And we ate there. And I said, ìAll those waiters, none of them were Swedish.î I could tell by looking at them. And I said to the people I was with, I said, ìMy, these all look like they came from Italy or down there.î Yes, thatís true. The Swedes wonít be waiters anymore. And they had cooked, but they could speak Swedish. They had learned Swedish. So I think theyíve gotten the others to come in and do the work they donít want to do anymore. It could be. So what did your parents say? You went with both your parents? Yeah. Never together. One time we were going to go together, but then my mother had so much arthritis she just couldnítÖ So the first time you went over with your mother, what year was that? Yeah, that was in í31. You went by boat then? Yes, I went by boat three times and flew three times. So and then you went with your father? Then I went with my father in í49. My mother was going to go that time, but then she didnít feel up to it. Every time you went there, you went to Öresö and Stora Aaby and saw the places where they came from. So they could explain to you then what they went through and where they came from. Were they disappointed when they returned several years later to see something that disappeared since they left? Or was it all intact as it was when they left? Well, my grandmotherís house was gone, I know, but my mother says, ìNow hereís where Mamaís house was.î So I saw a couple of houses that my other grandparents had lived in. So your mother, she met a lot of friends the first time, in 1931? Oh, yes. And then my fatherís sister, she had been in this country for five years and she went back to visit, but then she got married and stayed in Sweden. He never wanted to come over here, and why, I donít know, because he had two brothers and a sister over here. What was he doing then in Sweden? Was he a farmer? He was a farmer, but then he didnít live long. She became a widow and her kids were about nine years old, I think, or nine, and I donít know what Lisa was. But she kept the farm going. And she had a hired man, and so we even visited her when she was on the farm once. And did your parents, did they say anything that they regret they immigrated, or were they happy to come back to the United States again after they saw it? They felt relief and they had seen where it was. Yeah, well, they were established by that time, yeah. So there was no hope. I know, I see. They got married in 1904. In 1903, both my father and my mother went back to Sweden. They did? For a visit. Like a honeymoon then almost. Yeah, I was going to say maybe they went and got my grandmotherís blessing or something. They didnít plan to stay over in Sweden then? No, uh-uh. But she was in Washington at the time, and so they met in New York and went over together. And then they brought some more relatives with them that time, my aunt that I used to go and see. So whenever Iíd go over and see my aunt, when we got together weíd always talk English a little bit. And I was surprised how much she remembered, you know. And even unheard. I saw her, she died in í75, and I saw her that summer in a nursing home. And she still wanted to say a few words in English. And my cousin Lisa, who doesnít speak English at all, she just thinks she still remembers some English. And sheíd been there only five years? Sheíd only been here five years. She worked in the family then? Yeah. In the American family? Right here in Moline. Uh-huh. Thatís pretty bad. Uh-huh. So she got a little bit. Uh-huh. Yeah. Your parents, now, did they belong to any, they belonged to the First Lutheran, but did they belong to any Swedish organizations like Viking, Vasa, Swedish? Yeah, my dad was a charter member of the Vikings here in Moline. Too large. Uh-huh. And then we also had a Swedish literary society. In Moline? In Moline that a few people had started. Miss Grand, she was a Swedish teacher at our high school. She also belonged to church, and she also taught this Swedish school one year. Thatís how we got acquainted with her. And so she was a good friend of ours. And Mrs. Eggblood, thatís Leonaís mother-in-law, she started that Swedish society. Then, oh, there were a couple of them. And then a lot of times when some new Swedish young people would come, they joined that Swedish society, too. Where did they meet? In Holmes. In Holmes? Uh-huh, about once a month. How many members were there? Oh, sometimes we were 15, 20, or maybe, yeah, about that. And it was called the literary society? The Swedish literary society. So what were they doing then? They were always reading some thing. Oh, there were two or three of them that had charge of it, you know. And always read some Swedish literary work, some book or something. And they buyÖ And then we sang Swedish songs. Did you belong to it? Yeah. Uh-huh. So this was in the 1930s then? UmÖ yeah. I guess thatís what it was. And it was called Swedish literary society. Mrs. Sandell. See, another one you could go and see is Mrs. Sandellís daughter. She now is Mrs.Ö sheís Dr. Flatleyís wife. Was that her doctor? Yeah. Was she a Swedish? Yeah, she is Swedish. Sheís going to go there now in a couple of weeks. To Sweden? Uh-huh, to visit some of her cousins. Is she born in Sweden, or is sheÖ? No, she was born here, but her folks were real Swedish, and they wereÖ they both came over. They were some of them that went to this Swedish Bible class at church. I see. Uh-huh. So she is about your age then? Sheís younger. Sheís about ten years younger anyway. Maybe more, fifteen. I remember all this Swedish literary society if they had planted any literature or books in the library, I would read. For people toÖ and it was only for a close membership then. Uh-huh. So it was not for any outsiders, though. You had to be a member of that society toÖ To come? To come. Oh, sometimes we had some visitors. Uh-huh. Members ofÖ Well, letís see. I remember Harold Swanstrom was there. Have you ever lived here in Moline? In East Moline. Oh, you lived in East Moline? I lived there in East Moline. Oh. Well, what year did you come? ë71, to East Moline. Oh, I see. Harold Swanstrom died before that, I think. Yeah. So were they professional people then that belonged to this society? No, Mrs. Eckblad, sheíd been a teacher in Sweden before she was married. Thatís Carrie EckbladísÖ Thatís Carrie Eckbladís mother. So Carrie came, too. Have you seen Carrie? Sheís never home. Oh, sheís never home. Sheís hard of hearing, and I bet she never hears her phone. Because I know Leona has a hard time. Thatís her sister-in-law. She has a hard time. So you met in Holmstead and discussed Swedish literature. Uh-huh. All of you read then a piece there or a poem? Mostly Swedish singing. So did you have any connection with the society, with Augustana, in any form, with the faculty over there? Well, I belonged to the American ScandinavianÖ Association. But like Augustana people, did they branch out to the regular people, to the common people in Modena and Rock Island, or were they a knit society on the campus only? Oh, no, theyÖ Well, they came to First Newton, of course, because they had toÖ Yeah. You remember Anders? Yes. Well, I think he even came to our Scandinavian, our American Scandinavian, our Swedish literaryÖ I think he came sometimes. So you invited people then, soÖ Uh-huh. Guest lectures. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. So there was one society you had. Uh-huh. AndÖ I think that was Mrs. Eckblad and Anna Grand andÖ AndÖ So this Anna Grand, she was a forerunner of Marius Swanson. Yeah. In the Moline High School. Yeah. Was itÖ Swedish was taught in the Moline High School forÖ Yeah. For how long, do you think? Well, I think Anna Grand started it. In the 40s? No, in the 20s. The 20s? Yeah. I think before that. I donít know how long sheíd been there. I think some early 20s, I know it. So she was a high school teacher? Yeah, because she was in high school when I was. But I never took Swedish there. I was ashamed. Because I thought I knew too much Swedish, and theyíd think I was taking an easy course. I see. But my brother took it. He wasnít ashamed of it. I just thought theyíd say, ìOh, sheís just taking that to get an easy credit.î So I didnít take it. But Anna Grand was a friend of ours, and she was at our house a lot. Was that the only foreign language taught anyone in high school? No, I took French there. French? German? Well, you see, during the war, whyÖ German was cut out then. German was cut out. But they had taught German before. I think Anna Grand even taught some German before the war. Was she born in Sweden? Yes. Oh, yes. And she went to Sweden about every other summer. Oh, I see. Yeah, she was very Swedish. Did she teach you from Sweden, you think, orÖ? No. No, she came here. She wentóshe came and went to Augustana. I think they called itóit was like a high school, and it would be for older people. I know Bridger Swenson went there. It was an academy they called it. And I think when Anna Grand went there, she says, it was mostly boys and preachers that were going to go into the seminary. And maybe they were a little bit older or something, see. Because I know she said she was almost the only girl that graduated from there. And then she went on for teaching then, for teaching college. So Swedish was probably out there sometime. And see, there was another one after Anna Grand. Anna Grand died about in 1941, I think it was. And then there was another galóshe was from Minneapolis, and she took over. And then Margaret Swenson took over. But she was also teaching in Rockford foró And then there werenít enough classes in Swedish here, so she would have had to have had some other classes. So she went to Rockford where she had all Swedish classes. Politics now. Your father, was he a Republican or a Democrat? Republican. But he wasnít a politician. Did his duties to vote. So he was a very heavy citizen then, both your mother and father, quite early. So he never entered local politics then with your race in Morino. So you remember Mayor Oakleave and Johnson? Both Swedes. How about the police force now in Morino? There were Swedish policemen or sheriffs on there. Did they call them sheriff here in Morino? No. Police chief, I suppose. Police chief. There were Belgians on there too, I remember. One lived up on 7th Street. Do you think the Belgians were more involved with politics than the Swedes? Because they had problems with the language too, to get in there. But I think weíve had a lot of Swedish mayors. Canít even remember their names now. So they were able to get in there with the Swedish votes. They needed a few votes. Oh, those days, right. It was Swedes and Belgians. They were the two dominating ones. They were the two dominating ones. Did they agree most of the time? Were there any quarrels? I donít think so. About certain subjects, did they? No, I think they were all hard-working people. So they respected each other. I think so. Of course, now we have a lot of Spanish people here. They changed over the years. They didnít mingle together, the Belgians and the Swedes, because their religion cut them apart. If you were a Belgian, you were Catholic, and more than likely a Democrat, I suppose. I suppose. And it made them not attracted to the Swedes. Uh-huh. I think. What would happen now if a Swedish boy came home with a Belgian girl or vice versa? A Swedish girl went with a Belgian boy. Oh, I thinkÖ Is it easy to explain that to the parents? I think theyÖ They would talk to them. I think a lot of men are married. I think so. Do you remember if there are any Belgian people in the First Lutheran, for instance, that transferred over from Catholicism to Lutheran belief? Not any Moliners, but some that have come to us. I know. We had a couple in our church, and the man was Lutheran, and the otherÖ Was Catholic. Was Catholic, and was one of our best members. But they usually have a very strong belief to the Catholic, like the Belgians do. Yeah. They donít likely like the Swedes. Well, I think that was more so years ago. Itís more liberal now. I think it is. Fifty years ago was a different story. Oh, yeah. But I mean, today weíve had meetings with Catholics. Weíve had services together. Weíve even had exchange in the pulpit. So, I think itís becomingÖ Ecumenical. Ecumenical. Yeah. But the old timers, they had a differentÖ Oh, yeah. Öidea, of course, and well, thatís the way they were brought up, and practiced their lives. First Lutheran, did they have any special Swedish festivals, like Midsummer or Lucia program? Augustana. Augustana. Yeah. But not in Kjellstor? No. Augustana. Do you remember way back they had Midsummer at Augustana? Oh, I still go to it. Yeah, I know now, but I mean, years ago, like in the 20s. No, I donít remember that. Thereís a laterÖ Yeah. And I think itís American Scandinavian Society that hasÖ That they sponsored, see. Oh. So, you donít remember anything from 1915 or 1920? Going to anything like that? Yeah. No. Thereís a later invention, then. And a lot of times we get groups come over here and try to have it near Midsummer, and then they are our program. Dance groups and groups. Uh-huh, and singing groups, mostly. Oh. Uh-huh. So, thatís an interchangeable role today, when they can travel easier and give you a program. Uh-huh. Did your parents have a Swedish-American newspaper in theÖ Oh, yes. Until myÖ Recall that interview, then? Yes, and my mother would, when sheíd send in her money, then sheíd always write quite a long letter, and theyíd publish it. Theyíd say, ìThank you.î Yeah, and then sheíd read every word, you know. And a lot of times, one time she foundÖ she found a lady that had come over on the same boat with her. And she found a lot of old friends like that, old acquaintances, and write to them. And we even went and visited them. Some were in Rockford, and some was way out in New York. One time when we went to New York, we called on this one lady. Sheíd been on the boat with her. And, oh, she just thought it was so much fun to read about her old friends, you know. She found old friends that way. And then sheíd write to them. If she couldnít find the address, sheíd write to the paper and ask. In Chicago. Uh-huh. And a lot of times, and sheíd always sign it, ìAmanda,î you know. And people who knew her knew that that was her letter, you know. Same thing. So she wrote the contributor often then with the letters, I think. Well, every time she sent in her yearly payment, sheíd always write a little bit, how much she enjoyed the paper, you know. And, of course, that was a good ad for the paper. So theyíd publish her, and they published a lot of those letters, you know.