 So, was this annexed at that time with the city of Rockford? No, still is not. It's not annexed to Rockford? No. Chair Valley Township. So, at that time did you have your savings in Truman Johnson's bank? Down on Broadway? Security? No, I had the American Bank. Amcor? Amcor, yeah. And that's so many years ago. Gee, that's almost a hundred years ago, you know. But why? Well, anyway, I'll tell you, I maybe should tell you about some of the experiences we had when we bought this place. We moved out between Christmas and New Year. It was a day just like this when we moved. And the day after, the temperature dropped to 20 below zero. And all we had was a base burner, which was the proper thing in those days to have a base burner to heat the house with, you know. And I couldn't see those things because Dad had one of those up there in Rockview until we got a furnace. We had no furnace heat, no electricity, and no water when he bought that place, see. That was done on a handshake too, you know. But the man that, Lund, that he bought that place from on Rockview, he trusted Dad. Old man Lund was one of those guys that only trusted good Swedes, I guess. So, but I'll never forget when we moved in here between Christmas and New Year, it was beautiful weather like this, you know. I had just a jacket on, that's all. But the day or two days afterwards, the weather dropped to 20 below zero and we had a foot and a half of snow. And I had to go to work every day, you know. Boy, I tell you, that was an ordeal. But anyway, we started the base burner and I fired it up. We had anthracite coal. If you know what that is, it's a hard fuel. It's the only thing you could burn in that thing. But that thing was only made to keep itself warm, you know, to heat the house or the room. It wouldn't do that. So, but anyway, I know we started that up and I started the kitchen stove and fired it up so it was warm in there. And between the two of them, we got the house pretty comfortable. But we bought this place and I didn't notice that there was broken glass in the bedroom. And those bedrooms, there was two bedrooms in there, but they were much smaller than this room, the two of them together. But they were not side by side. There was a wall between them. And that glass was out there and I didn't know it. And they had pulled the shade down and we left it down, that's all. My wife woke up in the morning and she says, oh boy, I'm cold. My face is wet. I says, why? What's the matter? She says, there's water in the bed. I says, what do you mean? I fell over there. She says, there's snow in my hair. And it snowed during the night and blew in through that thing and she had a snow, a pile of snow on the pillow in her head and her hair was wet with snow. So I says, well, I'll get up and dress this and see if we can find out what's wrong here. And I got out there and lit the lantern, big old kerosene lamp, you know, got in there and I saw that light. So I got up there and I shoved some rags in that. There was six by nine glass and I, between cardboard and the material I had, I plugged it up. But it had actually snowed and there was snow on the floor and snow all over her. She happened to be sleeping on the outside of the bed. Well, so then I had to put a new glass in there. But then during the week, we were supposed to, at the end of the week, at the end of that week, we were invited down to my uncle's place down in Stillman Valley. So we were going to go down there for, I don't know if it was New Year's, I think it was the following New Year's, that Sunday. And they had a farm, you know, and boy, they had good chicken and good, you know, good cook and all that. So we were going to go down there and on the way, there was a dog laying there in a snow bank, big police dog. To me, it looked like he was half-froze. So I says, boy, I got to go out and look at that dog. He looked like he's suffering. So I said, what are you going to do with him? I said, I don't know. I opened up the door on the car and he jumped in there. But this was a Ford Coupe and I had myself, the wife, and this big dog in there. I said, what are you going to do with him? He was nestled down, boy, he was so beside himself because he's getting warm, you know. I said, I'm going to turn around and take him home and put him in the barn. So I put him in the barn and gave him some fresh water and some things to eat we had in the house and then we took off. We called that dog Nula and she became a very good friend of the family. So we got along all right. He was a good watchdog. But I put the dog in the barn and there was straw in there and, boy, she was just as happy in there, you know. And so then we decided it was too cold out there so we put her in the house with us in the kitchen. Well, we had a kitchen sink as such as it was with a big, we called it a slop pail. It was a five gallon pail sitting under there and you could wash dishes in that. When that got full, you'd empty it out. Well, this wasn't quite full and I thought I'll empty it in the morning. And a windstorm come up and it blew so hard that it blew out the frame on the house, the window. So the glass blew out and the shade, it was hanging down, the wind caught that and blew that down on the floor. And the dog got so scared she'd run around the kitchen, you know, and dumped this pail over. And when I come out there in the morning, my wife, I was dressing and she walked out there. She was going to go out there in just her gown and the lamp blew out. She said, I can't understand. I can't keep the lamp lit. Well, I said, I'll try it. So I lit that thing and it blew out again. I said, there's something wrong. So I got, went out in the hall and got my lantern and lit that. Of course, I could stand it. And then I saw the window and I looked out and here was the dog sitting out there looking in. He said, I don't want no part of this. And this ice had froze from that slop pail over the kitchen. So it was about an inch and a half of ice that was froze. It was a cold morning. Oh yeah, 20 below. All that week. So I don't remember. We went down to my uncle's and had the dog in the barn. But boy, that night, I tell you, we couldn't keep the house warm, of course, but we had gotten some furniture and I had big containers of this cardboard that they used. The same thing as they use now, I guess. So I went up there and took a look at that. I said, yeah, I can fix that. So I got some nails and I put that up and nailed up the whole wall outside with those cardboard, see? And then we pulled the shade down to help. I made a good fire before I went and firewood for her. We had to pump the water and carry it in in the pail and that was froze solid, you know. So the anthracite was not enough to heat the house? You had to have wood on top of it in the furnace? The what? To heat the house. Anthracite was not enough? Yeah, that was. It was there for heating though? Yeah. Did you use wood too or? No, not a foot. We had wood and a cook stove and a kitchen. That was all, see? And you didn't have a second floor then? Oh, no, no, no, no. Just some attic upstairs which was, you couldn't stand up in it or anything. But this house was just more of a shack than anything else. And you were working in Rockford every day at National Lock? No, I was working at Rockford Milling Machine then, I think. And then the Depression hit? In 30, yeah. And I knew it was coming. I said it, I predicted it. I said, we're going to have a Depression. How could you tell that? I don't know. I just felt that things were going out of control, you know. Was it a happy time for people during that last half of 1920s? Were people satisfied or? 29? Yeah, 28, 29 for instance. Yeah, well, I don't know. Just all of a sudden, it was a crash. They laid off everybody in that plant over there, Milling Machine, gave us two weeks vacation. They'd call us back. But out of 400 people there, they didn't call over six people back, I think. And it was in 1929? 29, yeah. And my dad was called back. And I was the first single guy to be called back. And so they gave me my job back. And then later I was transferred over then to Sunstrength. But Did they have a lot of sales in the factories in Rockford during the latter half of 1920s? What? I mean, a good order stock to come in, providing industry and the car manufacturers with everything from 1927, for instance, 48 and 29 until the crash. Did they produce a full machine then? Did they produce the machines? Yeah, I mean, like Rockford Products, they were started in 1929 by a hillman. Yeah. And you had National Lock. Yeah. You had Elko. Yeah, later. They have a good order stock then in the 1920s. Yeah, but that was fasteners, you know. And it was Elko. Yeah. Well, Elko was an offshoot from National Lock. And so was Rockford Screw, really. But it was easier to sell that kind of stuff than to sell big machines like we were producing. Like right now, the machine, the big machines, you know, heavy industry are down. They're not producing. They can't sell it. Like Ingersoll out there, machines, you know, they cost too much. But Elko, they made wood screws and they founded the Elko business on wood screws. They made wood screws and the way they made them and sold them, yeah, it was okay. They made money on it. So like Elko, they didn't have to have an engineering department to find out new ideas and so on. They just had a good order stock of wood screws and just produced and sold. Yeah. It was easier. Yeah. Yeah, they had salesmen, you know, to go out and sell this stuff, see. And Rockford Screw, of course, I don't know, that was an offshoot from National Lock, too. And Elko, some of the, well, Broberg and Elmer and Jelmer, England and all those, were the head guys for the shop. Harry Swanson and Paul Swanson were the money men, you might say. And it didn't take much money those days. So like P.J. Peterson and Olsen and England for Sundstrand, for instance, they were all established earlier. They were old. But Harry came in on 1929, Swan Hillman, he started with the operation. And Ruben and G. Geraldine, they started up 1929 or 1930. So there must be a good time, though, because that lured a lot of workers to set up their own shop on the farm. Were you in the same philosophy then during that time to start your own? No, no, no. Not at all? No, but I know that they asked me to go with American, Ruben Aldine and G. Geraldine, those asked me if I… Oh, they asked you? Yeah, they didn't. They did through Erickson, was a brother of Thurston Erickson, and he was a good friend of Ruben. And they said, you know, we want you to think about it. Don't come now because we don't want to be accused of robbing the good help from them. But if you want a job, come over and see us, see? But I wouldn't go. I didn't want to go. And so I had a pretty good job over there at National Lock at that time, so I didn't do… I just didn't feel like moving, taking a chance at that time, see? I talked to Ruben, you know, and he said that they took out their big loan of $50,000 and they were turned on. If they had received that, they would have been in the dump immediately because they just couldn't pay it back. So they were just in a good time, they came in at the right time until everything collapsed. But there must have been a good time though because it… Up until 29 was a good time. It was a good time. Yeah. But you had no thoughts in your mind to start up your own little… No, no, no, no. All I wanted to do was get this place producing and get it fixed up so it was livable. And I expected that I could, well, I could get by out here, hard time or good time, see? Because I could raise enough stuff on it here to live on. And it would have been impossible for you to go to a bank and ask them for about $10,000 to start up a little shop? You wouldn't have been able to get that loan that fast? Well, I guess they would have laughed at me, I guess. Yeah. And what about Swann Hillman? Where did he get his money? I don't know. I don't know. Maybe Eric Anderson was another one. Yeah, well, I know they decided to go in business and they went out and sold stock. And the boys that bought stock and them, they were retired wealthy, you know, because the Rockford crew made good money when they got going. But I don't know about their loans. I don't know how they, I think Swann Hillman must have had some backing of some sort. P.A. Peterson, he was gone in 1919, he died. Pellepo Union, you know, P.A. Peterson, the old guy. Yeah. But he was gone 1919, I understand he died. Because he had the hand in everything. Yeah, P.A. Peterson, yeah. Well, after he quit Levine Fost, he was, they said he started more small businesses in Rockford. Guys would come over to him, you know, and he was an easy mark, I guess. But he trusted them and I don't think he lost any money on them. But if you had a good experience and wanted to start a little tool shop, he'd say, well, okay. He didn't put out any money, but he signed for them, see? So he was the financier then? Yeah. And I don't know that he got anything for her or anything else, but he was just helpful, you know, to the Swedish immigrants, you might say. Because, you know, they didn't have any food stamps, they didn't have any welfare those days, but they did have work for those who wanted to work, see? How long did you stay out during the Depression? Only for a few weeks or a few months? Oh, no. I was out, I don't remember. I was out a month, I guess, maybe two months, and I got a – my uncle heard of a job down at Rock River Farms, a dairy farm down there by Byron, and they needed a truck driver. So I went down there and he introduced me and they hired me as a truck driver. So, but boy, that was an ordeal, too. I had a Model T truck that was one ton and I put three tons on it, you know, and it went out of control. It was so heavy in the back the front wheels went off the ground. And there was hard rubber tires or was it? Yeah. Oh, well, no, there was pneumatic tires, but they were small. And I remember one time, well, this kid that quit the job and I took it from him, he was driving along the river there and this thing went out of control and he dumped the whole truck down there. The only thing that saved him was a tree. But you see, I had so many cases that I come up with the idea of laying four cases on the fenders in the front and tied them down to counterbalance it some. But one time when I was driving into Byron and I was going along there and it was frozen and hard, all of a sudden the car rocked, you know, and the front wheels went up in the air and I ended up in the guy's front yard. And I remember that the boss down there, he gave me a talking to. He said, can't you learn to drive any better than that? I can drive it, I says, but it goes out of control when I got too much weight in the back. So I had to put cases, I forgot there was twelve, I forget what it was, twenty, twenty-four cases, quarts to a case, and they were heavy. They were a hundred some pounds. And I'd lay those on the front and I put a couple on the cab so I could control it. But I explained to him, I says, well, when you hit a bump, the front end went up and the back end went down and my wheel didn't control anything and it took off. And I went right up in the guy's front yard. So they had to go down there and fix that up. And I said I felt bad about it, but they don't know. He didn't know who did it. They figured it must have been me because that was four o'clock in the morning. HURST There was a long haul there out of Byron at that time with bad roads. MUNROE Well, from Rock River Farms to Byron, it wasn't too far, about three miles. But they didn't have any road lights either. HURST They must have been more than three miles. MUNROE From the farm. HURST They must have been nine miles. MUNROE Oh, from Rockford, yeah. I was at Rock River Farms. HURST So you were able to sustain living then. You could buy the car, gas for your car and drive it on because it was long distance in those days to Rockford to go to work. MUNROE Yeah, but I didn't – when I was down at the farm down there, I didn't go home for two weeks, you know. And I had the car with me down there. HURST So your wife had to fire up her – MUNROE Well, I wasn't married at that time. HURST But in the 30s, though, when the Depression hit, how did you do then when you were laid off? You started the farm a little bit? MUNROE Well, I worked on this farm down there until I decided I couldn't stomach any more of that. And I quit that job and went to Rockford. And yeah, then I got a job with this young – my neighbor up there. He says, I think I could give you a job down there where I work. He was a foreman at West End Furniture. HURST This out to the – MUNROE Yeah. So I got a job down there. And he gave me 40 cents an hour. So I felt I was sitting on top of the world now. And then they come through with an order that they couldn't make enough money. They had to cut wages. So what did they do? They cut me from 40 cents an hour to 20. And no – I got to get a cough drop, I guess. HURST They cut your wages then? MUNROE Yeah. So, well, they said he's a young man and they had to cut me. And there was another old gentleman there. He was 30 cents an hour and they cut him down to 20 cents. So I went to the foreman and I asked him why they did that to me. So he told me, you're single and all that. You got to cut down. So I just stayed there. Well, he says – he told us Stockis his name was, the fellow that run the place over there. He says that young fellow is one of the best workers I've got up there. So he got me – I think he brought me back from 20 cents an hour to 30 cents an hour. And I stayed there for, oh, I don't know, two, three months after that. Then they called me back to Rockford Milling Machine. And the foreman, he wanted me back there. So I went back. Dad, he'd been working pretty good, you know, eight hours a day anyway. How about your younger brothers now? Were they old enough then to be out of the work? No. Oh, they were still at home then? Yeah, they stayed home, yeah. They stayed home. Yeah. So they – I remember for – till I was – I was 17 years old, almost 18, when Mother said now, she says, you've been giving us your paycheck every payday. And he says, I don't want that anymore. She says, I'm going to put you on your own. You're going to pay $25 a week board and then you – if you put the rest in the bank. So that's how I bought that lot. I did put that money in the bank and I had $600 so I could buy that lot. But then when you married and came on your own, were you the money boss then or did your wife take care of the banking accounts and so on or did you – No, I think we were pretty much 50-50 on that. Joint account? Yeah. Uh-huh. Well, I didn't have no checking account or I didn't have much money in the bank either as far as that goes. When the bank – You didn't lose any money then with the bank? No, I had $5 in there. That's all. Have you lost that? No. I left it in there and finally when they start paying off their accounts, I got my $5 back. No interest on there or anything. But the one that Truman Johnson, Engstrom, England or the Bronquist, they went belly up? Yeah, that on security. No, they never recovered? No, those boys were playboys and they didn't know anything about banking. But a lot of Swedes had put money in there, a lot of Swedes. Oh, yeah. They did their banking there. Yeah, I remember I was working at Alco and this one, his last name was Carlson. He was saying, I'm glad I haven't got any money in any banks, he says. And my brother-in-law, Irene's brother, he had $400 in that security bank. I says, you better get that out. That bank to me is shaky. How I knew it, I don't know. All of a sudden, they closed up. Then he admitted he had $400 in there. And they went? Yeah. And then this Carlson, he was sitting at a drill press crying and he says, all my money I had, he says, six or eight hundred dollars was in that bank. He says, I thought you said you didn't have any money. I know, but I did. And of course, they lost it all, you know. But all I had was $5 in the American bank. American bank didn't close, you know. They didn't close, so I got my $5 back, all right. And the Swedish bank didn't close either. The Swedish American, yeah. Yes, the Swedish American. Yeah. I see. What was the difference there? You would think they would have a lot of mortgages outstanding in Rockford on houses and everything. How come they? Well, they were pretty restricted. I guess they didn't just buy a loan to anybody, I guess. And they had a tough time, boy. They had a long string of people in there coming in and pulling their money out. And they weathered the storm. So they made a run on the bank then, didn't they? Yeah. Only this side. The interview continues on cassette six. Next cassette.