 This is cassette 5, side 1. This continuation with Einer Johnson and we are in Seminole, Florida and we have 20th of January 1987. Cassette 5, side 1. I said if it isn't true, I said I'd sure I'd sure sue him too for slander. You know what the hell, I don't remember what the hell it was. But then I had a chance later to, well at least, I don't think I read it all, but I read enough and everything that I saw was absolutely true and it really raised hell with Nils William. Do you think he had received one copy then and he made copies of the rest? Oh of course, yes of course. Do you recall anybody else in Minneapolis received one? Oh yes, there were other people but I don't remember who the hell they were. What did they say then, the people you received? Well it's tough to believe. They were afraid to talk I suppose. They could hardly believe. It was so damaging and done in such an accusing manner but it was all substantiated. So they had done a lot of bad things? Oh, some whoever wrote it was no dummy, I tell you not. Do you think it came through Chicago? Oh it had to, oh there goes, where the hell are you going to get quotations from a meeting, from the minutes of a meeting? So they were definitely at that meeting? I'd say that they were, had to be, absolutely. So he didn't approach you though, regarding this letter, personally? No, he didn't approach me. He didn't say anything? No, no, no. So he was confronted and making a statement that was not true then in Chicago? An absolute lie, an absolute lie. So what happened then? It just dropped dead the whole thing? Well that took the wind out of his sails because he wanted to be the national coordinator, get paid. How about for Selma, consul general? He saw that letter too of course. I assume he did. I never talked to him about it. I just felt that let these people wallow in the crap, you know, I have no idea whether for Selma ever saw it or not. But he was out of the money then, in other words, he couldn't go back to Chicago again. Oh, gosh. It is strange though, he always appeared in Chicago and talked to people and sounded so good. He came from Minneapolis and he knew what he was talking about. That's right. So that was the inroad he made. If he had not said, if he had not named Svenskernes Dog as the only organization, that's the only one he named. The only one? The only one. In the letter too? They didn't have anything to do with it in the letter, but down at that meeting there was Svenskernes Dog. Where he reported that there was a committee in Minneapolis composed of however many I don't remember. And that Svenskernes Dog was a part of it. So he was sure about you not going to be able to know that what he said down there? Of course. And I wouldn't have known it except that they called me. Somebody was suspicious. Well, listen, he didn't have all the friends down there. Oh, no. And they just wanted to verify. Because they asked, as I remember that letter said that they asked questions. Oh, yes, well, how much money, God, I wish I had that goddamn letter. And I have no idea where the hell I get a copy of it anymore. I assume Miltz was the man, so I don't know. Oh, I know there are copies, but how the hell do you know? Westerberg at that time, what role did he play? He didn't play any role. No. He was in Chicago at that time, though. No. He was still in. That's right. But you see, Miltz William wanted, he, see, there was going to be money involved. He asked them, I think, to raise $200,000. Well, what are we going to do with that kind of money? So big salaries, travel expenses, see, and Miltz William, Miltz William was one that knows how to have travel expenses. But then, of course, you see the whole plot fell through. I'm sure that the consul, oh, I'm sure that, I mean, I would feel that the consul general saw it, because from then on there was no talk about Miltz William being the national coordinator. No more. This started quite early, though, because this was going to be a... Before the king was here, before 76. Well, I'd say it was in 75, see. The fall of, because I remember that we had our warehouse manager move down to Kentucky or someplace. The person that called you, did he call you? I have no idea. Well, you see, you can't tell. You can't tell now when they direct dial. You don't know whether it's in the next... You didn't know him either? I had no idea. He only asked you. He asked me very little. Didn't want to arouse suspicion, see. And afterwards I thought, I should have asked a little more. But he asked me questions which were... General. General. And asked if there was an organization, or if I was involved with Sonskin and his dog. Oh, and I told him all that when he was in the room. I said, I don't know a thing about this. But I said, somebody did call me, and I assumed it was from Chicago, the way they talked. Otherwise they wouldn't have known about what had been said, you see. So I could only assume it was from Chicago. Do you think the people in Minneapolis would have been... Yeah, but who the hell knew about it? Yeah, but after I read this letter, don't they have some questions to ask? Yeah, but don't you understand? I have no idea how many of the letters they sent out. Whether it was a dozen, or two, or a hundred, or what. I never saw the letter, but I understand they really undressed him, in other words. Oh, it was, it was. Like you said, if it's true, it's hard to sue. Yeah, that's right. I said, well, I said, I kind of laughed. I said, well, look, if you only... He says, oh, I know who it is. Well, I said, no. I said, if what they say in this letter isn't true, and you know who's behind it, then if I were you, I would sue them. Frankly, because... And I had nothing to hide. Because they said, yeah, so we... Something like this. Well, we called Minneapolis. And I think that they called, I think that they called two other officers of Zvensky and Zdolb, beside myself. I think so. But sometimes people are reluctant to, well, to get involved, you know. And, but when they quoted Zdenek Zdenek's dog, that, you know, it wasn't, as I say, it wasn't a goddamn hair that moved without being... He never came back to you and said that, I'm sorry, I slipped down in Chicago and mentioned you or not? Oh, no. This is one thing he never does. Oh, no. He never feels sorry? Never. He never apologizes. A term that he used all the time was, I'm telling you this, and if you repeat it, I'll say that you're lying. Well, I don't... Oh, that was... Now, you know, I've forgotten most of it as far as that letter, but it was a masterpiece. Oh, and it was unmerciful, as far as he was concerned. All truth. But he withstood the storm. He weathered the storm. Well, you see, always the best defense is an offense. He's never tired. Never tires. Never quits conniving and thinking. But here now, if we go into your organization... Yeah. Well, there isn't a hell of a lot to say. But you have given out awards to a lot of people, and you've been studying, and you've been searching, you know, what people have done. And there was, in his particular territory, of course, he felt... Yeah, but he's never done that. No, I know, but he's always been on your back, discrediting your doing things. Well, really not so much, except that he is this kind of a person. Well, he went to the... he went to Doug Laudert. C'est ça, right? And said that, well, anything... don't write anything about these awards because there's nothing to it. He actually did that? Oh, hell yes. He went to the American Embassy. You see, we have been meeting. I know you gave them out there. That's right. And we're doing it again next August 6th. I've already got permission from them. Wrote to them and asked for the auditorium on that date, and we got a reply, yes, delighted to have you. So he went to the Svenska Dagbradet? Yep. And he went to... oh, of course, that goddamned Nittwitt. What's that little guy that started... that started Swedish American of the Year? He's right here now. Vasa. Albin Vidin. Albin Vidin. He went to Albin and said, well, that's just nothing. George Washington was the first president. Well, hell, there were eight before George Washington. I got all their names. And what tickled me two years ago, or it'll be two years next August, was when the then American ambassador got up at the meeting and said, any of you who have heard reports about John Hansen, any of you who have heard reports that he didn't exist, that he wasn't what Mr. Johnson has told you he is, is not telling the truth. I have investigated this, and what Mr. Johnson says is absolutely true. Well, now, the American ambassador wouldn't go at a public meeting in the embassy, go up and make a statement like that, if it weren't so. Was it Forsberg? Yeah, Forsberg. But you see, he went to the American embassy and said, gee, you know, it isn't fair that... In fact, Forsberg told me this. It isn't fair that this organization can come in here and use your facilities. And, now, see, at that time, there was no ambassador. You know, it was a period of time when America did not have an ambassador there. But whoever the top dog was said, well, look, it's an American organization, and they pay for the facility. So I never begged him for a thing. And this guy told me, Nels William, he wants everything for nothing. Now, we paid our way, see. Oh, there's something else I was just going to tell you. Oh, Jesus. The first time that I ever met Forsberg, I was staying at the... Oh, what the hell is that hotel, that church hotel? Oh, Birgergatan. Yeah. You know what I'm talking about. Yeah, I know which one it is. I was staying there, Birgergatan. Birgergatan, yeah. So I was staying there, and I was just going up to, oh, this was like, oh, I'd only been there a couple of days. And so I had called the embassy, and there's a woman that I usually talk to there, say, well, I'm in town, and so, you know, we're getting all ready for the date of whatever it is. It's usually about the same time. So she apparently had told the ambassador. So the next day, she called back, say, she says, Ambassador Forsberg wondered if you would come to the embassy. He'd like to have a talk with you. Well, I said, that's fine. I said, I'm glad you called now because I'm just going up to Hrodek Slav, and I'll be there for nearly a week, and I'll come back a couple days before. So I went there, and he said, he said, you're from Minneapolis, I said, yeah. Do you know a fellow by the name of Nils William Olsen? I said, yes, I do. What do you think of him? He was an ambassador, and I wasn't about to bad mouth Nils William Olsen. Well, I said, I know him very well. I said, he's very capable. I've had my differences with him. So he says, I think he's a goddamned crook. He said that? Just like that. Well, I said, I may feel just about the same, but I said, I'm glad you said it. Well, he's an opportunist. He preys upon the Swedes. That's how he makes his living. So they saw through him then at the embassy? He had been there. Nils William had been there. How can he spend so much time, though? I mean, he should be afraid to step out to some thin ice, and he goes right through it. But he always takes those opportunities and chances. He never, never. Sure. So you never had any confrontation, though, regarding those awards with him? He has approached you at any point? Ambassador Tallgruth. Tore Tallgruth. Tore Tallgruth. Well, of course, you know, there's a little guy that... Now, he's on his side, though, because you know of him. Oh, sure. Well, he wants to... but I want to tell you something about his side. So, I'll tell you this before I forget it. So I've always gotten along with Tore Tallgruth, and so I went to visit him. How the hell was it? I was at the Billionaire's Isle, and he knew I was there. And I had talked to him a couple of days before, because... Well, that's another little side story. But so he called me. I had talked to him, and then he called me. He said, say, I want to ask you a favor. He said, are you busy this afternoon? I said, not particularly. I said, what do you got in mind? He said, I've got to take my car out to a garage. Apparently, it was kind of on the outskirts, definitely on the outskirts of town. And he said, I'm just wondering if you'd be... Oh, he asked me first if I had a car, if I was driving a car. I said, yeah. Well, he said, I'm wondering if you would follow me and take me home from the garage, because he said they're going to have it several days. I said, sure, I'll be glad to do that. Well, then he, I think he had, there was a twofold purpose, because then when we rode home, of course, then he rode with me, and he was telling me about how disgusted he was with Kurt Carlson and Nils William. And I could hardly understand that, you know. But then he said, you know, when I went to Minneapolis at the request of Nils William and Kurt Carlson, they told me that they were going to take care of my plane ticket and lodging and so forth. Well, he, of course, at that time he was able to get, I guess, free rides on SAS. But then, of course, from Chicago to Minneapolis he had to pay. And, of course, he stayed at one of Kurt Carlson's hotels. But anyhow, he never got a penny back. Never got repaid for his airfare from Chicago and back, nor he had to, and he had to pay his hotel bill. Well, that stuck in his drawer. And after all, he was then retired. He was not a government employee by then. And he was kind of complaining, and so I thought, well, what he wants me to do is offer to reimburse him, which I did. So I said, well, I said, look, if you happen to have those bills. He said, yeah, I just happened to have them. Well, and when I got home, I saw that he got a check to cover those expenses. But still in all, now he was perfectly willing to accept the John Hansen Award the year or two before then. To the Talbot? Yeah. But then Nels had gotten to him, because he even wrote several articles stating that, well, this really wasn't so, you know. And, of course, see the thing that makes people wonder, well, what the hell? If he was the first president, or if there were presidents before George Washington, why doesn't history teach that in school? It's a tragedy, I admit. But nevertheless, it's a fact. I don't happen to have that with me, because I can't bring every goddamn thing I own with me. I got three file cabinets full of stuff at home. But someday I'll give you a list, the list, the names of the guys, the date that they took office. Yes, yeah. I got all of that. You may even have. Yes, I studied. So, but you see, this was under the first constitution. Saying that George Washington was the first president is like saying that de Gaulle was the first president of France, which we know is not so. He was the first president under the current constitution, de Gaulle. Are they using the term in Congress as an example? That's right. But you see, all business was conducted in that manner at that time. That's right. All business. So, not under the present constitution, but it's tragic. It is tragic that they have forgotten, not only have they forgotten John Hansen, but they've forgotten seven other people. Because George Washington was number nine in presidential ascension. Did you talk to Alvin Wadeen at any time about this? Oh, he. You met him when he was in. No, I met him some time. During the Celine time, huh? So, anyhow. So, we, I always felt that Alvin Wadeen, even though he was a kind of a non-entity, he was, I think if a mouse had stamped its foot real hard, it would be easy to jump four feet. That's the kind of a, say one, there is a term which a lot of old Swedes use, and I'm talking about a lot of old time, people who grew up in Sweden and were accustomed to all of those vernacular type. There is a term that, now I'm not even sure that I remember it right, but I think if I were to say it correctly, then I know what it would mean. But anyhow, is there such a term as, if you were to describe somebody that was kind of a, that's a kind of a hanger on, and no matter what the hell you tell him, he bows low at the waist and says, yeah, that's right. Slätskestask. Is there such a thing, a term? Slätskestask, yeah. Yeah. It might be provincial too, but I heard it. Have you? Well, it may well be provincial. That's right. It may come from Helsingland, although, no, as a matter of fact, I didn't even hear it. I didn't even hear it from my dad. So, they should apply over here too. God damn right. And that's what I would class Aalvinn Vidén as. He was a guy that couldn't make a living over here, so he went back to Sweden. And there's an old saying, far gods, far gods are the mightiest. You can go in a strange town and be an expert. So he did a see-eye-to-eye with Nils William? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. He did? Nils William had him in his vest pocket. He bragged about that. Do you really believe that Vasa Order of America, now they had this Swedish American of the Year, do you think that Nils William Olsson had his hand in most of those collections? Every god damn one of them. He bragged about it. He did? He bragged about it. You see, his purpose you must understand. So why did he go? Who the hell got to be? Was it people that had done a lot of work? No, not a god damn one of them. Wendell Anderson, the governor of Minnesota that I knew very well and I still know him very well. The consul general, the consul general, Foreshell, I suppose he kind of wanted to make a little name for him. Well, not kind of. He wanted to make a name for himself. No ifs or ands about it. He's the one that contacted. You see, the consulate, any country's consul general can have access to governors and senators very easy. So he's the one that suggested, maybe with Nils. I wouldn't lower myself to ask him, but maybe the two of them went over there together. But anyhow, the governor's office called me and I knew Wendell when he was in the Senate, the state Senate. So I called and said, say, do you know anything about the Vassa order? Well, you know, what the hell are you going to when the governor calls and asks? I had no reason. What the hell did I have reasons to deny that for? I said, yeah, sure. I said, I'm very familiar with the Vassa order. I said, I'm a member. I'm not very active. I don't have time. You can't be everything to every organization, you know. So I said, yeah, why do you ask? Well, I'm going to be declared the Swedish American of the Year. And he said, I don't know a thing about it. I don't even know anything about the Vassa order, what they are or, you know. And he said, I feel real dumb about it, but here I'm going to go to Sweden. My wife is going to go with, and my father and mother are going to go with. You see, Wendell Anderson's grandfather came from Berghul in Helsingland, the same town that I was born in. So it happened. I didn't go because Wendell went. I was going that time anyhow. Oh, they had a hell of a, Christ, they traced that ancestry back to 1490-something. I want to say 94, but it's too coincidental with the Columbus. But that's how long they traced it back. Because you have to admit that church records in Sweden are excellent. And, but, here's a- He says, William, he doesn't even belong to the Vassa order. No, he does not. That's right. I would think the organization in Sershioff feel a little bit dumb about it. Jesus Christ. That's what I told both Talrup and Albin Widin. I said, I don't understand you people. Here's a guy that is doing this to enhance his own position. So what the hell do you suppose he picked on Johnson in Texas for? Kurt Carlson. Oh, so he got himself also once. Because, well, yes, well, of course. He missed one year. Oh, Jesus Christ. So, oh, I'll tell you something later on, very recent. But you see, he ingratiated himself with these whales to be, you know, you're going to be the institute that you become the Swedish American of the Year. Why, Christ, he got money. I had a guy call me right down here in Florida. And he went to some extent to get my number because, well, I'm in the telephone book now all year round. But so he called me, and I know the guy very well. And he said, he called me from Arizona. And he said, I had a hell of a time getting your number, blah, blah, blah, you know. So he says, do you know Nils William Olsen? I said, yeah. And, of course, I knew this guy well enough so I didn't have to act like I did when I was talking to the American ambassador. I said, hell, yes, I know him. I'm not proud of knowing him, but I said I know him very well, very well. Why, he said, I kind of thought you would. He says, that son of a bitch is out here begging $5,000 from me. I said, well, that's our Nils William Olsen. But this was recently? Oh, no. Oh, that was some years ago. Oh, yeah, I suppose. Oh, I'd say, well, it's hard to say. He had started this thing anyhow, this Swedish Council of America. Oh, yeah, he gets his inroads. And, you see, this is what he did. And I don't say that these people, if, you see, the irony of it is, the Vasa Order is going down the tube. It won't be too long. See, they've already consolidated. Now, there used to be seven lodges in Minnesota. Now, I don't know if there's three or four, or four or five, maybe. But, you see, then they consolidate the membership. And they do a goddamn thing. It isn't any wonder. I haven't attended a meeting in years because it's absolutely... This is Sight 2, cassette 5, continuation with Ina Johnson, Minneapolis, Minnesota. And we are still in Seminole, Florida, 20th of January, 1987. Sight 2, cassette 5. You'd enjoy this. Yeah. But I just said that I'll tell you that later. Yeah. Just a minute ago. What the hell were we talking about? I really don't know what it was. No, I understand. But I've told Kurt several years back. I just don't understand how the hell you were taken in by this character. But he was also the Swedish American of the Year, of course. There's a favor there he got paid. Yeah. To believe in what he's saying. Oh, sure. But you see the thing. What I started to say was, you know, I told Biden, I said, you know, these people that you are recognizing as Swedish American of the Year, I said, first of all, there isn't a one of them. There isn't a one of them that is a member of the Vasa Order. I said, I would think, and there are just all kinds of people, and I'm not talking about me, I'm talking about all kinds of people that have spent 40, 50, 60 years being active in the Vasa Order and doing a lot of good things. I said, those are the kind of people that you ought to be recognizing. Not some son of a bitch that's made a million dollars and doesn't even know what the Vasa Order is. Well, but you see, he was under the thumb. No spank about that. He says, I've got him in my best pocket. And it was evident. People that became big contributors to his cause. That's all it was done for. Because none of them have done anything in Sweden. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. In any greater standard. No. They'd probably never been over there until now when they'd been over there for a Council of America meeting. In the round table. You have not been invited there. If you pay $2,500, you can belong to that table, though. I wouldn't give them $0.25. They met no less September. Yeah. The round table. Yeah. It has cost me over $50,000 in money out of my pocket over these years. And I don't mind that. Of course, the travel expenses and the planning. I don't mind that. If I minded, I didn't have to do it. So you have to pay then at the embassy for whatever you use there. Oh yeah, but not very much. Oh yes, whatever we use, sure. We pay what we use, and that's it. But they are liberal to some form, though, to give you... Well... Do they send out the publicity, or... No, no, no, no. You have to do the... We do all that. We would rather do it, because then at least we know what the hell is going to go out. No, but when we have refreshments, and as you well know, liquor, for example, in Sweden is very expensive. But we understand that, and that... But can't you get it through the embassy? Do they have a... Well, we get it through the embassy. Duty-free. Oh yeah, but... But still, nobody complains about that. Who's helping you? You've got to have a local committee. Oh sure, sure. Maybe you know the guy, like several of them, but Åke Gidle. Oh yeah, sure, I know him very well. So he's on your side. Sure. He is related a little bit to Nisvallian, though. I don't know him. To his wife, Danmar. Who is that? I think they're cousins. Oh, but he can't stand them. He can't stand them. Oh no. So he is still helping you out, then? Oh, absolutely. In fact, I just wrote him a letter very recently. In fact, I talked to him. He called me down here. He was in New York visiting, staying with his daughter. He was in New York for many years, so... Oh yeah, yeah. And his daughter, of course, I guess really kind of grew up there, so she stayed here, you know. She's getting married down next summer. Oh, I see. Oh yeah, I know, I know, I know Oki very well. Very well. I've gotten, in fact, I've gotten several free trips for Oki over here. He's been to several Saskatawg. You know, you get a kick out of these people. They're such great people. Jesus Christ, do you think that they sat right next to God the Father Almighty? So they say, gee, who do you get... One time he asked me, he says, see, he says, I'd like to exchange contributors. I'd like to change contributors with you. Well, I said, why don't you give me your list of contributors, then I'll give you mine. He'd get the worst end of the deal, I'll tell you. So anyhow, you know, one time he said, God, he said, you send these Midsummer Queens, see, every year for about, well, I can't quote it for sure without looking it up, but about nearly 40 years we have chosen a Midsummer Queen during the Saskatawg. Yeah, that's well known. All right, okay. Well, we have sent all kinds of them over to Sweden. Sometimes I have been able to wrangle a free trip, but most of the time we get the airfare at wholesale. Well, these travel agents don't, there's not much of a markup in air travel, but it helps, and we appreciate that. And he says, God, he says, how the hell do you do it? Well, I said, I'll tell you how I do it. Most of the time I take out my pocketbook, take money out of there, and pay for the trip. Why don't you do that? We have brought over, I finally called a halt to it now this year. I brought over the Vasa Order Lucia many times. Most of the time I have paid for it myself. I didn't have to. I'm the guy that brought it to their attention. Did you know she is now dead? You know, when I get out of this, I forget. Lillie Lawrenson? No, no, no, she was not. She was not. Just drop the name. Oh, there was a, you know, most of that bullshit she copied. I don't know if you knew that. No, I didn't know. Well, I haven't read it. No, most of the stuff in her book she copied from other publications. But you see, it isn't that the Institute thinks so much of her, but it's an opportunity to get money from people, donate money to the Lillie Lawrenson Memorial Fund. That's all that amounts to. She was a nice little old lady. Sure she was, no question. But as an author, worthless shit. I read it two or three times, merely because to get passages that you could pick out of other books, word for word. Oh, shit. No, no, she was a woman that was very active in the Vasa Order in Sweden. In Minneapolis, or you mean Fleetwood? Fleetwood, of course. Elsa Fleetwood. Know her very well. I'm ashamed that I forget her name, but I did. She's been dead now, you know, for several years. Anyhow, back a few years, I suppose it was seven, eight years. Now there was a worker. God damn, she was a worker. Mostly title and not much else. She didn't have much. They had that apartment, a pretty run-down place. She lived in the same apartment with Talbot. Oh, she's dead? Yeah, she's now dead. Her husband is now in some kind of a rest home. Yeah, he's getting old. Yeah, very. She was just what you call a common person, you know. Very common. You one, son from Buros. Yes, right. But you see, the title, you know. Sure, it goes a long way. A long way, yeah. That's like that old story about the ranchers. One rancher told the other, he says, Look, little bull go a long way. If Nitz William Olsen had come forward to you, during all those aggressions and times you had with him, and say that, I make a deal with you, Einer. I want to arrange you to get an honorary doctorate. And we let everything get buried, what we have in the past. But you have taken it. I'd have told him to go to hell. No uncertain terms. No, I don't go for that bullshit. But anyhow, so we were in Stockholm, and we passed out the John Hansen Awards, really to some very outstanding people. Yes, I know. Very outstanding people. How do you select those now? Do you have a committee? In fact, when Oki was here, he said, I've got some names, and he said, I'll send them to you. See, this was just last week. Yeah, last week. Like about, no, maybe it was the Friday before, so a week ago last Friday. So no, we, oh, you bet, people who have done something. Not necessarily because they're rich. No way. Hell, we've recognized, well, I'm sure you've read it. Sure. Well, anyhow, so we were through with that at the embassy, and Elsa was there. And then I told her, I said, look, I've got an idea that I think should help the Vasa Order here in Sweden. You know, they're falling apart, too, you know. Their membership is, so I said, look, why don't you choose? There's two districts to the Vasa Order in Sweden. Why don't you choose a Vasa, a Lucia, from each district in alternate years? And see, the Stockholm is in the northern district. And she says, well, I suppose we should start here than in the northern district. Well, I said, yes, absolutely. Number 19. Yeah, so anyhow, I said, you do that. But I said, what I'd like to have you do, while I'm still in Stockholm, and it happened, it happened that a lot of these officers of the two districts were in Stockholm because of the Swedish Council of America, or the Swedish American of the Year for those doings. So I said, look, why would you be willing to have a meeting at your home? Have these people there, and I'll explain this to them, that it won't cost them a penny. I'll guarantee that I'll pay for the trip both ways as well as taking care of her while she's in the States. Oh, God, you know, that's like offering candy to a kid, see? Oh, yes, she says. They wouldn't be crazy enough not to turn that down, you know. Well, I said, I think it ought to create a little interest among some of the younger people. Because she had just been complaining several times before that, well, we're just having such a tough time getting any young people interested, and so forth and so on. So she called a meeting because they were all there in Stockholm anyhow, and sure enough, they came. I think all of them came. And I explained this to them, and they said, oh, my, yes, but are you sure that it wouldn't cost us any money? I said, look, I just told you it wouldn't. I promised you I'll guarantee the travel. And so then when I got home here, I wanted to get the okay of the group here, too. So a fellow by the name of Roy Nelson, by the by, who has been active for 50 years in the Vasa Order. He lives in the Minnetonka. He lives in Minnetonka. Not anymore. But he used to live right on Minnetonka. He lives in Plymouth now. He lives in Plymouth now. Okay, you know who I'm talking about. So I called Roy right away. We've always been good friends. And I said, look, here's what I'd like to do. But I said, I don't want to do it without the cooperation of the Vasa Order, and it's not going to cost them anything. And so he called. It happened. I come home on about a Friday, and the next meeting was the following Monday. So it was a real quick action. So I explained to him. Well, it shows just how envious people can get. There were two women there, the only two women who had daughters that would be of an eligible age, maybe to go take a trip to Sweden as the Vasa, as the Lucia. So I explained what I had proposed to the officers of the two districts in Sweden. And I said, I'd naturally like your cooperation, at least from the standpoint of you don't have to be obligated to do anything for her, to spend any money, but at least she would be welcome maybe at both the Christmas party in Minneapolis and the one in St. Paul. So they didn't say, aye, yes, boo, go to hell or anything. One of them got up and said, well, Einer, that's a noble gesture, but why don't you do something for our girls here? Well, she was the only one that had an eligible daughter at that time. The other woman would have one in a couple of years. So you had to wait a little bit. They didn't say that, yeah, sure, of course, that's fine, we'll invite her to that. She wanted to know why the hell I didn't do that for their girls. Well, I said, in the first place, I feel that the Vasa order here has more money than I've got. I said, you people receive interest checks every year, and they can hardly spend the interest. There's no reason in the world if you want to send a Lucia over to Sweden, you've got all kinds of money to do it. Well, of course, but you see, they are so goddamn tight. And they have a tough time spending their interest. And where the hell is this money going to go? There's going to be no new membership. And of course, now the interest is lower, but it's not any lower than it was before the great increase in interest rates. Now Roy Nelson is a fine guy, hard worker, and I have all the respect in the world for him. But of course, while his word goes a long ways, but anyhow, oh yeah, well, they finally accepted, oh yeah, that was fine, that was all right. But you see, when you confront people with the truth, it's tough to argue against that. And when I told them, I said, you people have got all kinds of money, why the hell don't you spend a couple of thousand dollars? But you are doing something like the Grand Large Board should do now. Of course. You have done more as a single member than the board or the district board has ever done. Of course. They have done nothing. But this year now, it just irked me a little bit. And I told Talruth and I told the other guy, the eldest then. Videon. I told him this, I said, why the hell don't you choose people that have done something that are going to do something for the Vassal Agreement? I said, you are dying on the vine and you are doing nothing about it. Well, then they had to overcome that kind of a proposition. They have apparently instituted a phrase in their bylaws that says that as long as some outstanding person, not necessarily a member of the Vassal Order. Well, Winstrom, he was elected, though. Well, all these people were, yes, yes, that's right. But Bertel, Jesus Christ, can they go buy people like that if Roy Nelson is another one? That should really be considered. Oh, Bertel Winston, definitely. But he is the only one. I don't know of another one. The only other common person is that woman from the Salvation Army. Last year. Yeah, last year. That's right. That's the only one that otherwise. Johnson. Otherwise, they are all money people and all for the benefit of our dear friend. So, but it did work anyway with this. Oh, then I said, oh sure, for many years. But then I thought, I'm just getting sick and tired of this shit. Then you see, we were doing the same thing with the Midsomer Queen. And this is what, this was, O.K. Yealy was really bore the brunt of, see, we went to a weekly magazine, I wanted to say all the brunt, but. Hemis Vikatidi. Hemis Vikatidi. And sure, yeah, that sounded good as long as it didn't cost them any money. And then they had advertised in there that the girls to send in pictures and little biographical material, and which they did. And we had some beautiful girls, gorgeous girls. We had one every year for some time. Well, then they were about to go bankrupt, so they were taken over by somebody. Well. You mean the Hemis Vikatidi? Oh, yes, they changed ownership. Oh, this was, I don't know, two or three years ago. I went there, in fact, I was there about, to their office, about the last week they were in existence. And because we had people that we worked with, you know, that you got to know. And then I wanted to go to Denmark, so I flew down, I don't remember where the hell I flew down to, and then saw them, and then I took that boat across, you know, over to Denmark. But, so I just thought, I just had about had enough of this Lucia thing. And there is no one that hooks onto it? No. Well, it should cost money. Cost money. So you are taking a lot of chances now? Well. You know, personal chances, in other words, to back it up if it fails. Oh, well, I've always backed it up. But the large, for instance, or the largest, the Minamini, so they would never take a chance like that? Not a penny. Ever. Oh, no, no, no. Like you say now, what are the money, what is going to go? What the hell I can do with it? See, they sold that Vasa Park property out at Lake Minnetonka. They got a barrel of money for it. They should have. Valuable property. They banked it and draws interest, which is fine. I'm delighted for them that they at least didn't just go out and squander it. No. And now, Oki, right now, is seeking, not sponsorship, but cooperation. He said, we're going to try some newspaper. Because, he said, you get better publicity out of a newspaper than you get out of a magazine. Which is true. Even Vicar Ravine, you know, any of this, or him and Vicar Tee, they only come out weekly or is it every, bi-monthly or something? I don't know, no, but they're going to work. Yeah. But he said, I'm going to go to a couple of newspapers. Now, he said, if they're willing to help. Oh, I said, fine. But I said, don't make that as a condition. If they're willing to give some publicity, because after all, they'll get some credit too, you know. And I said, don't worry about the money. We'll take care of it. But if they are willing, of course. By all means. Because I found this. That if you've got a little something invested in something, you're going to take more interest in it. Or than if you don't have. And that's the only reason that I would welcome some co-sponsorship. Because in that manner, they'll take more interest and make certain that it... But, you know, we've had a girl over here, and as a matter of fact, this past summer we had a girl from Uddevalla. Were you at Tuscanskinas Dog at all? No. Or up to Scandia when they... No, I'm not. The reason I ask is because the girl was at both places. No. Well, anyhow, she was here for the Aquitanio. All and was a week with the Aquitanio group. And so she had a hell of a time. She was here about a month. But that girl had been here. She was an active VASA member. But that isn't why she was chosen. But she was chosen as the Southern District VASA Lucia several years back. Just a wonderful young woman. And she's a nurse at the hospital at Uddevalla. So what are you planning of a New Sweden 88? Oh, yeah. We've got... Oh, 88? Yeah. Well... Are you active in that now? Well, I'm not so goddamn sure. You know, it gets to a point I've made up my mind. No more. And I tell these people. In fact, we had a meeting at the institute. About this New Sweden 88? Yep. Where Kirk was there and his daughter. She is the chief mogul now. And some people who are, first of all, aren't even Swedes. And I get a little sick of these Johnny-come-latelys. Have absolutely no background. They don't know a thing that has gone on. Or who has done anything. I mentioned Roy Nelson. And there's just all kinds of those people. And they've spent a lifetime. And they're Americans. Born here. But, anyhow, so... So the consul general invited... We had a luncheon. And... Do you like Svenskarnas Dagen, or will you be active participating? Well, it depends. It's a little bit later, though, but you will still be... Well, but this is what I'm drawing the line on. We are just not going to be the troops. We're going to have something to say as to what happens, or we don't work. Why the hell... Because I know I'll get the hog share of it to start with. Because I've got the time and the interest. But I'm not going to... Unless I have something to say as to what goes on, I'm not going to move a finger. I've got too many other things to do. Which is true. And you have the experience since past time. You betcha. I've got a memory of an elephant. When they were... When the Scandinavia... Today, Marilyn Nelson called me and said, Gee, she says, you're the only one among the Swedes that has something to do with floats for the Aquitaine. I said, oh, that's true. Gee, we're going to have a big parade. And we would sure love to have you have a float in that parade. I said, Marilyn, I said, have you got any money for it? Now, here they spent hundreds of thousands of dollars. I know that because I know how much they got from who. Oh, we haven't got a nickel. Not a nickel. Well, I said, I don't know how much you know about floats, but I said, you realize, if we go ahead and decorate a float in April, it's going to be worthless by August, the decorations are. Because they just don't stand up. Colors fade and they look like hell. I've gone through god damn near 40 years of this bullshit. So, oh gosh, she never had time to see me because she knew that if I saw her, I'd want some money. Because I knew how much money they had spent, like drunken sailors. And they just didn't have any money. Well, I'm just proud enough of being a Swede that sometimes I, and I'm not going to do it anymore, but I overlooked some of this crap. So it cost me $1,725 to decorate a float for the Scandinavia today. No reimbursement? Not a nickel. Now, we're going to have an outstanding float in 88. We're going to have one this year. But they're going to have to come across with some money. Not that I can't do it without them, but I'm just sick and tired of these people. Hating on them. Yeah, just, you know, oh God, how proud they were of that float. Sure, it didn't cost them a nickel. So they don't realize there are expenses involved. And that was just for decoration. That wasn't building the goddamn thing. It happened that I had one that I had built for August, that I had built the previous fall after the Octotango, before I came down here. And there's another, well, there's one in particular and two others that, big help, physical help, you know. So they are... Not money help, but physical help. A lot of bickering for money. Well, you know, they want to play the big shot. Jesus Christ, I come down, why is that a boulevard? And what the hell do you see? A big, the biggest goddamn billboard that, that, what the hell is the name of that advertising company? In fact, they bought out General Outdoor Advertising. They're big, big, big, big, big, big. A big sign. Something, I don't remember verbatim, but thanks, Maryland, for like, for all you've done for Scandinavia today or something like that. Big picture. Well, it happens that the guy that owned, he's now passed away, that owned that company was a very close friend of Kurt's. They were involved in some...