 I have all that information. Her name was Lucille Payne, L-U-C-I-L-E, and Payne, the last name, P-A-Y-N-E. She was born in Knoxville, wait a minute, Lucille Payne, date of birth May 31st, 1900, place of birth Old Orchard, Missouri. Oh, did you pick her up down in Missouri? No, hell no, I never been out of Rockford. I had a blind date with her at a dance, a sorority dance. That's how I met her, down on South Main Road. And she is not of Swedish background? No, no, no, no, she was, oh, I don't know if you want to call him Yankee or what, but she was born in this country, so. She was born in Corfu, New York. You said Old Orchard, Missouri? Oh, wait a minute. Oh, yeah, place, yeah, it says place of birth Old Orchard, and then, oh, that father, the father is Knoxville, and place of birth New York, yeah. 1986, I sit with Carl V. Strömqvist in Rockford, Illinois. He was born in 1902, June 30th in the U.S. He was the youngest, and my others are dead. He was here, he was in this country, he worked at Greenleafs. Oh, I don't know about that, but, I don't know when he came over. Boy, now was it. Well, that doesn't matter anyway, does it? He was here before, see? I mean, I suppose maybe he, well, we came to America because he had to go through the military training over there. What do they call it? Oxera? And he didn't want any of the boys to go through that. So we came to America, and that was in 1910. So you remember when you came to America? Oh, sure. About eight years. So, and your father, he was already... Sure, he'd been there, oh, he'd been back and forth four times, I guess. Yeah, well, I guess he was working on a farm in Sylvan Valley first, years ago, and the name was Johnson. But then there was another guy, the way I heard it, that worked down there too, or he did, same farmer or something, and his name was Johnson, Gutfred Johnson. So my dad says he was getting, they were getting each other's mail, so he changed it to Strumpquist. I don't know where he got that one from. Yeah, well, he used to call my land on a farm. No, he didn't own it, his folks were living. And so, then we come over... So you had to go to school in a lot of family, and then you went to... See, the older boys worked in the fields in the summertime. So we went to, how was it, so they could work in the fields. Tarpare, that's what we were. And so then, the older ones worked in the fields, and we went to school, and in the wintertime, I guess it changed off. Does that make any sense? In other words, the older brothers worked, worked out in the fields on the farm. And that helped pay for the rent, I suppose, or what do you call it? Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. Tarpare. And I was 18, then. You didn't have to...? No, no, just to school, a little bit. So I didn't know a damn word of English. No? Well, none of you did. I know. Your mother neither. No, my dad did. He did. He was only 58 when he died. Oh, I see. My mother was 84. He died 1920. The flu epidemic out here, whatever you want to call it, Camp Grant and all that stuff. We had a big camp here. You weren't here then, were you? We had 86,000 soldiers out here in Camp Grant. 86,000? 86,000. You mean 8,600? Like hell, 86,000. Okay, we're getting into it later on here. But were you ready to pack the American comfort, did your dad pick you up then or did you go by yourself to the United States? We all came over at the same time. He came over then? Oh yeah, and brought us all. We came over all together on the same boat. So then you went to Gothenburg on a train. And then on the North Sea over to? Liverpool and all that stuff. You remember a train ride in England? Going on a train? No, I sure remember the boat though. I was sick the whole damn way. From England? Coming over from wherever we got on the boat to cross the ocean. My mother and I were sick both all the time in bed. My brothers were up on a deck eating oranges in Medverston. I was sick. I wanted to go back home. You had it after a few days, huh? I was sicker than hell all the way across. So you don't remember the Statue of Liberty too much then? Oh Ellis Island, I remember. You remember? They were going to send my brother back to Sweden. My brother next to me, Martin. And see when you go through, they had blue chalk and white chalk. I don't know what they did if you didn't have a dark coat on or what. And so they marked him with a blue chalk or whatever. And if my father, if he hadn't been a citizen of the United States, he would have gone back. They were going to send him back. They said he had been sick when he was a kid. What the hell did they call it? It was nothing. We think nothing of it here. What the hell? I can't think of what it was. So they let him stay because my dad was a citizen already. He was a citizen? Oh yeah, he took out the papers in 1904. He came earlier to this country? Oh yeah. So they wanted to send him back? Yeah, they were going to. So they took you quite a bit of time then? Oh, they had them in the chicken coop. Were you ever there? No. I was in Ellis Island. They tell me now they've got all that out of there. But they were just like chicken coops. They herded you in, you know, and checked you over before you. I don't know how the hell they could tell that he had been sick with a cough or a croup or some damn thing, but that's the way it was. But you passed with flying colors? Oh sure. All the rest of us, but just Mark, the brother next to me. Did you eat at Ellis Island or anything? Oh hell no. I didn't eat anything. Oranges and I got, what was it, they handed me a banana and hell I didn't know what that was. Ice cream was alright, but I couldn't eat all the way over. Sicker than hell. But your dad, he could speak English then? Oh yeah, sure. Had all the documentation necessary? Yeah, only 58 when he died. So then you took the train then from Ellis Island to New York? Yeah. And direct to Rockford? Right. And he had a home here then or a house? No. Moved in with friends. Right in Rockford? Yeah. On 7th Street and 4th Avenue. You know where the drug store is on the corner with all those three story buildings? Well it was a Johnson family. They were good friends. We all moved up there for, oh I don't know, for a couple days. Then we moved over on 4th Avenue near 11th Street, 1443 over to Freed's house. We all moved in there and hell they were four kids and folks six. Had a house full there, boy. But we didn't stay there too long. We found this home on Charles Street. 2001 Charles Street. That house is still there on the corner. Charles Street and 13th Street. 14th Street. Oh hell no, it's 15th Street. There's a duplex where we moved in there. Lived there quite a while. And your dad had a job already then? Oh sure. Did he work at the? Greenleaf. Greenleaf. Greenleaf. He was? In the heat treating. Heat treating? Yeah. Oh so he had the? Hotter than hell in there in the summertime, you know. That furnace going, treating, well heat treating steel, you know. So you had a pretty good summer than the first year because you didn't start school then when you came in April? No, that's right. No, I didn't school until fall, you know. So you could roam the streets, 7th Avenue and 2nd Street and kiss Rocky? Well I didn't do much of that roaming around that I remember. Yeah but it was easy to walk around though because everybody talked Swedish at the time. Yeah but. Do you remember that, that they talked Swedish? Oh I got lost. We only lived, well see that's two blocks from the school and I got lost going to school. John Nelson School on, down there by 15th Street, you know. And we lived on 16th block or so away, two blocks, and I got lost going to school. Oh it was so crowded too I didn't have a desk for me. I had to stand up by the window sill. I had so many kids there. But not for long though? No, no. We moved, we moved, no we lived, that's how we lived there quite a while. Then we moved up to 15th Avenue. Do you remember if there were other kids that only spoke Swedish at that time? Oh yeah, of course you didn't know all because a lot of them were born in this country. So I guess the first word I learned was I don't know. I don't know in two bits. Two bits? Yeah. That was the money? Yeah, a quarter. Uh-huh. So your brothers now, they had already had their schooling. They didn't have to start in school or? Yeah, well two of them, John and Axel, they were the oldest. So Martin and I went to school here, grade school. Went to Brown School on 8th Street and 16th Avenue. The school isn't even there. It's all apart, you know, buildings there now. People lived there. And you continued in the school until you were? Yeah, I graduated in 1917 from grade school. And then I was. Seventeen? You mean you graduated from high school then? Because you were born to? I was eight years old when I came over here. So you had to go all the years here and you missed a year there in Sweden I suppose. Oh, I didn't have any schooling there. So you were fifteen then? 1910 and I graduated in 1917. You were fifteen? Yeah. Fifteen. And then you continued on with high school? No, I did, but I didn't like it so I just quit. Well, you could do that. Well, I did it. So then my dad thought it would be nice if I enrolled in Brown's Business College. They're still in business, you know. I didn't like that so I quit that. So, I carried newspapers and I ended up working in a grocery store, Globe Grocery, on 7th Street. You were a snusgatan there? Yeah, yeah. I worked there for Vernie Norlander. You're not a native of? No, but I know the names. Oh, I see. Yeah. So I worked there at Globe Grocery. That was the biggest grocery store in Rockford on the east side. And then you had Burr Brothers on the west side, see. And we delivered groceries with horse and wagon. I didn't do it, but we had a fellow that did that. We had a guy go out and take the orders because people didn't have telephones. So he'd go out and take the orders, bring them in, we'd put them up and then they'd be delivered. How did they pay them, by book or? You mean the people, the customers? Yeah. Well, maybe once in a while it was cash, I guess. Well, no, most of them were credit, you know. And he lost a hell of a lot of money because people didn't pay. But they still continued with their business. Still they lost money, but the business was going. Oh, they kept going there. I left the store in 1922. Oh, you were there for a few years then. Well, yeah. And before that, I worked, I was at the grocery store. I worked there. But I didn't like it. I was in the, well, that's Greenleaf's where I worked, where my brothers and my father were all up there, you know. So I got a job there in a tool room. And I worked at the store and then we were open Saturday nights till 12 o'clock. And the other kids, friends of mine, they could go out and have fun Saturday nights in here. I was stuck working. So I quit and I went out to Greenleaf's and worked, Bernie Norlander. And it didn't do me any good. Saturday I worked till noon. And you never knew Bernie Norlander either of course, no. He would be up there at the gate on Saturday noon, pick me up to go home and change my clothes, go back to the store and work. I still, I still there. I didn't do any good, no, damn it. But then I started peddling yeast in 1922, Fleischmann's yeast. Bill Silberg was a guy who was, and so one day he come in and I said, what the hell, get me out of here. I'm sick and tired of working here. Can't you get me a job with your outfit? So he did. And that was in 1922. And I got, oh yeah, I was getting $30. Yeah, I was getting $30 a week. It sounds pretty good. Hell yes. For selling yeast? No, they only gave me $20 a week. I was getting $30 in the store. That's hard to believe, but honest. And I didn't dare tell my mother, you know, that I took a cut and paid like that because I was so damn glad to get out of there so I would have Saturday nights off. But then, then most, well for quite a while that didn't do any good because Bernie Norlander, he'd meet me in his car, take me, I told you that, take me home, change clothes, go back to the store and work anywhere on Saturday. So then taking a pay cut of $10 a week, you couldn't afford to go out dancing. Oh, right. So it was a hard job at work at the grocery store. That was long hours. Oh yeah. Saturday nights to midnight and 7 o'clock in the morning to 6.30 at night. But Sunday you were off though. Sunday, yeah. You went to church then? Oh yeah, sure. Because I was confirmed Trinity Church. Trinity Lutheran Church? Yeah. The whole family belonged there? No, no, no. Oh, my dad, my dad never went to church, but my mother belonged to Salem over on 6th Street and 6th. How come you were confirmed in Trinity? Huh? You were confirmed in Trinity? Yeah, that's my own choice, you know, because I had friends, I don't know how many churches I went to, but then... You checked them all off? Oh, hell yes. You looked for the girls then, the best looking girls. Well, it turned out that way. And it was English. And I, oh, I went to, that stuff you had to learn, you know, and they'd be in Swedish and all, and Zion and all of them. And it was too tough, so I went to Trinity, it was English, you know, and I could learn. And Bannon, you didn't know him either, he was a wonderful guy. So that's why I was confirmed. We had a hundred and five kids in the confirmation class. I got the picture in the basement. Why did you go to the English Lutheran Church when you have all the Swedish around? There's Zion and... I know, and I tried them all out, and I didn't like it for some reason. Too much Swedish? Huh? Too much Swedish, you think? Of course. But I went to Trinity, and that's where I was confirmed. Oh. What did your mother say then when you went away from your mother's church? She didn't make no difference. But she stayed with the Salem? Yeah. There was a Swedish one? Yeah. How about the rest of your brothers? Did they also...? Zion. John and Mark were, I guess they were confirmed at Zion Church. I don't think my oldest brother was, I don't know. Were you the only Swede then confirmed in Trinity? Yeah. Well, no, heck, hell no. There were a lot of Swedes over there. We were over a hundred in our class. A hundred and five, you said? A hundred kids, a hundred and five. Yeah, I got that picture in the basement. That long. That's a big one. But then, so then we'd go to church, Christian Endeavor they called it, at 6.30 at night, on Sunday nights. So then we'd go over there to church, and when church was over, we dated the gals who went up to Bloit to dance. Were they allowed there? Huh? If you had gone to the Lutheran church, they wouldn't have allowed dancing on Saturday night. Well, how would they know? They had a way to sneak around. I suppose, but if they found out, but that's what we did. And you got away with it? Hell yes. You had a car then? Oh, sure, a Ford. You had your own car? Yes. 1917 model. You learned to drive, huh? I sure did. So a whole gang with youngsters that went up to Bloit. Why did you go to Bloit to dance? You didn't want to dance at all? Well, there were three dances here on a Sunday night. Oh, they was dry then? Well, and there was no dancing on Sunday nights. See, you had the Terra Aqua Gardens, and there was two dance places in Bloit. So that's where we'd go. Who ran those dances up in Bloit? Was that private? What? Who ran the dances up in Bloit? Oh, yeah, there were some people in Bloit owners there. You know, people in Bloit that owned the dance halls. There was no group or anything? It was just the private dancers? Open to the public. Open to the public? Oh, hell yes. Oh, sure. Creed and Culler, no difference. Waverly Beach and Interstate Gardens, that's the name of them. One of them's by the river up there, and the other one was... So you were a swinger then in the early 20s then? Oh, yeah. But I didn't get married till 1935. How did you learn to dance now? How? Yeah, because there was no girls in the family. I don't know. I don't remember that. You were not shy then for girls or anything? No, not really. Sort of. I still am. But you had no trouble to find a dance parlor up in Bloit? No. The only thing is, it seemed like I couldn't go up there any damn Sunday night but I had a flat tire on a car, either coming or going. Well, you don't know, but in those days, it wasn't demountable rims. You had to pry them off and, oh God. And sometimes, I know once or twice, I thought, well, I'll fool them. I won't have a flat tire. I'll go over to Belvedere and then sneak around the back way. Then I had a flat tire coming home. What about the other kids? Did you have girls with you from Rockford, Ohio? Oh, sure. Sure. Well, we'd be two couples that'd go up there. You would think they would be scared to come home late then, with all your flat tires. Well, I don't know. I never heard that they... I mean, it would be a bad excuse, you know, I'd be able to call up the dancing in Bloit. Yeah. And you got a flat tire. I don't know how we did it, but we did. So you took a pay cut and over to Fleischmann yeast. Yeah. There was no job there that was through pedal yeast. Pedal yeast. To the bakeries or to the... Bakeries, restaurants, bakeries and grocery stores, you know. Big businesses. You didn't go to private homes then? No. No, no. We had over 300 grocery stores in Rockford. Did you went to? Yeah. Would you believe that? 300? Yes. And a lot of them were Swedes on the east side. Well, and you had the west side. The Degos down there, they all had grocery stores. There were no Swedes on the west side? Not very many. The Degos and Irish. It was their location. Yeah. And they didn't come over here? Swedes on the east side. Well, once in a while they let one or two move over, I suppose. But you remember now, because I've been told by some old timers, well, you are not really an old timer, but you were so young when you came, they said that the Swedes would let them over the bridge. Is that true? Well... On Saturday night? Well, I don't know if it was that serious, but there was quite a rivalry, you know. We had football teams. They had the west side and east side football teams that would play out the 15th Avenue Stadium there, 15th Avenue lot. Oh, there was much rivalry there. One year, the Badgers on the west side, they had got a hold of an old, built an old coffin, you know, a wooden box. And then they had a parade. And guys carried the coffin, you know, it was empty, of course, across a bridge. And they threw it in the river then. I think the east siders got the coffin through, because they were going to bury the east side Swedes, you know, the Degos. But they threw the coffin in the river, so... That's how rivalry it was, so, you know. But they played on 15th Avenue. Was it American football? Yeah. Or was it soccer? No, no, football. American football. AACs and Badgers. That was the names of the football team. And I sold peanuts out there every Sunday. Every game? Every game. Peanuts and, yeah, peanuts. That's about all we had, peanuts and popcorn. So you were patting your owner with the basket like you have in your stomach, and bringing all the peanuts. Yeah. Did you play football yourself? Oh, hell no. I didn't play anything. Who were the most looked on? Were they Italians or the Irish? At all in the side for the Swedes? Were the Irish the most feared? Well, I don't know. There was a rivalry, and that's what you mean. Yeah, I mean... Oh, you know, the damn Swedes, or we'd say the damn Irish, or the damn Dago's. So I don't know. 50-50, maybe. The Dago's, I used to call the Italians and the Swedes, they had one thing in common. They didn't know the language as well as the Irish. Yeah. So the Irish, were they ahead in the business section, you think? Because they could speak English when they came here. Oh, yeah. You know, they made a lot of difference. Yeah. Did they have a lot of stores, the Irish? Well, yeah, but I don't think that is... Of the 300 grocery stores now, who were the owners? Well... On the east side, the Swedes? East side were Swedes. And the west side? Mostly, if they weren't Italian, they were either Irish or they were other nationalities, you know. But it was mostly Italians down there in South Rockford. But, of course, then you got your Lithuanians and your Polacks and everything else. But they were mostly on the other side of the river. So there was a borderline then between them? Well, the river, you know, was sort of like... And then in the politics, the Swedes were running the politics? Oh, yeah, sure. Yeah. We had Herman Hallstrom, he was a Swede mayor, and Blum, a druggist, was a mayor. Then we had some white people for mayors, too. They weren't Swedes. W.W. Bennett and... Oh, I don't remember... Hallstrom. He named a school after him, Herman Hallstrom. He was a bricklayer and he got to be mayor. And Blum was a druggist? Blum was a druggist. But he was also a socialist, wasn't he? Who? Blum. Well, not too much a socialist, I don't think. He ran a drugstore, you know. He was kind of... But he was a Swede? Oh, yeah, Blum, sure. See, Henry Blum. B-L-O-O-M. Was he born in Sweden? That I don't know. He could have been, but I don't know that. But Hallstrom, was he a... Hallstrom was a Swede, yeah. Was he a socialist? I don't know what he was, but he was a building, or he worked as a building contractor. Masonry and bricklaying and stuff like that, you know. I don't know how... It's funny how he got in, how he made it to be mayor, but... Spoke broken English and all. Do you remember that? Oh, sure. Heck, I knew him well. All of them, Blum and... But Blum, not being a druggist, he was a little bit more refined, though. Yeah. But they had respect with him. They what? They had respect. Oh, sure. And they paved the city of Rockford. Mm-hmm. So, how were they able to get in, not to a position like being a mayor? They needed more than the Swedish hordes, though. Oh, hell, yes. They needed the Italians and the Irish. Oh, yeah. Well, they must have voted for him. Because they didn't have an Italian running for mayor, you know. So, an Italian at that time would never have a chance. Well, maybe not. We had one mayor, I don't know what nationality, but his name was Bennett. He came in after Hallstrom? William Bennett. No, he was before Hallstrom. Before Hallstrom. Oh, yeah. W.W. Bennett. And how about the police force, though? Were they Swedish? Oh, yeah. He was a chief of police. We had one cop, Emil. Oh, come on. He was a cop on 7th Street. They had a hell of a lot of fun with him. Emil Lindstrom, he made a damn good glig. Emil Lindstrom, he was a cop. But we have a lot of stories about him. Do you live in Rockford? Yeah, I know where Kisswock is. Kisswocky Street. And there was Pope Street, 8th Avenue there, you know. Well, there was a horse that fell down and broke the leg, see, so they called the police. So Emil was one to shoot the horse. To get a shooting. Well, yeah. But, of course, that happened on Kisswocky Street, see. And there was Pope Street on the other side and 8th Avenue on this side, see. So Emil was there and quite a crowd and he said, Come on, boys, give me a hand here, I can't spell Kisswocky, move more to 8th Avenue so I can make my report. Is that really true? Sure. Well, you make this one up, don't you? Well, I didn't make it up or I heard it, but that's one of the jokes. And another one they had on him was, oh, yeah. Well, he was a comedian, you know. I mean, he'd blow his whistle, you were speeding, and so he was on Charleston 7th. And we had the red light there, you know, and it was an automobile and he had Ohio license plates on. And he turned when he shouldn't have against the light. And so Emil blew the whistle and said, Hey, you can't do that, you can't do that. You can't turn on the red light or something like that. And the fellow said, Well, I'm from Ohio and we can do it there. He says, I don't give a damn if you're from, wait a minute, I got that mixed up. I didn't know I'm from Ohio and we're allowed to do that there. I don't give a damn if you're from Cincinnati, you can't do it here or something like that. They were both in Ohio. Oh, he was nuts. And he was on the police force and he had a joke about Augie Bargrain and them. He had a meeting with all the policemen and he said, I understand that there's a report that some of my officers have been seen drinking on the Yob, but I want that stopped and if any of you want to admit you've been drinking it, let me know. And Emil got up and he said, Chief, I haven't had a drink for over two weeks. He passed the bar. So you think it was a much easier life years ago than it is today, for instance. You think people are hurrying more today than they are? Oh, naturally. They do. Well, sure. Cars and everything. More speed. All the changes in the world. My gosh, it's completely different. So Emil Lindstrom, he wouldn't be able to direct the traffic on 7th and Charles today. No, he was a character. There wouldn't be any time to drag the horse over the pole. No. And my best officer was seen taking a drink. I haven't had a drink for two weeks. And 7th Street, now that was the complete Swedish. Yeah. One Greek had the hat shop, Soros, but that was after that. That was mostly Swedes. Lundqvist and Eck and Vernie Norlander. So when this Greek came in, they know? Yeah. Had the hat shop. Yeah. He was not harassed or anything. He was just verified as a good businessman and the Swedes went to his store. Oh, sure. Boy, it isn't very long since he finally gave up right there between 2nd and 3rd Avenue. He's been there all his life, then? Gosh, yeah. About a year ago or so, he tore the building down there. So he was like a little red dot among all the Swedes. Right. He picked up a lot of Swedish words. Oh, he had to, I suppose. Sure. Because if a lot of people couldn't speak English, they came, you know, every year. And there was new ones coming in every week almost, in the 20s. Yeah. What do you mean? Coming over from the old country? Yeah. And they'd send mail from Sweden and they'd put the name, then, Kishwaukee Street. That's all they had on their letters. They knew what Kishwaukee Street that was in Rockford, so they got the mail. It's the only one in the United States. I guess so. They called it Kishwaukee Street. And they got the mail? Yeah. From Sweden. How could they spell Kishwaukee Street? Yeah. Even Lindstrom couldn't spell it. No, he couldn't spell up. So there was a... And your dad, now, he died in 1917? 20. 1920. January 20. 58 years old. January 20. And it was 30 below zero and he had the funeral. And it was the damnedest snowstorm. And we were... It was the last funeral, you had horses drawing the hearse. See? And all the... The few people who had the automobiles, they got stuck going into Scandinavian cemetery, you know, so deep snow. And of course, the horses got through there with their coffins so they could bury them. Well, I guess they didn't bury them, put them in a shed until it warmed up, I guess, and buried them. 1920. So he... There was a sudden death then? Well, yeah, it was epidemic here, see? There was a Spanish flu? Oh, we had 85,000 soldiers at Camp Grant here. And they had virus? They were dying hundreds a day. See, we had Camp Grant here. Yes. They were training, you know, for the First World War. Yeah, but it was after the First World War though. But the flu spread during the war, I suppose. Well, this was in 1920. They still had the 85... They had all the soldiers in camp and they were dying. And they tied their feet together and their hands, throw them on trucks, you know, and covered with a tarp and haul them down. And a few of the bodies fell off on the street when they were hauling them down to the... Wherever they could find a place, garages or automobile dealers. Like, you know where the Lafayette Hotel is? Yes. Well, that was a... Yeah, that was a hotel. And, oh, they had a big dance floor. So they lined up the dead soldiers until relatives come and claim them. They had them tied, you know, and tags on them. Oh, dear. And they dropped a couple of them off on the street because they just threw them on the trucks like logs. And they affected the people in Rockfort, too, then? Well, evidently. It didn't do any good, that's for sure. Maybe that's how we got the flu epidemic and that. Did you have any of your... Your father died now, but how about your... Yeah, well, he didn't... Same age as you? Young people? No, no. My father, as far as I know, I don't know why he died. But, yeah, he worked every day and... Only 58, I don't know. So he worked at Greenlee's then? Mm-hmm. Were there any unions at Greenlee at that time? No, hell no. There were no unions. No unions. Not that I know of. There might have been, but I didn't know. Your mother, was she homesick for Higgs Bean? Well, I can't say that. I don't know. She was able to? But she never... She never spoke English much. But she'd go out on the street, Harlem Boulevard, and clean homes for people that could afford to hire somebody to clean their houses. And then when she broke both her hips, then she'd sit home and listen to the radio. And, of course, she didn't know anything about it. There'd be ball games going on, you know. No runs, no hits, no errors. No runs, no hits, no errors. She heard that on the radio. She'd repeat that when I got home. No runs, no hits, no errors. Oh, God. Yeah, great days. So you had the radio then in the late 20s. Was this during the Depression, or she went out cleaning? It was after your father died. She went out working. Yeah, must have been, I guess, yeah. But you boys now are old enough to... Oh, yeah, we all lived home....fend for yourself. See, my dad... Well, we moved... We finally ended up on 9th Street and 15th Avenue. And that house is still there. My dad had it built. A two-story brick house. Yes, a block off of Broadway. Did you or your parents have any friends from Higgsburg here in Rockford that you could go together with? Well, my father knew people in Rockford, because he was here, you know, before. So Johnson family we moved in with on 7th Street that day. Now we moved in with a family named Freeds. F-R-E-E-D. One of the Freeds' son is still living, Laverne Freed is still living. But sisters and folks are dead. Are you not going to publish all this? Did you join the Lüyrand singing club? Yeah, but I didn't sing. Oh, you didn't sing? Oh, no. I belonged to Svea Soner first. You did? Oh, sure. I didn't sing there either. And then you joined... Yeah. They found out about it after a while, and so they shuffled you over to Lüyrand? No. No, no. You see, well, I peddled yeast, and I peddled to all the bakeries and all the grocery stores. And so, Aspruth, I had... Well, a lot of friends that belonged to Svea Soner. That was a wonderful club. Did you ever hear them before? Yeah. Well, that was the best Swedish club around here, you know. Oh, hell, I'm a life member of that one. I'm a life member of Lyre. I joined that too, but Svea Soner was the best. And at Christmas time, we'd have Gligg Christmas morning, you know, and I never missed that. And all prominent men that belonged to... Lidon. No, to... Svea Soner. Svea Soner, damn right. He was the big one, the... Yeah, Herman Hallstrom, and... Well, he was a member in all the showstroms and all the big contractors and big manufacturers, extroms. P.A. Peterson. P.A. Peterson, well... He was not the... Yeah, but he never belonged... I don't think he joined any club. No? You remember him? Oh, sharkhead papers to his house. In the wintertime, never an overcoat, just a little thin, like a silk jacket. That's all he ever wore. And so at Christmas time, you know, I carried papers, so I come with the calendar, and he gave me 50 cents. You know, other places you got nickel and a dime. So he was a big spender, that one. 50 cents, boy, that was a lot of money to me. Hell, that's all I made all week for carrying papers. 75 cents a week I made sometimes. Now the kids get... they want 40... what they're looking for newspapers. You got a paper here, you want to... Oh, I got to have this on. I got to tell you. Oh! Oopsie! It's just like a dog, you know. Don't record all this stuff. Turn it... oh, that's okay. Don't record all this stuff. Howdy, dude. Hope not. So he was a big tipper, huh? Well, you know, in those days, what the hell? So he didn't have any children? No, not that I know of. He lived on East 8th Street. You know where he lived? Houses. Houses still there. Yeah, here. They were looking for newspaper, boys. $44.20. Bi-weekly. Bi-weekly. That would be two weeks, you know, would it? $44.20. But you had 75 cents. I got, yeah, a week. And I had two paper routes, carried both the evening and the morning paper. And P.I. Peterson, he was a big guy here in Rockport. Oh, Union Furniture. He was bigger than the mayor of Rockport. Oh, hell, yes. He had more to say. That's where P.I. Peterson's home is named after. But now, now you gotta be a millionaire to get in there. I guess you gotta have $10,000 to get in there. What do you think made him different, not to be able to start so many factories and have his hand in every business there was? I don't know. He was just a, I don't know, pretty smart. I don't know. Did you talk to him at any time? Oh, not much, you know. Yeah, well, he never wore an overcoat, just a little silk jacket. So that was his style? Yeah, always walking. But it was cold enough to have an overcoat. Oh, you're damn right it was cold. But he was fat. He had some other installations. Maybe he did. Little Brenvin, maybe. That I don't know. But back to L.E. Rano. Yeah. That was organized in 1911? Yes, sir. Oh, that was the year after you came. Yeah, my gosh, you're right. So when did you join them? I, see, I belonged to Svea Soner. But then there was a benefit party at L.E. Rano. They were having a stag party upstairs at L.E. Rano Hall on a Saturday night or Sunday morning or something. So I went up there and they said, you've got to join Lyron Club. And I said, no, I can't. I can't do that. Yeah, you can do it. And they hounded me, you know. So I said, all right, we're playing pitch cards. I said, all right, I'll join your damn club if I win this pitch game. I won the pitch game, so I joined Lyron. That's how you become a member? Yeah. You could not sing? No, well, I never could. Never could carry a tune. Only in a bucket. But they took in members. It didn't matter if they... Well, because in those days it was mostly Swedes, but now, you know, we've got Mexicans in there. Anything can get in now. Are they still singing? They don't have a chorus anymore. No chorus? No. Carl Carlson was director of it for a few years there. So they have speeded off and then... Well, Sweden's owner, you know. What the hell. There's a music hall burned down. Were you here then? No, but I heard about it. That was something. Did you belong to, or did you belong to Vasa or Viking? My brothers were all Vikings. Baltic. And by gosh, there's one I never joined. I never joined the Vikings. And I joined the Eagles and I... My brother belonged to the Moose. Oh, and then we got active in Oddfellas. We had four Oddfella lodges here. But they were not Swedish though. They were... Well, on the east side you had mostly Swedes. We had them on the west side. We had two on the west side and two on the east side. So I still... Over 50 years a member in the Oddfellas. And your brothers, now, they didn't join the Lira? One of them. The one next to me. Mart. He's the last one that died. Mart. And the other... John belonged to Vikings. And Axel belonged to Moose Club. He'd go down there every Sunday morning, I guess, played cards. So what are they doing now then? If they are not having any chorus? Just meeting for fellowship and... I guess so. Well, they've still got a chorus. You hear them occasionally going out and singing at Guilford Village. I guess you've been out to the village, haven't you? Guilford. And, boy, they were... Christmas morning for Glug. That was a beautiful party. Tom and Jerry's at Easter. Oh, you had Glug Christmas morning? Oh, yes. After Yule Rota? I wouldn't miss that. And the best Glug in town, Herman Hallstrom. Well, one of the Ekstrom... Herman Hallstrom's recipe. And then when he faded out, I think one of the Ekstroms made it. There were several Ekstrom brothers, you know, big shots at the factories. They were all swell guys. Because I was nobody, but I was a member up there. I joined. And we used to have, in Sweden, we'd have kalladagen. We'd have that up there. Kalladagen? You know, the Karls put on the dinner or the party. I got pictures in the basement of the one we had at Sveasoner, I think. So if your name was Karl and you contributed, then you had a dinner or something for the whole membership. You were one Karl? Yeah. So you were Karl? Yeah, sure, Karl Leo. Helping family? No, that I can't tell you. So that's why you don't have a V, you know. Yeah, right. Well, four names I got. Karl O.V. Stromquist. Karl O.V.? But you won't tell who he is? No. There's only one guy. Oh, by gosh, he died. He was the only one guy that knew it. And he died here this year. Karl J. Janssen. So you continued to peddle yeast? Oh yeah, 40 years. 40 years? And you did it with the car then eventually? When you started, did you have a car right away? Yeah, a Ford. One had to crank it every stop. And you had the yeast with you? Yeast and a truck, yeah, a little truck. And you peddled to the grocery stores and the bakeries. We had over 300 stores, grocery stores in Rockford here. And we had 38 bakeries in Rockford. Now look at two, three. People don't eat anymore or what? Well, that's a changing time, see. The company, before I left them, the company, they knew what the hell was going to happen. And I couldn't believe it. They said that the way of the small grocer is no more. They're out. When did they say that? Oh, many years before it happened. But they knew it. But I didn't believe them. But it's just what happened. We had about 12 bakeries on Broadway alone. Now you got two. 40 bakeries in Rockford, you know, 38, 40. Oh, you hauled a lot of yeast. Oh sure, and then the bootleggers. How did they do? You had them too? Did we ever. During the prohibition. That means that depression for you, that was a good time. Yes, wonderful. You are one of the few that can really say depression, that was number one. Number one, but it didn't affect my salary. I didn't get more pay. You didn't? No. You worked double time. Well, every night, every night before I left the office, I'd call up, you see, we weren't supposed to deliver yeast right to where they had the stills. That was against the law. So I didn't do that. But I delivered it to the Italian bakery on Rock Street. On West Side? Yeah. And then he delivered it to the bootleggers. He made a nice profit on it. So he upped the price from what I charged him. Would you up the price a little bit extra when you delivered to them? No, I couldn't. Why? Because I was working for the company. You know underneath the table. Yeah, but I never did. I guess I'm too dumb or something. I never did, honest to God. Because he did it. Oh, the baker did? Oh, sure. And then he bought so much, he got a hell of a good price. So he got, you know, you pay like 30 cents a pound and then he'd get a reduction at the end of the month. The more you used, the more money he got back. You were actually one of the most important figures in Rockville at the time. Because if they didn't get the yeast, you know, no whiskey. Yeah, it was pretty tough. Of course, I worked for Bill Silver. That was my boss. But every night before we went home, there was three bakeries here, Italian bakeries. We had to call every night before I went home. So I could go home and have supper and not be bothered. No, no, if they got enough, we don't need any tonight. I'd get home, sit down, hey, I want a 500 pound right away. 500 pounds? Oh, yeah, sure. That's how much yeast they used in Rockford. Oh, that bootlegging was a hell of bakeries. That was nothing. So, well, they had a trial after, you know, when the federal authorities moved in. They finally moved in? Oh, yeah, because there were two cops standing on the corner of Morgan and South Main. This guy had just been released from prison, federal penitentiary or Joliet, I don't know which. He had just been released, and two cops on each side of him. A Cadillac pulls up there, and a machine gun, and riddled the guy that just got out of jail. Didn't hit the cops at all, and that's what started bringing in the federal men from, you know, checking all our records, who we sold yeast to and all that stuff. So you came in there too then? Well, no. You were sitting home eating dinner. No, I mean, no, I wasn't there, but that's what started. But you were called in for investigation? Oh, yeah. What did you say? Oh, I had to lie like hell. How could you lie, I mean, if you had the receipts and 500 pounds? Oh, yeah, well, we burned a lot of records, but I had to save some. Did they catch any of the ones on the west side, though, the police? I mean, the worst investigation. Oh, sure. FBI. Oh, yeah, and this Louis Dodaro, this bakery, well, they're still in business. The Ghiamani Bakery. Oh, yeah, well, because he bought, he used more yeast than Keeg-Stevens Bakery. It had 12 trucks. He had two. And then he bought corn sugar, and he bought, in the summertime, he bought grapes by the carload and sold them to the people, see. But he was an Italian, but he was a hell of a nice guy, and he served time in Leavenworth. He bought a lot of citizenship papers and everything, you know. He died here a year or two ago now. His daughters are still living. But he had, Keeg-Stevens had, I think they had 10 trucks, and he had two, and he used 50 times more yeast than Keeg-Stevens. How about the local authorities, the police in Iraq? They knew about it. Oh, yeah, they'd raid them. They'd raid them, and they'd find out where there was a still, and they'd raid them. But he was still back in business again. Oh, it didn't take long. They'd move to some other location. Did he die, or was he a wealthy man, this Italian? He finally died, but he was still in the bakery business. Was he a wealthy guy when he died, do you think? Well, he was. Because he must have made money on it, though. Yeah, he was no pauper, I'm sure of that. Because you made money, and he offered a price. Well, I didn't get any money out of it. It didn't help my salary any. But the value of the selling? No commission. What? You didn't have commission? Hell no, straight salary. And I wasn't getting much either. So this old silver, he made the money then? Well, he was my boss, but he didn't make any either. He got more money than I did, because he was the manager here. But the Fleischmann yeast company, they made the money? Oh, sure. They got it in every day from Chicago, come in on the train. So Fleischmann yeast. We had an office on the west side, a little place. Well, I thought the bakeries were the big customers. Well, they were, but not to compete with the bootleggers, my God. So they started already in the 20s then? Yeah, in the Depression. And the prohibition got on 1936? Yeah, I forget when it was. Isn't it strange that it could continue for so many years? The what? The prohibition. Yeah. Oh. Continued for so many years. Yeah, yeah. They made some wealthy people there. Boy, oh sure. How about the bars now? Like Leirand and Vikings and different clubs. They had to be careful too. Oh, sure. Where did they buy the liquor? Well. From the bootleggers? Well, maybe some of them did. And most of the clubs had their own lockers, and see, and they could put it in the locker and have a key. Yeah, have a key and get it that way. But, well, years before, many, many years ago, liquor was in. Liquor was being sold, you know. Yes. But then they outlawed it in the late 1900s. Because like Fleischman Company, Fleischman's Yeast, they had the biggest liquor factory in the world in Peekskill, New York. Fleischman's Yeast Company. They were the only, and we got competition from Anheuser-Busch Yeast and Red Star. Well, there's Anheuser-Busch. Yeah, they had yeast. They got yeast now, and Fleischman's cut out selling yeast altogether to the bakers. Can you imagine that? All the millions of pounds of yeast they sold. Why did they do that? I don't know that, because now, you know, it's owned by a tobacco company, R.J. Reynolds. It was Fleischman Company. Then it got to be Standard Brands. Then it got to be Nabisco Brands. And now it's tobacco owns it. So when you sold so many in the volumes, you got big blocks of... Well, they come in 50-pound boxes, see, yeast. And they were packed in pound packages, wrapped like butter. You know, 50 pounds in a box. And the cold didn't affect you? Oh, you had to have it in the refrigerator. You had to? Oh, yeah. Yeah, we didn't have any walk-in refrigerators. We had just big, had to put them in there.