 16th of December 1986 and I'm sitting together with Robert Borden, Rockford, Illinois. And he was born 1926 in Rockford. And we start now with your father, Hjalmar Rudolf Borden. He was born in Rockford. Yes. But if we go beyond that and to your grandparents, they came from Sweden. Yes. Your mother, grandpa and grandma. Right. So can you, on both sides. Yes. Can you tell me a little bit about the beginning in Sweden and where? Well my grandfather Borden was born at, I suppose he was born at home at this estate that his father was the, I guess the superintendent of this estate which belongs to a count, Count Bunde that's north of Askellud in Småland. The name of the estate was Bordhög Table Lake and it's supposed to be a very large estate or plantation or whatever you'd call it. And so my great grandfather was the superintendent or master gardener or whatever you'd call him. So my grandfather was brought up there but he was baptized in the Askellud Church. And so that's how I was able to track him down because our church here in Rockford had the records and so I found out he was born and he was baptized at Askellud. And his name at that time? His name was John or Johan, Johan August Karlsson because his father's first name was Karl. Karl Magnus Nilsson was my great grandfather. And so my grandfather migrated to this country in 1880 and settled first at Paxton, Illinois. He was unmarried at the time? No. He was married? No, he was not, he was unmarried, yes, unmarried. Now his wife, my grandmother, was born at Linderos which is not far from Askellud, north of Ways, probably 10 or 15 miles I would guess, but I don't think they knew each other in Sweden at all. I don't think she came to this country until, well she maybe came around 1882 but I'm not really sure just when she came. But she settled in Rockford. Her family, well I think her father's last name was Peterson, my sister has looked into this more than I have. My grandmother's father was Gustaf and so I guess the children for a while were known as Gustafsson but then they all took the name Landstrom. And so my grandmother's maiden name then was Landstrom, her name was Johanna. And they were married, I think it was in 1885 that my grandpa and grandma Borden were married. My father was born in 1891 but he had four sisters. In fact he had actually five sisters and a brother but one daughter and one son died when they were small. So only four sisters and then my father was the only son who lived to adulthood. And you have traced back to family, he came to Paxson you said? Yes. And he was married then? No. He was not married? That's right. And the reason why he came to Paxson, do you know? No that's something I've never been able to find out. He was the only child in the family up to that time who had emigrated. About a year or two later an older sister also emigrated but she came with her boyfriend or her fiancé, his name was Linval. And then they were married in this country, they were married when they got to Rockford but she was a little older. So why my grandfather left his home there I don't know. Of course he had an older brother and the family didn't own any land anyway, they were living on this Count's estate. So maybe he just didn't see any future there, I don't know. And why he came to Paxson I don't know. I have thought of trying to find the ship's lists because maybe that would show somebody else emigrating from Oscalood at the same time. Maybe he had some boyhood friend that had some contact in Paxson, I don't know. For some reason or other he went to Paxson and I found his name on the 1880 census of Paxson which was taken I think in June, I think he emigrated in about March or April. And I assume it was he because it was a John Carlson in the same age, 20 years old. And so I'm assuming that it was he although of course maybe they had another John Carlson but that was the only one I found in the Paxson records. He was clerking in a store. Of course they had quite a Swedish community in Paxson at that time so I suppose, I'm sure he didn't know English but they probably had enough Swedish people that made it necessary to have a Swedish clerk in a store. And he was living by himself, I suppose maybe upstairs or maybe in an upstairs apartment somewhere, but he wasn't living in somebody else's household, he was living by himself according to the census report. But then he came to Rockford I think about 1882 or it could have been 1883, joined First Lutheran Church and then my grandmother's family, her whole family migrated, even her parents from Sweden, from Lindoros. And so they joined our church and so I suppose my grandma and grandpa met in church but I think they were also rooming at the same house. There was a rooming house run by a family by the name of Nordstrom on Fourth Avenue, corner of Fourth Avenue and Ninth Street. And I think they were both living there. The family tradition you might say always said that that's where they were married, they were married in that home. And so I kind of think they were both living there or else he was living close by and so they, I suppose their friendship was cemented that way too. So in the census records from Paxton, from Fort County in Illinois, he was listed as John Colson, do you think that's the same person? I'm assuming it is because it was the same age. But check in the church records now, First Lutheran, he is listed as Borden. Yes but it did say in there that, well wait a minute now, yes you're right, I don't think it even mentioned his name from Sweden, it didn't mention Carlson at all. So apparently by the time he came to Rockford he must have already changed his name to Borden. And the birth date and the arrival date from Sweden, does it say that in the Lutheran church records? Yes, I have the, I was able to find the Flutnings Bevis, well some of them I call Flutnings Bevis for some reason or other. And that gave his name of course as Johann August Carlson, but that ended up with our church files which are now on record down at NIU in the archives down there. But the church record itself in our big books down at church lists his name as Borden. But it does say that he transferred from Paxton there. So apparently, according to that, he had joined the church at Paxton, but when he went to Rockford he took his Flutnings Bevis with him and turned it into the pastor here at Rockford. The Swedish one? And that was 1880 to 1883? Yes, well it was 1880 when he immigrated, I think it was 1883 when he came to Rockford, or at least when he joined our church. Now of course they didn't necessarily always join the church as soon as they got here, you know, I don't know for sure. But he joined the church, I believe it was 1883. What kind of a job did he get then when he came here? Well, he started working in furniture factories and I guess he fairly early got into the finishing department, staining and varnishing and polishing and so on. And so finally when the Scandia Furniture Company was formed, and that was located right down here on North 2nd Street, I think that was formed in 1889, he became one of the stockholders. I think he only bought one or two shares at first and later on a few more. I have his shares of stock in a file in the basement. And I don't know if he became the finishing foreman right away. I don't think he did, but not too long after they formed, he became the finishing foreman, foreman of the finishing department. And that was really his main job most of the time when he was bringing up his family. So they were the Stockhus family that owned Scandia, wasn't it? Stockhus? No, Stockhus family, they were in the plough, they were in the Scandia Plough Company, not Scandia Furniture. They were not in Scandia Furniture? No, they were in the Scandia Plough Company. That was located, I think that was on the water power area on the west side. I thought that was one of the stockholders up here, her father was one of the keepings in the furniture factory up there. Well he was in the West End Furniture Factory because his... And there was no Carl Scandia? No, his father, or his father-in-law, whose last name was Lynn, L-Y-N-N, I think there were two N's, was a big shot at the West End Furniture Factory. And so Amos Stockhus, Merle's father, eventually went in with his father-in-law. Because I think that the Scandia Plough Company was coming to the end of its line anyway. They didn't last beyond somewhere in the early 1900s, and all of a sudden they're just not there anymore, and just what caused it I don't know. Too many other big implement companies I suppose that just were too much competition for them. And so then he went into the West End Furniture Company with his father-in-law, Mr. Lynn, and that's where he spent most of his life I think. But your father, he acquired some stocks, wasn't that kind of unusual for workers though? Not in Rockford, no. We had what they called the cooperative system, and I think that most of the furniture factories, most of the Swedish furniture factories in Rockford were organized on the cooperative system. Yeah, but wasn't there between the management level though? No, the workmen too. The workmen would buy stock. In fact, I think in many of those companies they couldn't even get a job unless they bought at least one share of stock. That was the principle behind the company. So it was employee owned. Of course the management, they would own a lot more stock, and so they would really have the controlling stock. But the employees owned stock too. So P.A. Peterson, he was the kingpin? Well he was in a lot of the companies, yeah. And he apparently had the control of quite a few of them. Yes, he gained a lot of control later on when the companies began to get kind of shaky, especially in the panic of 1893, and many of these companies were almost ready to go bankrupt. And he would accept stock in them in exchange for helping to pay their debts and also refinancing and running the company. So you can look in some of the old city directories along about that time and for a period of quite some time, and you'll find P.A. Peterson listed as president. Oh, I know I counted one time in one particular city directory he was president of at least thirteen companies. He was a stockholder? So he was a stockholder in all those companies, and now he didn't actually run the company. You know, the president of many of those companies was more or less a financial advisor, and he would meet with them, but the company day-to-day management would be run mostly by the secretary and the superintendent. And the president was sort of like the chairman of the board, and he would help them to make their decisions and so on, but the company would really be run by the secretary and the superintendent. But he was on the ball, though. He had his walk between those different factories all the time, so he did. But obviously he couldn't really run thirteen factories at one time. And then at the same time, he was also secretary all through his life. He was secretary of a union company, a union factory. That was the one that was organizing the Allen Derbal? That was, yes, and that's the one he got his start at, you know. He was the only, I guess he was a young man then, he was the only one among them who had studied bookkeeping. And the others were all furniture workers, and well, he was a furniture worker, too, but he'd been studying bookkeeping at night, I guess, at the business school. And I guess from my understanding, he was the only one that knew bookkeeping, he and Jonas Peters, I guess. There was another one named Jonas Peters, who became a treasurer, I think. But the secretary was the one that really made the financial decisions. The treasurer, he maybe handled the money and wrote the checks and took in the money and took it to the bank and so on, but the one that really made the big decisions would be the secretary. Why wouldn't they be defeating its purpose, or to be having your fingers, well, it's good to have the fingers in the path of low-rise, but to compete with each other, I mean, so many different firms, factories. Well, I don't think they really competed that much, because they were quite specialized. Many of them, like for instance Scandia down here, made mostly what they called secretaries, you know, this type of a desk where you had a detached desk and a bookshelf, bookcase alongside. And then they also made some just plain bookcases, bookshelves with a glass front on them, and that was mainly what they made. Like the Union, or what were they like? I'm really not sure. I'm really not sure. I haven't made enough of a study of the other furniture factories to really know, but there were some that made just desks. There was one company that made just school furniture, just furniture just for schools. And there was a clock company, one that just made clocks. And so they had their specialties. So I suppose there was some overlapping, so there would be some competing, but I don't think they really competed too much. But he was on the ball, though, they say. Oh, P.A. Peterson? Yeah. Well, he was sharp. He, of course, learned bookkeeping early, but then he also was very aggressive. So my understanding is that during that big panic of 1893, and of course it extended for a couple of years, he went back on the road as a salesman. I think he'd been a salesman some. He traveled all through the country representing these various companies that he had gotten stock in, and some of those stockholders, just common workmen, were beginning to be kind of sorry that they had bought stock. It looked as though they were going to lose their money. And so he'd buy it from them. And of course, they'd buy it from them at kind of reduced prices because it was bad times. And of course, when times picked up, and he still owned it. What do you think makes the difference now with a man like him? I mean, he was just a regular common man, they say, from Sweden. And the majority got scared. They wanted to get out of it. What did he actually see then? Because he put a lot of money up there. Was he a millionaire at the time, you think, in the 1890s? Oh, I don't think he was in the 1890s, no. I think he was by the time he died. Maybe he had a few million by that time, but I don't think he was in the 1890s. But he was careful. Even a few thousand dollars was a lot more than it is today. He could buy a lot of it. Yeah, he could buy a lot of it with just a few thousand, and he bought quite a bit on credit. He was married late in life, never had any children. I think they did adopt a daughter later on, but most of their married life they had no children. And so he didn't have quite the same responsibilities that many of these old Swedes had, because many of them had five and six children to support. So he could display a little bit. Right. Gave them a little more freedom. And then he was just more ambitious. Many workmen, and this is true today, too, are very happy to just go to their job, work their hours, come home. Of course, today they have TV and so on. In those days they had to do other things, pitch horseshoes maybe or something, but perfectly happy to just go back and forth to work and keep working at the same old job. He wasn't satisfied with that. He studied, he worked long hours. They claimed that he was able at one time in his life to get by with a very small amount of sleep, too. He'd work all night long sometimes, or at least a good share of the night, working on the payroll of some company. And he'd just sleep at his desk, and then in the morning he'd get up and he'd go out and go to some of the other companies and make the rounds of various companies that he was president of and so on. In fact, when he first started at Union Company, he was still a cabinetmaker. And so he would work all night on the company's books, and then he'd work, well, not all night I suppose, but into the night. He'd sleep in his office, and then he'd get up in the morning and go out in the shop and he'd work as a cabinetmaker. And he'd keep the books at night. So he knew his trade in, from the bottom up. So he knew it both ways, yes. He knew it as a worker as well as the finance man. Any investment he made, in other words, he kept it under control. He just didn't buy something and forget about it. No, not for... Like you said, he was checking out the books and he had control of interest, of course. It's too bad that somebody didn't, it was too bad that he didn't have tape recorders when he was around. But of course he died, I think, about 1925 or 1926 or somewhere in there. But it's too bad somebody didn't interview him thoroughly and find out, you know, completely about his life. Because he was an unusual man, there's no question about it. Oh yes. Yes, he sure was. He never used an overcoat, they said in the wintertime. That's what I heard. My grandmother lived on 8th Street, my grandparents on my mother's side. And they used to see him walking by, always very briskly. He lived on 7th Street at that time, over near the... I think it was maybe at the corner of 7th Street and 12th Avenue. The house is still there that he lived. That was the first house that he and Mrs. Peterson lived in when they were married. Of course, he was married late in life. He was brought up on a farm, actually, out near Cherry Valley, on Mill Road. And then he moved into town and took a bookkeeping course and learned cabinet making, too. And then his parents moved into town, too, and they all lived on Catlin Street, I believe it was. It's the street that runs off Kishwaukee Street. In fact, I think his mother took in boarders for a while, too. Was he the only son? I don't really know. I think he had another brother, but I'm really not sure. The whole family is buried up there. You ever seen their plot up there at Scandinavian Cemetery? So he was the big one in the rock quarters, no question about it. Everybody knew him. Well, certainly among the Swedes. There were other big men, too, in other fields. Ralph Emerson was big in the farm implement business, followed by the name of Clark, J.L. Clark, of course. He still had his company. He was big in the manufacture of hardware of various kinds. They were of the British or English section. But they disappeared, or more or less, Clark, J.L., Emerson in the early 1900s. Emerson's son, his only son, was killed in a fire at the plant. And he did have one son-in-law by the name of Hinchliffe, but he got more involved in knitting factories and didn't stay so active in the implement business. This was before 1900, though? So he was competing with John Nelson? Well, John Nelson himself was dead by then. But his son was? His son, John Nelson, had three or four sons, I guess, and they all went into the knitting works. It was William Nelson became the best known. And it was Franklin Nelson, and I can't remember the others. And they started, well, they went in with a fellow by the name of Burson. Of course, John Nelson had been affiliated with Burson, too. And so you ended up having the Nelson Knitting Company, the Burson Knitting Company, the Forest City Knitting Company. Now I think the Forest City Knitting Company was started definitely by John Nelson's sons. And then there also was a BZB Knitting Company, Burson and two other people. I can't remember the names of the others. And so there was quite a knitting industry here in Rockford at one time. But this Hinchliffe was kind of big in that, too. But Emerson, when he got toward the end of his life, he didn't have any son, and he could see his son-in-law was getting into other fields. So he took in a fellow by the name of Branningham, and the name of the company was changed to Emerson Branningham. The old Branningham House is on National Avenue on the river side. The last house at the south end of National Avenue, you know where National Avenue is on the west side there, all these big homes? The last house on the south side toward the river is the old Branningham home. Well then Ralph Emerson died somewhere around 1914, I think, and Branningham ran the company for about the next 12 or 14 years. But the company was starting to go down then. I don't know if it was because of Branningham or other factors involved. They just didn't seem to be able to compete anymore completely with the Deere Company and International Harvester and so on. And so somewhere in the late 1920s, they sold out to J.I. Case. And so then the J.I. Case company took over the Emerson Branningham plant, and then that was the end of the name of Emerson, of course, as far as the Rockford business was concerned. So their family disappeared from Rockford? Yeah, there's still some grandchildren around, you know, but I mean as far as the big business is concerned, yeah. You mentioned a couple of years before, your grandma remembered P.A. Peterson. She never knew him personally. No, but she remembered him walking down the... Walking past her house, yeah. Yes. So they goes way back then to the early 1900s. Yes. He would, like I said, he lived on 7th Street, and I guess he would walk on 12th Avenue over to 8th Street, and then she lived a little bit south of there, but in the block between 8th Street, or between 12th Avenue and 13th Avenue, and so then he'd walk by her house on the way out to Union Furniture. I think he spent most of his time, I think he had his main office at Union Furniture, because that's where he was secretary, and so he actually, he continued to pretty much run that company, and then the other companies that he had interest in and was president of so many of them, he would probably conduct their directors' meetings and stop by from time to time to see how things were going and so on, but his main interest, his main job was the Union Furniture. So when he died in 1920, there was still pretty good business then, the furniture factories were running full steam. Oh yes, as far as I know. In fact, when I was a boy, I can remember these furniture, and that was in the Depression. I was a boy during the Depression of the 1930s, and I was brought up right next door here, and those factories on North 2nd Street were going full blast then. I can remember hearing there in the summertime when they had their windows open, I could hear the saws all the way up here, you know, the high-pitched twine of the various band saws and table saws and so on that were cutting up the wood. So they were located close to the river? Oh yes, right down on 2nd Street where there's a big sweep of just empty land now, that's where those factories were. They were kind of lowland, did they have any flooding sometimes? I suppose they had a little bit of problem in their basements once in a while, but you see there's a railroad that goes along there, and so that was handy for them to have the railroad going right by, and they had sidings leading right into the backyard of the companies. So there were actually three factories, three furniture factories along there. Scandia was the biggest, that was the furthest north, and then the one right down at the end of Casper Avenue here was Desk, Rockford Desk Company, and then there was another one south of that, about another half a block south, and that had different names. When I was a boy it was called the Eagle Furniture Company, but at one time they made Victrolas, you know, these record players, and it was called the Forest City Victrola Company or something like that. So it had various companies in there, I was the smallest of the three. So your dad, he lived down here on Casper Avenue? My dad was brought up down in the corner house down there. On Casper? Yeah, corner of Casper and Ridgewood, down this next corner here. And so he continued to work down in the furniture all his life? No, at least not that one. He started out, he left school when he was fourteen, when he graduated from Hall School, he started working for his father, and he worked there for about three years, and then he went down to Augustana, and they had an academy there at that time. So he attended the Augustana Academy and finished that in a couple of years. They were able to get a concentrated course, studying, taking more credits I guess, more subjects, and so he finished that in two years. And then they had a separate division called the Augustana Business College, and so then he went there one year. So he was down at Augustana campus three years, but of course two of those years he was in the academy. So he was interested then to go to, after high school, to continue, well he didn't go to high school then. He didn't go to Rockford High School at all. He went to the academy instead. He worked for three years, then he went down to the academy. Was this his parents, I mean your grandparents' idea, you think, to send him over there to... It was his father's idea. So he wanted him to get educated. His father wanted him to be in the office. My grandfather... The furniture factory. Well, yes, I suppose especially. My grandfather, of course, had always been in the shop. He did become a foreman, so he made a little more money than most shop workers, but still he was always in the shop. And he kind of expected, or admired and respected those in the office, and he had in mind that he was hoping his son would be able to work in the office. So that was what he had in mind when he sent my father to college. And so when he came out, he worked in various places. I think, I didn't even know this when he was living. My father died in 1949, and I was... This is side two, with Robert Gordon, Rockford and Lloyd. Side two. So he went to the academy, and two years, your father. Yes. And one year in the college. One year in the business college. It was business college then. Then he came home to Rockford. Right. And it was about the 19... That would be about 1914, I think. 1914. During the First World War. Well, of course, it started over in Europe. We didn't get into it until 1917. He finally got drafted in 1918, and he was sent over to Siberia. Many people don't even know we had forces in Siberia, but we... The Russian Revolution had been held in 1917, and the Allies were worried that Russia might join up with Germany. And so we sent troops to two different places in Russia. One in western Russia, in the area of, oh, I think Leningrad and Archangel, and up in there. And then we sent another contingent out to eastern Russia, Siberia, between Vladivostok and Lake Baikal, in that area. And so that's where he was sent. So he spent a year in Siberia. Did he have any special training, then? Why was he chosen to go so far away? Well, he was put in the office, so he did clerical work, and of course they need that in the Army, too. He had had an operation for appendicitis just a few months before he was drafted, and he thought that might have had something to do with the fact that they gave him a little bit easier duty, you know, instead of sending him out to fight. Of course, those forces over there in Siberia didn't do much fighting. Sometimes they were some skirmishes, but, with the Communists and so on, but most of the time they just kind of went through the routine of drilling and eating and sleeping and so on, you know, and didn't really, because my father worked in the office. He did have to type messages. As I know, he told me at one time that he typed messages in code, and so he didn't know what the messages were saying, because the letters were all scrambled up. And that was kind of interesting, because in World War II, I became a radioman in the Navy, and I was also typing messages in code, that I didn't know what I was typing. So in some way, we did the same thing, only I was, of course, taking it by radio, you know, with earphones, Morse code, you know, dots and dashes. And, of course, he was typing it up from something else, I guess. But anyway, we were both doing something somewhat similar. So he spent a year over there in Siberia? He spent a year in Siberia. And he came back to Interop for after the... Right. But he was very, very sick in Siberia. We think that he probably had rheumatic fever, although at that time medicine wasn't as advanced and they didn't identify it as that, but he was tremendously sick. And it didn't turn up until about, oh, 20 years later or so, a little more than 20 years later, it turned up that he had weak heart valves. The valves of his heart were weak. And of course, rheumatic fever does that. And he finally died of a heart attack in 1949. He was only 57 at the time he died. And so we kind of attribute that to his service in the Army, but we could never prove it. So my mother was never able to get any pension because we couldn't prove that that was the cause of it. But we were convinced it was. So he came back to Rockford after that? He came back to Rockford, yeah. And he started in the Scandia factory then? I don't know if he ever worked at Scandia again. He did various things. He worked for a while, and I didn't know this at the time, but he worked for a while for a railroad as a ticket agent or something. And then he went through an electrician apprenticeship program, became an apprentice and went through the program, so he became a regular electrician and worked as an electrician for a while. And then for a while, he and his brother-in-law, a fellow named John Nelson, who was married to my dad's sister, they ran a little grocery store down here on North 2nd Street for about a year or two. It was called the Borden Nelson Grocery. But then, well, about 1922 or 1923, he got in with his uncle. His uncle was running a furniture factory, and his uncle's name was Landstrom, Oscar Landstrom. I don't know if you've come across that name or not. For the Republic of Landstrom's furniture? Yes. He was my grandmother's brother, Oscar Landstrom. And so Dad got in there in the office, and he was the employment manager, so he did the hiring, and then he also had charge of the hardware stock. So he was the hardware buyer, so when they needed to, like, draw pulls and hinges and all the type of hardware, you know, nails and screws and all that sort of thing, too, he was the one that had to keep track of how much they had and make sure they had enough on hand, so he would do the buying for that. I guess they had somebody else that bought the lumber, you know, and that sort of thing, but he bought the hardware. And so he was kind of in charge of two different things there, the hardware stock, stockroom. I can remember being in that quite a bit, as when I was a kid, when I'd visit him at the office. And then, of course, like I say, he did the hiring, so when people were looking for a job, he would hire them if they had any jobs available. So he was there from about 1922 to, I think, sometime in late 1940 or 41. The company had already gone into receivership. The company had gone bankrupt. And I believe he and a janitor were the last people working. The janitor just to keep the place up and keep the heat up and so on. And Dad was taking inventory of all the last things that they had, because the federal government then, of course, would take over in the bankruptcy case, you know, and they had to know what the inventory was. And so he was the last one there. Then from there, he got a job with the state of Illinois as a sales tax investigator. And so he did that for about the last eight years that he lived. Did he have sales tax in the 40s? Yes. The sales taxes started in the 30s, I believe. And so he was one of the people that would go around and make sure everybody was paying it, and also to help explain to them the forms they had to fill out and the sticker they had to put on their door and the whole works, you know. So there was two businesses then, in other words, stores and entrepreneurs. Yes. Yeah, all retail business. Retail business. So how much was it then when it started in the 1930s? I think it was about two cents on the dollar. Two cents? I think so. It might have been three. I'm not sure. What was that money supposed to go for then? Just state expenses. State expenses. I don't know where they got their money before, because they had no state income tax. That came later. I frankly don't know how the state got its money before that. How was the regular tax and the federal tax? Well, that was an income tax, although that didn't start until, I think the first income tax was passed probably about 1913 or 1914. Before that, they got their money entirely from tariffs and excise taxes on things like whiskey and things like that. I think they passed, they had an amendment to the constitution sometime about 1913, which authorized the government to have an income tax. So then they began having it. It was very low at the beginning. And at that time, then, each employee paid his own. They didn't go through the factory, for instance? Yeah. I don't think that they started having what they call withholding tax, where they actually took it out of your paycheck until we got into World War II. And then to help to pay for the war, they figured they better make sure, because there's always some people that aren't going to send in as much as they should and so on. And of course, they didn't ever get it until the end of the year. And so this way, they could get it as the money was being made. So it was withholding tax. And so, yeah, I think that started maybe about 1941 or somewhere there. I'm not really sure, but it was in there somewhere. So I suppose there was a headache for the manufacturers. Oh, I suppose it was. They had to hire a lot more people to keep track of that. Sure. Send it in, yeah. To send it in regularly and keep track of it. Your grandpa, now, did he continue all his life with the furniture? No, not with Scandia. When did they fold up, in the 40s, 50s? I think they started... I'm not sure when they finally completely went out of existence, but they were sold out to a Chicago person sometime in the late 30s, I believe. And by that time, the stock was almost worthless. They weren't paying any dividends anymore. And they were so far in debt that people like my grandfather, although he still had his stock, knew that it was never going to be worth anything. But he just put it away in a box. And like I say, I still have it. I still have these stock certificates that he had. I don't remember just how many total shares he had. But he had left the company long before that. I don't remember just when. But I think he left the company sometime around World War I. He became one of the early stockholders in the Rockford Varnish Company. And that's been reorganized and renamed in recent years, and it's even moved to a different place. I don't even know what it's called anymore. They changed it from Rockford Varnish Company to Rockford Chemical Coatings, and now it's just maybe Rockford Coatings Company or something. I don't know just what it's called anymore. But he became one of the early stockholders there in the Rockford Varnish Company. And he started to work for them. In fact, I think he was a salesman. And knowing my grandfather in his later years, I could never picture him as a salesman. But just looking up in the old city directories, I find that he was a salesman for a while for Rockford Varnish Company. So he called on the retail stores then? Apparently he did, yeah. Probably not just in Rockford. Maybe he even had to travel some. I don't know. And then, and I don't know how long he continued with that. The last job that he had before he finally retired, and he was up in his seventies by that time, he was a night watchman out at the Varnish Company. I can remember us stopping there to see him sometimes when we'd be out for a drive at night. We'd go out there and stop to see Grandpa. My dad would push a button, ring a bell, and he'd come out and unlock a gate, and we'd go in there and visit with him for a while. I don't remember how old he was when he finally retired, but I remember as a child, of course I lived right next door and my grandparents just lived down the corner. We kids had to be, when we were down there, we had to be quiet in the daytime because Grandpa was sleeping. So Grandma would come out and kind of shush us up if we were getting too noisy out in the yard. So there was no way for him to sleep at a job then at night? No, I guess not. He had to be awake then, so he'd sleep during the daytime. So there was no such certain retirement date in those days? No. They kept on going? No. He went into security about 1933 or 1934, I guess somewhere in there. 1936, I believe. He didn't pay off until— No, he really, if he got any at all, it was so small he couldn't live on it, you know. And so he had to keep working. They had a very difficult time toward the end, but a couple of my aunts and their husbands moved in for a while, and so then they paid rent, I guess. It was a pretty big house, and so they—actually, my Grandma and Grandpa and two of their daughters and their husbands were living there at one time. So they had to be—must have been kind of crowded to have that many people there, but they were for a while during the Depression when my uncles didn't have very good work either, you know. And so it made sense, I guess, for them all to move in together, and so they were all there together for a while. So you all had to buckle up and make the best of it. Yeah, they did. You wonder many times how they could keep food on the table. Oh, I'm sure it was hard. In fact, finally my grandfather told my father, he said, I'd always hoped, he said, that I could just pass this stock on to you, the stock in the varnish company. And he said, it just doesn't pay that much in dividends, and I'm going to have to sell it. So then he asked my father if he would like to buy it. And so my father bought it from him, but with the arrangement that my grandparents would keep on getting the dividends as long as they lived. And so that's the way they handled it. They got—went to—I think they had to go to a lawyer to get that put into the contract or something. So my father bought the stock from them at the going rate, whatever it was at that time. It went up later on, of course, but he bought the stock from them at that—whatever the price was at that time, and then let them have the dividends. They didn't live too many more years after that anyway. So they had the idea, you know, to get stocks and to better themselves. To work for a living was not enough. And also education, he understood that there was a necessity for the next generation to prepare themselves. And how about hospitalization and doctors' care and things? They didn't have to be—they couldn't afford to be sick. No, not really. Now at Landstrom, where my father worked, they had what they called the sick benefit. That was another job that my father had. He was in charge of the sick benefit. How early was that, do you think? In the 20s? Well, like I say, he started there, I think, about 1922 and went there until about 1940 or 41. And so, now just when they started the sick benefit, I don't know. But I don't think the company paid into it very much. It might have been paid a little bit, then they took a little bit out of the paychecks of the men too. And I don't know how much it paid them when they were sick. Of course, you know, doctors and hospitals—of course, everything was lower cost and pay was lower and everything. But I think doctors and hospitals, percentage-wise, made a lot less than they do today. And it didn't cost you an arm and a leg when you went to the hospital, you know, like it does today. So they couldn't afford that if they broke a leg? I think so. My— They had to, I suppose. I don't think my parents ever had any hospitalization insurance. I don't think they ever had any at all. Your parents? My parents I don't think ever did. You know, later in life, my mother did, which was fortunate she did because she had to have an operation, but that was in 1957. But by that time, my father, of course, did. I'm sure my father never had accident—or never had any accident or medical insurance at all. No life insurance either? Very little. And I think when he died in 1949, I think he had $3,000 worth of life insurance. Of course, $3,000 in those days would be almost like $20,000 today, you know. But even—but still, we don't think of $20,000 as being very much today, you know, for life insurance. It sure didn't last long, you know. His funeral, I suppose, was almost $1,000. Today it would be a lot more, but even then it was, you know, close to $1,000, $1,800, $800 or $900. And so by that time he got that paid for, he didn't really have an awful lot left, you know. My mother had to go out and start teaching again. Fortunately, she was trained as a teacher and had been a teacher. And so then she went out—she went and took a teaching job and taught for 12 more years after my father died. Elementary school teacher or— Yes. Mostly first grade. So she had gone through education then. And unions now. Did they come into the picture? Not your grandfather. He didn't have anything to do with unions at that time. I don't know what they had at Scandia. Now my grandfather, Rosenquist, was a bricklayer. And he was in a union. In fact, I still have his union card or kind of a little folder in which it shows where he paid every so often, you know. At that time, the president of that union, of the bricklayers' union, was a fellow who later became a mayor of Rockford, C. Herman Hallstrom. I don't know if you've come across that name. Yes. He was a union man. He was president of the bricklayers' union at that time. I have his little union card in a file in the basement. But he turned his coat later on in life. He became a Republican. I understand he did later. And that's when he lost. Well, he lost out then. Yes, he finally lost out sometime in the early 30s. I think he lost to—I think he lost to Bloom, but I'm not sure of that. The druggist. The druggist, yeah. But they were both under Hallstrom. He was a socialist, really. Yeah, they were what they called—they called them progressives. Progressives. Also Hallstroms. But he had a workers' group with him here in Rockford. Some called them socialists and some called them Arbetarklubben, you know, the Swedish workers' club. And they ran into trouble then in 1917 when they drafted some of the Swedish. Yeah, I don't know if— Have you studied anything about that? Yeah. There were some that really were on trial. In fact, this great lawyer from Chicago that was so well known at that time—I can't think of his name now, but he was a well-known—he was the one that later on was—have you ever heard of that, what they called the Monkey Trial of 1924? He debated against William Jennings Bryan in that trial. Now I can't even think of his name. I can picture what he looked like. But he came out to Rockford. Did he defend? He came out to Rockford and defended the socialists. But they were sent over ten months to Bragwell in Chicago, to the prison. Is that right? I'm not really familiar with what eventually happened to them. But they were sent home because they refused to be citizens or sign the papers. One was a fairly respected doctor who had his office on 7th Street. But he was involved with that group. He had a Swedish name. I don't remember what it was now. What happened to him? Was he also convicted of—? I'm really not sure. I can't remember what the outcome was. But Halström, he was a young guy at that time. He tried to convince him that it was the way to go. So he was a bricklayer then. He was a bricklayer. And president of, chairman for the bricklayers' union, the local here in Chicago. Yeah. I mean in Rockford. In Rockford. The carpenters, plumbers, painters, bricklayers, their union was tolerated. But when the factory worker came in, you know, the machinists, tool and die, furniture makers, cabinet makers, when they tried to start organizing, they were frozen out immediately or kicked out. Why was that? Well, I think the machinists were able to make a go of it. I think when they had some kind of a skill, like a machinist, I think the machinists got along all right. The bricklayers, the carpenters, plumbers, I think people realized that they had a skill there and if they didn't work, you couldn't get anybody else to replace them. You see? Nobody else knew how to be a bricklayer or an electrician or a plumber or whatever. Whereas the fellow who just had an ordinary machine job, you could teach a new guy in probably 15 or 20 minutes how to run that machine. I think that made the difference. And so then they had to start having what they called the sit-down strike and to actually try to keep other people from working by force sometimes. And that's where, of course, your trouble came in because they would try to keep the scabs, as they called them, the non-union workers out. Whereas the skilled workers, like the bricklayers and plumbers and so on, they didn't have to worry about that because nobody could do their job anyway. So I think that was the big difference. And there was plenty of workers coming in with new immigrants coming in. Plenty of unskilled workers. And they were ready to take the place. They were ready to take the place of these union workers if they were on strike. But if they weren't trained as a carpenter or bricklayer or something, they couldn't do that. If it was a real skillful job like that, they couldn't do that. Electrician, of course, and machinist would be in the same category. And so they had their own separate unions. You had your plumber's union and your machinist's union, bricklayer's union, electrician's union. And if they decided to go on strike, they didn't worry about what the others did. The bricklayers thought they weren't making enough money. They didn't say, well, we're not going to work. You can have all the electricians and plumbers and everybody else. You want to keep on working, but if the bricklayers aren't working, it comes to a stop. Or if your electricians aren't working or something, eventually it has to come to a stop. And nobody else could replace them. So I think that was the big difference. So they had them over a barrel. In other words, they were on their way out. Whereas the unskilled workmen, they didn't have them over a barrel. They could easily be replaced. And so then they had to resort to force to try to keep others from taking their place. Whereas the plumbers and electricians and so on, they didn't have to use force because nobody could do their work anyway. So the management, they were apparently all united to have the same policy. Anybody talks union in the shop, all's you go. Oh, I think so. Until the law came in. Until the Wagner Act took out the blacklist. Was it 33 or 34? No, maybe 35, somewhere in there. And then of course, if they blacklisted them like that, then that was against the law. But they still try to do that later on, even in the 40s. I think they still do it. They still do it. It's hard to prove. They still do it. They just can't be quite as blatant about it. Do you remember anything of this Swedish Workers' Club in Rapport in the late 30s? Well, I don't know if there was any in the late 30s. Was there? Maybe there was. I don't know. Of course, even in the late 30s, I was just a young teenager. And you don't remember anybody talking about it? No. I remember that my father did not like unions because he was on management side at the factory. He was the employment manager. And I know he was always disgusted when the union there went out on strike at Landstrom because then that would be more burden on the office employees. And the office employees sometimes would be expected to go and do some of the job that the union guys did otherwise. So they were organized to create? Yes. But at Landstrom, they had a union because I remember sometimes he would come home kind of dejected and say, oh, the union's on strike now. I think he was one that had to probably meet with them because he was the employment manager and so he was considered part of management. So I suppose he had to be at meetings with them sometimes. And I know he'd come home kind of dejected sometimes. And I think he had to work longer hours then because, like I say, they would expect management to go out in the shop and do some of the jobs that work when they couldn't do everything. But at least to keep some production going, they'd go out and do what they could. He knew a little bit about staining and so on because he'd worked under his father at the other factory. So he could still do that work if he had to. So his father was not working at Landstrom? No, I don't think his father ever worked at Landstrom. What happened then with Landstrom? Was it a little time, depression? Well, it was a combination of that. They formed a bigger company. Landstrom was just one division of it and Oscar Landstrom became the president of it, but they called it Rockford Consolidated Industries. And Landstrom, actually his company before that hadn't even been called Landstrom. It was called Rockford Cabinet Company. And that went in with Free Sewing Machine. Have you come across Free Sewing Machine? Free Sewing Machine, I have. Free Sewing Machine and Heddorf Piano. And those three companies combined. And this is my understanding. Now I was just a kid at the time and I really haven't looked into it thoroughly, but my understanding is that those three companies, Rockford Cabinet Company and Free Sewing Machine and Heddorf Piano, combined and formed what they called Rockford Consolidated Industries. And this John Larson, he was the superintendent of the whole thing. Do you remember that name? The only Larson I remember was Anton Larson. Anton Larson. Anton Larson. Yeah, I think he was the superintendent. His office was right near my father's. I remember my father showing me Larson's office, but I never knew him. So did they go to pig then? Well they went into debt too much I think. And then just after they did it, the Depression hit. I can remember one time when my dad and his uncle, Oscar Landstrom, were talking. This was several years later. And I think by that time Oscar had already started another factory. He started another factory later on out on 23rd Avenue. That was called Landstrom Furniture. But he was saying to my father, he said, you know, I wish what happened to me had happened twenty years earlier when I was younger and could have gotten the start again better and so on. And he got a pretty good start. He was the old man then? The old man, Oscar. He was retired and he was thinking about all the... Oh, I suppose. He was always, he kept on, he stayed active in his own company. See, he reorganized and started up again. A lot of people couldn't understand that. You know, there are a lot of people who don't understand the corporation type of structure. They don't understand that all you lose, if you have stock in a corporation, the corporation goes broke and it might have debts galore, all you can lose is what you had in it. And the corporation itself might have a lot of debts and go bankrupt and can't pay off its debts, but the stockholders, they lose their stock but they won't lose anything more, you know. And so it's limited liability. And so Oscar, of course, he didn't have all the...