 So we, I suppose I better tell from New York then. First started, we come there, Döttingholm in New York. The, I think it was in July or September, I don't know. That's a long time ago. So we come in there from Sweden on Saturday afternoon, but we couldn't go to Alice Island then. So we had to stay overnight until Monday morning. And then six o'clock, there was a big ferry there come take us over to Alice Island. And then we stayed there all day, Alice Island, to get the paper and everything. They have a label on your coat, you know, where you was going to go and everything. And six o'clock at night, then the train come. Or I think there was train where we had to go anyway. And then we traveled Monday night and Tuesday night. So I was in Duluth Wednesday night. Yeah. So then I met him there and so I had my picture of him. Your brother? Yeah, in my hand. And he recognized me because he had a picture of me too, so. And your brother, he left when you were only one year old? We were only one year old. So that was the first time you saw him in person? Yep. I'm sitting together with Otto Thor in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1905, 8th of January in Banksford, Sweden. He came to the United States in 1924 on Rottingholm. And we have today 19th of November, 1986. So can you tell me a little bit about your father, Adolf Thor? What kind of work was he doing in Banksford? Well, he was working at the Sulphiten in Bankford. That's a paper mill. And then he was buying lumber for a company. So they made paper. They were sending over to different countries, you know. So he was traveling around then? No, no. He was in Sweden all the time. I mean in Banksford. Yeah. He didn't travel around to other communities to buy your lumber? Well, he was up to Gustavsh and Lennarsh and Tarshko and all that. Luxorby and if you know them places. Yeah. So that was his job? That was his job. And in the last few years, because he had to do that, then he was sharpening all the tools for the factory. Sulphiten in Bankford. That was a paper mill. How many kids were you in your family? Nine. Seven boys and two girls. Seven boys and two girls? Yeah. And were you one of the younger ones then? I was next to the youngest one. Next to the youngest one. Yeah. And they're all dead now. All of them. So you're the only one left? Yeah. I see. So all of them now, my wife and my son and his wife and two children. So you went to grade school there two years and then the regular school. How many? Four or five years? Six years altogether. Altogether? Yeah. Six years. And then I went in the, in January, February, you have extra school, you know, for arithmetic and things like that. For school? Yeah. I took a couple years there because I liked arithmetic. And then I was working for Sulphiden for a little bit and then I was... How old were you then when you started working for Sulphiden? I was 16 then. 16. You were already confirmed then? Oh yeah. Confirmed when I was 14. So you didn't start before 14 then to work? No. No. I was working for the farmer one summer and one winter and I worked for a relation to me another four or five months on the farm. And then I was driving horses in the bank for Lambert and Alvin. So I went to this country. Lambert and Alvin? Yeah. What kind of company was that? Well, they had the horses, you see. So the... Delivery service? Yeah. Delivery service. So you worked with that? Yeah. Worked with that child. So you didn't continue then with the Sulphiden fabrik? No. No. You didn't like it? No. I didn't care. It was inside work too, see. They come with that timber in and they cook the timber or the bark or whatever you call it and then they press it and then come to the last day you have to take it out of the machine and put it in bales, see. And then you put a wire on it and then you ship it out to the different countries. It was a hard job, you know. Yeah, it was so warm. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't care. How about your other brothers now? Did they... Well, Axel and Richard, Axel, he come here in 1913 and my other brother come here in 1922. And they were working in the part in the furnish factory and Richard, he was working for Mildred cement work. And the other one, the oldest one, he worked up in... He was in Duluth. And he came in 1906? Yeah. And he, then he stayed there until 1927. Then he come here to Rockford because there was hardly any work. So they were building fast hotels here. So he was working for Trundstrand and he was a steam fitter and plumber. So when they got the idea of going to the United States, did they come to any relation here? No, no, no. No relation? He didn't have any then with my brother. How did he get his idea to go here, your older brother? Well, there was one that been here and he said, yeah, been here in Chicago. And he said, you should go to America, he said, because you can make lots of money. But that time he said, you can pick up the money from the street, you know. But how did he end up in Duluth? In Duluth because there was three others that went to Duluth. Two banks, I suppose. Yeah. Do you know the name of them or? Well, I know one, Alfred Olson, there's one I remember. And then he was doing, he was doing a little of everything to begin with. And then he went to school to learn to be a steam fitter and plumber. And they were in their twenties then when they left? My brother was only 16. Your brother? Yeah, 16. So he went with them? Yeah, 16 years old. It was a risky business of a little guy, but he was the oldest one. Yeah, well, there was a lot of Swedes, you know, went 16, 17 years old to America. They left? Yeah. But like your parents now, didn't they, you know, a mother is always afraid to let them on the side, you know, until... She said that, you know, in Sweden you start to work when you was 14 years old. And he didn't like the Soviet Union? No, no, no. He never started it? Yes, he started it for a short time, but he didn't like it. So then I had a brother in Norway and I had a brother in Stockholm. So they all left Pengsforskan? Yeah, they left Pengsforskan. Nobody stayed? No, just... And then, yeah, Richard, he stayed there for a while. When he come here in 1922 then. And then he come here to Rafford and he stayed until 31. And then my oldest brother, not the oldest victim, Axel, here, he went home in 31 because it was hard to get any work. So he was going to go home for a while. And he stayed home then and got married in Sweden. For good? Yeah. And then two weeks after that, Richard went. And he didn't have any money or anything to go, so I borrowed the money to go to Sweden. And he stayed there. And what year was that? That was in 31. Hard time then, you know. Dollar was worth something. But before we go on, you know, you... Your oldest brother, what kind of work did he get then in Duluth? Was he on the... He was working for the city for a few years, I think. And then he went in the wintertime, then he went out in the wood, you know, chopping wood and timber. And then he went and learned to be a plumber. Up in Duluth? Yeah. And he married up there too? Yeah. Yeah. And they had three children. So then when you were 19 or 18, you got the idea to... Did you write to your brother then? Yeah, I write to him. And he said... You never saw him? No, no, no. Said, he have to have to take care of me for six months. To sign the paper? Sign the paper to come see. And I had the money from... I borrowed the money to the bank home. You didn't save up enough yourself? There was no way... No, no. Was it a hard time in Sweden? Yeah, home in Bengtforsk, it was not good. The factories, there was only... Well, they have electrochemical there too. You know, they call that breka. Yeah. Yeah. So it was hard for the guy to get a job? Yeah, yeah. And before you tried United States, you didn't go down to Ullevalla or... No, no, no. You wanted to go west? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I wrote to him and he said, you come on and... The one in Duluth? Yeah. So I had three jobs in Duluth there. I come here day after Thanksgiving in the morning. I come to Gainesville with train. And then... Didn't you like it up there or was it hard to get a job? It was hard to get a job. So did your brother encourage you to go down? How did you get to Rockford then? The train from Duluth. Yeah, but did you have anybody to come to here? Huh? Did you have anybody to come to here in Rockford? Yeah, my two brothers. They were already here? Yeah, all of them. But you wanted to see your oldest brother first before you... Yeah, yeah. You stopped there. And those brothers, you know, in Rockford, their name was... Axel and Richard. Two? Yeah. And they were married? No, no. No? They were single. What kind of work were they doing? They were working in the factory. They were working in the factory. They were working in the factory. They were working in the factory. And Richard, he was in the factory and then he worked for Melbourne outside, cement work. And he worked in this plane in Chicago and things like that. Wherever Melbourne got the jobs, he went. So what did they say now when you came down here? Did they... Well, they said, we're going to try. So I got here on Friday morning and he knew a foreman there and he was friend of the people they stayed with. And he said, come on Monday morning to the office and he said, you can start tomorrow. I was working. And I helped to put veneer on the dresser and chest and so on for three, four months. And after that, I was doing sanding. And after that, I put the cases together, you know, glued together and fit the drawers. And I was there a little over five years. Was that Landstrom's? Yeah, Landstrom's. Yeah, Landstrom's. And they called it the cabinet by that time. Cabinet. That was the name? Yeah, exactly. But he was the owner, Landstrom? Yeah, he was the owner. But you putting on veneer, it's a delicate... Yeah, well, there was 60 gangs, 60 or so. So there was the trade... They used to lift it and they glued and then you move it over there and then you put another one there and they glue it and maybe... That's nothing to it. You're doing fast. Yeah, going fast. And they were all Swedes there? Yeah, all Swedes. Started with 23 cents an hour. How did you take that 23 cents an hour? Was there more than you expected or less? No, in Duluth I had a little more there. You had to take a pay cut then? Yeah. But compared to Swedish money, what you had there in Sweden, was it better here? Oh, yes. You had more money in the pocket than we did then? Yeah. Where did you stay then in Rockford at that time? Huh? Or did you board it with your brothers? Well, no. A friend of... yeah, where my ex-in-law Richard stayed, he stayed with a lady and her sister stayed with her sister. She was married and had two children. She was born here and she thought just as good as we decided at that time. So she took care of the cooking and the cleaning and... Yeah, yeah. I have the room aboard there. The whole thing? Yeah. Three dollars a week. How much did you take home then a day? I mean a week? Well, I suppose it was around 11, 12 dollars. So you could still have a few dollars? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I paid my trip over in seven months, sent over to Sweden to the bank. Oh, you sent directly to the bank? Yeah. My mother had to sign for it because we had a four-family house. So your brothers didn't send a ticket? No, no. They didn't ask for it either? No, no. No, my mother said, I signed for you and you go to the bank and borrow the money. So it took you seven months? Yeah, seven months. And it was all paid? Yeah, well, and after that I looked at the alibis, you know. And Sweden was gone? Yeah, yeah. And then I stayed here until 1954, then I went home. For the first time? Yeah, 30 years. But not at the cabinet there at Landstrom's? You stayed there for five years? A little over five years. What happened then in 1949? Yeah, well, they started to get a little shaky, see. Did you have then the last year you worked there? Oh, it was 72 something dollars. So you got up that much? Oh, yeah. Were you satisfied with it? Yes, oh, yes, yes. But they were a little shaky, didn't they? They said they were going to lay off workers. And my brother, he was working there in this plant, in cement work, see. And he said, come on, because now in spring they hire all the help. Was it better paid? Oh, yeah, it was down a half. Down a half? Yeah, but a hard work. That lasted until the spring they froze, so they quit, you know. And then you had to belong to the labor union? No, you didn't need to be there for a while, because they were outside Chicago, see. But the union come in right after that. And there was no union at Landstrom's? No, no, no, no. Nobody there talked about union there? No, no, no. And then you came back then to Rockford, or you used to? Yeah, no, I came back here then. And then I bought a automobile money years before that from Carl Larsen. He was working downtown. Well, he had a garage business, see, fixing cars, Franklin. So he lived only three houses from where I was born in there when I first came here. So he said, what are you doing? He saw me on the street, and I said, I'm here looking for a job. Well, he said, Dr. Rodgers, he is looking for a man. Well, he said, why don't you call him, because he bought a new car from him, a Franklin. Have you heard about the Franklin? So the next morning I called him in the office, and he said, come on and see me. And that was on Saturday. So we talked there for a while, and he asked what I've been doing here, and what I've done in Sweden, and so on. Because I was driving some of them salesmen, you know, they went from one town to the other. In Sweden? Yeah, with a sled, you know, and cars. Horses and sled? Yeah. So you bought a car with four wheels. Did you have to drive a license then when you... No, you didn't need to have any license then. But you were able to drive a car? Yeah. So I talked to him, and he said, come on, Monday, start to work. And that was in 1930? That was 1929. 1929. Before the crash? Yeah. So that was in September 2nd, I think, or 29 or something like that. I don't know exactly. I think it was 29. And he had a big place out there, Tenjäkeland, and a big house. And he was a doctor. He was well-known here in Rockford. Was he of Swedish background? No. Yeah, he was born here, but his parents come from England. Were you able to speak English then with them? Yeah. You had no trouble? No, no, no, no. I went to three years in the wintertime in school. And then I worked with two who couldn't talk Swedish. Yeah, well, they helped me because I was actually to learn. And then I had a couple of girlfriends who couldn't talk Swedish either. So I started to work, and he said, I'll take you a month and see how you do. When the month was open, he said, you keep on. So I was there close to 50 years. 50 years? Mm-hmm. What was your duties then when you first started? Well, taking care of a lawn and handyman and driving. And you drove him to the office every day then? No, no, no. He was driving himself. I mean, I drive my missus, missus and the kids. Missus Rogers. Yeah, and the kids. They go to school and pick them up from the school and everything. Yeah. So they worked out the... Real good. The Depression didn't mean anything to you then? No, well, the Depression was coming in the last part of 29, 30, 31, 32. We got married the 7th of April. You know, a lot of people put off the marriage. Yeah. You didn't have to do that. No, no. And a lot of people lost their girlfriends. Yeah. So how much would you pay them compared to Lennstrom's and the labor work construction? Well... Was it considerably less? No, there was... You could live there with them then? No, no. No, we were renting an apartment. I was not married right away then. I had a room and then I was eating in a restaurant until I got married. So you couldn't live on the premises? No, no, no. Well, the week we got married, he got kept $10. Why? Well, that was how productive collecting money is. We got paid in pennies and nickels and dimes? Yeah, for about eight months. So they got a little better again. How much would you pay them? You were cut $10. How much did you have a week then? What was it? $28 or $29? I think we had $30 and then we... $30. Yeah, or we cut down to $20? Yeah, $20 or something like that. So what did you say then? Well, what are you going to say? You know there was trouble out in... Yeah, there was thousands walking on the street here. Oh, we were lucky to have work. Yeah, working hard. Did you continue to work? No, I never worked. No. So... I hope we rented furnished apartment for $20 a month, you know, so... I mean, you could buy dresses for maybe a dollar or... We lived right across from the Axis Cooksburg place. Oh, down there? Yeah, Fifth Avenue, yeah. 14, 12, I think. Another year and a half in furnished rooms. And then you drove out and the doctor was living out on... Spring Creek Road. It was all farmland at that time then. Oh, yeah. The mud road. You drove there every morning then, summer? Yeah, yeah. You had to shovel out the snow? Oh, yes. Was it mud road at Spring Creek? Yeah, there was just a little tire in the middle. They called it the mud road. So, how about your brothers? Were they laid off then? You said one went back in 1931? 1931, both of them, yeah, they were laid off. And they were not married then? No, no. So they could see no future then? Well, see, the funny part of it, after he went two weeks, and then my brother, he said, Well, what am I going to do? I don't have any money on things like that. So they could see no future then in Rockport? No, that was bad, you know. People have the money in the bank and laugh at that, you know. We had some money in the bank. I laughed, too. Oh, I see. What is the security? Huh? No, the Broadway bank, 7th Street and Broadway. So they closed off? They closed off. There was nothing. Oh. But the good thing, we had a little on the side. Otherwise, there was not so much. There was around $500, close to $600. Was it? Mm, sure. You could buy a house for that in London? You could, yeah. We did that one time. We paid $500 to buy a house. So you were living on, and you got married with Edith? Yeah, in 1932. How did you meet her? In Chicago, from the Serbian army. They'd been to the Serbian army, and I was in the Serbian army. And then we went up to the Café Idrot in Chicago. Have you heard about that? No, I haven't. Yeah. So we went up there and talked, and we fooled around there. It was time to go home. There was her and her sister, and one from Billings Fork with the salmon. And me and, and then they went, and I went over to my brother one night. And then I, if I was a letter to her, I'd go to meet her. I went in there in a way and started to see her. She comes on, she came from South Dakota? Yeah. She came down and looked for a job, or? Yeah. She was teaching in Oak Park. Children, you know, have hard to, she is a schoolteacher. I see. They have hard to learn. That's the handicap. Yeah, so she was working there for a while. And then she come here because she didn't want me to drive for them back here in Chicago and so on. So she come here about six months before we was going to get married. But that was pretty risky, though, I mean, to quit the teaching job. Yeah, yeah. Were you safe then with the doctor? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. You know you had a... Yeah, well, she was working there for two... So you got married then there in Rockford? Yeah. We went to Belvedere and got married. Oh, Belvedere. Yeah, in the court. Who married you? Huh? Who married you? There was a preacher there. The court, they called the man his... Oh, Justice and Peace? Yeah. Oh, you didn't go to a church? No, no, no. No, I don't want to spend that money. I didn't have... So we... So we... The church charge more than the Justice and Peace? Yeah, that was only $10 to get married. You took two witnesses with you then? There was two girls sitting in the office there. You didn't say a word about the... No, no, no. You didn't join the church then? Huh? No, no. So then we were... We drove from there to Galliette for honeymoon night. I stayed there a day and a half, and then we went to Chicago. And stayed with her for one day, her sister, for one day, and then we come back here Sunday night because I was supposed to work on Monday morning. He didn't want to let you off for a week or so? No, no, no. Did you ask for time off? Yeah. What did he say then? He said... Well, he said, we don't have anybody else, so three days, he said, would be fine. That's all? Friday, Saturday, Sunday. When I started to work there, I worked Sunday too, you know, from noon every Sunday. Every day of the week? Yeah, every day for years and years, for nine or ten years, because the kids, they had to go to Sunday school, and we picked them back. But there was no... Hard labor just to drive them back for the kids, you know. But he couldn't do that on Sunday, could he? Well, he didn't know when he was going to be called to the hospital, you know, and so on. Operation... How about his wife? Could she drive? No. No. So then the first week of April, you got married and went on the honeymoon for three days. Yeah. Back again. So did you buy a house then right away? No, no. Then we rented across from Skogsborg on Fifth Avenue there for a little over a year. Then we moved from there, then we went up here in Raffiw. Mr. Gron have a bungalow that we rented, and I think we only paid $20 a month or something for a room. We lived there seven years. Did you still have the money in the bank at that time, or when did you lose the money? In 1931. In 1931? Yeah. In other words, you didn't have any down payment then? Oh, yeah. I mean, if you wanted to... No, no, we didn't have any down payment on that, because Mr. Gron, he rented out for a month. He wanted to sell it to us for $5,000, but we didn't have money. There was no way you could have swung that deal if you... Oh, yes, we could, but we didn't want to take the risk. No. We didn't want to take the risk. So then we lived there seven years. Then we found two families down on Third Street and College Avenue, and there was $5,300 for a two-family house. It was an old house. So there was rent upstairs, and there was nobody living downstairs. They just decorated and it was ready, so we bought it. We stayed there seven years. Seven years? Yeah. And after that, we sold that. We made the deal, made the real statement, that we was going to buy a bungalow over here on 15th Street and 15th Avenue, and that was $9,000, and we sold the house for between $11,000 and $12,000. So we gained some money there, too. So he cut your wages, then, $10 a week? Yeah, for about six months, and then he come up with $5 and $5 and $5. He did that without you asking for it? Yeah, oh, yeah. You never asked for a pay raise? Nope, never asked for a pay raise. Did he ask you how you were making out? Yeah, oh, yeah. But Mrs. was very good. She tipped you. This is side two, Arritor, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So were you able to save any money then? Oh, yeah, more than anything. So they were pretty good then with tipping you? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Yeah, and then— But you had to work, though, every day of the week? Yeah, good. Did they drag you down? I mean, you couldn't go fishing for a day or something? No, no, no. You had no trouble with that? No, no. Did you belong to any organizations at the time, Barstow, Switzer, Bikes? Switzer, I joined that in Duluth. In Duluth? Yeah, because my brother, he lived—he took care of the hall in Duluth, the Switzer. So he lived free to take care of the hall. So he said, you better join here, so I joined that. And then when I left there, I transferred over here. But you had never had a chance to go to meetings, though? No, no. I never went. You never went to the meetings? No. And then after that, my wife said, what's the use? So we quit. I had insurance for $100, and I said, what the heck with it? But there was insurance, though, with that membership in Switzer? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, well, yeah. And then he raised the $1,000, you know, and all that. So you didn't belong to any organization then? No, no. And you were working for a doctor now. Could he give you medical care if you needed, for instance? He didn't pay any hospitalization for you? Oh, yes, he did. He did? Yeah. So you could go to the hospital and get free care? Yeah, he paid that. He did? Yeah. And when she had the first, when the girl was there, he paid for the hospital, and there was no doctor bill or anything. That was one of the benefits, that it was worth a lot of money. Yeah, yeah. You apparently never used it. No. You were too healthy. It was no use. But there were many people, though, that were sick during that time. It was just to stay away from the hospital. Yeah, oh, yeah. You couldn't afford it. Yeah, we couldn't afford it, no, no. What did your brother say when they left in 1931 and the next one left right after? Did they tell you to come back to Sweden, too? No, no, he didn't say anything about that. Then, oh, we were talking about it, and so Dr. Rogers, he said, I'm going to pay for the bill. But that was in, not 54, 65, when he paid the whole trip for me and Edith. When you went to Sweden? Yeah, 65. Yeah, and then, oh, yeah, 65. That's 65, though, 65. So he paid the travel for you then? Yeah. For both of you? Yeah. Was he retired then? Huh? No. No? He was still working? Yeah, he got a heart attack when he was 70, then he quit. So there was like a gratification for him. So 54, I went all alone then, so I was home a little over a month. And we were in 65, and we were three weeks. So when you came back 54 now for the first time, what kind of changes did you see in Bengtsfors? In Sweden? Well, you know, a small town, I suppose you've been in Bengtsfors, so you know, they have not changed a lot. But after now, after 65, they have changed. And now they have changed more yet, because Conrad Ingvall, he is, he takes care of all the buses that come in and out in Bengtsfors. His wife, they have the furniture factory there, and he said now, he said they changed some much. So you went. But it was not much between 1924 and 1954? No. How about the brothers now? They had a good employment there? Well, they worked for the city. And they married? One married, the other one never married. Richard never. So drove buses? Yeah, and he worked for the city too. So he married a local girl from Bengtsfors? Yeah, she was from outside in the country anyway, I think. But Richard, the one that had been here, he came to see us after we'd been in 65, he came in 66, and then he came again and again. Yeah, in 69 and 72, I think, he was here five times altogether. The last time, of course, he couldn't come over on the boat. He loved the boat trip. But he went back to stay in Sweden? Yeah, and he worked for the school board, well, the county or whatever state they have chartered there, and then he worked for the city too. It was funny because the first time he was here, you know, and when we were in Sweden, he couldn't go. He didn't know anything about English anymore. So then Dr. Rogers had a boat, and he said to Henri, you should take his brother, and they go right on the boat on the Mississippi. Yeah, the debut, we had a big boat, 40 feet long. And then he had to talk English to the doctor. He had to talk English. And after that, we said, we're not talking English. No, no, because she had hard to talk Swedish, you know, so we hardly talked Swedish more than we were to eat at Nabbit over here. Yeah, we talked Swedish. They talked a little English. So you know Mrs. Thor, your parents were Swedish? Yes. And they came to South Dakota? Yeah, my father homesteaded. Up around Arlington? Yeah. Where did he come from in Sweden? Uruguay. Uruguay. And your mother also from the same area? Uh-huh. How many children were you in the family? Thirteen. Thirteen? Uh-huh. I see. So he homesteaded there, and he stayed there all his life then? Yes. And it was 160 acres? To begin with, I guess. 120, the government do this way, they give you five years, and if you improve on the land, then you get it for a dollar an acre. And then if you want to buy some more, if the government improves, that you've done good, see, then you can buy 60 acres or 100 acres. He bought them, he had 320 altogether. And what year did he homestead up there? He come 1972, and he worked on the railroad. 1872 he worked. 1872. And he worked on railroad for a while, and then he farm. So I suppose he started farming in 78. 1878. We never listened much to my father when he talked, you know, but he did when he came out there. So you met your... Oh yeah, we've been there, I would say, 30 times. So it's 550 miles from here. So there must have been a rough time though the first years in draft and... It must have been hard, yeah. He told how he'd go 30 miles to buy a sack of flour, you'd have to walk, you know. He carried you on the back. Oh, he had a horse. Yeah, he plowed with a cow first. So Brookings was the nearest town then to... No, well, the biggest, Arlington was. He must have went to Brookings to get the flour. What church did you belong to up there? Mission. Mission Covenant? Yeah, Spring Lake. So there was a congregation there. How many Swedish families were living around there? Oh, there was many. It was a Swedish settlement. Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish. One wealthy farmer. He brought so many. We always called them greenhorns. Direct from Sweden? Yeah, to work the land and, you know. Were there more Swedes than Norwegians and Danish people? Oh, I think so, yeah. There was a Norwegian church there, too. So there were a lot of Norwegians. But, of course, I was with most of the Swedish people. So when you were growing up then with your friends up there, did they all leave the area to bigger cities like Chicago? Or did they stay on up there? No, not all of them. No. They got married, but the farmers... So one of your brothers then took care of the homestead? Well, no. For the last, I had a brother still. They still live on the homestead. We had a fellow out there. He was a senator, a neighbor. He wanted always to write up about our family, because we still lived. Just like he wanted them to live. And there was hardly any... I guess there was just about nobody that did that. The families had disappeared. But my sister, when she was living, she never wanted to have a write-up about it. So he never got it done. Now, my brother that is left on the farm, he is very sick this fall. So I don't know if he'll get back or not. Is his children... He never married. He never married. Three of them never married. Most of them, do they move out or do they stay up there? Of 13 children? I have a sister in Des Plaines. And I did have a sister in St. Paul. And then a brother, John, he was at Elmhurst. He worked for Commonwealth Edison. He was an electrical engineer. So you had a chance then to continue your schooling up there. You went through the grade school and the... And then I went to high school. High school. And then I went to one year of college at Madison, Teachers College. Madison, Wisconsin? No. South Dakota. South Dakota. I taught country school for four years. Up in South Dakota? Uh-huh. Your oldest brother. Your oldest brother. His name was... Henry. Henry. And he went to school just like you did and... Well, I don't think he went any farther, maybe than third or fourth grade. Third or fourth grade. But he educated himself. Through his girlfriend, then, or he married... Well, I think maybe part of it himself. And then he married this university graduate. And I actually helped him. What kind of work was he doing? First he clerked in a store, and then afterwards he owned his own store. In Arlington. In Arlington is where he worked. But then in Murdo is where... Murdo, South Dakota is where he had his store. And then they retired and moved back to Minneapolis where she was from. And then afterwards they went out to California where he died. They both died out there. When was the first time you visited your... 1972. 1932. 1932. You've been back there all day, huh? 1932. Yeah. After we get married, that was in July, in 32. Your wife, no, she didn't encourage you to stay in Arlington at that time. No. There was no homesteads at that time. You never had the urge to do that? No, no. No. No open land and fresh air? No, it was good. When you know you come from the city and come out on the farm, you know, first time is kind of bad. You're lonesome for the city. My brother and I. You were lonesome? Yeah. You wanted to go back to the city? Yeah. Why? How long did you stay up there? A week. I had my week vacation, see. You got homesick after a week? I don't think so. It was a bad time. You know, then I had a lot of relatives that went. And they fixed us lovely dinners, you know. How about your father-in-law? He couldn't bend your arm, I mean, to have you? He had plenty help. The sons and daughters. So what kind of farming arrangement did he have? Was it sunflowers at that time? No. He didn't start with that later? Wheat and— I don't think they ever raised sunflowers. No, I don't think so either. It was fairly north and close to Minnesota. Minnesota, yeah. We saw some when we went out there. But at that time it was corn and wheat. Yeah. And wheat, oats and barley. And hay. Yeah, they had pigs and chickens and cows. Now it's soybeans, of course, but that's, you know, in later years. They used to plant flax. So your father was doing pretty good then to raise— Oh, yes, he used to. A lot of hard work, though. He had a lot of house, a lot of work, hard work. But now in later years, you know, the boys was taking over. He was sitting on the chair. He had it good. The last 15 years he had good. Did he come down there at any time to see you? No, no. He never came to Rockford? No. He had no interest to take the train down to El Correo? No, no. No, I guess he was— And he did go back to Sweden once, though. Yeah. And my mother was very nearsighted. She never got glasses, you know, so she didn't enjoy traveling too much. But, of course, at home she knew how to do everything, you know. She was used to the house. Yeah. Then he was telling me—I didn't know— First, when he was telling me, he went walking to the grocery store, and there was a brooking, and that's about 25 miles, you know. And on the way home, they got a snowstorm, and he froze one of the toes. And he took his knife out and cut that toe in the first joint and wrapped it up, and that was it. No doctor. That was tough. So he was afraid of gangrene, then? Yeah. You know, on the road? No, no, he'd done it home. Come home, see that toe didn't come back, see. See, that turned white then when it frozen, see. Yeah. And he cut it off. And he was never sick after? No, no. That's what he said. I said, you sure are tough. Well, I guess they had to be. They were practical people. They couldn't be soft like we are. No, no, no. Farmers nowadays, they have a— Did you tell Dr. Rogers about that? Oh, yeah. What did he say? Well, he said that was okay because he wrapped it up, and the first joint and the second joint had been terrible, he said. Sometimes you wonder if you need a doctor. Yeah. In Sweden, you know, they thought I was crazy. Those guys here bought us out. No. No, I said that's true. Yeah. And when she was teaching school, that was about a mile from our home. And, you know, he couldn't walk, so he had to take the horses and the sled and take them to school and come and get them because that really gets snow out there. It's cold and windy. Oh, 50, 60 degrees, see. Yeah. It's strange to how people can get used to it, they can get used to it. Oh, yeah. But, you know, moving, no one ever think about moving up there. No, no, no, no, no. No. I like Rockford. Yeah. I just like Schoosbury. I like Rockford. So you worked there for 54 years for Dr. Rockford? No, 44. 44 years? Yeah, steady. And then he went to home, to an elderly home here, and then I took him out, me and my wife, we took him out once a week. And we went out and eat, and then I took him for a ride. But he paid all the expenses and gas and everything, so. So he died, and he died three years ago now. Three years ago. Mm-hmm. He was 91. And he still lived in the same place? No, he was in the home then. In the home then? Yeah. His wife? Yeah, she died before. She died in the home there, too. She just was there about a year, and he was there eight years. Yeah. He had a room there, and he was lame in one leg, see? So he limp when he walks, see? So he said, will you serve the meal to my room? And he said he will, when there'll be extra shots. And he said, that's okay, I shall. He was born to a millionaire, see, in Chicago. So York Park was his home. So they were well-to-do then? He was well-to-do here, too. What about his children? Did they stay on in Rockford? No, yeah, one. One? One, and a daughter in Minneapolis. And she died, she'd been on vacation six years ago, and when she come home the next day, she died. She dropped, she had sugar tuberculosis, and she dropped on the floor in the kitchen. Yeah. And Dr. E was 91 when he died, and Mrs. was 89, close to 90. What about his son, though? What kind of vocation did he take up? One preacher. Yeah, and one worked for Woodward Governor, Danny. Just as a worker, or? He was in the office there, an ex-man. Well, they trained out different machines. That's the last home Dr. Radius saw. When he died, he took over the house there. And Dr. Radius, he owned the land where Rockford College is, or the Springbrook College. That's where he lived. Yeah, that's where he lived. He lived out there? Yeah, mm-hmm. That was just a farm then. He bought it in 1947, and he moved out in 1950. And then he sold it in 1965. He got $740,000 for it. And he paid $58,000, and he spent that money on fencing, and the house, and garage, and greenhouse, and all that. So there was not a clear profit. Was he a doctor at the Swedish American? No, he went to all hospitals. Oh, he was a private practitioner. Yeah, he went to them. I don't know if doctors can do that anymore. I don't know. No, no. He was really with Rockford Memorial, but he could go to a... Well, he's a doctor now. He went to my hospital. That's all. So you were not able to participate then with the Swedes too much in organizations like that, because you were working steadily on their... Yeah, well, she went to church, and I went to work. What church did you join then? First Free. First Free? Mm-hmm. Yeah, so that's... And how about other Swedes? There have been a lot of original people they've been talking about, I've met over the years, people they had a hard time during the Depression. Yeah, well, most of them here, you know, there was a steel factory, a machine factory, Rockford. And the furniture, they started, the furniture started, and then they went down, and then the machines. So Rockford really been a good town to work. Very good, and that was because of the unions. Well, first they didn't have any union. No, no. And later on, Chicago, you know, was pushing that. So they came from Chicago and the union idea. Yeah. You don't remember anything about the Swedish Socialist Club here in Rockford? No, no. You didn't congregate with the kind of... No, no, no, no. How about... Do you remember Bus Albin? You never heard of him? Bus Albin, no. Vill Svinet? You got me there. Boven? You never met him? So you didn't meet those people in the 70s? No, no, no, no. How about Crazy Alma? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. That was one. Yeah. Pete Peterson. Oh, yeah, he was still living then when you came here. Oh, yes, oh, yeah. Pete Peterson, who was that? That's a new one. Well, I don't know. Did you say he was a socialist? Yeah, he was a socialist. He went and... He was so nice. Nice and new. But he... He was just different. Yeah. Was he well-educated then, or... I don't know, because... Whatever became of him, do you know? I don't know. They say he moved to Freeport, but I don't know. That's many years ago. And he come, he talked, you know, and he never go. He stood there, if you stood there one hour or ten hours, he stood there preaching and... Politics? Yeah, mm-hmm, yeah. I see, and he was on 7th Street then? Yeah, 7th Street and Broadway. What kind of work was he doing then? I don't know, I don't know. The first time I saw him, we were with Dr. Rogers at Huffman House. And Otto went up to pay the bill. The doctor was in a wheelchair. And then I saw him talking to this well-dressed man, and they had such a long conversation, and I thought it must have been another doctor or something. He looked so nice. And then he came over to doctor and me, and he said, could I sit down at the table and eat with you people? And he said, well, we were just ready to leave. We were just, you know. So he was just anxious to talk? Yeah. And then Otto told me it was just Pete Peters that I'd heard so much about. Yeah. We called him Crazy Pete. But then he told him all his marital troubles. That's what he was telling Otto when he was saying that. Yeah, yeah. But this Alma now, she was a Swede? Yeah, she came from Sweden. She was all right. But, you know, she's a good yabla, yabla gubbe there. She swore like a dick in the... So she didn't do any particular work then? She was just... Yes, what I understood, she worked in some restaurant in the Walshley district. And then she went into home, did she? Yeah. Yeah, the last she went into home. And I think she worked for that Eklund on 7th Street. Oh, you mean Sweden House, Eklund? Yeah. When they have their... on 7th Street, when I first come here, see? And I think she worked for them. So, the crazy Alma, we know them, too. And she lived... It's not too long ago she died, is it? 25 years ago? Oh, that can't be that, can it? 25 years? Yeah, so she died. Oh, I wouldn't wonder. Maybe, time go fast when you get old. So she was well-known? Yes, she was. She worked up on 7th Street most of the time. Sometimes she was up on Broadway. Yeah. Well, you know. First time I saw her was... I lived on 5th Street and off Broadway there. And I was going to go downtown, and I took a walk. So I went Broadway to 7th Street to not get lost. And then 7th Street down to East 8th Street and downtown. And the home, here was that lady with three or four guys, and she was there, and she swore, and she cussed, and things like that. She hit people sometimes. Yeah. Especially women, she seemed to get mad at. Yeah. And I went to the next window, and look, there was a shoe store there. So I went and listened, and boy, the language she was using, I think, was terrible. She used to talk Swedish all the time? Yes, Swedish, yes, sure. And the Swedish language she used, I was not used to that. Ha ha ha. Oh, yeah. So she used a refined language. Yeah. So, you know. And she didn't have anything to do when she went up one side, down, and up and so on. But when it was cold weather, you didn't see her. No, no. She stayed in then? Yeah, it was. Yeah. So she finally left Rockwood. Yeah. She got old and... Yeah. Well, I think they took her down to, what is it, Eldon? It was telling. But nobody knows, so I couldn't say. She had no relation, I suppose. Skooksberg, Axel, he knew her more than I did. Oh, I see. Yeah. He was closer to Axel. Yeah, well, he'd go there, 7th Street, all the time, you know, so. He lived in that neighborhood for so long? Yeah, and Fifth Avenue there, you know, right across from... He's been living there for most of his time? Yeah. So they married that lady. Well, we lived on Fifth Avenue. Virginia and Axel weren't married, and her folks were living. And Axel lived next door with another fellow in a room there. So I think he's been on Fifth Avenue just about all the time. So you have been healthy then and active all the time? Yeah. You used to bowling? Yep, mm-hmm. Every week? Every week, every Monday from 1 we start, and you're through about 3.30. Yeah. He is very, very active. He keeps you in shape? Yeah. And then I have helped elderly people, cut the lawn, do a little repair, and so on. And then I have my own lawn. What year did you become a citizen? 1932. 1932. Mm-hmm. So how did you order then, for Roosevelt or Hoover? You got me there. I don't know who was running then. Well, have you— I'm a Democrat. You're a Democrat? Yeah. Never been a Republican? No. I mean, I changed. I mean— You don't vote straight? No, no. We look for the man. We vote wherever we think is best. But I'm not that strong Democrat, so that's— So you lived in the Hallstrom and Broome? Yes, oh, yeah. Good mayors. Yeah, good mayors, yeah. So that's—yeah, I have to say I've been lucky, and I like Rockford, so that's the main thing. Yeah, so that's— So you have one son, then— Yeah, and he only lived seven, eight life in here. What kind of work is he doing? He's a tool and die maker. Tool and die maker? Mm-hmm. For certain stunts or—? No. Men's tool and die. Men's tool. Yeah. It's a smaller factory. Mm-hmm. On East Rockville. One boy is 20, and the other one is 17. So they are— Goes to Rockville, and then he's a salesman for computers. Mm-hmm. And the other one is a senior in high school. So you have a full employment family, then? Yep. So far they've been good. You never know what they're going to turn out, kids nowadays. Well, when they get over the teenage, I think it's usually—