 This is cassette two, a continuation with Miss Edith Weston, Omaha, Nebraska. Cassette two, side one. I had a question on the previous cassette. If your mother was pushing the Swedish anything in a particular way? Oh yeah, she taught us to love Sweden as such, but to love America more. Be so thankful we're here. But she evidently talked Swedish, we answered in English, but it rubbed off on me so I can talk Swedish, or could when I had the chance. I read books in Swedish. I read that Les Miserables is a Sam Helles Ulrichsborn. That's a classic I guess. So I read it in English. And also in Swedish. Sam Helles Ulrichsborn, Les Miserables, I guess it's Spanish or something, I forget now. But we took Svenska Amerikanska Punsten, Svenska Amerikanska, and my mother, they had a crossword puzzle and she worked at it every week, in Swedish of course. And I wasn't much help. They were a little bit too hard for you. But your classmates in high school, they were Swedish. Were they interested in the same way as you? It was forced on them like it was on me. So I'm surprised every once in a while some of these, even yet today, will quote something from the old Swedish. So we were all brought up about the same I guess. But when it was going on, the interest wasn't that particularly deep. Oh no. In other words, it was more than necessary to learn in school. Oh no, we made fun of the Swedes. In fact, I hate to admit this, but there was a time in my life when I was ashamed that I was a Swede. That was during the First World War. Yeah, maybe. But I'd gotten the idea that, I remember in my nose before the First World War, because when I was little, I thought, well anyhow, it's better to be a Swede than a Negro. And that's terrible. But there was the comparison you made, I suppose. It was, yeah, that I... At that time. Dumb Swedes who kind of got across to me that they were. But I didn't think my parents were dumb. I thought my father was the smartest man. I know better now, but I still feel that way about him. He knew all the answers, I thought. He wanted the best. Yeah. Did they invite people often? Oh yes. Why they did, how they could do it, I don't know. So your mother was very kind to people, you said? Oh my, yeah. Yes, but your father, now, did they... A little more... Reserved? Yeah, a little more reserved, yeah. But very pleasant. He had the nicest white teeth and he smiled. And he played with us kids. Not only prayed with us, but also played with us. We went on picnics every time we could. Had a good time together. Was he interested in the outdoor life? Yeah, we don't have any water around here. But there's a little damp water out in the Carter Lake. It's now taken over by the Negroes. But we went out there Sundays and weekends. You swam there too? And hired a rowboat and went rowing. That was... Were you able to swim in that lake in Carter Lake? At that, yeah. It was clean enough then? Yeah, they had a bathhouse there too. We would fish. But Missouri was not good for swimming. No. No, I guess... There was never... You don't remember any beach on Missouri? Of course, Missouri means muddy, muddy river. We go out there frequently because they got a nice restaurant right on top of the river. And I just love to sit there and watch the river. On the Omaha side? On the Omaha side. The bluffs on the other side, you know. But the fishing was good there. Yeah, well... Catfish or... Yeah. But that water is so muddy. It really is brown. So do you remember any shipping on Missouri? Well, they have a barge that go up and down the river now. A great big barge went up the other day. I don't know what they were hauling. How far do they go, Hampton? Yeah... Sioux Falls, I guess. But maybe beyond that, I don't know. So there was some shipping traffic here? Yeah. A few years ago, too, then. And how was the cooperation with other nationalities, now like the Irish? Your family didn't meet with them. It was only the Swedish people and then the Jews. Well, when my father got sick and my mother had to go out and work, she made friends with the Irish. She did? Oh, yes. Of course, she was the outgoing person. Did they come to her home occasionally? Oh, yes. They did? Uh-huh. So they had coffee and then... Oh, yes. Vetebröd. Oh, rødbröd, too. Rødbröd. Oh, yes. They baked every Saturday. Every Saturday? Bullar. I remember, the one house we moved in 1907 did not have indoor plumbing. No, they had the back house. But I remember on Saturday... No bathtub either? No bathtub. My father was an iron worker and he worked with the albinized iron. He made us a bathtub, but we had to fill it with water. You had it in your own house then? Yeah, in the basement. But I can remember the Saturday... One of the nicest memories I can remember on Saturday night when they stoked up the range in the kitchen. I know it was real warm. And we got our weekly bath and my father and mother worked together. And then Mama had baked so that she had a builder. And when I was through, my father would wrap me in a blanket and give me a bill I'd have in my hand and carried me to my bedroom. Said the prayers together. That's my fondest memory. That was every Saturday? That was every Saturday. Oh, yes. So you didn't hesitate to take the bath then? No, no. It was pleasant. They made it pleasant, yeah. And how was the routine now? Did Mother go up first in the morning to make the fire in the stove? Oh, no. Dad got up first. He was the first one up? He got up and put on the coffee pot. I know that. That was the first one. So they started with the coffee. And then they had breakfast. And what did they have for breakfast now, as usual? It was a hot day here. Our folks were poor, but we ate well. My mother had a good appetite. I told you, I think she weighed 230 pounds or something. She was fat and she was jolly. And although we gave birth to five children, only two of us reached maturity, so it was a lot of sadness. But we kids had to have fun. I remember my mother's statement, man horse or rolex, a man yersay. We couldn't complain that we didn't have a good time. So every fun you could make then was self-made, so to speak, and you could buy it. But breakfast, now, you had oatmeal or bacon or potato salad? Oh, yes. I think we had oatmeal or cream of wheat or something, and cereal. In the morning? Yeah. Did you have coffee also as a child? I think, yeah. You slurped out early? Yeah. With cream in it? With cream and sugar, yeah. Do you remember if you drank the coffee on the saucer at any time? No, but my dad did. I can see him blowing on the saucer when it got too hot, and he was in a hurry, that he poured on the saucer. I see. But only him? Yeah. Not your mother? Well, maybe she did too, but dad would leave when he was in a hurry. And they used a lump of sugar at that time? Oh, yeah. They got the beet. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. And then between the breakfast and lunch or the dinner time, did you have any coffee or anything to eat then? Well, that, you know, when you worked and went to school and everything, there wasn't, but they had Elva coffee, I remember. They had Elva coffee? Yeah. Oh. And the- But the big meal was at evening, of course. In the evening? Yeah. Except on Sundays, then we had- The big meal at night, at noon time, after church? Yeah. And you had dessert then too? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. And there was pie or- Oh, my. Oh, my, there was pie. I remember my dad was sort of a punk. And he was a punster too, he used to make- because I can remember him come in and look at Mama cooking and he says, oh, my, scavihopai. He was a jolly, you know, at the same time as he was a deserved, but- But I have good memories of my childhood, even though a lot of sadness. So but you were younger, you don't remember when your sisters died? Yes. You remember? I was three years old when a baby sister was just two months old died. And I can remember that somebody lifting me up, looking in on a table in the front room, there was this box, and somebody lifted me up and prompted me to say goodbye, little sister. You were three years old. Yeah. And then when I was nine years old, my older sister died. But that was- Do you remember that? Oh, that was my mother. And she was special, absolutely must have been. In fact, I got the idea, I don't know if you want to hear all this, got the idea that it would have been much better if I had died, because she was talented, she could sing, she could draw. I got books showing what she could do, she could sew. And I had none of those abilities, and it didn't make me bitter, for which I am happy because it might have spoiled, you know, a psychiatrist would say, oh, it would. But when we were- she had Bryce's disease, which was not curable at that time, and she was in the hospital. And my brother, who was three years older than I, they went there and they knew that she was dying, so they called. We didn't have a telephone, but they called to a neighbor, and the neighbor came over and told us to go to the hospital. And we come in, my sister was rational, and mom, of course I was embarrassed, I didn't know what to do. And she says, go over and talk to Hilder. And Hilder sang, oh, that shall be glory for me, when by his grace I shall look on his face, that will be glory for me. She died the next day. I read in my brother's diary where he tells about this story and how it affected him. And he also ends by saying, I hope to meet her there. And that's when I decided I was never to do anything that would make my mother cry. She almost lost her mind. I can remember hearing her crying out loud. That was terrible. And she didn't have any more children? Yeah, then she had another boy, and Gatif Thiriyan died when he was ten years old, and we had to live through that too. So it was just my brother and I, of course. He was three years older than I, died last year. But life went on. Yeah, but dad was sick, and that was the worst part. But we all had typhoid fever, you know, and that didn't. And left him weak, and being an ironworker, he had to lay off. And there was no insurance or anything to pay for any hospitalization? No. And he had no pension. He got $25 a month from the union. So he was a union man then? Well, he had to be. I think that the Andreen, who was the Swede from Sweden, who was the businessman and was in charge, paid their union dues, but didn't pay them union salaries. But in order to get the jobs, he had to have union men. He was a, I don't know. There was a lot of finagling. Yeah, a lot of finagling. And at that time, I suppose, the workers didn't make any questions, because they were happy to have their jobs. That's right. So there was no complaining? No. Like it is today, for instance. No. Now they know exactly what to ask for. And they were, the Swedes were all Republicans at that time. It's strange, though, how the workers could be Republicans. Yeah. Because they were, my father explained it to me, that when the economy was good for the rich people, the workers were better off. Yeah, you mentioned that. And I suppose that... They were told that it's the way it works. So that in our church, the Swedish Mischkovnit, there was only one, maybe I told you, there was only one family that was... Democrat. And he was a Democrat because William Jennings Bryan was a Christian, and he thought he had to work for him. What they taught us, I can see my brother still waving a flag, he says, I am a little American. That was what... Oh, and my mother thought it was wonderful. Free library and all kinds of free parades, and we took in everything that was free. Did people help each other? I mean, the Swedes know they're living in the neighborhood, if something happened. There wasn't... Insurance wasn't looked on with favor, exactly, but our church had a fyrkjapsförening, but that was... They gave you a dollar a week, a couple of dollars a week. Something like that, uh-huh. And of course they helped each other. And then the old people, they have to stay with their children, now when they got old and they're living their own... Oh, yeah. Well, what happened to the one that was not married? No sister, no brothers, what happened? Well, they got jobs as long as they could in the family, and they maybe stayed with the family. And even my age of gals that came from the country and got a job in the family, and they stayed with them until they retired. So there was not too many that was walking the streets then and... No, no. Sleeping in the alleys, and... Because you would think the ones that didn't have any families, they were... Who took care of them. Well, they had county homes though. Oh, yeah, but they were terrible, those county homes. Nobody wanted to go there. Nobody wanted to go there. We called them poor farms. Were they in the city or were they outside? They were not very far from here, about eight blocks from here, that is toward town, 48th, yeah. How were they run though? Did they have farms so they could garden and... Yeah, well... They could sustain... I don't know what they did. Of course, they were government-owned and controlled, and I don't know how they made their money. But there was the upkeep was poor. Yeah. And cleanliness. Oh, boy. It was those places where some of those old men lived was just... I think they were made four coal bins or something, and... That was a bad situation. Yeah, it's... It passed time. You don't remember any strikes when you were growing up? Yeah. They had strikes in Omaha? They had strikes. I know that they had... I don't know what it is, but anyhow, they had some kind of a demonstration, and they had evidently got into trouble if somebody had... There was strikes and there was disorderly, and there were fights. And I remember that somebody had used a monkey wrench, and that was their... I know they had a parade, and they had made out of wood imitation monkey wrenches, and they were ready to fight. It was more or less fun, but it was... I mean, if she was understood. Yeah. I worked for the Union Pacific through a strike. So you didn't belong to the Union, though? I didn't. No. You worked in an office. Yeah. But it got to be mandatory on certain accepted jobs. And I was fortunate to be on an accepted job because I had a special training. Mine was semi-supervisory, because I had to go through the picket line, and I heard somebody say, oh, leave her go. She's management, which I was not. But anyhow, I had that. So... You had the white flag. You could walk right through. Yeah. Well, I suppose there'll be a bitter feeling among workers when they are... Oh, yeah....fighting for better conditions. How about stores and businesses now here in Omaha? They are owned by Swedes. You have the Swanson Clothing Business. Yeah. And you had the Bloom Monument Works. Yeah. And the Bloom Woodworks. Woodworks, yeah. And then you had Golden Undertakers, Golden... Yeah, NP Swanson. NP Swanson. He was the undertaker. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Was he the only Swedish undertaker? I think so. Yeah, we are. We still do. I mean, you see... He's still in business. The Golden, of course, Golden's there too, but his wife is still in the business. Golden's wife. But they were there at the same time when NP Swanson... Golden was a Jewish guy then? No, he's Swedish. Swedish. And years ago when they had the funeral then, they was down from the home. Yeah. In the 19... when you were born, for instance. Yeah. And we had... You know, my sister died in 1902, was it? Then we had it all from home, the casket was. And then when the funeral... when the... there was a corpse inside, they had a crepe on the door to indicate there was a dead corpse in there. At the home. At the home. So that while Esther's body was in the house, we had the crepe. I remember that. So when did they take the deceased to a funeral home? Was it after the... Well, I think so, because my sister was in a funeral home. And that was 1909. Oh, 1909. So then the custom has started at the funeral home. Do you remember if they had any black bands around the... Oh, yes. They had that? And they had... my mother had a black veil over her hat. That was in 1909. How about the other people, like your friends at that funeral? Were they dressed in black too? Oh, well, it was the idea to wear dark clothing, they didn't. When did this idea come in, you can be dressed in shorts or anything, the rest of the funerals, when did the idea come in? Yeah, well, that came... I don't know. I wonder how... My sister died in 1909, my brother died in 1921. He still wears a black veil in 1921. So it was... And the other people, now they're visiting, attended the funeral, were they also in dark? Yeah. Dark clothing? Yeah. So that was after the Second World War, perhaps, they started to wear any kind of... I think so, absolutely. I think so. They were probably the closest to using black. Why was that, you think? I don't know. Styles change, I don't know. They don't want to have a black suit, I suppose. I don't know. They like those things after... So gradually, you don't realize what is happening, that you look back. Yeah, I don't know. But now they can come in green and blue and red and everything. What about in Sweden? They still dress in darker clothing. They don't use gray or... Now, when we were there in 1953, I observed the funeral. I wasn't going, but I saw them. They came on bicycles, but they had a high top hat. Do they still do that? Well, only the pallbearers might use it. But I think they go away from there. But they used to have a dark suit, though. They still do that? Well, it's like the show to respect, you know. Yeah, well, it makes sense. But maybe nobody would come to a funeral here if they didn't have the casual clothing. So at changing times, and women's right to vote, you remember that? Yeah. You were able to vote then when the right came in then? You were old enough. Yeah. I didn't know when. I wasn't very... That was after the Second... the First World War. Yeah. Were the women anxious to vote? Well, some were. How about your mother? Did she talk about it? No. Did she vote? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. You betcha. She voted as soon as she was able to. But there was no discussion about it before then? No. Because even after she got... she had trouble walking the last years, but she got some of the tickets of the polls. How do you see it now with this voting right? Do you think they suppressed the women too long? I mean, it was late for the... Well, I had... I of course am for equal... pay for equal votes. But I was so satisfied. I think that they so got lost a lot in becoming equal. Because I... Equal rights. I mean, they were equal. They had to give as well as take, you know, and equal. And I liked the way I was treated. I did have to fight to get certain jobs. And I did manage to get on two jobs that were never... Men......were men before. They told me that I... that was... I said, why now? Because I had a talking point now because the... it was changing. The employers had to do it. And I said, give me a chance. Give me a chance. One job, for instance, had... No, that's somebody's door, I think. Vivian's coming home. So, and there was a job that no woman had before. Yeah. You were the first one. Yeah. On two... I fought for two jobs and I got them. How were you able then to get to do so? They said that I told... You know what? I told them that the laws are changing and you have to... And they began to put pressure. You have to do it. Or tell the reason why. They said I couldn't have the job because I had to deal with salesmen. And the salesmen told raw stories. And it wasn't right for a woman to listen. I said, give me a chance. And I was treated great. They tried, you know, would you? Did they pay you the same scale then as... They had to pay me the same scale. They did. Of course, there were some jobs I never got that I played for, too, that I never got because... You did the job as well as a man. Oh, sure. And what year was this now? 1950s, in the 1950s, I think. So there was many known Northampere women to come in? Oh, yeah. Supervising? Oh, yeah. And it was hard. People tried to fight. I had more trouble with the men that would have liked to have had my job. And I got it over them, you know. Because they tried to undermine you. Oh, yes. And make it miserable. Yeah. But you didn't go back. No. No, but I liked the way I was treated. They treated me with respect. And the women, oh, like holding a door for you and things like that. I kind of liked that. They did at that time. Yeah. Yeah. Well, then when you came in top management, then they had to hold up the door for you. No. I think they would rather slam my face in my door. But anyhow, I happen to like men talk. And even yet, I don't like women bosses. Yeah, but you did all right with your supervising. Well, yeah, it was semi-supervisory. But I know that people really made it. I had to. I don't want to go through that woman. I heard that said. But they had to, you know. Not too much, but at least they gave me some satisfaction. You have to have a lot of skin in your back, then, to take the pressure. Yeah. Yeah. So, and how long were you in that position then, until you retired? Yeah. So you were one of the early birds, then, in getting the rights and positions. Yeah, it was, it's different now. Now it's different. Yeah. But the courtesy maybe has been slacked now, then. Oh, sure. After they happened. Oh, yeah. So it's a… I think they lost a great deal, the woman. Yeah. What do you think about the women pastors? Well, we had a chance to show that, and I was certainly not in favor of a woman pastor. They wanted one. In fact, the preacher, they were going to have an associate. And the preacher had contacted a woman, and I think had promised her the job. And she didn't get it, and I was on the opposite side. Women, I can tell by reading a letter whether it's written by a woman or a man. In what way? You mean in handwriting? Yeah, I mean, if I don't like it, a woman must have written that. So I'm prejudiced, and I'm sorry. I'm not a domestic animal. But there are quite a few women in the group. Oh, yeah. One of our churches, starting a new church in Miller, and the assistant pastor is to be a woman. And she is one that married one of our boys, so we're very good friends. And she was made to be a preacher, there's no question about it. She's got all, she can talk louder and better and more distinctly than a man can. So in her case, it's okay. Regarding the Swedish store owners, did the Swedes patronize those stores? Or did they go to the American owners instead? Well, the only retail ones were grocery stores and meat market stores, except at Swanson. Oh, yes, Ambassador Clothing had a good reputation. They were high class. So when you bought your clothes, for instance, now you could go to stores anywhere. You had as good clothing here as in Chicago or New York. They came in fast. There were big stores here. Well, they do now. At first, Marshall Fields in Chicago attracted me very much. So you took the train then? Yeah. So there was better sort of... Yeah, I had a cousin in Chicago, so I went there. And I thought it was great. But they have a good store here now. But they was in the early 20s, though. They had Brandeis and Hayden's and the three big department stores that sold everything. So there was a good store in the early 20s of the ladies' fashion. Yeah, but many of the members of our church had their own business, grocery stores. Made their delivery, they had. The interview with Edith Westerlund continues next slide. Next slide. This is cassette two, side two. With Edith Westerlund, Omaha, Nebraska. Cassette two, side two. In the Covenants, they had a hospital here. Do you remember that? Yeah, and it was quite a going affair, but it went under during the Depression. They needed help from the headquarters, and they didn't get it. And that was a terrible... it was a going situation. How big of a hospital was it? Gee, how big it... it wasn't a tiny hospital, but I don't know how many beds they had. A hundred beds or something? Yeah. And the nurses then from North Park? They had a training class here. Here in Omaha? Yeah. I know some people just had their 50th anniversary of the graduates from the Covenant Hospital. So they have a training course here. Yeah, and I taught there. I taught, had Bible class up there. That's before I had a car, I remember. And this hospital, the Covenant Hospital, was there only for the Swedes? No, they took... For others? Yeah, but it was mostly Swedes. See, the Covenant had a big hospital in Chicago. Yeah, the Swedish Covenant, yes. But they were not able at that time to support out there? No. Divian's brother-in-law was our pastor then, and that was a sad day for Paul Erickson when they had to close that place. Oh. So that... it went under because of the Depression. Yeah. I never... maybe I told you this, or I never knew very much. My father didn't have any work at all. Carpenters had no work. But I kept my job, and they gave a 15% reduction. But the salary remained the same, less, and then when... Returned, where I'd done it, 15% went up again automatically. So we didn't feel that we... How did you get your pay increases? Because you didn't belong to the union? No. Did you ask for it, or you just had to wait until the... Oh, you had to wait till the... It was... in 1919 I got $100 a month, which was fabulous, I guess, for someone just out of high school, you know. $100 a month? Yeah. And... Your dad didn't make that kind of money? No, I made more money than he did. And that was right out of high school. Don't you think he thought that he came to a crazy country, or he came to a... Oh, man. I never thought of going and doing anything else, because they were hard up. All I thought of, I got to get some money. Help pay the... pay the taxes and pay the... That's all I could hear about. They had to save money for Skaterna. Yeah, but they didn't pay too much Skaterna. No, I guess not, but anything... Anything that was worth a stop. Even a small one. At that time, Omaha was a very busy railroad station, because this was like a... Oh, yeah....center for the Midwest, so to speak. They came from Chicago and went west. They... at that time, when I worked there, it was right after the First World War. 1918, didn't they? Yeah, that's after the First World War. Yeah, November 11th. It was my... the day the armistice was signed was my folks' silver wedding day, November 11th, 1918. So they had a celebration in church. But then they were... it was still under government control. That was very, very bad. There was no discipline. The gals, the stenographers, didn't have enough work to keep them busy, and they would take their work right at their desk, so they're closed. Really. The only thing is that they asked the people to look busy if you could, if someone came in. They should look busy. And if you'd sit there quietly and read at your desk, that's okay. So they had their whole work with them to job them. Yeah. And then they go on, not too long after that? No, not too long. They settled down. How could they be so lazy? I mean, at least at that time... That's the trouble. Well, it happened in... it happens in government now. Limited money. Like, you pay $600 for a toilet seat. They got... it's their money, well, you just get it. It had to be a showdown. Now, that's what's happening now in the large places. They're cutting it down. It was too many employees. They are overstocked. They got to fish them off, just like the fish in the pond. Otherwise they choke each other. So it's a rat race. Yeah, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. But overall, though, people have increased the living standard tremendously. From the old house to the chicken coop and to the modern grocery stores. Bag after bag. Years ago they had to... It's going to keep on. That can't keep on. That deficit has got to come down. Nobody seems to worry, though. Every once in a while you read something about somebody. I read in the U.S. News and World Report. It can't last. And now that Russia is getting common sense, they're liking decent people, of course, they're always going to be competitors, but they don't have to be mortal enemies if they do settle down to decency. Who knows? Well, now, what about Sweden? About Skatner? They are skatters. Yeah, they got them. They got them. But it seems to work. Well, it's crazy. Old Regan, he says, he says, don't raise taxes. You can't spend more money than you got. And then you come in. They call it bankruptcy other places. Yeah, there's new terms every week. And nobody knows what to do. So that's... Of course, Sweden takes care of their older people better than we do.