 Yeah, we have 21st of July 1986 and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Agnes Grud, Rockford, Illinois. And she was born 1907, 27th of December in Rockford. Your parents now, they both came from Sweden? Yes, they both came at the same time. They were married in Sweden, in Espolt, Skåne. So if we start about your father first, Wilhelm Holmberg. Otto, yeah, Otto Wilhelm. He was born on a farm here? Yes, he was, well even in a small village. His parents were, his father was a wagon maker, and Faramore was a midwife. And she practiced for over 45 years, and she was extremely well thought of by her clientele, her patients. And I had occasion to visit with one of the women who she had attended, you know. She had five children. So your father came out of a family of five children then? No, no. He was, he had a brother who passed on early on when he was in the military. He died of pneumonia, I believe it was. So my mother never even met him because he had been gone many years. And so my father was the only child left on the family side. And my mother was one of eight. And she was sort of in the middle, so to say, you know. She had, let me see, there was Aunt Nettie, Aunt Tura and Nettie, and then Aunt Marie and Hilma. And then my mother. So there were the five girls and three boys in her family. And she came out of a farm family then? They had a farm? Yes, they had a farm. Her father was a bricklayer, so he was busy with that. But they had a small place in the country, you know. And it was down in Vimmerslev? Vimmerslev, yeah. Close to Symmershamn? Yeah, down in there. In the Höggradsgården. So your parents then, they met in, how did they meet? In church or? They met, yeah, my mother was working. She was a child-pig in the press-yard, down in Esport, where my father's parents lived. So that's how they met. And they got married in 1907, in the spring, on March 6th. March 6th. Aha, and I was born on the 27th. So they went to America immediately after the wedding? Yes, in April. Did they have a wedding? Yes, they had a wedding, a wedding there at... At my father's parents' house, they had a big house. The only son? The only son, yes. And they wanted to see that my father and mother would stay in Sweden, but my father had been to big countries and he wanted to go to America. Tell us a little about your father's travels to the big seas. Yes, I love that he had... Well, I wish I had taken notes, you know, about some of the things that he told us about. I know that he talked about sailing, you know, around the horned area down below South America, that is very treacherous. Cape Horn. Cape Horn, yeah. So he went to sea when he was a young guy then? Yes, aha. And because he was 27 when he married my mother, and so as I say, they came over here and then he worked at Rockford Drop Forge. Not right away, he worked for W.F. and John Barnes for a number of years. And they were hard times back in those days, you know, but he got a job there. So when he came over, do you think they had friends or a relation here in Rockford? Well, my grandfather and my Uncle Ernie were already here in Rockford. On your mother's side? Yeah, on my mother's side, yeah. But they were here? Yeah. They had come earlier than two? Two, they had someone to... Two of them? Yeah, my grandfather and then my... he was a bachelor uncle, my Uncle Ernie. But Grandma, she must have left to Sweden. The parents, yeah, the parents didn't come with him, you see. And my mother's mother died young, she was just 52. So then it seemed strange, my grandfather, you know, was here, that is. My great-grandfather was here, and he dreamed one morning, when he came out to the kitchen for breakfast, he said, I think that my mother has gone away, and she died that same night. They found out when they got the telegram. So he had a dream? Yeah, it was... so she had a long shot. And she was still... she was in Sweden then? She was in Sweden, yeah. And he was here? He was here, yeah. I don't know how many years he was here, but it was... It was before, while I was little. Was it the intention that Grandma would come over afterwards, or did she... I don't know, I don't know. But he... I think my brother Ernst came first, or they came together. I don't remember that. But anyway, my grandfather came back when my mother... His wife died. Yeah, his wife died, yeah. So they had a place there, so he lived there until he was 72 years old, when he died. Did he have more children than your son and mother? There were eight, yes? Yeah, there were eight, yeah. Eight, yeah. So my brother Eric came over after Ernst, so he came later, after my grandfather was... So is it possible that your mother wrote to her father and brother that she wanted to come over here, or... Or how did the trip go? Because they had to come to someone, to make it easier for them, maybe. Yeah, my parents came here, so that... So it's more likely that your mother had written to him then, and said that we are coming over? Oh, yes, yes, of course, yeah. Was he living in Rockford then? Yes, they were both my... Both in Rockford? Yeah, mm-hmm. I see. Yeah, they always lived here, nowhere else. And so my grandfather, he helped build some of the factories here in Rockford. He was a bricklayer, you see, and he was a very good one, I guess, or whatever. So there was his trade. And your uncle, too? No, he was a teamster type of person. He just loved horses. And for many years, he selected the horses for Scandia coal and lumber that they had for their wagons, you know, before they had automotive trucks and so forth, when they had the horses and wagons for the delivery wagons for the coal and lumber. So there was his... And he would always... Ernie Erickson, now he called himself Erickson, and so that's what he did. He went back to Sweden and stayed there for the rest of his life. I see. So he called himself Erickson. Was your grandfather's name Erick Holmbrunner? Yeah, his name was Nils Erickson, see? Nils Erickson. Yeah. Mm-hmm. So he kept that name. Yeah, so... So did they tell you about the travel over here, your parents going through Ellis Island, and they had no trouble? No, no, they had no trouble, because you see, seeing that they had my mother's father and... To come to. And brother here to come to. And then your father, he was able to speak English, I suppose. And yes, yes, he could speak English. And he didn't have to be afraid to be seasick either when he went over. No, no, I guess not. But my mother was, because she was pregnant with me, she got pregnant right away, you know, the second month that she was married. And so when she wrote to her, to my father's mother, who was the midwife, you know, she wrote to tell her that she was expecting, Farmer wrote back and she said, Well, I knew that when I said goodbye to you at the station. I could see it in your eyes. She's a very sharp, she was a matriarch, my grandmother. So she could see that? Yeah. Like with a full heart? No. And this woman that I called on, when I had Brita along, it was back in 61, I went back there. And she told me, oh, she said, when I saw your mother in the doorway, all my cares just fell away. I didn't worry about anything. I knew I was taken care of. So I thought it was nice for Brita to hear this. Had a good reputation, I see. Oh, yeah. And they didn't want the younger woman was assigned, you know, to take over. But they wouldn't, the patients that my grandmother had attended, they didn't want anything to do with it. It was my mother, Paulson. So she was a matriarch? Yes. Yes, my father said that. So he and his great-grandparents, he grew up with them more than with his mother, because she was out with her bag every day, and her bag. Nothing stopped her, he said, either. She'd drop everything, you know, when she got the word. She probably had to stay there the day you two were disposed? Oh, yes, yes. I say that the very last case that she had, that was while my mother and I were over there, so that my mother stayed in the house with my grandmother there that summer. And one day this wagon came rambling up to the house there, and a man came in and he said his wife was expecting again. It was their tenth child, and he wanted to, my mother, my grandmother was ill at the time. She had gallbladder trouble, so she was in and out of bed, you know, so much. And so my mother tried to tell him, oh, she said, you have to look up the new midwife, because Maude Poulsen is not, she's not able to, she shouldn't go. And oh, well, he said, but, so my mother assumed that this was in the future, you know, not right away. And you know, the next day he came back, and he said, my wife refuses to have anybody else. And she was in labor, she was in labor then. And my mother, my grandmother was in bed, and she heard this conversation. So she called my mother, Elida, to hit me in Vesca. And you know, my mother had to get her dressed, and she got out there, and they put her up on that wagon. She sat on, you know how these old wagons with the board seat there, and I don't know how far it was. It was a distance. She had to go, and she came back two days later, and then she was bent way over like that. And that was the last, she died two weeks later. But as we helped her off of the wagon, she said, Divine Fiend Pogue, you know. And so, and then before she left, she told my mother, she says, I have brought all the other children, there are other children to the world, and I will bring this one also. So that was the last delivery. That was her last delivery. There must have been many hundreds, because every family had so many kids, eight to ten. Yes, true, yes. Yes, and there were a few times when they called the doctor, the husband was worried, and he called the doctor. When he'd come, and he'd see that, oh, yes, and he had more poison, don't be having any into me. He said, that's how much they depended on you know. She had a good reputation. But she said, well, if they were that concerned, why. So she didn't have time to have children of her own. No, she only had the two sons, and she always wished that one of them had been the daughter. So then when I was born, oh my goodness, you know, oh, we should, they should bring me over there, they'll buy the piano, and because my folks later, you know, about that I was playing on this little organ that my mother had there, and so I've always played something, either piano or violin, and so that I was happy that I could at least see her, because my other grandmother, of course, had been gone for many years. So when they came here into Rockford, your father, he started at Barnes. Yes, he worked at Barnes for a number of years. As a blacksmith or? Yeah, he was fireman there, I think, you know, he fed the furnaces and so forth. Did they rent a house first, or did they buy a house? Yeah, well, they rented first for several years, they rented. And then from there, as far as I remember, he went to the Rockford Drop Forge, and he ran their biggest hammer there, you know, where he mowed it. My father was a big, very strong man. So then he came into his father's business more or less. Yeah, well, after all, it was with iron, you know, works and that, but he shaped it big, huge thing, this huge fire. I know I used to bring him lunch sometimes. My mother and I would walk to the shop, and I'd stand and watch him, you know. Of course, it was hard on his, very hard on his legs, so he had trouble later. But he would put his foot on that lever, you know, and that huge thing would come down to red hot, and he had these red hot, huge pieces of iron. But then, so then, and he felt that he wouldn't be able to do that type of work too much longer because he was worried about his legs. And then he went into the meat market business. How old was he at that time when he quit the Rockford Drop Forge? When he quit the Rockford Drop Forge? Oh, he must have been, let me see, he was 10, and he was 20. He must have been in his 40s. 40s? So he realized then that it was a hard job to continue. Yes, that he wasn't going to be able to end, and he liked it. So he had a market over on Broadway. You know where the viaduct is, and then there's that building immediately to the right. It's kind of an iron triangle shape almost, and he built that. So he had a, it was groceries also for a time, and then there was a bakery there. How was he able not to transfer over from mechanical work to a completely different line? Yes, yeah, well, he had a little experience in the old country too with butchering. So he would, for a while there, he did some of his own butchering. He went right to the farms, and then he had a truck, you know, so that's how he got the idea that he wanted to have a store. A business also. And it was successful. So then my mother passed away in 1944. She was just 60 years old. And then my father, I assume in 1944, my father died in 1950. And he never got back to the old country, but my mother and my brother Bob, my youngest brother and I, went over there in 1924. 1924? Mm-hmm. So what do you remember then, meeting the people there? Yeah, I remember, so while we stayed at my paternal grandmother's, my, the boardroom was Kansas. And then I went to, then I studied, I enrolled with the concertmaster of the Göteborg Symphony. And then I lived with my aunt there in Göteborg. And she was a housewife at the Jernvik station there. And my mother, Maria, she lived there in Göteborg. And then I studied with Kaga Ragouli. And then, after a year, he said that maybe I could travel to Germany or Czechoslovakia to continue my studies. And he helped me, wrote letters and such, so I went to Prague. And I studied there for two and a half years, in the German Music Academy. But in the summers, I went up to Sweden, so I was there with my relatives in the summer. And your parents? Yeah, well, it was, so my grandmother died the first summer we were there. She died in July. We came in May. And she died in July. So your mother was at home then? So my mother stayed there in the yard until, I think it was October. And then she and my brother came back. But I stayed in Göteborg with my aunt. Tell us a little bit about your interest in music. How were your mother and father interested in music? My mother had a beautiful voice. She sang a lot at home. So when I was three years old, she would sing a song. She heard it on the organ, so she went into the front parlor, as they called it. And... So here I was. Playing? I was standing on one foot, pumping the organ with the other foot, and then I would pick out the melody on the organ. You did it without any lessons? Yes. How old were you then? Three. Three years old. Three years? Yes. So I have always played. So it came naturally? Yes. But when I was eight years old, I had piano lessons. And when I was nine, I started playing the violin. My father liked the violin music. So both your mother and father liked to help you buy the piano and the violin? Yes. But weren't your parents not happy with the need to learn? They wanted people to work with their hands. Yes, that's true. They were a bit unusual. Yes. They appreciated music. But you didn't have a hard time attending the lessons and being attentive all the time? Oh yes. Was there a Swedish teacher in Rakvor? Yes, my first teacher was a daughter of a Swedish businessman. They had a large garden. It was the Peterson Flower, Greenhouse as they called it. That was on the corner of 7th and State Street. So it was the first teacher? Yes. And then I studied with Eloise Spool Morgan. She gave both violin and piano lessons. I studied with her and her husband. After that I studied with the violin teacher at Rakford College. I studied with him until I went to Sweden. So your mother and father bought a Hardorf. What was the name of the piano manufacturer in Rakford? Mine was the Peckard piano, which was also very good. It was an excellent piano. And then you continued your education in Sweden? Yes. Did your father have a lot of money? Yes, they sent me money so that I could pay for my education. I lived in a free house with my aunt, but I paid for the food. I was a subscriber to the railway station. I had my goals there. My aunt had a cold bed and people around her who liked her a lot. She was very skilful. And you went to school every day? Yes, I had private lessons a couple of times a week. I had to practice. It was both piano and... No, it was just the violin. I studied the violin there. Then I studied with Professor Schweider at the German Academy in Prague. How did you get interested in the violin? Yes, it's... A big step. When did you get interested? I was 17 when we moved to Sweden. You had already started with the violin? Yes, I had studied here since I was 9 years old. I studied with Ludwig Schmidt. He was a professor at Rockford College for many years. They played a small orchestra at Rockford College. They played in May, when they had their May Day. It was always so beautiful. I don't know if they still have it. At Rockford College? Yes, at Rockford College. They have their May Day. It's the Queen of May Day, when they vote. This is page 2, the continuation of the musical work. Your father was interested in you learning to play the piano and the violin. Yes, the violin. Could you please him with the usual music? It was classical? Yes. You didn't play any of those slow songs? I like folk melodies. Like the ones you play at Christmas time. Or the old songs. I've always liked them. Like the one you play at Rockford College. Could you play those songs? Yes, but I've played them for David Erlander. And for Lucia, at the Christmas party. I've always liked them. I played in the symphony orchestra for several years under Dr. Gates. You lived here in Rockford? Yes, I've lived here in Rockford all the time. So you were employed in the symphony orchestra? No. Or was it just a private... Yes, it was private. So you had performances? Yes. But you were paid for it? Yes, sometimes. I often played in the church. I played for weddings and such. So you had a long career as a young girl. Yes. In Gothenburg and Vienna. When I came back, I had students there for a few years. I met Solom at one of the shows I played. It was your first show? Yes. I met him in December 1934. We got married five months later, in April 1935. He was of Norwegian background? Yes, he was of Norwegian background. Was he also a musician? No, he was a manufacturer. He made the sanding machines, the production sanders, the machines that they used in furniture factories. So he made different sizes. It was not the floor sanders or anything like that. It was for the... Besides the wood products that they used his machines for, they even used it for the... like sealing. The National Gypsum Company bought for their acoustics materials. He had the Solo Machine Company. It was down on Ray Street. And then I have the two daughters by Solom also. First of all, yes. So you lived in the Depression? Yes, yes. And it was a difficult time for my husband because he managed to hang on to the factory, to the business. And then of course it developed even more from that. So he was a pioneer of sorts too. But how offered the Eau Claire, Wisconsin? He was from Eau Claire. Eau Claire, yes. Yeah. But I met him here in Rockford at the YWCA, at one of the Lucia programs. He played the piano for a group of girls for Lucia and her attendants. And he asked a mutual acquaintance, he wanted to know who the young lady was at the piano. That's how we met. Yeah, it was. So you had a date in two and three? Yeah. And then you were married? So then we married, and then I had a daughter the following year in the fall, Marie. She lives in Texas now. And then Britta came along about not quite ten years later. And she's the one who is living with her family on a dairy farm in Wisconsin. So that's where I'm headed for this afternoon. I see. So she became a dairy farmer. Yes, and she got her degree. She graduated from St. Olaf College with a nursing degree. And she has three children now. Do they have musical talent? Not particularly, that I have noticed. They like music, and they seem to have a sense of rhythm and all. And the youngest, the boy, is playing the cornet in the band at school. So I'm kind of hopeful that he will stick with an instrument too. Did you try to teach them piano or violin? No, I didn't. I tried with one of my older grandsons. But you see, they always lived away from Rockford. They never lived in Rockford. So I didn't have that close of contact with them. But when they were small, your daughters? Yeah, all the daughters. They didn't pick out anything on the piano like you did? Yeah, they had piano lessons. And my oldest daughter always had a very lovely voice, and she was very active in school, in the operettas and plays and such. And now Britta has a sweet voice, and she will sing and accompany herself on the guitar. And she does this in church from time to time. But otherwise, she's very busy. She was very... She loved it over at St. Olaf College, and she was in the student chorus there. She would have loved to have been able to make the main St. Olaf choir, but seeing that she was in the nursing field, she wouldn't be able to attend enough of the rehearsals so that then the conductor wouldn't take on anyone. They could not be there for every rehearsal, you see. But she joined the other one, and they did very well, too. It was a very nice experience for her to be able to be with that group. But she... after graduation from college, she got a position with the hospitals of the university there in Madison. That's where she met her husband, although he had always been a dairy farmer. But he liked to come to the same place where the young folks met, and there were a lot of nurses and medical students there, too. So... and Britta always said that she wanted to live in a small town or on a farm, so she got her wish. Yeah. So it worked out all right. Your parents, they were both living then in Rockford when you married, of course, 1935. 1935, yes. Because your mother died in 1940. Right, and my mother died in 1944. And your father in 1950. In 1950, yeah, right. So did he continue with his meat market business then? Yeah, he had the market for quite a while, and then he was sold. And then he had a small business. It was a kind of a restaurant and tavern for just a short while. But then he just sort of retired because then his health started failing. So then he sold the house that he lived in, and then he took some rooms. So that's where he... and then he passed away, as they say, in 1950. So Britta just barely remembers him because she was born in 1946, you see, so she was over three and a half years old. Yeah. But he never went back to Sweden for a visit? No, he never went back. Did he talk about Sweden often? Well... Because you had very good memories of Sweden, doesn't it? Yes, yes, I did. You visited so long there, so... Yeah, yes, I did, and I enjoyed the cousins. And when I was staying there during the summers between my studying in Prague there, I usually stayed... I had headquarters in Malmö with my aunt and uncle and the two cousins there. And it was always enjoyable. And then I would go out to the country where the other relatives lived. Both your fathers in Esbult and the mothers in Vimmerstløv, you visited both places then? Yes, I visited there. And then I was in Hammen-Hygge, that's where my one uncle Erik lived, and his family. And I always enjoyed and I always appreciated that I could speak Swedish with them. I feel rusty now because I don't use it. I don't use it enough. But your parents were talking Swedish all the time then? Oh yes, they spoke Swedish all the time. Between each other? Yes. And you had to answer back in Swedish too then? Yes, I was... It was the first language I knew. And then I had to go to Zion Church, the Swedish school in the summer, you know. How long was that? About four or five weeks? Something like that. What did you learn there? Religion mostly? Oh yes, well, yes, we had to... It's so long ago, but I've always remembered that I was so interested in language. I had an affinity because I did... They always told me I did so well with the German too when I was in Czechoslovakia. I never did learn the Czech because that's Slavic, you know, it's different. I could just say different expressions, you know. How did you learn the German though? In high school here or...? No, I did take a course over in an adult education program that they had in Jatobori to prepare me, you know, for German because I knew I'd be with German-speaking people. And so evidently I got the accents and did well enough so that they never took me for an American or a Swede. They'd say, oh, but you just... They thought I was French or Italian. And I said, well, I know there's some Russian in me, but that's way back seven generations or whatever it was. But that's probably where I... Were you on your father's side? It was on my father's side. So maybe that's the musical... Yeah, I was going to say, I've always had an affinity for Russian music and that. I just feel... And of course when I was in Prague, I had Russian friends there too. They were just lovely people. I enjoyed them so much. You could feel something in common with them. Yeah. But the rest of your cousins on your mother's side especially, there were eight kids there, were they musical-inclined in any way? Interested in music, playing an instrument? No, no, they didn't seem to... They enjoyed music, but they didn't perform or they didn't play. You were the only one then in the family. Yeah, uh-huh. And as I say, my mother... My mother has... I suppose he's gone now because he was a... He sang a Lund Stumm Scherzka. He was a trained singer and so he was on the staff there in Lund Stumm Scherzka many years ago. And that was back in the 1920s too. And I remember they came to visit just one time to Malmo to meet the American cousin or whatever it was. So that was interesting. I lost contact with that part of the family. You see, my mother's mother's family came from Trelewory, Trachten. And they were some of the founders of the Gumi Fabrik in... Seetud? That makes these for the game, what is it, the volley? My cousin, Marget in Sweden, she I think would know more about that background than I would. So I always have enjoyed, you know, I have such good memories from the old country. How about your brother? He went back with your mother to Rostock? He came back, yes. Or is this the collection of Sweden then? Oh, he liked it because, well, now he stayed in Malmo also, but he spent most of the time out in the country where my mother was staying with my grandmother, you see, at the time, and then all during that summer. Because she stayed in order to get the estate settled, you know, and there were things for her to do. And so, because then my father and my older brother Lloyd stayed here in Rockford, you see, to take care of the business. So you had two brothers? Yes. And one girl, so three children in the family? Yeah, the three of us. Lloyd was born just 14 months after me, so he was born in February of 1909, and then Robert was born in 1912. So, but they were both gone. Did they take up any kind of music? My brother Bob had a very nice voice. He sang. But no instrument? No, no. Lloyd did take some piano lessons, but he was more interested in playing ball, you know, or something like that. Although the teacher felt that he had talent, but I guess the folks felt that he didn't want to do it badly enough himself and they didn't want to push him. With me, they didn't have to, because I'd play rather than do anything else. So there was no pushing and shoving for you? I liked to make music and cook and all that, and my mother was such a gardener. She loved her garden. So we got along beautifully, you know. She would be out in her garden and I'd be cooking up things in the house. So when did your parents buy the first hostel? When you were in high school or? Yeah, when I was, I think I was about 12. Or was I 10? I think I was 10 years old when they bought the house on 9th Avenue. And that's where they lived from then on until just the last year that my father was alone. So after high school, did you go on to rock for the College Band? No, I studied there while I was in high school for the music, you see, part of it. And then I went with my mother when I was 17. I went to business college for half a year before we left for Sweden. And so I've had a little different experiences along the way, you know. And you belong to the Zion Lutheran Church? Well, I was confirmed there, but now I've been a member of First Lutheran. That's on the same street as Yolanda Young for many years. But your parents, did they join? They were charter members of Tabor Lutheran. But then before that, we would attend services at the Zion Church because we were, all three of us were baptized in Zion. And then we were confirmed also there. And of course I was confirmed in Swedish. In Swedish. But you chose English or Swedish? Yeah, at that time. So you had no trouble at all then to learn the hymns? Yeah. No problem? To learn the katechism. Did you play at church at any time? Oh yeah, I played in church often. So your parents were proud of you then? Yeah, they seemed to enjoy the... Did your parents join any organization like Vasa, Viking, SMOS? I think, yeah, they belonged to the Vikings for a number of years, you know. And I played for them. Vikings? For the Vikings. I think it was Lida Lodge, same name as my mother's, Lida. It's not often you find anyone with that name. Did you play dance music then? No, I played the solos, you know, the violin solos. For a while there, I played... Now when did I do that? That was before... Was it before? No, it was after I came back from Europe too. I played for a folk dance group. And that was fun. I went to Chicago the one time. And they had a big... they had a sort of competition. And the Rockford group didn't get any prizes in there, but we really enjoyed it so much. And they liked to have me play, but I didn't play long after that with them. So you had to play your shawties and hambo and different things? Mm-hmm. Oh yeah, you know, if you play sooner or later, unless you are a church musician, you get into a different stratus. I see. Anything but this old rock and roll. It doesn't fit in. Oh. So much of it is so terrible that it just kind of buys you. They don't go to school to learn rock and roll. No, they don't know one note from the other. Most of them. And then they repeat it 150 times, you know. They use about a half a dozen words, and then they keep repeating them and screaming in between. Isn't it strange though that people have deteriorated in their... Yeah, in the taste. You get tired of repetition, but they don't. I know one of my Swedish friends used to say, he used to travel to Spain a lot. He was with a Swedish co-op, and he always said that it was so... He loved the guitar music of Spain, but he said, It gets too monotonous. After a while I can't stand it. Even though that was pretty, but this rock and roll, I think they get brainwashed or something with it, that boom, boom, boom, boom, you know. It's just like they go down to Africa in the jungles or somewhere, because that's where they originated, that type of... It's remarkable though, how those gifted musicians like Horowitz, watching him play hour after hour, and no notes, nothing. How could you remember all those things? Tremendous memory. How is it possible to remember all the... It means you've got to be gifted then for the... Oh yes, and then it's the practice. They've done it all their lives. Because sometimes even the other faculties can weaken. I know I have my fiddle partner in the symphony, the dear old soul. I think she must be 90 now. For a long time she hasn't recognized people and forgetful and everything, but she can still play the fiddle. I don't know now, this past year I haven't been in touch with her. She's out at the nursing home out on the west side here in Rockford. I heard that she spends most of her time in bed, so that she's not able to communicate too well. So, no, it's... Strange. How were the Swedish people not too entertained? Were they intellectual receivers? Yes, they enjoyed it. One of my cousins, Shirlene, came from Malmö. They were the ones that I stayed with so much when I was there. He became a chemical engineer. He was with the Nobel for many, many years. In fact, he married the boss's daughter, and that man was the top scientist with Nobel. So Carl Gustav worked under him. Shirlene? Shirlene, yes, Carl Gustav Shirlene. He was a graduate of that. I always say he was the West Point of Sweden. It's up in Stockholm, what they call it again. I can't think of it. Was he in a technical high school? Technical, well, it was... Because he had the highest degrees in engineering, you know. I see, it must be a technical high school then, or technical school. It's a... Oh, my, it's an old, old school there. It's one of the top schools in Sweden. I was in the old part of Stockholm, and I had a couple who were the woman with the sister of one of my Swedish friends here in town. She was married, and they lived in an apartment in one of those old buildings across from this educational school, like I say. Yes, that's probably the Technical High School. Technical, yes, it was. But it was another name, too, in connection with... You mentioned you had an uncle that worked out in Iowa. Yes. For a German farmer. Yeah. His name was Eriksson. Erik Nilsson. Erik Nilsson. You see, so he took my life. Now my mother and several of the other children there, they did it the old way that they had in Sweden, where they would add son to the father's first name. You see, and my grandfather's name was Nils, Nils Eriksson. But this one uncle called himself Eriksson because he felt that was more proper. That was really neat. And he came long before your mother came here. Yeah, they were here a number of years before my mother and dad came. And what did he work on?