 We have a 24th of January 1987 and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Adelaide Samuelsson. Now in North Palm Beach but regularly in Bridgeport, Connecticut. No, I don't live there anymore but that's where I came from. Yes, and where you go back, you go back to? Wallingford, Connecticut now. Oh, I see. And she was born 6th of October 1907 in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Both your parents came from Sweden, from Värmland. That's right. And can you tell me a little bit brief about your father's decision not to go to the United States? Did he have any relation here that? Yes, he had a brother and he had a sister that were in, they were both in Sioux City at that time I guess. He went out to see them but came here. Were they farmers here or? No, they were never farmers. They were always, what do you say, mechanic wise or something to that. They were industry. So they couldn't find that kind of work out in Sioux City? Couldn't find any work when they first came, you know. Those were hard days. It was hard, they took anything they could get as work. So he worked on the railroad and he worked various places I understand. How long did he stay in Sioux City, do you think? I guess about three years, three, four years. And during that time he corresponded with your mother? Mother, yeah. And she was located in? She came to New Haven, Connecticut. Together with her parents or? No, she came alone. She had a sister she came to see. So she came in 1894 at that time? Yeah, and they were married, no wait a minute, yes, and then they were married in 96. So your father now, what did he want her to do, to move out to Iowa or? Well I guess, I wouldn't know that part at all, but I know that she said if he wanted to see her he would have to come east because she wouldn't go west. She'd gone, she thought that she would only stay here a very short time and go back to Sweden. But instead he came east and they got married. And then they, then there was a depression. They lived through a depression and in 1900 they went back to Sweden with two children. And in that same year they came back. My father came first and then my mother followed. They didn't stay over there. It wasn't quite the way they had thought it would be I guess and so they came back here. And they went back to Connecticut then? Yes, they went back to Connecticut. Did they buy a house then at that time or did they rent it at first? Well that I wouldn't know. I wouldn't know because I wouldn't know what they did the few years until they finally decided to come to Bridgeport. It was because he had work in Bridgeport and that's when they settled in. So he got the kind of work he was looking for? He was with the tool making and die making. Was there in his family from Sweden also like his father? Well he got, no his father was the miller in Rottneros. Mjöla had the charge of the mill there. But they also had a, I guess I only know this from hearsay of course, that there was a workshop connected with all these buildings at that place. And the boys all learned their trade I guess you'd call it before they left Sweden. So he had other brothers that also left Sweden? Oh yes. How many? One, the oldest one, two my father and his brother, three. One, two, there were four brothers that came here. And your father was the first one? No, his oldest brother was the first that came. How did they help each other? You think they sent over money for the ticket? No I think they all earned their own money and came. They had a very, there was I think eight children in the family. But they were all, all did very well. Did they all stay here in the United States? Did anybody go back and settle there? Well my, one of my uncles, he came over here when he was 18 years old and he lived here 32 years and he said he was more American than he was Swedish, but he married a Norwegian girl and she thought she wouldn't be happy unless she could go back to Norway. So they went to Norway and stayed in Bergen for I guess about six or eight months and my uncle said that they'd either have to go to Sweden or go to the United States and she chose to go to Sweden. And she is still alive there. In Sweden? Yeah, in Sweden. So he didn't get accustomed with Norwegian? No, it was the weather conditionings of... Too much rain on the west coast? Too much up Bergen, you see, and he said that it was, he didn't see any sunshine the whole time he was there, so he was... It was enough for him? That was enough. Yeah, he was... But the rest of the brothers then stayed in this country? Yeah, yeah. Do you think your parents had the idea of being here five years and then go back to Sweden and stay for good or, because that was usually... Well that's what they did, you see. They tried it then and it didn't work out. But it didn't work out. Was your grandfather still living then as a mjölnare in Rotterdos, you think? Yes, yes he was. Very fine, yeah. Did some of your children take over that kind of business? No, no. No. No, what do you stay down there? No, see my aunt in Sweden married a schoolteacher and he was the schoolteacher there at Rotterdos. So they kept the old house, because she kept the old house after. Well I think my grandmother lived with them until she died, but my grandfather, they had a little place all their own until that time, when he retired. When they came to Bridgeport, did they join the church then? Oh yes. The Lutheran church? No. The Covenant? No. They went to... Well I guess it was, they started out, because they were Mifunskirke in those days. The Covenants, yeah. In the Covenants, yeah. So there were you were raised in Sunday school and confirmation? Yes. How many children were you in the family, sister? There was four. Four. Two sisters? Three sisters and one brother. So what kind of work did you get then in Bridgeport? It was mechanical, tool and die making. What company was it? The Swedish? No, no. Well, they were, he worked for Bryant Electric was one and I don't know, I wouldn't know the places. Bryant Electric? Yeah. I think that was, became part of Westinghouse. No? Oh yes, it's no. Yeah. If it's in existence, I don't know. So you went to school there then? Yes. And when you started to work, what kind of work were you looking for then? Did you go to college? I went, started out with college, but I ended up doing nursing. Went into nursing and... But I didn't really practice too much after that, nursing. And how about in your family now, did you talk any Swedish at any time when you were small? Well, we heard Swedish, but we never talked Swedish. We never knew really how to talk Swedish. So you never answered back then? No. But you listened to Swedish? Yes. We could hear, we could understand some of it. We didn't know it all. And of course, as we got older, we knew less and less. How about your older, you had two when they were born? Yeah, older. Before they went to Sweden. Did they talk more Swedish? No, they talked absolutely none at all. Nothing. And there was no stress in the home either? No. By your parents to learn Swedish? No. You didn't went to a school at the church for instance to learn Swedish in the summer? Well the Lutherans had the schools, but the... But the covenants? The covenants didn't have that. How about confirmation? Was it in Swedish or English? It was Swedish and English. But we didn't know the Swedish, so we got the English. Did they have two classes then? One Swedish and one English? Yeah. And boys and girls together? Yeah. Yeah. And were the other Swedish families around where you lived then? Not particularly, no. No we didn't have any... American standard? We didn't live in any like sections. They did have them like Black Rock and such, but my parents didn't live in any of those. So they were all kind of people? All around, yeah. English and Germans and Italians and... Just about everything I guess. Mainly English around. Did your parents belong to any Sikh society? Yes. Like Vasa? Not Vasa, but they had Svea, and Hundred Men Society. They were all Sikh benefit societies in those days. Mother was very active. She was active in the Republican women's groups and she took an active part in things. So they were Republicans then? Yeah, they were Republicans. How about your father? Was he active? No, my father never... He was a very quiet person and never took part in anything, well except that he did with those Sikh benefit societies and those groups. And then they had a John Erickson Club and all the different ones. It was Republican? Yeah, it was Republican of course. So what did your mother do then? She helped out with the precincts and voting booths? Yes, and things like that. Tried to get people registered to vote? To register to vote, and she was of course most anxious in those days when women got the votes for the first time. So that was the beginning of that. That was all in her time. So she was all for that? All for that, yeah. It was quite early then, at that time. Yes, it was, yeah. Was she very stubborn about it? No, oh no. No, she wasn't any fighter out for it. Did she run for office herself? No, no, no. She was working behind the scenes? Scenes, yes. And were most of the Swedes Republican there in Bridgeport, do you think? I think most, if I can, of course, that's really before I know too much about politics, but I think, I know that most of my mother's friends were. Of course, my father always believed that when you vote, that's a private thing. No one knows exactly how you vote. That's your prerogative. Well, I think there are spotters there that counts the votes and can tell who's the fifth or fifteenth or something like that. They look it up. In many cases, they think they want to look it up. I think they can do that. They spotter can do that. Yeah. Eight to vote. Well, as we were children, we used to say, Papa, you know, how are you going to vote? He said, wait till the day comes. He said, oh, that's the day to vote. Did you discuss politics in school, in high school? Yes. Oh, in school, in grammar school and all, we always. How did you discuss it? In other words, did you listen to what the teacher said or to any outsiders? No, it was just the teachers and the children. Discussed the system. Yeah. Well, they'd always joke about it, you know, whether there was always two sides. And you know, there was always the group of saying, you know. Did you ask your mother, for instance, she was very interested in why was she a Republican? No, we never asked anything like that. Did she explain to you that this party is better than the other? No, no, no. We just knew that she was doing her part, that's all. What happened then during the depression of the Hoover era when he lost out? Was there any discussion? My father was out of work for a whole year. Whole year. Before the election? Well, I don't know when that depression was now, but during that, oh, around the 21s. Wasn't that depression year? No, 29. No, that was later. This one was the early one. 21. What did you ask? About the depression. Wasn't there a depression around 21? Wasn't there a depression around 1921? No, the real depression was 29, of course. Yes, well, that's after the crash. Yeah, that's the crash. You mean, was the depression in 21? No, I don't think so. Well, then it was 19, right after the war, right after the First World War. That ended in 17. 18. No, 17. Did it end? I thought it was. 17 was the end of the war. End of the war, yeah. Huh? Yes, 17 was the end of the war. So it was around 19. So it was completely shut down in Bridgeport, all the tools? A lot of things, yes, an awful lot was. What happened then? Did your mother have to go to work? No, no, no. They had some insurance, and then they had to take that insurance that they had and live on that for the year. But it was hard to get food on the table. Well, sure, but it was... But you were still growing up. But she was a terrific manager, and she knew how to handle things. And we... And there was no relief work at that time. In other words, there was no... Oh, there was no such thing as relief in those days. Yeah. Did they own a house then at that time? Yes. But they were able to keep it, though, the payments and... Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. Well, see, they never believed in buying anything unless they owned it. In those days, you didn't buy on credit or anything like that. They put down a lot of cash. There was no mortgage. Yeah. They didn't buy anything that they couldn't pay for. What kind of work did they do then if the factories were closed up? Did they go out on the farms, or did they travel to other cities? I suppose there was bear there, too. Well, it was all around. You know, it was tough. Everything was down. It was hard. And Hartford, there was also a tool and die-making town, West Hartford. Yeah, West Hartford, yeah. Manchester. Yeah. All those places. So there was a hard... Then you started to look for a boy. You met Arthur Oliver Samuelson. That's right. And he was in New Haven. How did you meet him? Oh. Well, I guess I have to say we both met at my mother and father's friend's house, and his mother and father were there. And that's how we met. And then you married in what year? We were married in May 23rd, 1936. So it was right after the Depression. What kind of work were you doing then before that time? Well, I was doing secretarial work with the nursing and secretarial. Was it easy for you to find a job now during the Depression years? Well, you just had to go. I had a very good position, and you just had to go down and down and down. And well, you had to accept what you got, and that's all. It was everybody's... But there was, you know, you went, which I think someday may have to do it here. They're trying to cut back places, I see, now. And that's what we did. Keep your job. You say either you take less pay or you have to give up your job. Was there, so for most of the people that had a job, that they told them to... Well, I imagine, I couldn't say for most, but the different places. Was it easy, you think, for a girl to find a job rather than a boy? That I wouldn't know. I don't think so. Like secretarial? I wouldn't know. But you had no trouble, though? You were working. I managed to have a little job. How about your father during that time, after the start? Well, by that time, he was retiring. He's retired. I see, so he didn't have to... No. Did he get the pension then from the factory where he worked? No, he lost everything because they went to Sweden on a trip. They went in 1930, they went to... To Sweden. To Sweden for a visit. And at that time, that's when they start closing all these factories down again. So he lost out on his pension. And they closed off for good. In other words, they never started up again. They never came back, no. Did he have money in the bank that he lost during that time? No, they didn't. They didn't lose... Some money was tied up, you know, that they had in the bank. How was he able then to cope with it? I mean, people today without a pension just couldn't even exist a week. I know, but they had to. They managed. They managed. And your mother never worked? Never worked, no. No. She never worked. Well, you got married in 1936. Yeah. On May the 4th. Did you continue to work then? No. You quit working? Yeah. Was there the custom of that time? Yes, it was, yeah. Why? Because I moved from Bridgeport, so we didn't live in Bridgeport. I moved to New Haven. Because that's where my husband worked. He had his own business there. I see. And the housewife at that time just didn't... Well, there were some that stayed and worked, of course. That was the beginning of where they married and worked. But even at that time, if you worked in the telephone company, you weren't allowed to get married and work. Well, there was an unwritten rule, in other words. Yeah, they had a ruling that you couldn't be married and work. Did they keep people, kept people away from getting married, you think, for a few years? Some of them married secretly. I see. I know friends who did that. They couldn't have a big wedding then. But they couldn't, no. Did they work though, or did they have to call a miss then without... Well, they didn't. They never showed their titles at all, no. So there were ways to go around it. Oh, always. You know that. How long did they continue, until after the war, or then during the war? That was it. That changed everything. Then it was okay for them. No, then you had to work. Everyone had to go to work. In Connecticut, was there the same rule applied for teachers? If two teachers married, for instance, or... Yeah, they had that rule. Couldn't work. No. But when the war came, that changed everything. Do you think there was a rule from the Depression, in other words? Possibly. It was enough to have one working. Possibly, yeah. And your husband, he was a singer. Yes. At that time, he belonged to a chorus in New Haven. Yes, the Apollo Singing Society. And it was quite a large group. Yes, it was a good-sized group, yeah. And they were all 100% Swedes? Yes, just about. At that time? Just about, yeah. He was one of the officers later on. At that time, he was only performing as a singer. Well, at that time, he was secretary for the club singers. He's always held some kind of an office. So his parents, now, they came also in the 1890s? No, they came earlier. Well, yes. His mother came in 1988. That's when she came. His father came in 1989. I think that was it, yeah. And they were married in 1990, I guess, 1890. So did he speak more Swedish than you, do you think? Oh, yes. He knew Swedish. I didn't. I really didn't know Swedish until I went to Sweden. And that's when I. So he practiced more Swedish at home than in his home? Well, a grandmother of his came from Sweden. And lived with them? And lived with them. So when he was a little fellow, he had to know. He had to talk. So before, when he started school, he couldn't talk English. So there was grandma, was a teacher. Was the reason. But Arthur always did well with his Swedish, didn't he? Arthur did well with his Swedish. Fairly well. Fairly well. Not too well. Not too well. But he was a singer, and most of the numbers rented were in Swedish language. Oh, they were all, yes. Most of them were. So there was no trouble for them with singing, because then it comes. Comes through. The rhythm and melody and so on. So tell me a little bit about the Palos. What kind of programs did they have during the year? How many times did they express their knowledge of singing? Well, they tried to have a concert at least once a year in those days. A big concert with the tuxedo and the? With their uniforms. Uniforms. Yeah. Yeah. And the uniform was? National. That was the white pants and the blue coat. And the singer's cap. And the singer's cap. Mm-hmm. And was he also a director at any time, or? He was never, you mean a director of singing? Yes. No, never. No. But he was an officeholder. Yes. Secretary at that time. Well, he rose from that to be the national president. What year was that? 1950s? Yeah. I think it was 1950 he was president. Wasn't he? 1950? I have to really go back on that. Way back. No. I think it was around the 50s. I know it was about. He was followed by Erlin, Libby. No, Erlin didn't follow him. It was, what was that other man's name? It wasn't Erlin. It was, no, it was the man from Chicago. Oh, dear. I can't remember his name, either. The one from Chicago. I thought it was a question for Trudy. That meant a lot of traveling, though, for you. Well, he did. Yeah. You had to go to different functions. He was the one that really started to organize and get the whole thing working such as it is today. Nationally, you mean? Nationally, yeah. Because the West Coast, they were about ready to fold up. And he did a lot of pioneer working out there. He went out. And talked to them. And talked to them. And they listened. And they got going and really held on, in which they are today. How many terms did he serve as president? Four years, or? Yes, it's four year term. Four years term. For the president. For president, yeah. So you went with him, then? Most of the time, yeah. And he did that on his own expense? He did that on his own. They didn't have anything. They had no treasury, no money to do anything with. And they almost lost Maseek Teening. But through the work of Arthur and Erlen Levine. Gunnar Blom. And Gunnar Blom. He became the editor. Editor of it. And it had been in New York. Had been with George. Johansson. Johansson first. And George and Arthur, they spent many hours together trying to figure out how they could handle this. And finally, it was best that it went to Chicago and taken over by Blom. And it worked well? And he did a good job, yeah. So he was able then to get them together and see the necessity of it. That's right, yeah. Because it must be hard, also, the distance between the East and the Midwest and the West. But today, of course, that's so different. Now we have fly to everything and people. You went by train, then? No, he flew. We drove most of the time. He liked driving, so we drove. He was not a retired man then at that time. He was still working. He was still working. What kind of work was he doing? He had his own business? Securities as a broker. Oh, I see. So that's how he managed. He had a wonderful secretary that took over while he was gone so he could trust her. So he could, over the phone, perhaps, direct the work to them when he was away. Yeah. How did he learn the business? By himself, starting from the bottom, or did he go to school? Oh, he had quite a life. He was a salesman. That's what he started out as, a salesman. And he was on the road for years. What did he sell? He sold toothpaste. Toothpaste? Yeah, for a company out of New Haven. He started when he was 21 years old to go on the road. So he sold to wholesale, then, to stores? To drugstores, all the places. Yeah. He went all over the East Coast, down into Florida, all the way up. He did that kind of job, the work, when you married? No, no, no, no. It was all over then? Yeah. That's when he first started. He was a young fellow then. So during the Depression, what kind of work was he doing then, securities? Yeah. What happened then? The low years. Well, it was a struggle point again. You have to still go out. Was he able, and there must be a hard time, to convince people to save and buy stocks when they saw this earlier happening, the crash? Well, he suffered in the crash himself. He thought he had it all made once upon a time, and then he had to lose everything. Had he invested in something? Oh, yes. Houses or real estate? No, no, no. In securities. In securities. Yeah. He won the crash in the market of 29. PSY II, continuation with Mr. Samuelson. What? PSY II. Oh. So when you met him then, there was a new kind of business you had to learn then. Did you help him out? No, no, no. No advice. Well, I did. I did it at, I was an officer in the company. So I knew a little bit about it, because I had been doing some banking and brokerage work once upon a time. But I only relieved when the girl went on vacation and things like that. So people called into him? Well, he had an office, you see. An office, yeah. They called in, and he bought what was recommended. He called. He was a salesman. He went out and sold himself. You know. Not the way. Oh, yes. Yeah. Yeah. He's a salesman. He ran the office. Must be a tough job to recommend something, and if something goes wrong, then they get blamed for it. Sure, you go through that. But is there a risk they take, you think, investors, that they should take at least 2 thirds of their own blame if they are recommended to buy something? Because they are the final sayers, though. The people who buy it. No, the person that buys it has to make up their own mind. They have to make up their own mind. He just recommends what you want and what he thinks would be good. But if it's bad, then it's easy to blame someone. Well, of course. So how many years did it take them before he could get on sure footing again? After the war? Sure, it was after the war. Yeah, it was a struggle up to him. How about during the war years? Did they still buy securities and bonds through his office? During the war, he didn't have his own then. Oh, he worked for somebody else then? Yes, he worked for another brokerage house. He didn't have his own. It wasn't until after the crash that he, well, he lived in California then for several years. And then he came back east, and then he started in his own business. So you made your own then in New Haven? Yes, New Haven. And singing, that was one of his hobbies. Did he do anything else beside that? Oh, he was an active Masonic wise. How about any other Swedish groups, singing? I mean, Viking, Vasa, Switzerland. Schutzmänner. No, he didn't have, you see, New Haven didn't have anything. But he was active in the Swedish welfare. Anything that they had, he was. But he didn't have to do like your parents belonged to a hospitalization? No, no. No, those were all over by that time. Anyway, they were gone. All those was gone. Yes, they couldn't exist. You have some cake? No, thank you. So going with your husband on, all right, that's fine. Want some more? No, that's fine. Help yourself. Thank you. It's a big cake. So going with your husband on different across country, trying to organize this American Union of Swedish Singers to get it going. Well, it was organized. What did your husband mention something after all those meetings? What was the hardest thing to convince the people to do? In other words, there's always been the saying over the years, forget about it, because the Swedishness is going to disappear. And they are not interested in young generation and so on. Did he ever hear that from the? Well, no. Arthur's point was that he wanted to interest young people in, because it had to have the young people to. To have a continuation. Continuation. And that they would have to allow, like when people intermarry, and if they're interested in Swedish song and the learning of Swedish song, that would be fine. To bring in good voices. And that's what it takes. It's not they had to be just pure Swedish to be able to be members. They would, now he was hoping for the second and third generations, because they were just dying out. So he understood that it got to be intermarriage to? Well, not particularly intermarriage, but it had to be. Thank you. The future depends on the young people coming in. Like my parents. OK. So did the membership stress that point that in time they were supposed to be 100% Swedish? Well, that's how they started. It would be only Swedish people that were. They continued that thought. In other words, they frowned upon if an Italian came in, or an Irish, or German, or? Well, of course they would only come in anyway by invitation. But if they were married to a Swedish girl, for instance. Well, they would be more interested than to join. You see? Yeah. And there was no reluctance then to admit them as members? No, no, never. No. No. It's really the voices that they, but they needed voices, you see. You got to, as he always said, we've got to replenish the ranks. I always wonder about how, are they able to learn all the Swedish songs? Very well. Pronunciation. There was no problem that they could on that. If you had a good teacher, if there was some folks in there that really knew the Swedish, and then they get the pronunciation. For singing, it's very easy to picky it up. They don't know what they're singing, but they can pronounce what they're singing. So they can still have the heart in the singing to over? Yeah. They like the music. They can read music, and therefore, all they have to do is learn, just like you'd learn Italian or any of the other songs that they sang, German. And they sing German songs, Swedish songs, Norwegian, Danish. How many members were of Swedish descent in New Haven for instance, Apollo, in 1950s when your husband was the president? How many were 100% Swedish? Very few. Very few. Oh, yes. They were all. They were all, we started thinning out them at that time. Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes. Because immigration, there was very few that came over to this country after the 20s. That was never, just one and two. If they had them, I think they mostly went to the Midwest. Very few came into the state in the East. But how about after the war, though? Didn't you receive any out there in Stanford and Bridgeport and New Haven? Not particularly. No, very few that they ever had in New Haven. So there was no new blood coming from Sweden. So they had to be replenished by the natives. That's right. Well, the ones that had been here, second and third generations, as we call them. So at the concerts now, was there a public interest then to support? That's what you had to hope the churches and the, it was. Now, I think the churches in the East were the first ones that had less and less of Swedish. If it was a Swedish church, as they called it, they really couldn't have Swedish sermons because the young people didn't know it. And they also realized that they had to depend on young people for church. So you didn't understand any Swedish sermon then when you were growing up? Not really. No, no. How about the singing part of the hymns, hymns, and I mean hymns and songs? You'd hear them, and you could know them, but you didn't know how to read. You didn't know what they meant, if you know what I mean. I didn't know what they meant. Like your parents now, did they feel more at home, you think, in the church when the Swedish was spoken? Or they never commented about that? No. No. No. Well, I just think they grew with the times, that's it. They had to. Came into it. Yeah. And the Paolo's singing group, singing choir, is it still? Still in existence, yes. How many members are there now? Well, I guess there's about 20, 18, 20, 20 or more. And then, of course, they have associate memberships, which help to support them. Do they have their own locality up in New Haven? No, they used to, but they don't anymore. They practice in churches then and other? Yes, other places. Yeah, they. So you were on tours to Sweden, though, a couple of times? We never went with the tours. No? We always went on our own. I see. Yeah. We went to Sweden four times. And. And it was to visit your relation in Jämtland? To visit our relations all over Sweden, because I had them in Jämtland and Stockholm and Karlsborg. I had an uncle living there. All around Sweden. And your husband's parents, they came from Sweden? They were all Juteborg. Juteborg? Both his mother and father came from Juteborg. And they really. So they also retired and passed away in New Haven then? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And they didn't have any pension either, too? Oh, yes, he did. His father was a railroad man. I see. So he was secure then. He was secure all through everything with his pension. And that pension at that time, did they take care of him and his wife then to live on? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Well, they had invested their money wisely. And so they had enough to live on. Yeah. And they had their own house then? They owned two houses, three houses. And they had a summer house, so they really. A summer house? Where did they have it? In a lake. At the lake? At the lake, yeah. How about your parents now? Do you remember going on vacation like they do today when you were a young girl? Did you take any trips anywhere in Connecticut or Massachusetts? Oh, yes. Well, as we grew up, sure. Well, my father drove a car, and we went to places in the car. Just for the day then, or did you stay overnight? Well, if we went up to Massachusetts, you'd have to stay overnight, I'm sure. You visited the friends then? Friends and relatives and such that were around. Yeah. So there was a close connection during that time between the relation. Was it closer at that time, you think, than it is today between cousins and uncles and aunts? No, I think. Well, we didn't have too many. We said that we're really that close, but we, you know. I think that's when we were children. Of course, we had my mother had a brother who had a farm, and we always went up to that for weekends. And what was that farm? Newtown in Connecticut. And that was a regular farm with cows, dairy farm? Well, they always had at least one cow or maybe two. But they didn't do much farming on it. Did he make a living on that? No. No, he didn't. He was carpentry. He did. Made his living with carpentry. Just to support a little bit. Yes, but they liked living in the country and raising their family in the country. And your husband, he passed away when? How many years ago? Eight years. Eight years ago. What did he think about the seniors then? Did he have hope of his neighbor? He knew. And then, of course, John picked up and carried on there and financially helped him. Helped all of them. So they had conventions every four years. They won the electing president. And they get it from all over the United States. And they have conventions every two years. But that's the divisional. Divisional, yes. So what do you remember now best from this traveling with your husband with the seniors? Is there something specific you remember that was? No, just that they always had good times together. Whenever singers get together, they always have a good time. Well, singers became a whole different kind of singers as the years went by. The Swedish singers had had a very poor reputation once upon a time, that they did a lot of drinking. All Swedes, did they say? All Swedes, I guess. Well, maybe. But singers particularly, when they got together, there seemed to be a lot of drinking. Why was that, do you think? Was that the Swedes seemed to be a little bit formal and stiff until they get liquor in themselves? I guess maybe that's it. Isn't that right, John? We're talking about years ago. Years ago, I could answer that. But then you can answer that. That when the Swedes got together, the singers got together, they always had to have drinks. Yes, I would say, pretty much. You mean together which way? When they're singing. Not rehearsal, necessarily. No, but they always had. After rehearsal. Verdandi, they had after rehearsal. So some of them cut their rehearsal short to go to drink, you know. They were, years ago, much harder drinkers than they are now. That's it. And because of that, I think you've got a better group of singers today. Because now they're more interested in singing than they are in drinking. In the cultural aspect of it. In every aspect of the fellows. Your husband, he was a professional security broker. The rest of the singers, now, where do they come from? Were there any painters and laborers? Laborers, all kinds. Carpenters? There was office workers, carpenters, lawyers. So the singing brought them together, then? That's right. It's for their love of singing. That's the point. So many people, as you say, they love choral singing. They love the male voices. Of course, today now, we have both male and female voices. Was he a soloist, your husband? No. He did some years ago, when he was younger. But he was never a soloist here. He sang with quartets. Out in California, he sang with quartets. And they didn't belong to the Swedish singers, then? Well, they weren't organized that way. Do you remember your husband singing, outside the singing, in other words, when he was home and doing something, shows around the house? Did he sing or whistle or anything like that? Well, of course, whenever the opportunity arose, he did. He loved to sing. He loved singing little songs. And his drinking songs. He loved his drinking songs. Of Venneberg? What? Gluntena, Venneberg? Well, Gluntena, he never did sing. I think he did. They had a, that was a Mr. Rosengren. And he was always trying to get Gluntena together, but it never worked, I guess. It didn't. But. Well, Arthur was very active in Masonic singing. That's what I said. And he was active in Masonic singing as well. I think he belonged to a quartet that went everywhere to sing. Yes. How was he able to do that? I mean, you would think one group would be enough to practice and perform with. So he went to different. Oh, sure. Almost two nights a week. Well, it does take that time. And then, of course, he didn't sing with a church group. He never sang with a church group. He was not in that choir. He was never in the church choir. So. Would they be different than you think from. Oh, when I say he never was, he was for a while in the beginning. But then that was took too much time, you see. And that was the point. But when he was with the chanters, he sang with the chanters. And as John said, they traveled a lot to the Masonic Affairs doing that. The reason I asked you if he was singing in his home or in the shower, you very seldom hear people sing anymore on the work, for instance. You could hear bricklayers and painters that were singing when they're standing out there. You don't hear that anymore. You don't hear it anymore? No. Why? I don't know. You never thought of it. But you never hear that. Years ago, they did. No, I didn't think of it. Because I don't hear. I haven't been out to hear them. So I wouldn't know. No, but I mean if you walk. By. Building sites. Yeah. I was here. But today you don't. Maybe it's too much noise, so. Well, it's too much noise, I guess. Modernization of all the equipment. They have the electric saw and the electric this. And the big boxes they carry on the shoulder. Yeah. That's all they have. All music. Yes, that's right. They have to have that too, some of them. So they probably have distorted some of the beautiful singing that was done. That's right. They have to listen to the rock and roll of today, I guess. Was he active always in the last days, your husband singing with Apollo? Pretty much. No, he was with North Star in the end, but it was with a singing group. North Star? Are they in Bridgeport? Bridgeport. The Bridgeport. That's a bigger group there. It was. You know, they vary. They go up and down. Sometimes one group has a real large group, and the next time they have a small group. So you can't really. So there is still an interest then. In other words, they are still hanging on. Oh, yes. And carry on the tradition. Yeah. That's right. Are they interested in to go to Sweden, for instance, for exchange with other singers, or they sponsor groups? Well, they get some of those groups together. I don't know if I can find a wife. How did you take this traveling now? Because your husband, he spent a lot of time on the singing. Were you a deep, hard interest in the tour? Well. It's always hard advice. Well, of course, we just. His interests and mine. Of course, I had other things to do, too. I was active in masonry, or Eastern Star work. And so we had lots of things to do. Together in a certain way? Yes. And then sometimes he had to go his way, and I'd have to go my way. But we always. Well, it worked out fine. Do you have any children? We have two children. Two children. One boy and one girl? That's right. Any message to your wife? Tell her he's almost three. What city had the strongest choir, you think? Oh, it's Chicago. Midwest has the strongest. How could you see that? Because of the number of participants? Sure, there's a number of choruses. There's so many choruses. And there's so many more Swedish people in Chicago. So it gives strength. But you would think New York, though? New York has very, very poor. New York has the poorest of all. This because of the transportation after work. It's hard to get together. I don't know. There's so few. There's few Swedes that are actually Swedes, I guess, in New York. It's always been. There once upon a time, they had two big, big choruses years ago, but they've just fallen apart. They have one that tries to hold on. But there is a pocket around Bridgeport and Stamford, and then Norwalk and around there, Brantford, a little bit further away. Yeah, and that's New Haven. New Swedish settlement, though. Yes. But Brantford has mostly with Vasa, I think. That's their. And that's an older group of Swedes, isn't it? I guess. I wouldn't know. But I know Vasa is quite strong there. And also Hartford. Yes, they're strong in Hartford, too. So you never belonged to Vasa? No. No, we were too busy with hard things. It can't be every place. In one place. No. At one time. So he was able, then, anyway, to attract interest from the West Coast, because it was the hardest furthest away. Farthest away, yeah. And they're now growing out there, very much so. It's really wonderful how they're growing out there. They have big women's choruses in Seattle, Washington. Were the women choruses taken in by the men choruses at the beginning? No. This is just the past. Few years. Yes, very few years. Why was that? Why didn't they go together? Well, of course, it was strictly a male chorus. That's why. This sounds like a little bit chauvinistic, though, I mean, if you're in the record. No. You see that male chorus singing is one voice, I guess, one group that like it. The women came into it, I don't know really how, but the, should I say, no, when you traveled with your husband, the women were there. And then someone had the idea, well, maybe we could form a little group of our own and sing, pick up voices. I think it really started in the extreme west. And then they were the first to ask if they couldn't become members of the AUSS. And of course, it took a little doing for the men to give in and say, well, we'll have women too. So now they sing each separately, and then they sing as a real group chorus, the two choruses. But they both support the same organization then? They support the AUSS. The AUSS. But they're all, see, the women rehearse by themselves, and the men rehearse by themselves. They don't rehearse together. Do you see in the future a woman president? No. Could be. They have a woman for some office now. I think it's treasurer or something. I don't know. See, I'm not active anymore. I don't know really what they do. So and then you started to go down south, Florida, in the 60s or? Started in the 50s. Oh, 50s already? So you got a place down here then? John and Arthur, they're the two that John wanted us to come down. He said, that'll be a good place to go. So we came down to see them, and then we've been here ever since. So you've been knowing each other for many, many years now? Oh, many, many years. From Rhode Island to Connecticut. Yes. Oh, yes. I see. We're like a big family then, going down here early. Oh, yes. You spent then the whole winter down here? No, when we first started, we came down for a couple of weeks, and then we went to three weeks, and then it went to four weeks. And pretty soon it was a month and two months, and then we bought a place. So we've owned this place 25 years. And you drive down here then every fall? Every fall. Every December I come in. So you bring your car and? Yeah. And you stay until April, May? May. May. Yeah, stay in May. And then you have a house in New Haven, or an apartment, or kind of medium? Well, we had a home in Woodbridge for 40 years, but I have just moved into a Masonic retirement home now. Oh, I see. I shouldn't say Masonic home, because it isn't a retirement community. I have my own little house. Oh. Oh, there. And it's owned by the Masonic? Well, no. Each one of the land is Masonic land. You have to be a Mason to raise the star. Your husband had to be a Mason to live there, yeah. Yeah. But it's very, very nice. I'm very happy there. And there's security. That's security, yes. Well, that's the reason why, you see, because I had a big house in Woodbridge. And it was too much. Too much. How about your boy and the girl now? Did they go through high school and college? Oh, yes. They're all through. Where did they go through college? Well, my daughter went into Massachusetts General Hospital, and my son was at Connecticut University. A store? In stores, yeah. And my son is in the brokerage business. The name is his father. So you followed him, then? Followed him. And my daughter raised six children. Did they marry in Swedish? No. No. The son is never married. Oh, I see. But daughter married an American. He's a retired German, or? No, a Yankee all the way through. He was from Chicago originally. He was born and brought up in Chicago. But they met in Panama when they were in the service. And they were married in Panama. But they were Army people, so you see they've been living. So he's retired, then? Oh, yes. Now they moved to California. And then five years ago, they decided to come back to Connecticut, nice little state. So they're living in Connecticut now. They like the coast better than the west. Yes. So you were in the military? Yes. So how about your grandchildren? Are they interested in the Swedish background? Are you Swedish? They always did this from little ones. Always wanted to hear about Sweden and things. We're Swedish. We just love to hear them because they say, oh, I like it. Is it Swedish? We like it. Oh, that's good. We like it. It's Swedish. How about Christmas now? Is they all Swedish? We've always had traditional Christmas, always. You learned that from your mother? Mother, yes. And you taught your daughter that, too? That's right. And we always celebrate Christmas Eve. You have syltan, ryskullskröten. Oh, yes. All of them. Nytfisk, too? Well, most of the time, not always. Because your grandchildren, they are grown up. Grown up, sure. High school age. They're beyond. They're married. I see. Yeah. They're great grandchildren. Yeah. So we have very, but. Have they been in Sweden? Yes. Your mother or son? Yeah. They traveled with us in 1960. They came up from Germany because he was in the service. And then we traveled all through Sweden and Denmark, Norway and Denmark together. And we had one of the boys with us. So we really had a nice visit then. So they've seen their forefathers? Yes. In third place, then. Yeah.