 Cassette 2, side 1. Continuation with Edwin Nestander, Omaha, Nebraska. Cassette 2, side 1. And so he got ants in his pants, you said, when the springtime came. Yeah, he went back to Colorado and Idaho Springs. Have you ever been there? Yes. They also had silver mines up around there. Oh yeah, they got gold and silver. But they had very little silver up in the Black Hills. It was mostly gold. And darn little of that. They had to crush an awful lot of tonnage. But it was a lot of tonnage to crush. So his job here, you know, carrying and stacking cement blocks, was it harder than working the mines, you think? Well, he didn't work in the mines. So he had a good job then with his... He worked in what they call a concentration mill. He had a... I don't know whether he'd ever worked in the mines. But the only thing he ever told me was that he had... he was gold... what they called a gold mill... gold... gold amalgamators, yeah. Separated the amalgam, mercury and the gold, see. So did he get a job then up in Idaho Springs when he went back? Did you hear from him again? Did he write to you? Yeah, things opened up a little bit there and he got a job feeding the crusher in the concentration mill. And that's what he did all the time he was there, you know, when he was working. He never went out to look for another job. And the reason he got that job was because he went down to Idaho Springs with Bob Nylander and his family. And he bought a place in a canyon up there, clear up above town, in a canyon called Bear Creek Canyon. And it had two little... there was two little houses. He had a pretty fair-sized house and then a little cabin, a three... a two-room cabin. And that's where Dad lived and he batched there. And one winter and a summer I lived with him there. And the way that happened was that in 19... when was this? Anyhow, in 21. In 1921 and 22 there was a depression in this country and you couldn't get a job for a lot of money. So of course I went out to the harvest field. And I got out to Fremont, Nebraska and went to work out there for a farmer shocking wheat and barley. And after we got through, of course, the jobs were all done then, see? So then we had to go somewhere else. Well, we just piled on one of them freight trains, you know. Every train that pulled out of Fremont, out of the yards in Fremont, had at least a thousand men on top. In 1920, 21? 21, 22. Yeah, and I was up there and we rode those... we rode the top of those boxcars and refrigerator cars all the way to... from Fremont to North Platte. And you were so many years nobody could stop you. They couldn't stop us. Heck no. It was like an ant hill. Yeah, there was a bunch of... me and a bunch of other bums, see? How did you survive though? I suppose you didn't get paid. Well, I got paid and then, you know... And it lasted a long time, whatever you... Well, yeah, sure. I didn't pay the railroad any money for riding on top. And anyway, we got to North Platte and we went to the employment office there. And of course, that's a higher altitude out there and of course, there was a lot of wheat. And I got to this employment office and they said they didn't have anything particularly, but I should stick around. Maybe some farmers would come in. So this... I'd buddied up with a kid who went to work for the same farmer in Fremont with me, a kid from Minnesota, a Swedish kid, Blomqvist his name was. And I liked him. He was about my age and he was a real congenial, good worker and he was a nice kid. Where did you sleep then? Under the sky or anywhere? Oh, when we were on the road? We slept in empty boxcars or anything you could. And so... We sat on the curb and waited for some of these farmers to come in and I guess after an hour or so, somebody came up and said, say, you boys looking for a work? Yeah. What do you got? And he said, well, he says, I want a couple of fellas to shock. And I said, well, fine. So he hired us. So we got in that broken down Ford of his, Ford touring car, and he took us on out to the farm, which was down at Paxton, which is 28 miles south of North Platte, across the dunes there, see? So we went to work for him. We went to work for him and there we slept in a chicken. He had two army cots. And we slept in the chicken house. The cots were set up in the chicken house. That's the only place his house wasn't big enough to take care of me and this other guy. But he fed you though? Well, we had supper, yes. Yeah, and then we went out to the chicken house and went to sleep. And the next morning, well, we got up real early and I was, what we were doing, you see, out there they headed, they run what you call a header, and you drive a header barge, and that's nothing more than a hay rack, and you follow it under a header. And it spouts it out like a combine does, it eats wheat now, see? Anyhow, then you have to tramp that stuff down, and you got a pitchfork, and you spread it around so that until you get it finally, you get a big load of it, and then of course you haul it on in, and then you have to take and pitch it off onto a stack. And then they thrash it from that stack. But the header barge don't cut only about that much off, see? Just off the top, and they left the rest of it standing. And we had to drive that, they cut it across the fields, and so the thing was going this way all night, I mean all day. And of course that first night, when we went to bed, well, I'm telling you, I was riding that header barge all night, and I woke up in the middle of the night, and I had charley horses in both legs, and I just thought I'd die, I'm telling you. Cramps, yeah. So I got up and I walked around, and I stepped in that chicken crap, and it was a mess, you know. And finally, when I went back to bed, I got rid of the cramps, I went back to bed the next morning, well, of course we went out and we did it all over again, see? The next night, I was used to it, it didn't bother me. So I slept all night. But finally, after we'd harvested all his wheat, or barley, or whatever it was, he gave us each chick, and took us into town, and dumped us off. We went to the bank, and gave him the check, wanted the money. He says, this guy doesn't have an account with us, he's overdrawn now. He doesn't have any money here. Oh, gosh. Here we'd worked, what was it, four or five days for him. And I needed some new shoes, and I needed a jacket, and a few things, and the other kid needed it too. So finally, I says to the farmer, I says, Did you walk out to the farm then again? Yeah, I said, well, what do we do? He says, you better get a hold of him, and get your money. So he and I walked back out there, seven miles from town, see. And this is on a Saturday. And we walked out there, and we collared this guy, just as he was eating. Was he a Swede? Oh, no. No, no. No, no. And, no, I think he was Irish. Anyway, we collared him, and said, look, these checks you gave us aren't any good. We want the cash. He says, I haven't got the cash. So we grabbed him then and said, look, you're coming into town with us, and you're going to make arrangements with that banker, and you're going to pay us, or there's going to be trouble. So he got in the car, and he drove us into town then. And we got into the bank, just as the banker was closing up, see. So the banker took him in then, and he made arrangements with him that he would pay us off. And the banker was real friendly. He was all right. And this guy, I don't know what he had to do, hock something, or he had to guarantee this some way or another. And he did. And so then we started down to the railroad track, looking for a train out of there, see. Well, there was nothing going east or west until the following Tuesday. And here, this was Saturday. So the station agent says, well, I says, how far is it out to North Platte? And he said, 27 miles. And I said, where's the highway? And he says, well, he says, let's just grab a road going there. And it goes right right up there. So we started out on that gravel road. I had bought these new shoes and these new pair of pants, and I think a jacket and some socks. And I don't know what Elmer and Blomquist had bought. That was his name. Anyhow, I, along about, we walked and walked and walked and walked, and finally a lightning came, thunder came, we had a real storm. Boy, we just got soaked. And the rest of the way we had to walk in the mud, and most of it was sandy anyway. And anyhow, we kept that up all night until about 3 o'clock in the morning, while some farmer driving into North Platte passed us and then stopped and picked us up and gave us a ride about a mile and a half out of town. And we got into North Platte and went around to boarded rooming houses, you know, and of course there wasn't a bed available. Finally we hit one rooming house where the old lady says, look, she says, and here it was about 4 o'clock in the morning, she says, look, I've got a bed up in the hallway, up in the attic, on the top floor. If you want that, you're welcome. So we went up there and we didn't even take off our clothes at all. We just plopped on the bed and didn't even, well, it had a blanket on it and that was all, see, so we didn't hurt much. But anyhow, we got it all soaked, I guess, from our wet clothes. But anyway, I didn't wake up then until it was about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, and he was still asleep, Elmer was. So I shook him, I said, come on, we've got to get the hell out of here. And so we had paid the lady for the bed the night before, so we didn't have to worry about that. So we got out of there and went down to a restaurant and got ourselves a cup of coffee and a couple of eggs and something like that, I don't know, we had something to eat. And we went on down to the railroad yard and took off. We got straight out of there and went as far as Scotts Bluff. And there was nothing doing there because the beet harvest wasn't on yet. So then we started north and we went up through South Dakota. We hit Rapid City and then took the northwestern, I think it was the northwestern, anyhow, took that line that goes east and finally wound up at a small town up there where I went to work for a farmer that plowed. And we kept that up and I'd done some of that. And finally I was supposed to meet this guy Elmer somewhere because he took a different job and I was supposed to meet him on a certain date and I was there and he didn't show and I suppose something happened, he couldn't make it. And so anyhow, I was alone from then on. And then I worked on through North Dakota over into Montana and Wyoming. And then I decided I better go on up to, oh, I went up to Whitetail, Montana. You know where that's at? So I went into the lumber yard there and I asked the guy if he had a job for me. He said, sure, I got a job for you. He says, I got three car loads of coal and the box car loads of coal down here that got to be unloaded. Just waiting for you. And I said, well, how much a ton? He says, let's see, what was it? I got 50 cents a ton, I think. No, 75 cents a ton. So I said, I'll do it. And I caught a ride down to Scogbee, North Dakota. I think that's North Dakota. And I ran into a couple guys there that was looking for a job. So I said to them, I got some coal up here in the lumber yard up at Whitetail, Montana. And I said, you want to unload it? You want to work on it? I said, I'll give you 50 cents a ton. You have to wheel it with a wheelbarrow. Of course, in those days, that wasn't too bad. You worked for a dollar a day, some of them did. And it didn't take them a day to unload two tons. So they came up with me. And I don't know how we got up there. I don't remember how we got up there. I think we caught a ride with some farmer or something. Anyway, we got up there and went to work. And we unloaded that. And then the lumberman came out and said, look, I've got two more cars coming up. Do you want to stay and take care of those? So we all said, sure. So I had a little cash in my pocket. And I took off from there to Wenatchee, Washington, riding the blinds. Do you know what the blinds are? No. The blinds is that portion that has the telescopic entryway into a car. Way in between. In between, see? And then the blind that you catch is right behind the tender on the engine. You've got a space about that deep, and you can stand in there. You can't sit? Oh, no. You'll go. You could sit on the floor, sure. But it'd be pretty, you'd have that much room, see? About that wide. Anyhow, I got out to Wenatchee, and there was a man for every apple. So I took off for Seattle. And I still had a little money with me, see? I didn't really have that much money. I'd just eaten on it. Yeah, I'd curl up anywhere and sleep. So I got into Washington, or into Seattle, into the railroad yards in Seattle. I was looking for a place to sleep. I was tired. I saw a whole bunch of railroad passenger cars, you know, all there in the yard. And most of them were open. So I just went in there, in one of those, and I laid down across the seat. And I woke up in the morning with somebody prodding me with a gun and a flashlight in my face, see? And here it was the railroad cop, see? He said, what are you doing in here? I said, I'm sleeping. He said, well, son, I'm sorry, but you can't sleep in here. He said, you've cost me my job. He said, you have to get out of here. I said, where will I go? He said, I'll tell you what you do. He said, you go right straight down the street. This was in the suburb of Seattle, see? I don't remember what the name of it was. Anyhow, he said, I'll tell you what you do. You walk right down there. We got a new jail in this suburb, and it's just been built. And you go down there and tell them that you want a place to sleep. They'll take care of you. And I did. I went down there at the jailhouse, and he says, sure. He says, it didn't cost you anything? No, it didn't cost me anything. You had breakfast in the morning, too, maybe? Oh, no, they didn't give me any breakfast. No, I didn't sleep there. I went to a restaurant, you know, got me a weenie or something like that, or else I went to the store and bought some milk and bread. I got along. And the landlords, they watched the cars, and they had the cops check them. Oh, you're darn right, especially at that time, you know, with all them people loose, you know, all them tramps, all us tramps. And anyhow, I went down to Portland then, and Sis was in Portland. And she was working at the hospital there after having taken her training, and she had her R.N. So I called up the hospital, and I got a hold of her. And I told her that I was in town, that I had beat my way around the country, and I was in the town. I wasn't very presentable, but I'd sure like to say hello to her. So she met me out on the street, and we sat down on a bench there, and we talked, and she thought I looked just terrible. And she scolded me up one side and down the other. I said, well, what the hell could I do? She said, hell, you've got to live. You can't give up. So anyway, I left her there then, and I think she gave me $10 or something like that. She was not married then at the time? Oh, no, no, no, no. She was working. She had gotten her R.N. She was a nurse, and so she was working at the hospital, and I think she gave me $10. I've written to Dad. I said that I would like to have fare from San Francisco. I'm going on down to San Francisco, and if I can't get work there, why, I'm going to go on over and stay with Dad if I can. So I went to... I finally got down to San Francisco. I was riding the blinds the whole time. The passenger trains were faster than those freight trains. But on one of them, some of them, of course, over the mountains, they used two coal-burning engines. These were coal burners. How did you get into those blinds, though? They were not locked? Oh, you take on the tenders there on those coal-burning tenders. The coal bin was there right there, see, in front of the blind, and they had those ladders on the side. You just grabbed around as it went by and swung on. Then you crawled over and stepped over. But there must have been a dirty place to be. Oh, it was dirty, sure. But you were dirty anyhow, so what? It's no wonder your assistant didn't see you presentable. That's right. I sure wasn't. Of course, I'd washed up in the jail. Those things are leftovers. So you caught another blind going east? No, this time I couldn't get... Somebody was in the blind, already in there. And there was no room for more than one? No, and the damn thing had stopped. This guy was standing in there, and the engineer didn't care, I think. So this thing just started to take off with the two engines. So I jumped on the front end of the second engine. And I never had such a damn hide in my life, I'm telling you. Going through those tunnels in the smoke, I about died. And if I'd been in the blinds, I'd been just about as bad. But I finally made it all right. I got down to Marysville, California. And I got off there, and that's a Mormon town. And I walked uptown, looking for a place to clean up. Well, I got down to the jungle, where the hobos camp, you know. It was by a river or a creek or whatever it was. And I cleaned up as best I could. And then I went uptown to the town. And I ran into a guy who was looking for some help. And he asked me if I wanted a job, and I said, why, sure. And he was a landscape. You know, he laid out landscapes for some of those rich Mormons up there and took care of some of those lawns and groundskeeper, see. So he says, OK, you can come out with me. So he took me home, shoved me in the bathroom. He says, now there's the bathtub, hot water, you take, clean up, get cleaned up. And your wife will wash these clothes for you in the washing machine. And you put them on when she brings them back to you. He says, and you can come in the morning, and we'll start out to work. So I did. And, you know, I stayed with that guy for, I think it was two weeks. And he was just wonderful. He wanted me to stay there, see. He says, you stay here. He says, I'll see that you get work and you get along. He says, I'll help you. And he would. He was real good. And he paid me pretty good, too. I don't know what I got now, but I think it was probably a dollar a day, something like that. So then I went down to San Francisco. And I didn't have a dime when I got into Oakland, California. Not a dime. So I was standing there at the ferry. You know, there was a ferry that goes between the two. And it cost a nickel to go across. And some guy says, you coming? You going to get on this ferry? And I said, I don't have the money, but I sure would like to get across. I think I'll get some money coming to the post office. So he says, well, here's a nickel. I'll give you the nickel. So I got my ride over. I walked from the wharf, clear up Market Street, about two miles, two and a half miles to the post office. Uphill the whole damn way. And then I didn't have any. And I went up the window and I asked, is there any mail for me? He said, no. He says, I don't have anything for you. I said, my, I'm supposed to have a letter here with some money in it. You had written to your father? Oh, yeah. Like I told Sis, see, I said I'd written to Dad and I was expecting him to send me some money to get so I wouldn't have to beat my way back. He said, no, you didn't. So I thought, well, it's been plenty of time passed, and so I wasn't going to wait. So I walked back down to the wharf down there. Of course, I didn't have any money to get the ride back to Oakland because I knew I was going to have to catch an eastbound train. So I went into a restaurant and I said, have you got anything I can do, I said, for a little something to eat and maybe fare across the bay? And the lady said, yeah, you can wash some dishes. I said, fine, I'll do that. So she sat me down, made me eat first, and then took me out and says, look, wash some dishes. And when you think you've done enough to pay for the dishes, for the meal, why fine. And here's a quarter or something like that, she says, you go across the ferry. Well, on the ferry. So anyway, I got over to Oakland then and I went down to the yards and I caught a western Pacific freight train. And I got into a boxcar with about four other bums. Was it in the nighttime? This was in the daytime. In the daytime. Yeah, this was in the daytime. And we held that freight train down and it stopped, of course, at the division points for a certain length of time while the train crew ate. So then we were able to scrounge something to eat. And I sat there in that doorway of that freight train for 927 miles from Oakland, California to Salt Lake City. And then I caught a—out of Salt Lake City I had to go over to—what's another town? It's where they raise a lot of fruit, a lot of peaches in Utah there. Ogden. Ogden. So I was going to go to Ogden. And I caught another freight train, but this was reefers, refrigerator cars, see? And there was some empty ones in there. So I went up and walked along the top until I found an empty one and we opened up the— I opened up the—there was another kid with me. I didn't know him, but another guy. And opened up the hatch on there and crawled down in that ice chamber, see? And closed the darn thing and took a stick and stuck it in there so it didn't quite close so we got some air, see? And we were scooting along, you know, to beat the cars. And all of a sudden I heard a thump, thump, thump across the top. Pretty soon the top opened and here was the brakeman. He looks down and he says, come on out of there, you two. So we both had to climb out. He had a gun on us, see? So he says, come on. So he says, all right, and I says, jump. He says, get off in here. I said, well, we're not getting off in here until this thing slows down at least. Well, the train was running then? Oh, yes, sure. Sure. So it's still running, see? Going like hell in some stretches and then it comes to a grade, it slows down, see? So I says, you can shoot if you want to. And I says, when this thing slows down, I'll get down on this side and the other guy will get down on the other side. And then we'll jump off. It wouldn't stop, you know. So I took this grade and he was doing probably 20 miles an hour when I jumped. I landed all right. I was all right. But the other guy wasn't. He jumped. He lost his footing and he rolled down that embankment on all those old cinders and stones, you know. And after the train passed... Because they're too excited. So what happened then? Well... We're out in the wilderness. Yeah, so he dumped us off then out in the wilderness. Of course, it wasn't wilderness. It was in a valley, see, where there were a lot of fruit trees and things, see? Apples and apricots. And stuff like that. So we went on into the first town. I don't remember the name of it anyhow. And... Was he able to walk? Oh, yeah, he could walk, but he was pretty well beat up, you know. He wasn't crippled, but his clothes were all torn. And, well, you know, when you roll down along some of them rocks and he jumped off backwards. You know, you jump off a train, well, you better step down, you know, in the direction it's going. So anyway, we caught something out of there. I caught something out of there. I didn't see him again. I never did see him again. I left him there. And I caught another train out of there and came on into Denver. And then I went out to the DNRG, the Narrow Gauge Railroad, yards. And I caught a... Well, I tell you, me and... I was down, hiding down on the embankment, because I didn't know whether the guy would let me jump on or not. But anyhow, pretty soon, well, here comes this narrow gauge engine, see, pulling about three small cars, you know, like they ought to. Well, if you've been up there, you've seen it. Anyhow, this engineer stopped then for the brakeman to throw the switch so he could get off there and get on to the main line going on up to Idaho Springs on that branch line. So he saw me down there on the embankment and he says, You want a ride, buddy? I said, Sure. He says, Hop on. So I hopped on, put on top of the tender, and I sat up there on the coal pile the whole damn time, rode from Denver on up to Idaho Springs. Of course, we made two or three stops on the way up there. And I kept kicking the coal down for the fireman to shovel, see. So I keep going up that way. But anyway, I got up there and I inquired where Dad lived, and they told me that he lived up in Bear Canyon. How far was that from Idaho Springs? It was right on the edge of Idaho Springs. And so I walked up to Canyon. It was about a mile, mile and a half. And I walked up there, and they told me that it was a place with a fence around it and two cottages there, one small one and one other one that was a little larger. So I went up there, and I went into the small one and banged on the door. And Dad came to the door, and he saw me, and he says, Hmm. And I said, Well, I said, Can you put me up for a bit? Oh, yeah. Come on in. So I stayed with him then for all winter and the next summer. Yeah, part of next summer. You were able to get a job then? Up there? No, I just did odd jobs. I went out washing windows. I shoveled snow whenever it snowed. And I worked in a hotel down there sweeping and cleaning and janitoring and firing the boiler and anything I could get. I even worked in a whorehouse. The attendant there too? No, no. She just had jobs, you know, jobs to do. She arranged the traffic? Yeah. She had, I was pretty handy, you know. Idaho Springs, now, that was a boom town, though. Oh, it was a boom town then. Pretty rough then. Oh, yeah. It was rough then. Now it's a resort. It's a resort, yeah. But at that time, you still saw the remnants of the Wild West. Oh, yeah, sure. How about your dad? Did he have a job then at the time? Yeah, he had a job, but it didn't last. They'd call him back whenever they needed him, you know, and then he'd go back, but he never looked for a job. In the meantime, Nylander was living in the other house, see, and his wife had died, and his daughter, Ancoria, was there, and she didn't have any use for me. Oh? Oh, I couldn't understand it. Anyhow, I don't know. Oh, she probably was pretty sweet on some other guy, but I didn't have any intentions of getting sweet on her anyhow, see. She didn't appeal to me. Well, anyway, Dad would go to work every once in a while, and I'd go to work every once in a while, and in the meantime, when we didn't have any work, we'd go up in the hills and pick up windfalls and logs. For firewood? For firewood, and then we'd take it home and have to hand saw it and then chop it, and that's what we cooked on. We had a little coal-burning stove. So you had to prepare for the wintertime then to get the firewood? Oh, absolutely. That's all the heat you had. Because there was a lot of snow up there, too, so you had to get it in the pan. Well, yeah, but I tell you, that was the best winter I ever put in. It was nice. You could have snow that deep on the ground, and you could walk around outside in the shirt sleeves. Oh, I see. And the snow would stay there. So there was no blowing or... Well, once in a while, if it happened to come up the canyon or down the canyon. But it was a nice... I don't know, those pockets like that, if there's any sun at all, why, it warms up, see? And I thought it was just a wonderful climate. Did you go down to Denver at any time to try to find a job there? No, no. The only time I went to Denver was finally after I'd been there a year and I decided I'd better come back to Omaha. And I had saved up enough for the train fare, see? And I went back then, see, and I rode the cushions back down to Omaha. And when I got down here, the streetcar on out to the institution... You rode the cushion. That means you got a different car, a different regular train then. A regular train, yeah. I rode the cushions. And I paid the fare and I got my seat, see, rode the seats. Anyway, I went up to the institution then and it was tough getting a job. You couldn't get a job in Omaha then. It was still kind of rough, awfully rough. And me just being in, I didn't have any contacts or anything. And they were not able to pay you off at the institution either? Well, I asked them for a job. I asked them if they had any openings for me. And he says, well, he says, the only opening we got is as a firing the boilers down there. We'll be assistant firemen. And he says, we'll pay you $25 a month in room and board. I said, I'll take it. So up in this little room up here, up in the tower of the old, old hospital, I had a room clear up there in the top. Yeah. This was my room in this top little circly room there up there in the top. And... So you overlooked the facilities? Yeah, yeah. How did you feel though after all this traveling and bouncing around and... Was it good to be back in Omaha? Oh, sure, sure. I was tickled to death to be back. I'd been all over the country. As a matter of fact, I'd been over quite a little bit of the world. And I've always been glad to get back to Omaha. So that was not a trip you wanted to make over again then? Oh, no, no, no. I don't ever want to make that trip again. That was rough. You had no idea what the next day was going to be? That's right. Yeah. Yeah, and not only that, but it was a little dangerous. Yeah, there sounded like pretty rough people there, eh? Oh, a lot of them. Those brakemen. So a human being at that time was not worth much? No, not a great deal. There was too many of them. Well... Like we said, there was one man for every apple. That's right. One man for every apple. That was in Walla Walla? No, it was in... Yeah, Walla Walla. Walla Walla, yeah. Well, that was in Washington State. No, not Walla Walla. It was in... Bonacci. Bonacci. But it's still in Washington State, though. Oh, yes, yeah, sure. That's the apple country. Yeah. I saw a lot of apple trees. You didn't care too much about the climate, Arthur, but you never thought that there was a nice climate in Washington State. No, I... It didn't appeal to you, to stay? Well, I didn't have anything to stay for. There was no future to look forward to? No, of course I had no education, you see. And... So I got back here anyway, and I went to work for the institution, and I worked for a year, and maybe a year and a half. And I finally got me a job with Hudson Manufacturing Company. And I was in a... I had a room in a boarding house down on South 25th, and down close to Leavenworth Street. And this was a lovely place. People by the name of Harvey. And she was a fabulous cook. And she set a table that was just out of this world. I mean, it was just darn good eating. Wasn't fancy, but it was really good. And she was taking in several boarders. It was a great big frame house, and there were several boarders and roomers there, see? And I got this little room clear up in the corner up there, and one of the front rooms was occupied by a guy by the name of... Well, it doesn't make a great deal of difference. I can't remember what his name was. But anyhow, he was working for Ever... National Carbon Company, and he sold Prestolite batteries. He had the Prestolite... He was their Prestolite representative for this part of the country. And he sold these batteries, you know, to everybody, the garages, and I found out also to the distributors of radios. See, by that time, radio had come in, and you had to have a battery and some B batteries, an A battery and two B batteries, to run one of those sets. And they were just beginning, just coming out, see? And so he sat there at the Sunday dinner table one day, and he says, What do you want to do, Ed? And I said, Well, I'm working for Hudson Manufacturing Company in the parts department, you know, in stock clerk. And I said, There's no future there. I said, I'd like to get into electronics. Only they didn't call it electronics in those days. I'd like to get into radio. And he says, Well, would you like to get into the distribution end? I said, Yeah, that's fine. I can probably get into the technical end of it. Because I had been making crystal sets, you know, ever since I was in the orphanage. Even when I was in the orphanage. Oh, yeah, sure, sure. I always did. And I'll take you downstairs and show you a nice shop, if you want to see it. Anyway, I told him I'd like to get into radio. He says, I'll see what I can do. Now, he called on the dealers and distributors in Omaha and also the distributors in Lincoln and Grand Island and the bigger towns, see? And his distributor in Lincoln was H.C. Noll Company, and they were Atwater-Kent distributors for automotive ignition. And Atwater-Kent had wanted Noll to take on the Atwater-Kent radio line and sell it, and Noll didn't want to do it. He didn't know anything about it. But they told him, Well, if you don't, we'll get a new distributor, and he'll insist on both lines, the automotive and the radio. So Noll decided, Well, he'd probably better do it. So he decided to sell his business to a guy by the name of Chapin down in Lincoln. And then Noll moved to Omaha. Then he came up to Omaha and opened up a warehouse, see, down in the warehouse district. He just had rented a space there and stocked a few sets and hired a couple of guys to go out and sell them. So I went down to this warehouse after I'd talked to Stuart. Stuart was his name. After I'd talked to him and Noll said, Well, I wanted to know how much money I was making. I said, I'm making $18 a week. He says, Well, I'll need a shipping clerk and somebody to repair these. I said, I don't know anything about them, but I'd sure like to learn. But he says, I'll only pay you $16 a week. Well, I said, Well, I'm sorry, but I won't quit an $18 job in order to take a $16. As speculative as that was, you know, this was right in the very infancy of radio. So I parted. I went on home. About three weeks later, after he had hired two or three other guys and they'd swiped sets on him, see, he called me up. He says, Ed, you still want to come down and go to work? And I said, Yeah, at $18 a week. He says, Okay. He says, I'll do it. He says, The other guy's been stealing me blind. And he says, I trust you. Well, I said, I don't steal. Don't have to. So I went to work for him. And that's how I got into electronics. And you stayed with that? I stayed with him for 12 1⁄2 years. And then because I was talking to somebody that wanted to hire me away from him, he fired me after 12 1⁄2 years. So I went to work for the guy that was trying to hire me. And I had a contract with him. I made him sign a contract that I would get a... Why did he fire you? Just because somebody told you? Well, he didn't want the competition. He knew doggone... I'd started this parts business down there with him, see. And I'd been with him for 12 1⁄2 years. And when electronics, you know, these parts started, they started needing parts. You took it pretty good then. Sure. I opened up the first parts house in Omaha in the back end, under the garage, in the warehouse. You were doing that trade then in the beginning? Well, sure. We didn't have any instruments or anything like that to start with. All we had was a meter and a battery. Shaking a spark. That's right. Sure. What they call a continuity meter. And then anything, of course, in those days, it's all you needed, really, if you knew what you were doing. And then he showed me how to do continuity to tell whether a coil was open or whether it was closed. And if it was open, it was bad. And if it was closed, it was still good. You see what I mean? Unless you got a full reading on it, then, of course, it was shorted. So, that wasn't any... I fixed... I shipped... We shipped Atwater Kens out of there three express vans every day, almost. And at night, I'd stay there and work those... Was they in the downtown? Oh, yeah. Downtown. And where did you live then? Were you married at the time when you got this job? I was living where Stuart was, see? I see. See? And I had known my wife when I worked at the institution, see? Firing. I'd run into her there. And after I left, then I called my sister who was working there. She came back to Omaha, went to work for Emanuel, you know, for many years. And your wife, she was not of Swedish background? No, no, no, no, no. She's German. German and French. Born in Indianola, Iowa? Indianola, yeah. She was born of a German-Lutheran family. He was a preacher. Oh. Yeah, and... I called up my sister one day, got to thinking about Martha. I'd always admired her. I always was afraid to ask her because, heck, I was... I didn't figure I had much to offer. But after I left the institution and had been doing fairly decently, you know, with Noel, and finally got out on the road and selling, then I called. And she had... She had her sister up there, was taking training too at the time, and she was just about ready to graduate. So my sister says, Well, you don't want Martha, you want Elizabeth. And I said, No, I want Martha. Well, Elizabeth's a lot prettier. Well, I said, I want Martha. So she got in touch with Martha, or got Martha on the phone then for me. And, no, she told me, she says, She's rooming down at Pettigrew's. So you get a hold of Pettigrew's number and call down there. So I did, and I caught her. And so I asked her for a date, and from then on, of course, we kept company until we finally got married. Was there Anna Kurtz then? Anna Kurtz. Anna Kurtz. Mm-hmm. And you were both Lutheran, you said? Oh, yeah. Did you belong then to the Emanuel Lutheran Church? I don't belong to any Lutheran church. I don't belong to any church. I did belong at one time to Salem, when my brother was down there. Oh, down there. Yeah. And then when we moved out north, my wife and I belonged to Trinity. Were you confirmed at the Emanuel Lutheran? I was confirmed at the institution. At the institution. Yes. Right there. And they had a little chapel there. Oh, yeah, sure, a beautiful chapel. Now, that is... Did you go to the Emanuel Church and the students there? You mean down at 19th and Cash? Yes. No. No, my brother used to go down there occasionally. Oh, I see. When he was in the orphanage, you know, and... Did you belong to any Swedish organizations there in Omaha? Like Vasa? Well, no. I tell you, there was a chorus called Orpheus. Yeah. I belonged to that until that broke up. A Swedish... Well, it was a Swedish chorus, male chorus. So you were a singer then? Oh, yeah, I done a lot of singing. Uh-huh. Orpheus. Never had any particular training, but then I loved to sing, and I got a son that's got a very good voice. Was there a club or society? Well, it was just a chorus. Singing chorus. Yeah. Oh, okay. We sang around different places, you know. And did you go to other, like, known club? No. Northern? No, no. Vasa or like? No, I just didn't have time for that. When I went to work for this other fellow, this fellow by the name of Clark, after Noel fired me, when I went to work for Clark, and I had a contract with him, that turned out to be no good, but I had a contract with him calling for a third of the profits, and I was supplying all of the know-how, he was supplying the capital. And I stayed with him six and a half years, and I didn't see a dime in profits except my salary, so I kept asking him for it, and finally he said there just wasn't any, and I knew there were, because he was taking the money out and buying an interest in a Wurlitzer jukebox set up, see? The Kiewalt? Oh, yeah, they were very, very, very popular then. And so he was letting the radio accessories business go to pops. He didn't care. So finally it got to the point where I just decided that I was going to have to do something, and I could see the handwriting on the wall, and so I started talking to manufacturers' agents, and I tried to get some capital, see? I drove all over the state of Nebraska and called on people I knew out here that had money, and I just couldn't find anybody that would stake me. I had one guy out here that wanted to, but he was from Kansas City and belonged to the Kansas City mob down there, and I didn't want any part of that, see? So anyway, finally I ran into a kid in Omaha here who had $1,500, and I borrowed $500, and we started on $2,000 in capital and opened up as a partnership on 28th and Farnam, in an old grocery store, a little bit of a place. And that took off. And right today my son is running it. And they took it over, and I gave it to the kids. The two boys were in it at the start, but now they just couldn't get along, see? Like brothers. There were too many chiefs and not enough Indians, see? So anyway, Chuck went down to Oklahoma City and went to work for somebody down there in the same kind of business, and Herb took over and mortgaged all he had, you know, and put it in there, and he's doing all right now. He's showing a promise. It's hard to have a companionship, you think. You have to give and take from both sides. You mean a partner? Yeah, to be able to have a partner, because you don't know the partner. Well, yeah, it's all right if one is predominant, but when they both want to be chief... So one has to give them... Yeah, one has to... they have to realize that one... Now, you take the one son. The one son is very much like his mother. He's very methodical and picky, and he wants things done right. So he's got a German background. Yeah, yeah, and my other boy is more like me. He's outgoing, very, very, very good salesman. So in the last three months, he's a Philco TV distributor, and it belonged with all the parts business and all the rest of it, see, and he's done almost a million dollars in the last three months. So he has a big business, then. Oh, yes, it's not peanuts. It'll do five million, six million a year. And you laid the foundation for it. Oh, yeah, sure, I gave it to him. But, boy, by the time that he took over, why, of course, it just went down the tube, see? He lost their key employees and lost a lot of accounts. So it is not easy. Oh, no, but he's learned. During the Depression, though, did you fare all right then, during the Depression years? Yeah. How did that affect you? Well, the Depression didn't bother... You know, everybody wants to be entertained, and the radio business was always pretty good. So I knew that you could make a living at it anyway. But during the war, when everything was rationed, you couldn't get any parts or anything, see? It was worse than the Depression, then. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure, sure. Of course, in the 30s, well, that was pretty rough. Yeah, especially for a farming country, of course. They didn't have too much money. But like you say, they liked entertainment. Oh, yeah, but they bought TVs, or not TVs, but radio sets. Yeah, sure. And how about the political affiliation? Have you been a Republican like most of the Swedes? Oh, yeah, yeah, I've been a Republican all my life. Never been a Democrat? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. That's a bad word. You can't talk about Democrats in Nebraska. It's strange. Oh, yeah, there's more Democrats in Nebraska than there are... Well, I won't say there's more, but there's more Democrats in Omaha than there are Republicans. By far, yes, sure. All your labor... Yeah, there's no in the later years, though. Well, yeah, but in the early years, it was all Republican. Yeah, I mean, they were... Sure. And most of the Swedes and Scandinavians, they were... Republican. Republican, yeah. Turning away now from the politics, back to the home. Well, you came there and... Don't you have a mic? Or you've got one? No, it comes through right there. Oh, you pick it up from there, too. So how did this affect you now? I mean, you had no father figure to talk to. That's right. And how could you talk and relate to the ladies there that worked there, the deaconesses and nurses and so on? Did they have any respect for what you wanted to know? Oh, yeah. When you got old enough, you start asking. Well, yeah, but, you know, those sisters up there were just like any other women. They... Some of them were much more concerned than others. But most of them were not married, though. Oh, no, any of them were married. They never had any kids of their own. Well, no, I don't think so. I know one sister that came there after she lost her husband. But outside of that, I don't know of any deaconess up there that had been married. So they fed and clothed you. I understand. But how about when you started getting old enough and you wanted to do something, you had the electronics interest. How would you ask for that? You wanted to... Well, I'll tell you. We were directed to do most of what we did up there as kids. Like I told you before, I had to work in the greenhouse and in the garden in the summertime. Then you had a man to work under. Oh, yes. They had the gardener. Yeah, well, he was the caretaker. That is, the lawn caretaker up there, too, done all the shrubbery and everything else. He was a landscaper. And besides, a registered florist. Now, this greenhouse, they also raised flowers, see, for the institution for the tables. He raised carnations. I worked in the greenhouse when I wasn't in school until I graduated from the eighth grade at 13. And then I was, of course, told to go to work because they wouldn't let me go to high school. Even though somebody tried to convince them that I ought to go, I, the sister, couldn't understand it and wouldn't allow me to. But she had the last word. She had the last word, yes, because the director had died. Lindbergh had died, and the assistant, who was acting director at the time, was called to another charge, so she was alone. And all they had then, you see, was the resident...