 On this Indian village. The bread didn't raise that particular day, you know. So he had it on the floor to cool and then all of a sudden he jumped up and down and all of, you know, jumped. Just ruined the hell out of it, because he said it wasn't any good and it didn't raise. So he was a goddamn mad. He just jumped all over it with his shoes on, you know, and flattened it out. God damn it. Eric Ferdinand, he could be hot-tempered as hell. But there was a hard job, though, to be a baker. You had to go up there at two o'clock in the morning. You had the dough raised already. They all worked nights. And the yeast man was important. If he didn't show up... There was a lot of swearing. If a baker didn't show up, they'd call me. Get me a baker. So you got it either way. They'd call me any hour of the night. I would go and go and go. But now you were married in 1935. Yeah. Did your wife put up with this thing? I guess she did. She stayed with you? Oh, hell yes. She was pretty damn nice. So you married a non-Swede? Oh, yeah. She was a white girl. You never dated a Swedish girl? No, let's see. No, hardly. Because you were very visible in the grocery store there. And you saw a lot of girls in the bakeries. Remember Ekström's? Ekström's confectionery? Yes. And you remember Pearl and Eva? No, I don't remember those. Pearl, of course, they live in California now. She married Anne Lance at the barbershop on 7th Street by 3rd Avenue. But there was one girl you dated? No, but her... Pearl. Eva was Pearl's sister. They're out in California, I think. But her mother thought it would be nice if I dated her, dated Eva, see? Oh, she tried to arrange it, huh? We went out a couple of times, but I don't know what happened. It never materialized. But I was... What the hell was it? Well, one night, I had an office girl, of course. And she was married. That was before I was married, I guess. Or maybe I had been. Well, anyway, she called me up. It was about... I guess we were married because my wife was there. About 11 o'clock or so, and this office girl called up. She said, gee, her husband, we called him Doc, nickname. She said, he isn't home yet. I wonder who he is. Could you go out and look for him for me? And she told me places where she thought he might be, you know. So, well, it was 11 o'clock, 11.30, whatever it was that night. I went around to some houses or places I thought that she thought he would be. Well, I didn't find him. He finally came home. So when I got back, I told my wife. I said, well, I've been called to do just about everything. But I said, I've never been called to attend a baby being born. So, oh, it was a few nights later or maybe a week or something. I guess I told somebody about it. You remember Al Nelson's bakery on 7th Street and 5th Avenue? Well, that was a bakery, Al Nelson. And I talked like him, perfect, you know. He said, hello, Red, this is Al Nelson. My wife is going to have a baby. Could you come right over? Laughter It wasn't Al Nelson at all. It was some other guy. Kidding me. I had told somebody about it, it seems. But he imitated Al Nelson to perfection. Do you believe that? Yeah, of course, you know. But what the hell, I tend to laugh like hell afterwards. You didn't go over those things? No, hell no. I said, I've been called to do everything. Find husbands and bakers and everything else. But I've never been called for a baby being born. So that was it. But you were well known all over Rockford and surrounding areas? I think so. You were very visible. Yeah, the telephone operators knew me. The bakers didn't know my number, why they didn't ring me. They said you're called Sternquist. Sure. They had a nickname for you? Red. Red? Oh, yes. I very seldom hear my name. Well, they called you Red. Oh, sure. I used to have red hair. But I slept in a bed too short and I lost it. And I don't want to get a toupee. I got some wigs in the basement, but I wouldn't use them. Long curls and everything. You have some wigs, you said, in the basement? What? That is being a clown though? Yeah, clown wigs. I got them in suits, you know. I don't know if I had the... Yeah. I got big shoes. And all the parades, I give out flowers. Only they didn't get them. This is when they have parades here in Rappaport? Yeah. And then we'd go all over Cleveland, Toledo, Detroit. On conventions, you know, and I paraded in all of those places. Did you follow along then? Oh, yeah. We were ten guys in the clown unit. And they're still doing it, but now they got 30 or 40. And they only allow us ten. They wouldn't spend a nickel for us getting any equipment or makeup or anything. But now they furnish everything, I guess. So we did a lot of... Went to children's homes and gave out candy. I was in all the parades. I used to walk and give out flowers, but they never got the flower. Nice old carnation or rose. I'd get them down to Highland Floral and get them. And I'd present a lady in a parade, go up and hand her a flower. And she would grab it, and all she got was a stem. I still had the flower. See, I cut off the short stem, and she'd grab down here, and she'd only got the stem, so she didn't get any flower. And she'd call me dirty names. I had a bouquet with stems on it. I'd give them a good one then. Down to Coronado, a ladies' night, in the lobby there, I was dressed up and giving out flowers like that. And I gave one to one gal there. And she got the stem, and she says, That's why you horses ass. Oh, Jesus Christ. So where do you inherit this family business from? From your father or mother? No, hell no. From Johnny Sabin, a good friend of mine. That's how I got started. And Swede Johnson, you ever heard of him? Swede the blind man? No. You remember Swede Johnson? No. You didn't. Was he blind? Oh, blind for years. He lived on Fifth Avenue? What happened to him? Oh, I don't know. He was blind. He's dead now, you know. And his wife, they belonged to Vikings over there on Fifth Avenue. You didn't know Swede Johnson? No. How could you miss it? He was blind, and he put on a Christmas party for the kids for the blind center over the restaurant there on 7th Street. Oh, he was in the clown too, you know. Blind, and well, he wasn't blind at first, you know, so. But he was a character. So he inspired Julent, though? Oh, he was a character. And our director, Johnny Sabin, he's dead. He got me started in it. We were only eight or ten of us when we started. Now I guess I got about 30, 40. Do you remember Olle Skrathult? Yeah, sure. He was here? Yeah. He was the house owner on Third Floor when they used to have wrestling up there. Jan Friberg, oh, my dad, oh, wrestling, that was big business. I mean, he liked to go, and he always dragged me along, you know, because he believed it, because now, you know, maybe it wasn't quite as crooked in those days as it is now. Jan Friberg, he was going to be the world champion, you betcha. He was in Rockford? Yeah. Olle Skrathult now. Well. What did he do? Did you like him? I don't think I ever saw him personally. You didn't? No, I see pictures of him. Yeah, but he was traveling in the stories. Oh, sure he was, but I don't think I ever saw him. Maybe I doubt it. They said he drew big crowds. Oh, sure. Oh, he was popular as hell. I guess I just didn't have him to get involved. There was no others that you remember that had traveling assemblies, like theatrical groups. You never played sketches or small dialogues? You know, playing theatrical plays? Oh, well, oh, we used to. I was in a couple of them at Rockford Theater. You were? We had minstrel shows. You know, minstrel shows, you don't have them anymore. Two black ones on each end, and I was the interlocutor. I was a white man, and these coons would have different stories and stuff, you know, and so I was the interlocutor, dressed in a tuxedo and big shot, you know. We had fun at Lyron Hall. I was, oh, hell, I'll show you a picture. A shrine parade in Chicago, in the big shrine parade, going down Michigan Boulevard. I got an Arabian costume, or it's a long, like a dresser coat, but it's Arabian, and I had one of those turbans on my head, you know. Then another one of the clowns had a red rug on Michigan Boulevard, so he'd put the rug down on the pavement, and I had this basket. I was a Hindu, see, I had, I was a snake charmer. I had the snake in the basket, you know, but then I had a switch. It was operated like a trick. It wasn't a real snake, but I just flipped the switch, and the snake would come up, and I'd play, you know, blow on the horn or something, you know, and they made me cut that out because I was holding up the parade. It ended up at the Chicago Stadium, and there was the imperial sir of the shrine, you know, the big shot for the whole United States. And, of course, I would pass out flowers. I'd put flower act all over, but this time I had a dozen roses, beautiful dozen roses. This is Johnny Saban, he said, and they were up in the reviewing stand. He'd run up there with the roses, and, oh, thank you, thank you, thank you. Well, he didn't get the dozen roses. He got one goddamn rose, you know. And, boy, I'd turn around and run down those steps. I was so damn glad when I got down to the bottom because I had the real ones, and I just left him with the stem. I didn't know if I'd get out of there alive or not, but I did. Oh, goddamn, we had fun. So you were a great snake charmer. Yeah, oh, and we were out at 15th Avenue Stadium. That's where the circus used to be, you know, when it comes to town. Get him up for it. Yeah, and so we put our makeup on at the Eagles Club there, our paint and stuff. So this Johnny Saban, like I said, he'd, you know, a carnival clown or a circus clown, and they don't have much time for amateurs, you know. They're the best, you know. But Johnny Saban, he says, come on, we'll go over and visit the clowns for a while. Well, he didn't get very far there, but so we were just walking there before the thing started, and there was two women came along, and they were talking Swedish. And I was in my clown outfit, you know, and I said, oh, nia svensk. Oh, I thought she was going to faint. Oh, wait till I get home. In Swedish, wait till I get home to Sweden, tell them I saw a Swede clown. I didn't know what it was, because she talked Swedish, you know. But she had such a big kick out of me talking Swedish. A Swedish clown, she'd never heard of one. Jesus Christ. So when did you join the Masons? Unless you were married? Let's see. I don't remember now, because I can look it up. So you passed all the tests, and how could you get time for everything? Running around with yeast all over the county? Yeah. And Liron or Liron? Well, of course, I was just a member, but I was secretary of Liron for 18 years. I just gave that up. I thought I had enough of it, so I quit. 18 years. That ain't on recording, is it? Well, it's good. This is your credit. Oh, yeah, but. Mr. Sturmquist, been a good standing member, good secretary? I don't know how good. You're holding a big book then with the... Yeah, and a lot of them don't pay their dues, you have to drop them. Be surprised, the guys you... So how is it going now? I mean, you had about 300 members when you were... 400, close to 400. When you were the strongest? Uh-huh. And what happens now? Well, they... Do they go down? Well, we... Oh, I don't know. I imagine they had to drop 30 or 40 that didn't pay last year. And you take in some new ones once in a while. I don't know what the membership now is, 300, 350 or 375, I don't know. But you still have the hall. Oh, yeah. You own that and... All the clubs are in bad way, you know. They're all suffering. All the clubs? Moose Club. Every club. Svea Sauner and 3L is the only club that isn't having problems, I guess. Live and let live. They're on 9th Street. What kind of purpose do they care for? Well, good times. And it costs you $500 to get in there. But my nephew belongs there. I'm not too proud of him. But he knows it. But he called me the other day and wanted me to join 3L because the charter's open. I'd get in for a hundred bucks, see. And he said, you better get over here because we have a good club and we have a good time. But I told his mother, I said, I'm not joining club. I said, all he wants me over there is to play cards and take all my money. So to hell with him. So I didn't join. I belong to too many clubs now. I've been a member of the Elks Club for 51 years. 51 years? Yeah, life member at Oddfellows. And life member at Lyron. That's what my wife kept talking about too. She said, why don't you get out of some of this stuff? We're going to have to pay extra to the newspaper for listing all your clubs. Did she also belong to Lyron? No. No, she graduated from college. She didn't belong to a sorority. So she was a sophisticated woman. Well, no, she was wonderful. What did your mother say when you married a nun, Sweden? Well, evidently she thought she was pretty nice. I had my mother in a putty comb nursing home in South Rockford. You know what I paid to have her down there? She died in, what the hell was it, 58? Or was it 48? 43. $13 a week I paid for her in a nursing home. $13 a week? A week. I got the receipts downstairs yet. Did you continue to live in her home then, or your home? Or when did you move here to this? Oh, that was her idea of moving or buying this. She lived on Albert Avenue on the West End, see? Because her father started a cemetery out West State, Willwood. And then he went over and left Willwood and went and started Darlington. That was your father's home? Yeah. Well, I mean, he was, I don't know if you'd call it caretaker, but he had charge of it when he was there. First at Willwood and then he went over to, so he got a big, great big monument at Darlington. And then I didn't even think of it and buried my wife at Swedish. We got a lot there that's all full now except, yeah, I'm the only one left. Because my, John died, Axel died, and Mark died, so I'm the only one left. Were you going to be at the Swedish cemetery too? Well, the bronze plaque says that, so it's got my wife's name on one side of it and then my name. But when I died that day, I haven't put that in yet, because I'm still living, I guess. What are you going to have inscribed after you? Hello? What are you going to have inscribed on your tombstone after you? My name, because my wife's name... I know your name, but... My wife's name is already on it. Do you want to have a verse? No, no, no, no, no. A funny man? No, thank you. A good man? No, just my name. The yeast man or a poet? Yeah, yeast man. All right. Yeah, my boy. Oh, great. Well, it's thanks to you, you know, that bread has raised. In the wintertime, we had Model T Fords, you know, Model T Ford and just a little side curtain. Colder than hell, but rain, shine, rain, sleet, or snow. Rain or shine, snow or sleet, you'll always see Fleischman on the street. Is that what you want to have on the tombstone? That was a Logan. That's what we should have, yeah. Never thought of that, thank you. Maybe Fleischman could put that on there. Oh, I'm sure of that. Rain, shine, snow or sleet, you'll always see us on the street. And Model Ts. And then one time, the road was blocked. We couldn't get over there to drive. I guess Interurban got through, finally. So I packed two suitcases of yeast, because the bakers didn't have any yeast there in Belvedere, see? We went over there twice a week. And so I finally got on a train, and I got in there late at night. And what I should have done, I hadn't worked there too long. I didn't know it, because the bakers worked nights. I should have gone around then, because they were out of yeast. They had gone to every grocery store in Belvedere and got the little cakes and used them, so they'd bake some bread. And here, I got over there, I checked in a hotel and didn't go to the bakery still in the morning. I got hell for that. What the hell? I was new at it. I didn't know. I should have known. But they got their yeast. Well, it seems interesting when you're thinking back with all those bakeries in Rockford. Did most of the people buy this bread in the bakeries? They didn't bake themselves? They did a lot of home baking. But still they had all those bakeries. How could they get all the bread? I don't know, but they still... Coffee bread? Still we sold a lot of small cakes of yeast, you know, the little ones. They were two cents a piece. Now they're 40, 50 cents, I guess. And Billy Pyle, did you ever know that store in Belvedere? No. Grocery? At Christmas time, he bought a carload of Monarch coffee. A carload. And I used to have to go over there three times a week with yeast cakes. They'd come two dozen in a package. And I'd fill them up with 15, 20 packages each trip. Monday, Wednesday, and Friday I had to go over there for his store. Did he serve coffee down there? No, no, he sold it. He had the biggest damn store. Hell, there was nothing in Rockford to compare to it. He had 10 or 12 delivery wagons. They'd place their orders and then deliver them. He had a long business to haul his wares home. Did he serve Rockford too? Well, most of his business was Belvedere. There was more grocery stores, but that was the biggest one there, right on the main drag. Billy Pyle. Yeah, there was a couple, three other stores, but three. And then there was bakeries over there. How could you remember to deliver to everybody? It's natural, I guess. They let you know? Of course, we had books, route books. We had to mark how much they bought each week. A lot of bookkeeping. Sure. You had to sit up all night to check the books? No, not quite. But you didn't collect any money at all? Oh, yeah. You did? We had both cash and credit. You were never robbed? No. Small cakes, that was always all cash. You know, in Houston. In downtown, remember dry goods stores used to have, when you paid them and then they put the money in the box and pulled the cord and went up to the office with the money and then you get your change back in it? Remember that? No. You don't? They must be long ago. Oh, sure, when I first started back in the 20s. I wasn't even born. No, well, that's what the big, yeah, downtown, there was one big store they had. And I'd go in and put the yeast in and then I'd send a ticket up there, how much I wanted, and he'd send the money back, you know, down to me in a little cup. It had a wire running. Was he afraid to be robbed or something? Who? The cashier? No, but that's... That was the system. That was their system. Why wouldn't he sit right there and give you... I know, like they do now, a cash register right there. The office was up on a landing a few steps up, see, and they could see. They went on the counter. They could see the whole store, you know, if anybody was stealing, I suppose, shoplifting. They didn't know about that in those days, I don't think. So the money came back there in a... In a little box, you know, and I know it was Lawton Brothers, and so I sent a slip up there in the money, and I think it was a quarter or two much or something, you know, and I called her attention to it and I said, You got too much money in here. And she said, Well, we were just trying to see if you were honest. I said, That's what I thought. So they ran a little test on you. I guess. Oh, boy. When I delivered yeast down in South Rockford, well, I had this, see, this baker. This baker bought the yeast because he had a bakery, so it was a legitimate business. But then he would deliver on Island, no, not Island, the other street. There was, oh, it was like a store, but machine guns and all that stuff in there, you know. Oh, boy, it was really an arsenal. In Rockford on Lincoln Avenue, see. Well, you see, that was a hangout for the bootleggers, and that was where the yeast would go. And so one time, I was supposed to, I did wrong, I was supposed to deliver it to the bakery. Well, I went down there with it, and he said, Do me a favor and take it up there to Lincoln Avenue, will you? And so I went up there, and oh, Jesus, they had an arsenal in that back room, you know, and I picked up a, oh, I don't know, maybe I should talk a little in Italian, you know, and oh, brother, you know, like they were, after that, like, they started talking together, but not saying anything because I could understand them. Well, I could understand them. I could just say, Buongiorno, that's good morning, and buona sera, good night, and all that stuff, see. But, boy, that was an arsenal. I was glad when I got out of there, but another guy, see, what was the big crook in Chicago? Capone. Capone, see, he had everything tied up, and we had a guy here in Rockford that wanted the same system. He wanted to be the kingpin here and handle the yeast and get a commission on it, see. They were in the yeast business, too? Who? The gangsters? Well, everything in Chicago went through Capone. He was in charge of all the bootleggers and all the hoodlums and everything, see. He was the kingpin, so he got a rake off, something for handling it or, you know, being in there. Well, this guy wanted to be like Capone. He wanted to be like him because here, I didn't deliver direct to bootleggers. I sold it to the bakery. I thought they were baking bread with it. I didn't know. So he called up and he wanted to see me, so I went down there, and it was on Ferguson Street. And I went in the back room, and, jeez, you should have seen the guns, walls, revolvers and machine guns. And he said, I'd like to make a better deal with you than getting it from the bakery because he wanted to get his cut on it, see. And I told him I couldn't do it. And I said, absolutely not, the company won't stand for it. And, boy, I didn't know if I'd get out of there alive or not. I was glad when I got to the door and fresh air, I got the hell out of there. But I never, he never got it, but, see, that way he'd make a commission. But Louis Dodaro was... So he was an Italian? He was Italian and a hell of a nice guy, but he served time at Leavenworth for selling yeast and grapes. He bought grapes by the carload, blue grapes, or they made wine of that, I guess. But he died not too long ago. The bakery's still there. Do people know that he was a guy like that in the underworld, you think, this Italian? That he was? Well... You knew, no? Yeah, well, he was, oh, yeah, I knew all the different guys that... But how about the big public? The big public were in the racket. Well, like... Because the word spreads around, you know, but it probably takes a little while before it goes out. What? To know what people are doing, you know, and crooked business and... Oh, yeah. But all the blind pigs in Rockford, my God. You know. He even had me on the jury one time. And I was working, I was, yeah... So I went down to Carpenter and I said, I'm sorry, I can't serve on the jury. He said, you're going to serve on the jury, and that's all there is to it. And I told my head because I had to work. So I'd go up there each morning, and it didn't last too long, but... And he asked me a question, and I'd say the wrong answer, so I'd be excused, see, for the day. So that's how I got by with that. So you were excused then? Oh, yeah. What kind of answers did you give them? Well, because I said, yes, oh, and I guess one day I was there and they asked me what my occupation was. Oh, yeah. Well, they asked me, well, yeah, when I told them I wouldn't serve. Well, is there any reason why you cannot serve? And I said, yes, sir. I have no use for these spotters or private investigators that you have inspecting stills. And to me, they're lower than snakes. I was excused from jury duty. So I could make my route, at least. What the hell? But they had two guys there. Oh, I guess they had two guys that are Docus brothers, and they were bootleggers. And I knew they were, and they were up... Were they Italians? They were, yeah, they were up, I think so, they were up there for bootlegging. Oh, yeah, the judge. Yeah, oh, yeah, the women, those in the courtroom, the judge, yes, yes, oh, yeah. He asked me why, why, I guess that's when I got thrown out. Any reason why I wouldn't be a fair and just juror to serve on the jury? And I said, yes, sir, I have. I got good reason. I said, these private investigators you have, you call them investigators, to me, they're lower than snakes. I was... Shuffled all to me. Right, and then I walked out of the courtroom, and here are these two guys standing in the lobby. I thought maybe they'd clobber me and all, but they didn't. I got out of jury duty anyway. But that was only one... Then, you know, I report for, I don't know, what is it, a week or ten days or whatever? So another case... That wasn't bootlegging. But it was somebody else, and I knew... But I told them that I couldn't serve because... You had your convictions. Yeah, I had my conviction. But there was very few that were convicted, though, for bootlegging. Oh, yeah. Very few. They got some of them. They'd have them in jail, but then you could still go to the house. You used to get Bidego Red and milk bottles, quarts. So you have delivered Rockford. Rockford is right. And then you had the milkman and the iceman. You never tried that business? I almost went to work for Standard Dairy once. But by God, I forget what happened. My ambition was, I thought when I was a kid, to be a Western Union messenger, you know, in a uniform, and I thought that was big stuff. I went down there, and I was supposed to start there on a Monday before I went to Globes, because I'd been there and applied or something. Oh, it rained like hell that day, you know. Western Union on a bicycle out in the rain. I took the job at the grocery store. I never took the job at Western Union. So they delivered telegrams by bicycle? Yeah. To any house in Rockford? Yeah. They'd give you a uniform. You're supposed to maybe pay them a dollar and a half a week. I don't know. Oh, I worked for a floral shop, too. Oh, I worked for a dry goods store, too, downtown. A dollar seventy-five a week. Deming's. Deming's Women's Store on West State. A dollar seventy-five a week? That's what I got, yeah. That was when you were fifteen or something, not fourteen? Yeah, yeah. And they had an alternation room up there, you know, for women's dresses and fit-in net. And that was my first job, to clean, see that everything is neat. And the rooms where they'd try the dresses on would be clean and dusted and all that stuff. And cover everything up at night with white sheets before you went home. A dollar seventy-five a week. Howdy good. But I worked for Ingalls Peddling Flowers. They were on 11th Avenue. He'd call me when he had funerals or something. And some of the sprays, I had to put it on my bicycle and walk, deliver the flowers, you know. I just had a bicycle, no cart or anything. So I was delivering something at Ingalls to Rockford Floral Shop on West State, right by the river, right next to the newspaper office. And he was a Greek, run it, can't think of the name now. He said, say, would you like to work for me here in the floral shop? And I said, I don't know, I work over on 9th Street, over at Ingalls. And how much are you getting? And maybe I told him or something. He said, I'll tell you, you come to work for me, I'll give you five dollars a week. How's that? Oh, gee, you'll never have to pay me anymore. Five dollars a week, boy. So I took that job for a while, but that was a big funeral, big flower pieces, you know. He didn't have any, so there was a guy who was always whistling. He had a team of horses and a wagon. And he was doing his delivering for him, you know. So he got paying me five dollars a week. Why, hell, if it wasn't too much, why then I could handle it all on the bicycle, or lead. And so he'd go by with his horse and wagon, and saw me putting flowers on the bike, and he'd whistle, and he'd call the boy, you're a cheapskate. You were talking about funerals, you know, and the flowers. Did they use a lot of flowers at funerals years ago? Oh, yeah. They did? Big wreaths or curtains? Yeah, quite a bit. They did? Yeah. And the funerals were big. A lot of people attended. You betcha. Did people take off for work then without pay? I suppose they did. To attend funerals? Funerals were at home then, you know. I mean, most of them were at home. They weren't in the funeral. Like my dad, because I was 19, 20 when he died. He was at your home? And I had it right at home. I've got the picture here of it. The foreman where he worked at Greenleaf's came over there. He died during the epidemic, the Camp Grant flu epidemic. So they took off for work, the workers at Greenleaf? Well, this was his boss. Oh, his boss. His boss come to the house that morning. Afterwards, we had him, the undertaker had fixed him up and brought him over there. So Frankenberg was his name and he had another guy with him. They rang the bell and I went to the door and he was half plastered and he said, Is your father home? Boy, I could have killed the son of a bitch. My father home. I don't know how he died, but he was half snockered. But his friends at Greenleaf's, did he work with them when he came to the funeral? Oh, sure. Some of them. They did? Oh, it must have been. I don't know. I mean, because if they took off for work, then they were not paid. No, that's right. Maybe they weren't, but maybe some of the neighbors, I suppose. Maybe that way. Because in a house, you didn't get room for too many people. And then you had it in the church? No, no. Just at home. That was it. Oh, I see. Did he go to church then? Well, I imagine some of them did. But not in your case then? No, no. And when he died, 1920, that was the last of the automobiles. I had the last hearse drawn by horses. And it was 23 degrees below zero, and Scandinavian cemetery. Cars couldn't go through. The only one that went through was the horse drawn. Too much snow. Yeah, too much snow. So they could get up to the grave. It was that cold, and that was the last of the horse drawn. After that, the automobiles took over. And they didn't dig any graves then in the wintertime? Well, I suppose, or whatever they did. They built a big fire above on the ground so it got warm. I don't know what the hell they did do. I don't think they could dig a grave frozen that hard. To have to use a pickaxe or drill, which you didn't have in those days, I don't think. I don't know. I don't remember, but anyway, that's the way it was. You belong to Masons now, here in Rippon. There's one thing I can figure out. You dress in Arabic outfits. You are snake dancers from India, you are cannibals from Southern Africa and everything. And you have colored people. Yeah. You know, I mean... Well, see, this was the Shriners. The Shriners, yeah. But why don't they employ real black ones instead of painting white ones? There's black Shriners. Not with the white ones, though. No, no, but there's black Shriners. I had a convention here years ago at the Faust Hotel, and I'm telling you, that was something. It was really high class. Do they paint themselves white? No, no, they were black. You're talking about black ones. I know, but I mean, in your case, you belong to the white Masons. Yeah, yeah, but we had a lot of clowns made up. And you had a lot of Arabic stuff, you know. Yeah, we had them make black-faced comedians. Do you know what I mean? Yeah. Do the black Masons make white-faced comedians, then? No, not that I know of. They had a convention here. I know what you mean, but they had a convention here. It's kind of odd, you know. Yeah, it is. You better get a couple of black kids in there. Yeah, it is. But they don't do that. No, not that I know of. They never got here years ago. But they, the colored folks had theirs here at the hotel, and they were damn high class, high class colored people, boy. They were really... But you don't mix with the white Masons, though? They don't, I don't know. They're not invited, do you? No, not that I know of. They're separate. What the hell? You were not invited as a clone? I guess not. I don't think I asked anyway. But we had camels down at Fairgrounds Park years ago when we first started. You had camels? Yeah, from Madison we got them. It was in a parade. So you were riding a camel then? Not me. I was in a pony cart once. I got a hold of, went down Mount Morris. Went down and got a pony in a cart, a little cart. So I had this pony in a parade. But he didn't want to go. So I was able to get a branch from a little small tree. And then I got a hold of a carrot with a string, and I tied that on the end, held that in front of the pony so he would go, see? Trying to get the carrot, he kept going, but he never got it. So we ended up at the 15th Avenue Stadium, Byers Stadium. That's where we rode around that cinder track. And boy, he really took off that cinder track. I thought it was a whirl-a-whirl. I thought he was going to win the first race. He really took off. And one parade I had the donkey. Oh, that son of a gun. I got, I rode the donkey. And the parade was at 7th and Charles. And the damn donkey didn't want to go either, so I got a branch and a carrot and held that out. But I was over on Charles Street and 7th, and some guy fired a.38 blank revolver, you know, and oh, brother. I don't know how I stayed on that damn donkey, because it went wild, you know. Bricks, hell, I'd have been killed if I'd hit my head. But I was able to stay on until he quieted down, but oh, brother. I never rode the donkey after that. Back to the yeast route. Back to the yeast route. And come back, I got a cousin named Jalmer Stromquist. Jolly, they called him for short. Well, Jalmer Carl Stromquist. That was his name, but I always called him Jolly. He was next to you? Well, he was a cousin of mine. What cousin? And so, evidently we were on our honeymoon. I went away for a couple of weeks. And come back, and in the paper was a baby boy born to Mr. and Mrs. Carl Stromquist. And they had that posted up in the bakery. It said, oh, you had a military affair, you know, military wedding. The baby was trying to hang on until after the wedding ceremony. But here was my cousin. Oh, my God. My cousin Jalmer, he was an iron worker here. Jolly. Was he a brother to your father? Cousin. Cousin of mine. He was your uncle's boy then. My uncle's boy. Yeah, in other words, he was a brother to your father's boy. Yeah, right. So he was there. Did he have a big family? No, I don't think so. He's dead now, but I think his wife is living. She worked at Peterson Home years ago. He was quite a rounder, Jolly. Yeah, he was an iron worker. There was only one boy? Oh, no, then they had Jolly and they had, let's see, Johnson. Johnson and Guler, that was my cousin. That was my uncle's, that was my father's brother's. Yeah, so I was his uncle. He was my nephew then, wouldn't he be? He's in Florida, I guess, now. But I guess Guler brought him out finally. But it was Johnson, Guler, Plants, you know. My mother died, she died before we came over. And so they had Albert, yeah, he's in Florida, and they had a sister, Ann. She married Vic Peterson, used to have an orchestra here. And Albert and Frank, Frank. Frank got a good job with the federal government. During Prohibition, he was checking drugstores so they didn't have any moonshine selling it for good liquor, you know. So he had a good job, Frank. And then Ed, Ed, he was a smart son of a gun. He graduated from Carnegie Tech with highest honors, I guess. And they did it all right. So they were quite a few strong fists, the Rockwood. Well, it was, see, my father had two brothers. And... Did one stay in Sweden? No, they were all here before we came over. You had a lot of cousins then, too. My uncle, wait a minute. Oh, I saw in the paper. Your parents, now, did they go back to visit Sweden? No. You know, your father went back so many times between the... Yeah, after we came over, he never went back. He never went back. And as soon as we left Sweden, I suppose it must have broken his father and mother's hearts. They died shortly after we came over. Did they correspond? He had other family members left in Högsby? Or your mother? Did they write to all of them? Not that I know of. You don't remember any letters from Sweden? No. You don't remember your mother writing any letters, Christmas card or anything like that, when you were growing up? No. She didn't talk about it either? I know shortly after we left, my dad's mother and father died. They were, I guess, grief-stricken that we left, I suppose. I don't know, but it seems to me, if I remember right, they died shortly after we left in Sweden. We lived on a big farm, Torpåre. My older brothers had to work in the fields during the summer. To pay off the rent. So we went to school in the summer, and they went to school in the winter, right? Because they had to work in the field in the summer, yeah. The young ones had to walk quite a ways, I know that. We had oxen, no horses. You remember that? Oh, yeah. Do you remember going to church? Oh, yeah. And that's Higsby, Kalmar land. The church, New Year's Eve, we'd light, we'd take boards or whatever, and torches like, you know, and march through the countryside. Oh, it was beautiful to see it. You know, I was eight years old, but I remember that. And all through the countryside, and you'd walk to the church, it was right by, across the bridge, right over the river, you know, and you'd toss the torches in there. It was frozen over, but that's where you'd get rid of them, and the church was right there in Higsby. And so I, we had stuff up in the trunk on 9th Street. We had the trunk that we came over in, and they had the family Bible up there. And, you know, you always put the name of the person. And I left it up there, and when I got the house, I rented it out after we bought this. And tenants, they took the big trunk. It came over from Sweden, and it was so, you know, it was really sturdily built and in good shape. And I suppose some of the tenants, they took the birth certificate, and I know my father had a.38 revolver in there. That's missing. But I had some trash living up there. I was glad I finally sold it. It was the old house you lived in? Yeah, my dad had it built in 1914. And it was on? 9th Street and 15th Avenue, right across from Vega Hall. It's still there, and I sold it a few years ago. Oh, that's something else I had trouble with my sister-in-law. My brother, the last one, died. It was a good friend, but battle axe. She enjoyed getting people in trouble, just enjoyed it. And I called her right to her face, old battle axe, you know. Well, so then, what the hell was it about? We didn't get the house. Well, I took care of my mother. I paid all the taxes. They paved the street, 9th Street and 15th Avenue, and I paid that. That was the last one home. So my brothers all agreed that I should have the house. So they signed papers, you know, that in case anything ever happened, I would get the house. So, well, like I say, my last brother had died. His wife, she still lives. Well, I talk to her now, but I told her to go to hell many times. And so she heard about me, that I was getting the house, you know. And she says, I saw her down at the club, we were having breakfast. She was sitting there selling chances or tickets. She says, I heard you're going to sell the house on 9th Street. You can't do it. Because, she said, I never signed anything over to you. And I said, you sure did, Edith. I can prove it. She says, you're a goddamn liar, and that's what you are. Well, I said, suppose when I go home and get a copy of the affidavit, or what the hell you call it, if I come back here with it and show it to you that you signed it. In the meantime, I thought, boy, I better get a photostatic copy made because she's apt to tear it up. She was that type, so I did. And I showed her that, and she said, that's not my signature. You're a dirty crook. I said, look at it again, will you? Yeah, she says, yeah, I guess that is my signature. So I got the house. I sold it. Boy, I had renters in there. Oh, Jesus. They didn't pay the rent. Well, you married Lucille Payne. Yeah. Did she start to work? Yeah, she was teaching school. Teaching school. Oh, yeah. And, well, we had a new superintendent here in Rockford. His name was Ankenbrand, that came to town. He decided that the children of today decide better than having married teachers, worn out. What the hell did he call it? But anyway, so he wouldn't allow any woman married to teach school in the city. What year was that? Ankenbrand was his name. Oh, yeah, she said Ankenbrand. He said we don't want any old maids or what do you call them? Hypocrites teaching the children of today. We want teachers that are unmarried. So she still kept teaching because she went out in the country and taught, you know, country schools. So there was forbidden in Rockford to be married? Yeah, under that superintendent. But that was changed, you know, after he got out of there. But she was a substitute. They called her for substituting. That was okay, but she taught in the country school. She taught at Owen Center. She taught at Argyle and different country schools. And like I said before that, they were short teachers. They wouldn't show up if they were sick or something. Under other superintendents, they'd call her. She went to school, that school, she always went. So she continued to work then after marriage? Oh, yeah. Your wife's father, he was religious? Oh, you couldn't play cards in the house? Oh, no. Well, you see. You had to throw out all your booze and whiskey and brandy and everything you had? Because he never came over where I lived, and he didn't have it. He never? Oh, no. Why should he? There was a son-in-law. Well, you see, we got married in 1935. And he was connected with a cemetery, Arlington. And playing cards or anything, I don't know what the hell he thought we did when we went out nights. But he didn't believe in it. How about your mother-in-law? She died. Yeah, that's what I tell you. She died when one of the other daughters died. She got married, and then the mother died. And here, Lucille and I got married, and we were up to another daughter's place on a farm in Michigan. On our honeymoon, we went up to—we were up there when Bert Hassel was missing. We heard that while we were up at St. Ignace—way, way up north at the locks up there. And then we went back to the farm, and she got a letter from her father, and you could hardly read the writing. And he had a wonderful penmanship, see? But she says, there's something wrong at home. We'd better get home. So we rushed home, and sure enough, he was sick. We were home a day, and he died. So what happened when she married into a Swedish family here? You had some of your own ideas with lutefisk and sylta and— Yeah, we'd be invited out. We'd be invited out for all that over to my brother's house. Brother John on 8th Avenue. I see. There were you— 1647, 8th Avenue. But your wife, did she count on the Swedish cooking and stuff like that? Yeah, she liked it. Well, she didn't do any of it herself. She didn't do that? Lutefisk? No, no, no. She ate lutefisk? Oh, sure. We'd go over to my brother's and different—you know, be invited out. It was a completely different kind of— She loved it. Brunabé, and meatballs, and sylta, and all that stuff. The whole bit? My brother's wife would make that, see? John. And his wife died, and then he just went to pot. And I can understand it, because, you know, you feel like it. But he played golf with them every day, pretty often. And he was very active in Oddfellas. Oh, he wouldn't miss a meeting night for anything. Well, then it was his wife's birthday, and we were up to Swedish American Hospital. And the doctor said she could go home the next day. Yeah. So we left, and she died that night before—that's how she went home. So, have them over here and eat. I went over there, and he was just coming up out of the basement. And I said, What are you doing? Oh, he said, I was just down the basement. He had clothes on the chair, you know, so I said, Ah, where are you going away? And he said, My niece is coming over. I got an appointment with the doctor today. He'll check up on me for something, you know. So I left, and the niece came over 15 minutes later. I found him hanging in the basement. I hadn't been gone 15 minutes that he had that on his mind when I— he was maybe making preparation when he came up out of the basement when I got there, see? He could see somebody was coming in, because the basement windows were just flush with the sidewalk. So he was—you know, maybe it was in the attempt then, but he was just coming up the steps. And I said, What are you doing? Oh, nothing. And he said, Nieces—so she came over 15 minutes later, and he hung himself.