 So he worked there and he stayed with that kind of work all his life? You're speaking of my... Your uncle. Oh, in Iowa. Yes, he was a farmer, yes. He took the top prize one year. They held a contest for corn pickers. Corn huskers. Corn huskers, before they had machines to do the work. And he was very well thought of. He would come to Rockford once in a great while to visit. But for some reason I can't recall what place in Iowa it was, if it was near Dubuque. So he didn't want to settle down here and work in the factory? No, you see, he had promised this childhood sweetheart that he was going to come back to Sweden. And I think this is what kept him from accepting his boss's offer because this daughter was very attractive and he had pictures of her and all that. But as far as I know he hadn't courted her, but her father liked my uncle so much that he felt that that was... and he would have made a wonderful son-in-law, I know. And he felt he would have depended on him to keep the farms going and so forth. But as I say, Eric had promised this girl that he was going to come back to Sweden, and that's what he did. So he went back to Sweden? He went back to Sweden and he married this gal. And I know my mother felt very badly about it because she felt that he could have done so much better in this country. So he left the big farm in Iowa? He left the big, yes, he went back there and then he had a big farm there in Sweden. It was very nice. It was at Ekedala, Hetergården. Did you meet him there when you were home in Sweden? Oh yes, we stayed there on the farm with him. Do you know when he went back? How many years did he stay in Iowa working for this German farm? Oh my, gee, I couldn't tell you. I know he was gone for several years, you know. So it must have been between five and ten years, somewhere in there. So the girl he married now in Sweden, maybe she had a farm too? No, no, she was just, her folks had a small place, you know. But she was a typical farm gal, you know, and so forth. She was good, you know, she's still living. She is 94, something like that. My uncle's been gone, he lived to be up in his 80s. I think he must have been 84 or something like that when he passed away. And he was such a nice, he was my favorite uncle. What did he say about his time in Iowa? He didn't plan to go back again, he married her instead? No, he tried several times, he wanted to raise corn so badly in Sweden. And he would raise some of it, you know, and it would be just beautiful, but it never ripened. Because it didn't get, he thought maybe because it was in the southern part of Sweden, but it just didn't get warm enough. And so forth, so that, yeah. But he had a car, he bought himself an automobile over there. And so did my younger uncle, the one that just passed away this summer. Because Uncle Albert, when we were over there, would always bring us up to my father's relatives in Skona. Because that was just a nice drive for him, he enjoyed doing that. And so me and my father's relatives tried to talk me into getting some land up in the woods there. He says, we'll build you the cabin, we'll build you a little summer place and all that. And they say, they come here from Stockholm and all over, they like our Skånska skogar. And so forth, but of course I didn't go into that at all. My father had just this one cousin from his father's side, Matilda Frey. She is still living, but she was always the first one I heard from in Sweden for Christmas. I always get the first Christmas letter from Matilda. But not the last couple of years, she had a stroke, so that she can't write anymore now. So her daughter-in-law writes for her. And she had just this one son, and he's a real honey, such a charming person. Stihl, S-T-I-H-L, the Stihl family. So if I go back there again, I'd certainly hope to visit with them also. So you had good contacts with Sweden then? Oh yes, yes I have. And your second husband now, that was Lawrence Greenwood? Greenwood, yeah. Did your first husband die then? Yes, because Peter was about 24 years older than I, so he passed away in 1961. And then I was a widow for almost 12 years. I met Greenwood, and then we were married for 11 years when he passed away. What kind of business was he in? He was employed at different companies, but he spent most of his working years at the Barber Coleman's. He was from southern Illinois. His father was 100% German background. But then on his mother's side, she was German and she was half Cherokee, Indian. And he always felt that was sort of quite interesting to him. So he was, I don't know, as far as work. And then he worked with some machines, but he was also, in his latter years, he did, oh, I like that, he worked for detective agencies. Of course, he was retired when I met him. And he had a family, too, so that I have a stepdaughter and stepson here living in Rafford, and then a stepson and his family over in Marengo that I have contact with. So that's one of the nice parts about it, because my own girls are out of town, you know, and I don't get to see them too often, but especially the one in Texas. And she has two sons. Her oldest is John Peters, and he's a public accountant. And he is now in Europe with his wife, and he will be reporting around the first of September to someone in the firm that he's with, the Young Company accounting firm down in Saudi Arabia. So I guess he signed up for two years, I understand. So I hope they'll keep the peace some way or other. And he doesn't seem to be worried about it at all. Your daughters, did they marry someone of a Swedish background? No, that's funny. They both married fellows of German background. And then Marie's first husband died at 42. He had, they say, plastic anemia. So she remarried, but it wasn't working out, I guess. But anyway, then the younger son is down in Texas also, and he's mechanically inclined. I think he takes after Grandpa Solom very much, because he's so good with his hands for machinery. So he's learning the graphics trade, you know, the machinery that they use for the graphic work. So have you been back to Sweden? The last time I was there was in 68. And then I went over there with my daughter, Britta, too, so we were there. And she stayed in a place outside of Uppsala. She had a little six-weeks course there of weaving. And she stayed right at the Liksom Huså skola. And then she went in and took the tram into Uppsala for the Swedish lessons. And she enjoyed that. She said, she wove a number of things, and she had to do it right from the bottom up, you know. They had to set up the looms and all that. So she says, that's one thing I learned to appreciate, what it takes to make materials and so forth. So she is receiving some Swedish culture through the sketch. Yeah, right. I'd be interested, for instance, you like cooking, you said. Yes. So your mother taught you how to make different Swedish dishes. Oh, yes, I enjoyed it. Do you have lutefisk? Oh, definitely. It's not Christmas Eve without lutefisk for me. And how about your children? Do they like it? Yeah, well, now Britta, she cooks lutefisk on the farm there. Because the family she married into were very fond of lutefisk. And her youngsters are not quite as much taken with it, you know. I think you have to develop. I was raised with it, you know. You had no choice. I had no choice. I remember when my mother would buy, she, in those days, you know, she bought the ones that were all dried, and you had to soak it yourself, you know. Oh, yes. That Christmas now, did you take in the Christmas tree long before Christmas or shortly? Well, we used to take it not too long because I don't believe in setting it up too early. Oh, the week before, possibly, the week before. And then you had it all dressed in different things, ornaments. Oh, yes. Did you have Santa Claus coming when you were small? No, no, I didn't have it for my children. When I was growing up, there was a man in the group that my parents associated with that would have this man particularly who would dress up in a Santa Claus suit, you know, and come knocking at the door. I remember the one time he came through the dining room window or whatever it was. He was in a hurry. It was so funny. Oh, I remember that. He was such a nice fellow, and he played the accordion. And he and I would, when I was a kid growing up, I'd play all these old-time melodies, you know, and he'd play the accordion, and we just had more fun. And, of course, the gathering always enjoyed. I used to know. I have forgotten a lot of them because that was so long ago now. But you were able to pick up even? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. I had an ear for it. Oh, yes. Gamla Sjömans Valserotor. Da-da-da-da-da. Jag får ut på böljan blå. That was one of the old favorites. So then your father liked it? Oh, yes, yes. He really enjoyed that. He had a lot of times. Yes, he sure did. Yes. Yes. Like your mother now, did she like it over here, moving to Sweden? She liked it, but she always remained quite Swedish, you know, so that she encouraged us to remember the Swedish language. And, of course, we heard it at home so much because my parents would speak Swedish to one another. But then again, as we grew older, my dad would speak in English to her and then she would answer in Swedish, too, you know. But like I say, she was the one that almost saw to it that I went to Swedish school in the summertime. And then I would read Svenskartribunen and I'd read all the stories and all the little jokes. They have such nice little bits of humor, you know. So you didn't have any problems to understand those? No, no. You picked them up immediately, wouldn't you? Yeah, yeah. As I say, I guess I had an affinity for the language. Svenska Amerikanaren, was this the only paper she had? Well, there was a tribune, you know, Svenska Amerikanaren. There were a couple of them, you know. You don't remember if she had one that was called Kvinnan och Hemmet? Kvinnan och Hemmet. To see the rapids in Iowa. Oh. They came once a month. No, I don't believe. The name sounds familiar to me. Maybe I saw it somewhere else, though, but I don't recall that we had it at home, you know, exactly. But I know that she would always get the tribune and all Amerikanaren. How about the American papers? Oh, yes, she read those. We always had newspapers. Your parents, did they take part in the politics, for instance, locally? No, no, that they didn't do, you know. Of course, my dad, I was brought up a Republican all the time, you know, from when I was just a little, you know, so that, you know, the only... What was the reason for that, you think? Well, he believed in the free enterprise system, you know, and all that. He was very, even when he was, as I say, he was working himself, you know, by the sweat of his brow, I like to say. And, but he was always very much soul-minded. Both my husbands were Republicans, too, so I guess... You had no choice. And I have a lot of Democratic friends and all that, and so that, and we're just American, like you say. That's the main thing, too, but I like the ethnic things, the food and the culture part very much. And I tried to pass on some of that to my daughters, too, but of course, now Britta has been, she was in Sweden with me. Three times we were over in 62, 64, and 68. And she says, too, now, that she's so happy that she had that amount of time in Sweden, because now she's so busy with her family and all, but hopefully that she can go over there and meet the children of her cousins, you see, and the children, you see. So, and I believe in this exchange of students, too. I think that's a very fine thing to do. So I was trying to put a little bug in her ear and say, how about getting someone, you know, from over there and staying at the farm? It'd be so wonderful for the children, too. And she said she'd certainly give it a thought. And so hopefully now they're in the ages now where it would be very beneficial, I think, for them to be exposed to other nationalities, too.