 So we got back to school, you know, and after the lunch hour, the principal come in and she says, Eugene, I want to see you a minute out here in the hall. And she called you out in the hall, see. And she says, I noticed you were out here playing with the kids out here pretty early today. Yes, ma'am. Did you go home for lunch? No. I says, I don't think so. She says, I'll ask you again, did you go home for lunch? I says, no, I didn't. Well, did you skip lunch or did you have lunch? No, ma'am, I had lunch. Well, where did you have your lunch? Well, we hid it down by the creek in the culvert. Well, didn't the dogs and cats get into it? No. We rolled a big stone up against it. Well, she says, was your lunch all right when you got there? I says, yeah. So you didn't go home then today, huh? No. That's against the rules, you know. So I don't remember what the penalty was, but she did something. I forgot what it was. If I had to come in and do some work, you know, something like I will either take my lunch or I'll go home for lunch every day. Probably a hundred times I had to write that. She's making an impression on me, you know. Did she tell your mother or parents? No, they never knew about it. No, she never said anything. But to think that, you know, that they would watch so close to see who the kids, because there was a lot of kids out there at the same time that I was out there, see? She knew us all by name, you know, and she knew that we should not be there at that time. Also, they kept an eye on you. Oh, yes. You better believe it. They don't do that today. No, no. This is a different era. So you went through then how many high school tournaments? No, I only had eight grades is all I had. I graduated from John Nelson School. Did you work during that time, the last few years at John Nelson? Well, I worked during the summertime at Rockford Milling Machine. I couldn't work on a machine, but I worked in a crib. And all I could dream about was the day when I would be assigned to a machine where I could operate a lathe or a milling machine or something of that type. I just dreamed about it. I wanted to be a mechanic, the best mechanic that I could be. Did your father talk to you often about what he was doing and how he was doing things? Were you interested to listen to what he had to say and encourage you to follow the same line? Yeah, well, I told him that's what I wanted and he said that's okay, see? So after I got first, well, I was only 15 and I was supposed to go back to school until I was 16, but I never told them at the shop. They never kept records, you know, so they didn't know. But my foreman found out about it, but he said, well, just keep it quiet now. And when I got to be 16, then of course I got a permit from the school board to work. I had to have that even at 16, see? And then I brought that over to the office and they gave me a job in there again. And I worked at milling machine then for several years. And I can remember when the foreman said, I'm going to take you out of the crib now and I'm going to put you on a little baby lathe, a little lathe that was not a watchmaker's lathe, but it could do quite a bit of work on it. And he says, now, he says, I'll show you how it's operated and this is what you do. So he did and he said, now try it. I did. And then this handle here, he says, if you don't watch what you're doing, you're going to run over and hit that stop and then you'll break a pin in there. And it's going to take you a half hour to get that out. And I'm going to kick you where you sit down so you'll be standing up for a week if you break one of those pins, he said. He was a rough guy anyway. But I never broke any. I watched it and I did a nice job. And finally one day he'd come over, you know, he says, I think you've outgrown this thing. Now I'm going to give you a lathe right next to your dad up there. And then, of course, I could use dad's tools and I could use his bits that he sharpened and he showed me how to do them, you know. And I did all right. I did real good. This guy now that taught you how to do and wash this pin, was he a Swede? Oh yeah. Yeah, Hugo Anderson, yeah. So did he speak in Swedish to you then or? Oh, I could speak English then. I mean, could he speak English? Oh yeah. Oh yeah. He spoke English. He was the foreman and he could speak. All the foremen over there could speak English. And then I didn't know of any milling machine that couldn't speak Swedish too. Because they had a lot of guys come in there, Swedish, you know, see. They were coming all the time. Yeah. Before we go into the work now, in school, what kind of activities were you involved with in school? You said you played baseball and how about other activities in school? Were you active? Well, that's all we had. We had manual training where we got little instruction and handling wood machinery and so forth. School? Yeah. Were you interested in that? Yes, but not too much. I wanted machine shops, see. So after I got to be, so I was 16 years old, this Axel, a friend of mine, he had a job but he wasn't making much money so he wanted to go to night school down at the Rockford High School. We'd go down there and learn machine shops, see. So I went with him down there. I says, I don't need that. I don't need the lathe because I know enough about that and so I don't need it but I'll go with you anyway, see. And I made several things down there, clamps and surface gauges and things like that. And the foreman come over there several times and he says, I don't know what you're doing here. He says, I can't show you anything. He says, you seem to be able to get around pretty good on your own. How did you pick this up though? Did you watch others do things or? Yeah, with Dad. That's a natural talent, that's all. Dad, no, he didn't have his little shop at home? No. He didn't have any old? No, we didn't have any. I wish many times we had but we didn't. He had a workbench down there where we sharpened some skates. We made a wood block and had an emery wheel and shoved them in front of that wheel. So I did sharpen the kids' skates for them all winter long down there. But that's the only thing, yeah. How about girls though? Do you date girls in high school there? No. No, I didn't have any interest in girls until I was about 18 or 19 years old. After you quit school then? Yeah. But I know the kids, we were going out on sleigh rides, you know, and the first thing I asked them, you going to have any gals in there? Yeah. I don't want to go then. Can't you have a sleigh ride without women? No, they had to have that. Well, I said, so. Who were the kids now? They were all nationalities, Italians, Polish, Lithuanians? Mostly Swedes. Mostly Swedes? Yeah. So in school now, if there were other nationalities, did the Swedes stay away from them then? No. No, we mixed with them. I had friends that were not Swedish and couldn't speak or understand any Swedish. We had some kids were roughnecks, you know. You had to let them teach them a lesson or something. Did you learn it faster to protect yourself? Yeah. Well, not only that, I tell you, I can remember when we were going home from school, the gals, we'd always go in groups, you know, the girls would be in front of us and the boys in the back. And this Russell Lundquist, he and Milton Anderson, they were two real tough guys. And this Russell, he got a long whip. He got picked up down there at the creek. And he kept hitting the girls on the legs with that. And I told him, don't do that. Oh, you little runt, who do you think you are? I says, you'll find out before I'm through. I says, cut it out. Leave them alone. Well, finally he thought I meant it because he quit. And one day he had heard that the kids I was hanging around with were going to build a little hut, you know. We had gotten a hold of boards and things. And this kid, Russell Lundquist, he was very much interested in carpenter work, see? And his dad was a carpenter. So he says, I'm coming over to help you build that. Well, you know, that was an insult to us to help us build a thing. That was the thing we prided ourselves in was to build this thing. And he says, I'm coming home with you tonight. That's all there is to it. And he was a big guy, you know, and strong as a bear. I didn't know how in the world I was going to get rid of him. I couldn't just outrun him because although I was very fast on my feet, in fact, I could outrun anybody in school. I always had that reputation. And from running all the way home at noon, you know, and all the way back so we could, we had to be home before the 12 o'clock whistle blew. We let out a quarter to 12. See, then I'd have ten minutes to eat and grab a sandwich and be back to school again, see? So this Russell, he made up his mind he was going to come with us. So he followed us. And I can remember, just boiling on the inside, that big brute, I mean, I handled him. And I picked up a big stick, oh, it was about three foot long, but this big around. And I walked up the back of him and I whacked him right across the butt with that thing, you know. So he went right down on his knees. And I stood over him and I said, if you get up, I'm going to hit you over the head with this thing. You're nothing but a big bully, I said. And the kid turned around and he looked at me and he was cowed. He turned around and went home. No, he didn't. He followed us for a couple more blocks. And then I saw three more of our kids that were going to help build his hut. So I said to him, I gave him one across the back with a big stick. Give him the same over there, I said. Then is when he turned around and he thought, this is going to be too much. He said, I'll get you when you come back to school. But, you know, he never did. I guess he figured I had enough spunk to do that, I might think of something else. You were not afraid that we were going to gang up on you or you would get some other friends with him? I don't think there was too many people that liked him, see. So I didn't have much trouble with that one. At that time, it was not the custom that the guys hang out with the girls all the time? No. Like they do today, for instance? No. Our school yard was separated. So the girls were to the left-hand side when you come out and the boys to the right. And there was an imaginary line down there and you had better not be seen over there, even to chase a ball over there. Well, you couldn't do that? Oh, no. You couldn't mingle with the girls? Oh, no. No. No, no. No. And if you did, but after you left the school yard, then they could mingle. What we did there was not because we wanted to, but the girls wanted some protection, you know, so they stuck with us boys and we took care of them so they didn't get in trouble. Or if the creek was flooded, I remember I had high tops that went to my knees and if there was about three, four, five inches of water running over it, we'd each pick up a girl and carry her across and go back and get another one and carry her across until they got across, you know. So I don't know how the parents dared in the school, dared to let us cross the creek. How did they know that that bridge wasn't washed away underneath that we were going to walk on? But nothing said about that. We carried the girls across and beat it. Now you're on your own. So there was no school dances at that time? No, no. Uh-uh. They were forbidden by the church people? No. There was no such activities, that's all. No. Uh-uh. No. I remember that teachers and the principal ganged up on me one because they knew I was very fast on my feet and they wanted me to compete for the school down at Fairgrounds Park. And I refused, absolutely refused to go. And I didn't tell anybody, but the reason was that I didn't have any tennis slippers and I couldn't run with those big old shoes, you know. And I wouldn't ask my folks for a pair of tennis slippers. They were 98 cents a pair. But I would not ask my folks to put up that kind of money, so I refused. And the principal called me out in the hall. She says, give me a reason why you want to do this. She says, you're the best candidate we have and you could bring us some honors for the school here if you would go in and run for us. And I says, well, I just don't want to. I don't, my heart isn't in it. I don't feel like it. And they finally gave up. So you never told them the reason? No, I never told anybody. So you never set your parents into a predicament of buying something you actually didn't need or anything? Uh-uh. No. No, I never asked them for anything that, unless it was absolutely necessary. And I didn't have to make any demands on them whatsoever. How about your mother now? Did she, clothing and so on, did she make them up for you or did you buy them in the stores? Oh, we bought more of the clothes that we had to have like, things for us, but otherwise. Not shirts or anything like that? Yeah. No, she bought all that stuff, yeah. It was pretty cheap to buy. Dad was working now so we could... But it was hard to get the cash though for people. Oh, yeah. They didn't want to spend more than... No. How about the First World War? Did they affect Rockford in any way? Was the employment situation pretty good? Did they all work? Oh, yes. Yeah, I don't think... I don't recall that there was much effect on... How much did your dad make then, an hour? A dollar and a quarter. An hour? Yeah. During the First World War? Before the war? Yeah. I think he was up to two and a half then. Two and a half an hour. No. No, it was no... No, two and a half a day. A day, huh? Yeah, a day. Two and a half. Because I remember he got a raise from two and a quarter, he got a raise to two and a half a day. Ten hours. Because we didn't figure hourly raise, we figured how much you're going to get for a day. And my first job at milling machine was ten cents an hour and eight hours a day, five days a week. And when I come home with my paycheck, I handed it to mother and I never got a nickel back on it. So you handled all the whole thing? Yeah. You never asked for a few cents to... Only thing, once in a while, the kids, the fellas I hung around with at the shop, they had a store over there on the corner. And the kids that have an ice cream cone, I go and ask dad for, if I could have a nickel for an ice cream cone, see? And I remember one day he told me, he says, well, you got a nickel the other day to get an ice cream cone. You can't have ice cream cone every day. Who taught you those ideas? Did you feel that yourself that you handed over the money? I guess I just, well, I heard so much about the poverty and shortage of funds and everything. That's why I didn't go to high school. You understand that. Oh, yeah. I didn't want to go to high school or college because I wanted to help the folks. And that's what I did. And all I had in my mind was to be the best machinist or mechanic I could possibly be. So you started out from the beginning in the crib and elevated yourself to different stages. Yeah. I can remember one time when they, well, it was right after the war, I think it was, when they put a sign on the clock that no more raises will be given for, I don't know how many months it was. And I was an apprentice then at that time, or I got apprentices' wages. I wouldn't, they tried to get me enrolled in an apprenticeship course, but I didn't want that. I says, no, because I said I want to learn one thing thoroughly, and when I have learned that, then I want to be moved to something else. So I talked to the super one day. I asked him, I said, Mr. Cedarleave, Ed Cedarleave, his name was, I understand that you're not going to give any more raises now. Yep, that's right. Well, I says, does that include me too then? Well, yeah, well, I says, I'm only getting, I think I had gotten up to where I was getting 15 cents an hour then. I says, well, if that's the case, then I think I better move on because I don't intend to work here for the next year for 15 cents an hour. Oh, don't worry about that. He says, if you're worth it, you'll get it. So you spoke up then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, was that kind of unusual for that time to go forward a little bit too fast? Yeah. Like your dad, for instance, did he ask for a pay raise or did he get it automatically? For myself, you mean? No, your dad. How did he get his pay raises? Did he ask for it or? Well, yeah, but he was on piecework most of the time. And he was, I'll tell you, he didn't have to ask for any. They gave him an increase when he was ready for it. I remember I was working on the lathe over there and I stopped Ed Searly for the second time and I asked him, I says, what my chances are to better myself in the plant? Well, he says, what do you have in mind? Well, I says, I want to be the best mechanic, machinist that you've got in this plant if I have the capabilities. And do you think I do? Yes, he says, I think you're very smart and you learn quickly. You're doing a nice job on what you're doing. What do you have in mind? I says, well, I want to be so good that if a man over here takes a vacation or gets sick, you can call on me. I'll go down and pick up his job and handle it while he's gone. And this includes lathes, milling machines, shapers, planers, boring mills, and everything. He looked at me for a while and he says, boy, you've got things pretty well planned out, haven't you? And I says, yep, and I'm going to make it. Again, I say, if you think I have the ability, I don't want the company to waste their time on me. He says, no, you'll make it. And that was on Thursday. Friday, I was working on a lathe in the tool room. They wanted a lathe hand for the tool room that was good enough to do any kind of lathe work. So they transferred me then from the lathe department into the tool room and I worked for the Ed Seedorf's brother. His name was Brewer. Brother. And so he said, he come over to me on Friday, he says, I understand you talked to Ed. Yeah, I said, I did. Yeah, he says, you're going to be moved, he says, you'll be moved off the lathe and you'll be transferred down to the planer, planer department. And I says, I didn't expect that to happen so soon. Well, I think you'd fit in down there. We got a job for you down there. So they put me on a planer. Boy, I did real well on that. I did a real good job. And so they moved me to some other equipment around there and I did alright. And then, I don't remember how it was, I was transferred over to Sunstrand adding machine. So you were working for Greenleaf then? No, no, for Rockford Milling Machine. Rockford Milling Machine, where you got your – Yeah, that's where I started. And so they transferred me over to the adding machine department in adding machines and I worked for Axel Gustafson over there. And, you know, I made a pretty good niche for myself over there. Axel got to like me real well and I picked up on his lathe work and drill work. So he got me, he said, when you got a new man in there, Jane, go over and teach this guy the ropes, see? So I can remember one time I was working over there and a man come up from down – no, we had a machine that had to be reworked up there and it had to have a planer job done on it. Now, I heard somebody talking to Axel Gustafson about this. So I says, well, I says, they got a machine down there but they haven't got an operator. He says, that's right, and I need that machine fixed. I says, well, you're talking to a guy that can handle that for you if you want it. He looked at me and says, you mean you can go down there and handle the planer? You betcha. I said, I can fix that job for you in good shape. So, well, he says, let's go down and talk to the foreman. So we went down there and said, I got an operator here. I'm just a young punk. I was only 17 years old, 18 years old, you know. He looked at me and says, you mean you're going to run this planer and do that job? I says, yeah, I can do it. Well, let's go over to that machine. He says, let's see. The machine was empty and that had a belt shifter on it, you know. Let's see you start that planer up. So I did. Got the motor going. Now he says, I want you to start that thing on, run the table out so it's about four feet from the end. Stop it and bring it back. I says, okay. I run it out, stopped it, and brought it back. Now he says, I want you to start the thing from back here and I want you to stop that planer right here. And he held his hand and I, you know, started up, stopped it. Yeah, he says, I guess you're all right. So he says, but I says, I'll tell you what. When you get to working on this table that you're going to planer, use the planer for, I'm going to be watching you. And he says, if you do anything wrong, I'll stop you. I says, okay. So I got the crane and put it up there, you know, and shimmed it up and put the pegs in there to hold it, you know, and everything. Now he says, he come over and he says, I've watched you. You're doing all right. Go ahead. You know what you're doing. So I did. I finished the job up, a couple of hours, and brought it back upstairs. Axel looks at it and he says, that's what I call good service. He says, that looks real nice. What did the foreman say? He says, I was okay. That's all. What did they say to the older people? Were they a little bit ashamed of a young kid coming up here? Yeah, so from then on, if there's any work that had to be done on a milling machine or a large shaper or lathe, Gus says, Gene, take that down. I've talked to the foreman. He's got a machine empty for you, so you go ahead. That's all right. So why were you transferred to Sunstone? Were they together, those two companies? Yeah. I asked for any kind of, well, any kind of help that I could get. They wanted me to go to – he offered to put me at Sunstrand on his own. So they had started about 1908, 1908? I don't remember what year it was. They were very small then at that time. How many were there? Yeah, well, they had the big plant there. And the adding machine was already invented? Yes. But you see, Adolph Sunstrand, Oscar Sunstrand and those boys were originally interested in Sunstrand and the adding machine. But they were also, in fact, I think that Adolph and Oscar invented the ten-digit machine. But they were also involved in Rockford Milling Machine. So when they moved over there and they built this new plant for Sunstrand and they started with this adding machine, then they thought it would be a good place for me to move over there and learn something. So they put me in the motor drive department, which was an electric drive for the adding machine. Instead of pulling a lever, you know, this is automatic, see? But I wasn't interested in that. I did a good job and I told them, I said, I'd like to get into the tool room. And they kept putting me off until one day I said, well, if you want to put me in the tool room, I get away from this place up here. I says, then I'll quit, go someplace where I can get into tool and die work. So you were not interested in the kind of work that you were – No, that was too mediocre for me. It was good lathe work and all that. I can remember one time when the engineer, I forget his name, his first name was Walt, he had designed a fixture for making the carriage, cutting a groove in the carriage. And so Gustafson gave me the job. He says, set that up, that new fixture, and do that job, will you? And when you get a dozen of them done, why bring them in there and show them? I probably, I don't know if they want more than a dozen now or not. But anyway, I had that set up and they had miscued on the drawing, so they made the fixture backwards, see? So that instead of running into the cutter, I set it up to run with the cutter, which worked if you were careful. And this Walt come out there and he looked at me, you know, and he shook his head and walked away. He went over and got Gustafson and he come over and he said, say, he says, did you learn to run a milling machine backwards like that? He says, you know you're running it backwards? Yes, I do. It's a running – I'm running it backwards. Why are you doing that? Because it's necessary. I says, I didn't know this Walt, the designer. I says, whoever designed this made it backwards. You cannot run the cutter the way you're supposed to on this machine and do that job. And he looked at me and he says, yeah, I guess you're right. Go ahead and finish it. So you had started to invent your own ideas? Well, I had to. Were there any moments during the work cycle did you question yourself, can't this be done better? A young guy always had these ideas, you know, it can be done easier and more convenient. And did you get away with it? Like this time you did get away with it. Yeah, oh yeah. And Gustafson come over and he said he felt pretty cheap, he says, and I did too. But he says, it's all right what you're doing. How did you figure it out? Well, I don't know. I just couldn't – they had stops built on the other end. I couldn't cut the stops off to get the cutter in there. So I turned the fixture around and run the cutter the other way, which could be done if you were careful, see? Because it would – if I fed it in too fast, it would catch, you know, and probably break the cutter. But I finished up the twelve pieces and brought them in there. I brought them in to the fellow, the name was Walt, in the experimental department. He says, I understand you had a little problem with this. And I says, no, I didn't have any problem. Well, Axel was telling me you had to run the machine backwards. I says, yeah, but that's all right. You can fix that fixture now so you can run it the right way. But I didn't think you wanted me to wait for that, so I finished it this way. So then he thought that was pretty good. And a couple other jobs I did. I did some jobs for them on the English money machine. It had a long carriage on it, and we had to drill the holes for the stops in that carriage in the tool room by hand. And I had to lay those out with a height gauge. And they told me this Charlie, who had charge of the department in there, he says, Gina, he says, I want those close. Plus or minus 1,000 would be good. 2,000 is off. 3,000, it'll show off. And that won't be any good. So I says, I'll try to make them right. So he says, when you get the first one done, bring it in to me. We'll put the stops in there. We'll check it out. So I brought it in to him and checked it out. And he says, gee, that's the best one I've seen yet. He says, can you do the rest of them the same way? I says, try. I says, I'll try. But I said this, when I got my little magnifying glass on there, if I can see it with that, I can make it. And what I did is laid out lines for – first I made a circle and then I laid out the lines to the diameter of that circle. And then I pushed the drill down and if it edged over, then I'd punch it on there until I got it going just right in the middle of those lines. And that worked perfect. So they were very happy about that. So I got those things to do for quite a while. But one time, they were trying to make the atom machine less expensive, you know. So they had some little wheels that they wanted made to propel that ribbon in there around. And so he says, see if you can come up with something that we can use for that. He says, probably something out of sheet metal, thin wire. I says, okay. So I did. I made one and I made a tool for bending those little cogs in there. Got a cute little thing. It worked real good, you know. And he never said anything to me, but Walt did, the fellow in the experimental department. He says, I think that was a cute idea you had there, he says. And even Ed, the superintendent of adding machine, come over and made some remark about it was a real nice thing you did there. I don't think we'll be able to use them because it's too frail, but the way you come up with the idea was real good. So they went into production and did the – No, not on the – they didn't use this thing. But they thought the idea I had for doing it, well, that's what they asked for, see. But I couldn't – it was, to my idea, it was too flimsy for what it was going to do, see. But it looked good to them anyway. But that adding machine that Sonstrand brothers invented or got into production, that lasted for many, many years, the same prototype. Oh, yeah. It was never changed anything? No, no, no. The only thing they started from the small machine to the bookkeeping machine which had the long racks, yeah. And then is when I asked for the transfer in the tool room and they kept putting me off and that was Walt. He wanted me to come in there. He said, Gene, he says, I could give you a good job in the experimental because I think you got a good mind for that and you should – I'd like to have you in there. I says, Walt, I like you and I like that offer but I want dyes. I want to make dyes and tools. So I says, if I can't get her here, I'll quit and go someplace else. I'll go to National Lock. I know I can get dye making over there. Well, you don't have to quit. We'll get you. So they gave me a job in the tool room down there and I got along real nice there until I – I remember I – it may sound like I'm bragging but these are facts. The little – I had a little German there. His name was Myers. He was an inspector and he brought a fixture up to Maynard and he says, I've had this fixture sent up here twice, Maynard, and he says it's off. And he says, haven't you got somebody here that can really fix this thing so it's right? He says, I don't want it plus or minus five. I want it plus minus five-tenths. Okay. So Maynard brought it over and gave it to me and he says, Gene, you think you can satisfy him? Well, I says, I'll make it right. Okay. So I did. Sent it down there and it come back. No, I says, that thing is right. You'll have to talk to that little Dutchman down there, Myers. He says, he says it's wrong. No, I says it's right. So I used the sign bar and the cube, you know, and height gauge and indicator. So I called Maynard over and I showed him. I said, I want you to go over this with me now and you'll see that it's right. So he did. He sat down on a chair. He says, show me. And I did. He says, okay. Well, I can't understand it. He says, you take it out to him and tell him about it. So I did. So he put it up on his cube and checked it out. He says, it's almost 12,000. He says, can't you work closer than that? I says, Mr. Myers, that thing is right. You come into my tour room, I'll set it up and I'll show you. I don't care about that, he says. You got to show me here. So I says, wait a minute. I says, you, just that cube has been reworked lately. Yeah, I just got it back. It's been totally re-scraped. I says, did you check it after that? No, he says, I didn't. I just took for granted that he, the guy that did it, checked it out. And he says, well, I says, let's check the cube out. There's something wrong. Checked the cube out and the cube was off from one side to the other 16,000. He looked at me, he says, oh my gosh. He says, well, I says, if you want to come back, I'll set it up in the tour room for you. My cube is right because I checked that. And so he took the cube and went back to the guy that did it and he says, re-scrape this thing and make it right. He says, it's no good the way it is. And so I set the cube up for him again and the sign bar in the tour room and he said, I'll come in there and look at it. And he come in there and he says, okay, it's right. It's right on the button. He said, okay. So Maynard said, Gene, I know you haven't asked for it, but I'm going to give you a two cent raise. Two cents, you know, that was a big raise those days. You're going to get a raise. So was he a foreman or superintendent? Maynard? Yes. He was a tour room foreman. I see. And by the way, I saw him playing golf up at the Sandy Hollow. I walked up to him, I asked him, do you remember me? Yeah, I sure do. Many years ago. Oh, yeah. He was, let's see, when I talked to him over there, he was 72 years old. He was playing golf every day up there. So the Sunstowns, now, then we are probably moving ahead a few years there. They split with the Rock when I moved to Connecticut. Why was that? Did they sell off or what happened? Well, so they put me in a tour room. No, they, yeah, they put me in a tour room and I said to Maynard one day, Maynard, I said, I, he says, what do you mean you're going to quit? Don't you like it here? Isn't there enough money? If it isn't, I can arrange for a race for you. No, I says, I never asked for a race any place I went. If I didn't get it without, then I'd go without, that's all. So I told him, no, I don't want that. But this kind of work doesn't appeal to me on a long-term basis. I'll graduate from here and all your work and I'll be an adding machine man. And I'll be able to do your dye work and add in here real good. But I want the kind of work that goes all around. He says, why do you look that far ahead? Well, I says, Maynard, I says, how do you know? No, he says, you'll have a job here as long as you want it. And I said, what do you mean? How do you know if adding machine will be here next year or not? Oh, yes, he says. Yeah, they're permanently rooted here. They'll be here for a long time. Well, I says, I'm not so sure about that. I says, not that I know anything, but I want to be prepared. I'll tell you, I'll quit two weeks from now, finish up the work I got here, I'll leave, and that's my notice now, two weeks. And then at the end of two weeks, I'll leave and I'll go over to National Locker someplace. After I've been there for two years, if you want me, I'll come back. And you know, after I left Sunstrands, adding machine, I think it was three months after that when they gave notice to their employees that they were going to move. What happened then? Well, these people from Bridgeport, Connecticut, they were sportsmen that were interested and they wanted to be near the ocean. They could have their yaks and boats and that. So they thought they could put the thing in there just as well and be closer to their home where they're used to being. So you knew about this sealant? No, I didn't have no idea. I had no idea whether they were going to. I just thought if it should happen, I'd want to be prepared, that's all. But I know that George Johnson, the employment man, come out and talked to me and he said, I understand you told Maynard that you wanted to be prepared in case this plant moved out of here, you'd have a job with somebody that you knew the business was better than – and you wouldn't want to probably go with the adding machine wherever they were going to go. And, like I say, a very short time after, I went and I left the adding machine. I think I went to National – yeah, I went to National Lock and I worked for Harry Fagerberg in there. We got along just fine and he liked me and I liked him and everything was fine. I was learning the trade very rapidly over there, small dice or big dice. And then I quit there and went to Elko and I was with Elko for 14 years. And then I went from Elko to Estwing Manufacturing. A friend of mine recommended me in there and he said, you're a superintendent over there and you could work yourself into something there. But I didn't agree with that, so I quit. It was during the 20s then, you worked at National Lock and Elko. Yeah. So you had full employment. Was it a good time then? Oh yeah. Well, not at Elko. I worked three half days every other week. During the 20s? Yeah. And so there wasn't much money there. Believe me, I lived out here. I bought this place and I drove back and forth in my little Ford. You got married then? Yeah. Yeah. I got married in 24. 24. And so I didn't have much money to spend on three half days every other week. And I remember when the foreman, Broberg, called us together in the tool room and said that they had to lay off some people or cut the hours. But he said, and he looked right at me, you know, I hadn't been there very long. He said, I haven't got a man in here I can afford to lay off, he says. I'm going to have to cut the hours. And so he did. And they cut them several times. And I was getting 82 cents an hour at the time when they started cutting on. I ended up to where I was getting 38 cents an hour. So they had cut from 82, I got cut to 38. And then of that, I divided it down by four half days every other week. There wasn't much money. But you had scraped together some funds to buy this place there. There was a bond? Yeah. I had my wife, Irene, had saved money. She worked at the piano factory, had the Thayer Action, it was. And she had saved some money. So we put the money together and bought the place. Oh, I had bought a lot up there in Rockview. And the guy that owned it, he offered it to me for, I forget now how much it was. I think it was $400 for the lot. He told mother he was in there, if somebody wants to buy the lot, he says, it's for sale for $400. Well, I said, I'll talk to my son. Maybe he'll buy it. So I was working then. And I had saved up some money. I didn't throw it away. I spent it. And I called a guy up and I says, I'm interested. I'll buy that lot. So I bought it. And of course, it was sunken down. They need a lot of filling in there and everything. It didn't look like much, see. I said, I'll buy it. So I bought it and immediately started filling it. They were fixing, improving the streets up there. So I got them to come in and dump some fill in there for me. Free fill them. Yeah. And I got a lot of it filled. And then when they built this security bank on the corner of 7th Street and Broadway, I went down there and talked to the foreman that was digging the big hole down there for the bank. I says, boy, you're going to have a lot of fill here to get out of there. And he says, yep. I said, I know where there's a place you can put some if you'll be interested in getting rid of it. So I told him where it was located. Well, he says, I can't do it for nothing up there. He says, I could probably find a place closer, but I'll charge you 25 cents a yard and we'll bring up six or eight yards of the load. I says, that's a deal. I'll buy. And I'll tell them where to dump it. So they did. So I got it filled up. But in the meantime, in the bank, it wasn't filled up enough. So I decided I'm going to build a garage. So I built a double garage. And I had never built a garage or anything else. You know, I hadn't laid out a – I didn't know how to lay a foundation out. And that had to be – when I built it there, I needed four feet of fill. So I had to – first I put a foundation for the base, I should say. And then I built four feet up of cement because I hadn't filled it yet and I was going to fill that afterwards, see? And I remember how I – how am I going to lay that out so that it'd be square and in line with the world? And I figured out with a square and a twine that I could lay it out and check myself from all corners so it'd come out all right. And then I put up the forms. We did that by hand, the cement work in there. Boy, that was a lot of hard work. HURST Did your dad help you in that? MAGGIO A little bit, but not much. Dad wasn't able to do a lot for me, but he couldn't tell me how to lay it out or anything. But I figured it out and it worked out all right. I might add the garage is still there. It still looks all right, too. And so I built a 20 – let's see, it was 18 by 20 double garage. And I went down to the city and asked them if they were ever going to approve that alley in the factory. I'd like to get some readings so I know how much fill you're going to put in there. And they come out and drove some stakes and they did. So I brought the garage floor up even with that, see? So when they come out there and fill the alley in and graded it up, I was on the grade for it, see? And I built the whole garage myself. HURST You mentioned two-car garage. MAGGIO Yeah. HURST Most of the people probably didn't even have a one-car garage at that time. MAGGIO We had what was a one-car garage on my dad's place in the back there. HURST So you had a car then at that time? MAGGIO Yeah. But I built a two-car because I figured that I might, you know, have a little workshop in there for one, see? But you know, it was funny when they come up there and decided to regrade the alley. And I remember Anderson, the old man, he had built his garage up with the level of his lot there. And when they got through with the grade for that, his garage was up here. No way to get in, no way to get out. It was over six foot, seven foot. HURST A little bit of miscalculations. MAGGIO Yeah. And even the fellow next door there, he was an Italian that bought that place, Pili. He bought that from Johnson. And his garage, he built a garage. He figured I built a garage, he's going to build one too. So he built one too. But he didn't get the grade that I did, so when they come up there and graded, he was three feet off a grade. HURST Who gave you the idea to check with the city though? MAGGIO Dad says, I just asked him, this isn't going to work. I got to have a grade here. Yeah, he says, go down to the city engineer and he'll give you a grade. So I said, I went down there and told him what I wanted. He said, okay. And at Pili, he built a garage, but he didn't build a double garage. He built a single garage. And we were standing out there looking at him one day. And he says, I don't know. He says, my roof on my garage is like this. He says, it's getting worse all the time. And the sides are going out. Why don't yours do that? Well, I said, you didn't brace it properly, that's all. And I don't remember if he had it tear down or what, but anyway, he was swayed down about a foot in the middle and then the sides had gone out. You see, he didn't put the ties in there to tie the garage, see? So I said, well, what do I do now? He says, I don't know what you can do with that. I says, I don't think there's any cure for it. HURST So you tried a completely new profession, the carpenters, and started off? MAGGIO I didn't compete with carpenters, but I HURST So, I mean, you started with something brand new that you hadn't done before. MAGGIO Yeah. HURST Yeah. MAGGIO Well, after I got the garage built, then I really filled the lot up. And I got it so good that when I bought this place, I sold the lot in the garage for $1,900. So it was what we had. It gave me a down payment for the building, see, for this place here.