 Det här är cassett nummer tre. Och sidan nummer en är en fortsättning med Mrs Jackson, Rock Island, Illinois. Och det är 25 september 1985. Så vad vi gör här nu, vi har lite blandat upp här på Mero. Det var Munisink. Jag vet nu, jag vet nu. I Kupraköppet. Och det är det du nämnde, Skandia. Och stoppade på den lilla, gamla, hos Håman Limestone. Det var då vi fick bilen. Och du var där för hur många år? Två år. 1918-1920. Jag hade bara en liten brindor. Men sen efter att du kom till Mural, Wisconsin. Det var ett kall för åtta år. Svartående, det står här. 31-38. Svartående. Och det var lite annorlunda. I andra ord, även från Munisink i Michigan. Från Tricenter, ja. Ja, jag tror jag var lite beredd att det var så långt norr igen. Men jag gick... Så Munisink, det var ganska långt norr där. Ja. Det var en lång distans för mig att ta. Men det var en spot på naturlig skärm, som du har använt. Men kall vinnare. Och många djur. Ja, det är rätt. Det var även svenska finn? Det var även finn. De var väldigt reservade, var det inte? De var väldigt... ...vitt med att leva som de alltid hade. Och de ville stå så här. En familj som jag nämnde, de var finnisk. De hade byggt en liten hus, kanske av sin egen wood. Kastade trädet ner och gjorde flör och allt. Det var alls wood. Och stående runt omkring, för vänster och så vidare. Och de ställde sig ändå, på den tiden. Det var det enda jordkvartalet jag har sett driva. De ställde sig. De ville bara leva på det mat de kunde ta på sin farm. De var svåra människor, hade en stor familj. De ville leva på det. Och... ...att jobba riktigt hårt där. Ta sitt mat för sig själv. Att leva på det. Och de trodde att de skulle ha vunnit ett eget eget. Det var deras religion, det var naturen för dem. De var... Veenberg var deras namn, jag kan inte ihåg dem än. Och de gjorde allt de kunde för oss att göra det vackert. De hade flör skruvd i hett. Och det mat de använde var alla hårdkast, men det var vackert. Men det var en förändring för oss. Och deras barn, var de bråkade upp i skolan? Ja. Vi hade en liten av hans son. Min hundgång hade... Det var när vi var ute på huset. Och han sa att han hade gått ut i vänster och jobbat i en stålfaktori. De hade gjort stål i sin hus. Och han sa att han hade gillat det och var glad att han fick gå till vår kyrka. Men han var ut i vänster nu. Så de var... De hade kanske en 8-grader education, men inget i Moreana. Men de hjälpte varandra och hjälpte dig också? De gjorde det. Vi stod i ett pariseringshus varandra. Vi gick ut där. När vi gick på trainen kom vi på sattardy morgonen och stod till lundag. En pariseringshus hade att hålla oss i huset och ge oss transport. När man inte kunde driva bil. De var vackra, men de var reserverade. De hade alltid gjort det så här och vi fick gå. Men det var en stor förändring för oss, både av oss. Det var en erfarenhet för dig att komma där. Och i Unicing hade du en liten kristmärketskärla där. Det var en färgkärla. Ja, ja. Och du hade den på tavlet. Det var en liten kristmärk. En av vänsterna tog den och vi satt den på tavlet. Var det kristmärkt att ha den på tavlet, inte på tavlet? Jag tror att vi inte hade någon annan stånd. Han tog den på en stånd, så vi tog den där. Det var okej. Och du hade några dekorationer på den? Ja, vi gjorde det lika bra vi kunde. Och du hade elektriska ljus? Ja, vi hade elektriska ljus. Det här var i Mourna, var det en svårkrig? Man fick saker som mat och ... Ja, det var lite svårt. Hur gick det med spanish fluet? Hade de också hittat det? Spanish fluet? Ja, jag tror vi hade det. Det var en väldigt seriös flu. Men jag tror inte några av våra plattare död från den. Vi tog inte den. De tog bilder. De har presenterat den med en Model T4. Jag trodde inte att du skulle ge henne kredit för de bilderna. Det där lilla hans kyrka är vad du vill se på. Det är Scandia. Scandia Lutheran Kyrka. Ja, där har vi förlorat vår lilla tjej. Catherine Jackson och henne hos 1919. Hon är beredd i cemeteriet. Hon är uppe i cemeteriet i Mjønäsingen. Hon blev beredd av en norrwigerisk tjej. En norrwigerisk tjej som hjälpte oss. Hon ställde sig med mig innan barnen kom. Jag hade en annan hjälpare, en typ av nördsläkare, som var där. De sprang en notering på mig. Vi trodde att allt var okej. De sprang en notering på oss som inte var där. Det här lilla tjej var på dörren. Jag var uppe. Johan och jag pratade om det lite. Jag sa, varför inte få Mrs Holder att bera med barnen? Han frågade henne om hon skulle ge henne en hud. De bröt henne upp till mitt bed. Hon var beredd där. Hon var en fin kristian. Det gjorde mig inte bera. Vi kunde gå ut och få en annan pastör, men vi kunde inte. Vem var middagen? Var det en tjej i kommunen? Medan middagen? Hon var en typ av nördighetslänkare. Det var en liten norrwigerisk tjej som ställde sig med oss. Hon var en bra kristian. Hon gjorde inget så dåligt i sin tid. Så du hade ingen doktor? Vi var under doktorn. Hon var under doktorn. Han var den som sprang nuson. Vi kunde inte bryta henne. Han sa att det var en abstraktion i hans hår. Inget vi kunde göra. Men mest var det en middagen som följde hela det. Doktorna kallades aldrig för en barn. Ja, om ingenting hade hänt så var det bara middagen. Vi hade hittat henne innan. De var ofta bryta i sin hem. Ja, de gjorde inget annat. Sedan gick vi igen och också... ...gick vi till Mitchell. I New Home i South Dakota. I New Home. I New Home hade du din mor i nu för ett tag. Hon hjälpte dig ut. Mrs. Jackson. Hon hjälpte mig inte ut. Vi hade att hjälpa henne. Hon var i dåligt kondition. Det blev svårt för oss. Vi hade ingen bil nedanför. Vi kunde ge henne och vi visste att det inte var bra. Så det var lite svarta dagar. Vi gjorde det bästa. Men din... Delores Pauline var nöjd vid Clay Center General Hospital. Var det den första du gick till hospitalet? Det var en riktig kansas-blizzard den dagen. Drömskapet kom ut, 9 miljoner, och han sa... En av de andra var lite sjuk, så vi kallade honom. Han sa att han skulle gå med mig i bilen. Han visste att barnen skulle komma, så jag gjorde det. Jag gick på måndag och barnen kom på vänster. Jag stod med en äldre liten i Clay Center i de dagarna. Jag fick en taxi och gick till hospitalet. Det fungerade. John Mc couldn't come down for two days. There was no telephone, no roads or nothing. But then he got down and we got along. So a blizzard like that usually lasted for about three days? Yeah, yeah. And then it calmed down by itself? Then it got down, got the roads open. So most of the people, if they didn't have to go out, they knew that. They stayed in shelter. But the pastor, of course, he had to go when somebody called him. Well, I couldn't call him. There was no lines to call him. Nothing to, no way. But he had some others helping with the little children in the house. They got along. And before I forget, Ed Swesberg, you helped to organize... Girls chorus. ...the Young Women's Society. Was there something new then for that church? Yeah, it was new. It was a bunch of girls, just real nice girls, that needed something to do. Some of them sang in the choir and something. I got a hold of them and we had a little society, a missionary society, and then it ended up being a girls chorus. So you taught them to sing and play with them? Yeah, and some of the girls could play. So I started leading. We sang, we even went to Oldsburg and sang, and I think we went to a couple of other near congregations on a Sunday evening. So what did the old man say about that? I don't know if he was living then. I think maybe he had gone. But there was another deacon, I guess he was deacon or trustee. He said, I don't know if that's very good that these girls are going out on a Sunday night. We used to have service, but we didn't have a Sunday evening service at our church. So I didn't feel like I was making the room. But somebody had a spot, you know. But I still have letters. At my birthday I had letters from some of those girls in California and out far, far away that I appreciated them. So you saw the need for it to get them together? Yeah, that's... So... Yeah. Is there a picture of it there? Yes. The two little tiny heads you see below, that's my two little girls. Just little girls. And one of them went to Lindsberg and then she's going to do music and then she went to nursing. She's 73 and she's done lots of good in the room. Another one is doing other good things. So I'm happy about that. It wasn't anything big. I don't want any recognition or anything. But there was a need for it in the community. Yeah, yeah. I felt it was good. They got together to sing and practice. How were the people? Were they shy at that time to talk to and get them to bond? No. Those girls were nice on them. And I think they felt that need, like you say, of togetherness. You live on the farm and far away, why they needed to get together. And there were ways of getting... They had cars. Somebody had a car and they'd pick them up. It was just a name. How did the other churches do it, like the Baptist Church and the Covenant Church? Well, they were far away, like Clyde and Bramford. Bramford was a Zion Lutheran church, but also a Covenant church. You didn't have any pressure from outside the clay because there were all Lutherans there. After we left then, there was some connection between some of that. There was a Lutheran church out there they had some connection with, but that I think has disappeared, I don't know. So they didn't bother while we were there, but they did start up afterwards, I know. Did your husband preach in Swedish in Clay Center? At that time, or was they all gone with one English? Well, let's see. Pauline was born in 19... 26. I think at that time we had been doing half and half, sort of. Swedish in the mornings and in the... Swedish at night, I don't remember, there was a change in there just about at that time. They were taking half and half. What did your husband say about that? He has to prepare now two sermons here. I mean, there's enough to prepare one. I don't know what he thought about it. He just did it, that's all. So he had no trouble then with the language to speak in either, or preach in either one? No, no, no. Did he say it at any time? Yeah, he said it was getting easier to do the English. He said that? He said that, mm-hmm. And you get away from it so long, you know. And there weren't many Swedish people there, some that we could go and see. So there were some people in the church I bet they couldn't understand in Swedish or... Oh, there were us. That's why we felt we had to change, yeah. So it went... Did you feel any pressure from the Senate to change the order of English? Were they more liberal to stay with it? No, I don't think we... I think they were all doing... So many are doing the same thing they were expecting at Genotica. I think that was... So 1969 was the Tonero. Well, she's got it down there. I thought it was earlier, but there was... So then you went 1931 to Merle, Wassa, and Irma, Wisconsin. Yeah, we've kind of gone over that, haven't we? Yeah, that's right. We faced it all in the beginning here. So... But you were there for eight years. Yeah, I've got... You started to grow together with the congregation. You know how it was to be there for many years. Was that a good... Merle? Well, let's see. And Irma? And we had Wassa too, you know? Yes. I guess I don't know. I think it was pretty good. But I think, as I remember back, we felt that it was time to change. I believe that was the best answer I can give you. And then 1938 to 1943, during the war, you went to Monten and Mosling in Wisconsin. That was kind of a... The mountain was a place where we were called to, of course, and then the Mosling went along with it, and that was far away. It was about 30 miles, I think. And we went there once a month. Yeah. Oh. And then your children, or your girls started to... The Mosling church, you know, they destroyed then. You remember? I never been there. Yeah. It was in depression days, the deep depression days, and the farmers that owned land around the church, you know, they said, oh, there was quite a large lot for the church in the cemetery. And they said, take that church out of there so we can plant food there. You can keep the cemetery, but we want... So it was voted on in the past. Did they erase the whole church then? Not the whole church, but the cemetery. Yeah, some of them were awfully sad about that, some of the members, but that's the way it was done. And that was during the war? Yeah, very, very depression days. So you were there then in depression days in Merrill. Was it a hardship then? Did they lower the salary then for your husband? Well, they didn't put the salary up or anything, no. It got to be a hardship all the time. And we were raising our girls then too, you see. Hami graduated from high school in Merrill. How could you afford them to send her tents? Well, from high school she went to Oshkosh, Wisconsin, and took a business course. And that way she started to earn a little bit money. And Dorothy was still in high school part of the time. And then she finally, through that job and some friend, she found out, or maybe through a paper, they found out that who was the one that was comptroller down at Augustana? Erickson. Erickson. That he needed a job, she wrote and asked and she got the job. So that's how we got moved all of us down here. Then she was safe? Yeah, then she took on to that. And then Dorothy got into college and pretty soon Pauline got here. But the money that was paid for your husband's work was very minimal. In other words, it was very low salary during the whole time. No, he didn't have anything. He didn't have anything being given to him. Nothing. And no pension rights or anything, so to speak. No, we just got... There must have been a hardship. But you couldn't take a work because it was unheard of that the pastor's wife took a work during that time. You couldn't even take one. I'll tell you when I didn't take a job. Where did we go from there? Well, then you came to New Windsor. Yeah, then I did. In 44? Yeah, that's when I took a job. So you could do that then? I didn't ask anybody if I could, I just did it. Well, I knew that we were just stumped for income and stuff. And I thought, why should I sit home in a room here in an apartment or some place? And somehow, I don't know if I can even tell you how I got the word that they needed a housekeeper at Moline Luther. And I called authorities up there and sure enough they took me. They needed one. And I'd never done such a thing in my life, but I learned how. And I was with them ten years and I liked it. You traveled then for New Windsor? No, no. We moved from New Windsor and we hadn't made no arrangements when we left. Oh, I see. After the 60s? Yeah, that was way back. I'm telling you too early. But there I didn't have any. In New Windsor you stayed in the Parsonage then? Oh yeah, all the time we were there. Because it was unheard of that the pastor could take outside work. No, I never thought of it in mountain, even as poor as we were. Didn't you feel at any time mad at this idea that the pastor's wife should do? Actually you were two people working for the congregation for one salary. Well, you're saying it right. You had to be at the ladies aid meeting, you had to be there, and you also had to help your husband with maybe sometimes with the secretarial work. I didn't do much of that. No, but I mean you had to keep dates and all the keeping going. I had to see that the bills were paid. But that was the way it was done. Nobody thought that that was the way it was supposed to be handled. My, how different it is now. Now it's different. A big difference. Well, it puts the wrinkles in my face, but you'll see. You managed to survive them all. So this went after your husband retired or you could take this work at... We had made no arrangements and if we'd been wise we would have made some arrangements. We hadn't, but it came on that we had to quit. So Hortensen and Everett in their big hearts said, come and stay with us until you can find something, and we did. And that is when the thought came to me, I'm not going to sit here and live off of somebody else not doing anything. So then I got this job. And then he helped a little with the pastoral work at Trinity. The shop in St. Paul. Yeah, yeah. But he was retired in 1960. Yeah. And then we found a little apartment in Rock Island, because I had to take a bus to that. So I got close enough so I could walk to Luton Hospital. And then we lived at that apartment until we bought that little house out there. And then we lived there. So you actually never retired? You kept going. Yeah, I kept going. Even after he died I was out there two years, and that was a long time, to be alone and have a house and a yard and everything. And at that time the pastor's pension was not that high? I'm going to be truthful and frank to you. He didn't keep up his pension. You didn't get anything then? I get a very little bit for some medication. Yeah, you mustn't pass this. No, no, but like the cinder, they didn't have a safety that they helped the pastors to pay when they had hardships like depression. We didn't get anything. Maybe we didn't know how to ask for it. I don't know. No, but you would think the cinder, should they have been foresighted enough, that the pastors out in the areas where they had depression and farmers, dust balls and everything, moved the people away to California. Why didn't they have a safety net for the pastor to pay the pension when they couldn't? I can't answer that. But they didn't do that? Well, it wasn't all that he couldn't. He just was not a financial man. He just didn't know how about big cars when he couldn't, about other things when he couldn't, and didn't see the background at all. And so we struggled with it. It was hard too. And now I have what I've got left is in the bank and I hope it will keep me here till I stay. So you had good health then, apparently. Well, I had quite a bit of trouble out there when I was out there the two years. The girls took me to the hospital and to the doctors. Since I came here, the first three months or so, I had one trouble after the other, but since then I feel that I have recovered. If I had been walking back and forth here and I couldn't stand up, you see, my back is bad. But that's a poor excuse, you know, if you can get along otherwise. I'm just thankful for many things. When I see Mildred Hall and Lily Anderson, some of these down here, I go down to the nursing center, it's beautiful. And if their minds stay clear, that's the thing. That's probably the most important thing, so you can enjoy the world inside. You have raised daughters. Three daughters. And they all say, don't worry about it. And they're back at that time. I know that. And they all got schooling that you didn't get. In other words, they went to higher school than you did. Graduated from college. They worked for some of their college and that's all right. Didn't hurt them. So they don't have to go through the hardships you did in the late years? No, they don't. They're pretty good. They're just that good. Polly married a Catholic and they live in Belvedere. Built them a nice home and they're just getting along fine. He's a little older than she is, I know, but he's a good man. I'd trust him for anything, anytime. And on your 90th birthday, September 3rd, you had a big gathering here. That's when they all came for the party. How many generations were at the gathering? Five generations? Well, it was Papa and my children and grandchildren and me. It would be four generations then, wouldn't it? Me the first one. There were a lot of small kids on there. Wouldn't that be the fifth generation? Yeah. I had three little ones come last fall, all of a sudden. Little tiny ones. So I have seven great-grandchildren. And then their parents and my children, that's four. They should be... Well, taking our grandparents, it would be five generations and we know them. So if those small children on that picture sit and take their time to listen, you can tell them all the way back to Indian times. What you have been having the daughter of your mother. That's something to talk about. There was one thing I forgot to ask you here in the beginning. Your parents, now your grandparents, did they ever talk about Sweden as a hard place to live in and glad to get out of? How did they express Sweden to you? I know that they both came over here hearing from relations from this country. They lived up around Frankfurt. It was a bunch of relations up there. They heard from them and those people from here that had come from Sweden and were living in Frankfurt and around there, they said, Come on over here. You can buy all the land you want to and you can raise wheat and you can raise corn and everything is just going good. So come over here to America. So grandma and grandpa all heard that and that's why they came. I've got letters to show them. So they didn't, were they homesick I suppose in the first, but did they get over that? They had all their minds made up they were going to stay here. How about your father now? Jackson. Well in other words not Jackson but your godfather. Your father? My father and his father. My father, I didn't know anyone back of that. He died in Sweden, his father. His father was widowed and he never saw her again. His mother was a widow. And he never went back for a visit when he couldn't. And no other brothers and sisters in Sweden? Was he the only? No, he had some brothers in Sweden. And one brother came here to America. What was his name? Abel Johnson, he was the youngest one and he married, that's a double marriage. He, Pappas brother married mamma's sister. And there was a double marriage in the Chalberg and Nelson family and I can't explain it to you but they told me when I was a child they were somehow cousins and there was a child that was born deaf and dumb. I have a picture of her. So they lived in Kansas on the farm then? Many of them are gone, some have moved to Texas, they're scattered far and wide. I can't keep up with them. But they had big farms out there and a lot of cattle, they said it was just grand in Kansas. Come on over, that's how they got here. So that was the... And you haven't been in Sweden and seen your... I have been to Sweden. You've been to Sweden? I have been to Sweden. So you've seen the places where they came from? I have. When I had lived out there two years at the house, Hortense and Dorothy were over to Dorothy's house and all of a sudden they both had the same idea. They said, they were going to Sweden in the summer. And they said, Mother, you come and go with us to Sweden. And they talked me into it. It took me a long time to decide and I went with them to Sweden. In June, daddy had died in October and I went with them in May or June, whatever it was that went. And I was there for five weeks. Did you see anything in the landscape that your parents or grandparents had told you about? I definitely saw them. Was there something specific that you remember? Well, first of all the home of my second cousin, Evert Boreen. He and his wife took us into their home. We stayed there. Were they in the west of Jutland? They were in fall shipping. They had a home there. And he and she started taking us one place after the other, right around where the parents were. We had a truck, a car we could all ride in to. And we drove around and she would take a Swedish lunch along. We would sit in the parks. It was a glorious time. And we were in Stockholm, look things over there. I wouldn't give that up for anything. I have a picture there of Cullen, if you know where that is. I don't know where it is exactly. It's where my great-great-grandmother was born. I see. It was a particular farm she was born on. Was this still standing, the old house? No, the house, there was a cellar, a little cellar left. And they said that was all they had when they first came there. And then they built a little log cabin of some kind. And they had to walk about from 40, 50 feet to get to a spring where they could get even enough water to drink at first. And then they built them a well. And so they lived there. And they had that whole trip and then far to walk to a store or anything, you know. So that was really memory. Det var ett slags intervju med L.C. Jackson, Rock Island, Illinois. Nu har vi idag, 25 september 1985. End av intervjun.