 Here we have June 22, 1986, and I've sent it together with Mrs. Frank Olson, Rockford, Illinois. Your parents now, Oscar Hallberg, or as he was called in Sweden, Hellberg. Yep. He came from Borlänge in Dalarna. Now you had the dates on that. Wasn't it, was it 1917 that he came over? Well, it was the time of the First World War. And I think that's why my father left. Do you know the reason why he left? The only thing I can pinpoint down is the fact that there wasn't any work to be had and things were so poor in the family that in order to make a living, I think that was his choice, was to come to the United States. And in going, what you had said about the book, Frank and I tried to kind of read, and we just sort of read into things there, thinking that my dad first went out into Nebraska. He had cousins out there to see what work situation was out there. And it was very poor living for him then, very poor living. So he came alone then for Sweden? He came alone. None of his family came with. How many children were there in the family? I think there were five. There were five. And his father was a tailor, which would have been in the winter months, wouldn't it? I mean he would have farmed in the summer, and in the winter he was a tailor. And my dad says he can remember him going traveling and sewing and things like that. So I suppose there wasn't much on the farm to support the whole family. So then after dad stayed in Nebraska for a while is when he came into the Chicago area. And from Chicago then he came into the Rockford area, I guess because he heard of Rockford's building and things like that. So my father started out as a carpenter at that time. I don't remember what the period was there from the time that dad came and when my mother and father married. I do know that he came to board at the boarding house my grandmother had, and that was how he met my mother. And it was in downtown Rockford? On 9th Street. 9th Street? Uh-huh. Yep. So your grandma had a boarding house there? Uh-huh. And what was her name? I told you, Peterson, it was Amanda Olson. Amanda Olson. Amanda Olson, right. It was Amanda Olson. Was she a widow then? No, no, she wasn't at that point, no. Now I don't know what my grandfather did, but it wasn't long after that that my grandfather did die. So my grandmother had that home down there on 9th Street for a long time. So she had many boarders then, too? No, I don't think she had many. I think one or two was about it, because there were quite a few in that family. I think my sister had five sisters and one brother. So it was quite a household. It must have been a—seems to me that it was—it's tore down now. It's the parking lot where Swedish American was. There was a great big house there on the corner. The hospital, you mean? Where the hospital parking lot is now, yeah. So this boarding house, then, she, in other words, fed them. She didn't have them for room and wash and—did they live there? They lived there. I think it was room and board. I think it was. And then he didn't live there that long, and then he went to live with—he is now my uncle—went to live with a man, Martin Carlson, and then after that was when they married, the sisters and stuff like that. And he continued on as a carpenter. That was his job. That was his job. Dad always liked working with his hands. He went back to night school. I remember seeing papers that he had done correspondence work with a school in Chicago area. So I feel my father was more or less self-educated, too. I don't think in Sweden he finished schooling. That wasn't unusual, was it? They didn't finish schooling there at all. And also this day book he had out in Nebraska, it shows that he was interested to jot down things and poems. Certainly in politics, my father— That's what he was interested in? Yes. Yes. How did you know that? They were married in the 1920s, your father and mother in the 19— I wished I had gotten the papers out. I would imagine it was around in there, yeah. But my father was always interested in politics. From the time he established a home here in Rockford, even before that my dad was in politics. And there was a party here in Rockford, and I think you referred to them as a socialist party. And at that time my father was— A member. A member of that, yes. And he was committeeman and chairman and things like that. So he had always been interested in politics. So he was very active then? Yeah. Yeah, my father was. And then after the socialist party, it then became the democratic party, didn't it? If I'm not— Well, yes. No, I don't know when the— In a milder form. Yeah, yeah. I don't know when they dropped the label in here in Rockford of the socialist party. I don't remember when that was. We had a mayor here in Rockford, Blum. I don't remember what his first name was. And I think he was the one that helped my father too and worked with my dad. And that was how my dad became that much more interested in politics. But up until the day my father—or the week before my father died, why, politics was something that he read up a lot on, discussed a lot. My brother, at the age of about 18 or 19, went out to California to make his millions out there. My older sister has never cared about politics, but I seem to enjoy that. And when I was in school and after school, my father and I, of course, did an awful lot of discussing and talking of politics. And it's quite interesting. I thought my father was a very knowledgeable man. Always thought that he should have had more education than what my dad did. I just finished reading the books, The Immigrants, again. Isn't that Moberg that wrote that? Yeah. And now after I have read that, at the time that I was reading these things, I could remember things then that my father told me about things in Sweden and things that my mother-in-law told me about in Sweden. And I can understand now why they didn't have education and went on and stuff like that. I realized why my father was so interested in politics. How was he interested? Did he participate on the city board, school board? Not on anything. My father was precinct committeeman. He was in the carpenters union. And then my father ran for alderman, too. I think he ran twice and was defeated both times, and after that he quit and then just served as precinct committeeman and things like that. So, like I say, I think if he had had education, he would have gone farther. Do you remember when you were born, you don't remember the Depression too well. Very vaguely. My father and mother built a house on 19th Street, and it was the only house in that area, the only house. And during the Depression, my father had to give up the house and rent it out, and I can vaguely remember the five of us going back out to Nebraska to live with his cousin on the farm, and my father could work on the farm for room and board for our family. So I remember vaguely the cold, the hunger. I can, that's the things that stand out in my mind, was the cold and the hunger. So he was able then to keep up the payments with the rent? He did, although his renters did not keep up payments on that, so when my father came back from Nebraska, he was, it had then been taken over by an uncle of mine, and he had to repay my uncle that amount of money to keep the house. But there was no work to be had in Rockford, there was no way he could support the family, and this was the easiest thing for him, was to go back out to Nebraska. Where in Nebraska was that, Phelps County or? Hastings, near Hastings, and out in that area. So he had a brother there or? A cousin. A cousin. A cousin. And there was a big farm then, so he worked? Yes, there was a big farm. They had quite a few boys, and then my dad, and we were the hired help, and we were treated like hired help. I can remember, like I say, the cold, and I can remember the hunger, and I can remember my mother, I crying one day that I was hungry, and my mother snuck me into what was called a pantry, and told me to sit in the corner, and she gave me a piece of bread with some lard and some sugar on it, and told me to eat it and not cry anymore, and not say anything to anybody. Stands out in my mind, and if I remember that, I think, my, what those people must have gone through during the Depression. Must have been horrible. So how many were you in the family, five? Five. And did you go to school out there in Hastings, or? My brother and my sister did. Sometimes I was taken to the school just to visit, and it was a one-room schoolhouse. We either rode on a wagon, or during the snow, we went on a sled. So I can't tell you when we went out. I can, my father told me that at the time it was cold, and it was rainy. So I'm surmising that we must have gone out in, in say early, early spring, and stayed the summer, and then it seems to me that when we came back was towards the holidays again. Now whether we were there just about a year, might have been just about a year, because I know when my father came back, they brought food and butter and eggs and things back, and they stored them on the back porch of my aunt's house because it was so cold. So it must have been just only a year that we were out there. So there was a miserable time, you remember? Oh, terrible time. We had to share beds. There were three of us in a bed sometimes. Sometimes they put the youngest children into bed, and sometimes it was with my sister and my mother. And we were, we were treated like the hired help and the poor hired help. And my father was very miserable. My father's pride was terribly hurt that he had to go and do this, but this was the only way he could support his family. So you started living there just for the boardroom? Just a boardroom for the family, that was it, and just to keep us going, that's what it was. Your mother, did she have the work too? My mother had to cook and clean and do the cooking for the farmhands and for the family. My brother, my brother was twelve years older than I. So if I was out there when I was—okay, now you've got to tell me, the depression was in— About thirty to thirty-six. Okay. So would I have been about four then, four or five? No, four, wouldn't I have been? About four years old I would imagine. So my brother was twelve years older than I. So I think my brother must have worked out there too then because he would have been old enough to work. They sent them out quite early to work. But I've never questioned my brother about that. I was going to, because when he came back, now this spring I was going to talk to him about some things and put it down on paper. And I will get to it again sometimes. So he remembers them, do you remember? Oh, yes, my brother remembers. He had to be one of the farmhands then. My brother can remember everything that went on. I can remember the family getting sick out there and the farmhouse that we lived on couldn't help us in any way. And I remember I became terribly ill and they had to take me to another cousin's house to stay for a while. So it must have been an awful time for my dad. My father had such pride, was so proud of doing for himself that I can remember in later years different things that led me to believe this even more. This was maybe 15 years ago when my children were home and were little was the beginning of what are now the famous garage sales that are going out all over. And I can remember my father here one day and I had gone to a neighbor's house and had gotten some play clothes for my children at this garage sale and brought them home and I showed my father what I had gotten. And my father refused to let me put them on the kids. He told me that no matter how poor they were during the Depression, if we didn't have clothes, they had enough money that my mother went and bought material or even feed sacks in those days they used and that was what the clothes were made out of. We did not take from anybody. No second hand? No second hand. I admired my father. I wished I had So he was a strong minded person? Very much so. I did find that tape. Remember I told you I had taped their voices? I did find it. Would you like to have that? Yes. You can hear my mother talking and it might not be of any interest to you, but it was my way of getting my folks' voice on the tape. I also taped my mother-in-law too, so I have that tape I will give to you too. And she talks about when she came over. Can I talk about her too? Yes. Okay. She had You can see your husband's mother. Yes. She had a husband and a mother. She had friends in Sweden who had a relative over here in United States. I think that was out in, I think it was in Iowa. So this woman sponsored my mother-in-law to come over here and work and be a maid. And then she had to stay with her for a certain length of time to work off her coming over. And then after that my mother-in-law went up to Minneapolis to work as a maid and as a cook and things like that. So on this tape she tells about when she came over and she also tells about what she did in Sweden as a little girl. It was quite interesting. Is she still living or? No. My mother-in-law died in November, this last November. In the last six months we were in Sweden constantly. She didn't even recognize us as children. We were sisters and brothers. So we learned a lot but too late. She lived with you then? No. She lived with us for a while. Yes, she did. And then when things became very hard to take care of her, she had two broken hips and they were not set properly. Then she was out at Elm and Nelson, so she was in a wheelchair all the time out there. But you got her voice? I taped her too. You mentioned you got old enough and coming to high school and start to understand politics on your own. Oh, I certainly did. Were you leaning towards a Democrat or a Republican or just to be opposite to your father? Oh no. No, I was a staunch Democrat. But sometimes you like to rebel a way to see different. Yes, yes, I did. But no, I pretty well believed what my father said. And after I did get into high school, then I did get into debate. And so I read up and did debate politics and enjoyed that. So how come you met Mayor Blom? Was he already dead then when you got old enough to? No, he must have been a cousin of my father's or some shirt-tail relative of my father's. I see. So they were close? Yes, they were close. They never had any children. So they were very good to us as children. I can remember the gifts that they gave to us. And Blom and your father, they had the same identical political teaching or belief? Oh yes. Oh yes. And I think Blom was called a socialist. I think he was. Yes, I'm sure he was. Yeah. I think he was. So there was enough votes then to get him in there as a... Blom? Yes. Oh, he was a good mayor. That's according to me. I don't know what the records are, but I think he was a good mayor. How do you think the Swedes voted now? Were they actually... If a Swede was running for a political office, did they cross the line, do you think, from Republicans and voted for like Blom now, for instance? He must have gotten votes from somewhere else. Oh, I'm sure. Because here you have Italians and Irish, some Germans. I mean, you would think they were an opposition. No, he must have been a pretty strong candidate at that time. He must have been. Must have been. I keep thinking I'm always going to go back and look in Rockford history as to what he did during his term. Because my father was with him constantly and was with him so much, I would imagine I would learn a lot as to what my father thought and did at that time. But it's one of those things I'm always going to do. But he was a strong mayor, and it seems to me he was elected more than one term, too. I think he was. I know that after he moved to Florida, and he was written up in the paper at that time, and at the time that he was written up, it sounded as if he was respected then, too. So, I'm getting a little cold. Did you become interested in politics, not like your father? Never did. Never. Participated in it? No. I have been interested in—how do I—I'm not articulate, so I don't know what to say—social issues. And I have worked with that through churches here in Rockford. A number of years ago, Rockford was fighting very hard for what? Open occupancy. And I believe very strongly in open occupancy at the time, and I fought hard for that. And we were able to get some blacks moved wherever they wanted to. Was that sponsored by the churches? Yes, the churches were interested in that. All the churches? Not all of the churches. The one church that was the biggest mover of that was the Unitarian Church. And there was a period when we left the Lutheran Church and went to the Unitarian Church. Because I became unhappy with our church, not the Lutheran Church as a whole, but our church, I didn't feel took on any social issues, and I thought there were an awful lot of problems. And not that I left the church at that point, but I did go to the Unitarian Church to listen to speakers, for book reviews, and things like that, because I've always been interested in that. And it was shortly after that that our Lutheran minister that we had here at our church found out that I was doing this and felt that it was not healthy and that I shouldn't go to them. And if I did, he told us to get off the fence. We either go to that church or our church. And it made us angry, so we said, okay, we'll do what we want then. Since after that, we found out that he was a very narrow-minded man anyway, so I feel now I was justified in doing what I did. I really felt seriously that we didn't understand a lot of the social issues. So I fought quite hard for that. So the Unitarian Church are more open than for social issues and not afraid to speak out? Yes. The Episcopalians here in Rockford, too, did a lot. As a Lutheran, do you feel that our church, too, has not been a little late bloomers on some things? Yes, they probably are. I'd like to follow and see what happens. I'm afraid to take the first step. I don't think it's so much now, but I think back then, like I say, I can only judge what our church was doing. I don't know what the inner-city churches were doing, but I know what ours was doing, and I just felt that it was not. Out in this area here, we, not only me, the neighbors and the community fought hard against integration and open occupancy. There was many underhanded ways of putting a house up for sale, and if someone did come in to look at it. And I felt at that time, and I feel very strongly now, that we would not have had to have busing if we could have had open occupancy. There would have been a remedy from the beginning, then. I think it would have. I think it would have. Is it a dead issue now that... Open occupancy? Yes, or is it a problem? There's no problem now. No problem now. They don't even talk about it anymore? No, because blacks can buy wherever they want to. There isn't a problem with that. I imagine there is a... There are some people, yes, I take that back. There are some. I have friends that will not rent to blacks, no matter what their social standing in income or anything is. They just won't do it. But I think they are in, I hope, in the minority now. But the people are probably scared, though, if somebody moves in with a different skin. The value will go down. Isn't that the biggest problem, you think, that... Well, I don't think it should be judged by skin. But there's the money, though. They might lose 10, 15 thousand dollars on the house, perhaps. But it never been a problem here in Rockford. Well, could be. It could be a problem to some people. Because we are brought up that way, you know, to be... Especially Swedes, I think, you know, to be wary about something that's different. Why? When in Sweden, I... No, we feel sorry for them. Oh, I see. We feel sorry for them, but stay over there and be okay. Oh, no, it's a different thing, though. But I mean, 50 or 100 years ago, it was a different thing. Yeah. We had the gypsies in Sweden. We didn't have the color people. We had the gypsies. Did they pose a problem? Of course they did. And it took a long time. I think I read that in the immigrants, too, that the gypsies did prove a problem in Sweden. So like your dad, now, was he open-minded for things like that to be fair to and square with? Yes, I think my father was. My father, when he worked as a carpenter here in Rockford, I can remember him coming home and telling me how he worked down in South Rockford and food-wise I can remember my father saying how different it was, but that was smaka bra. He told me that. Then my father was given a political job during Governor Horner's term, and we went down to Springfield and lived there. And I think we were down there for two years until Horner was replaced by a Governor Green at that time. This Horner, what kind of... He was a Democratic. Democrat. So your dad had some influence. He must have had something. He must have had something because he was offered a job then down at the State Armory. And then my father was in charge of not maintenance, but repair. And he had a plumber and an electrician that were under him, and then he had some men under him that repaired and replaced and did things like that. But that lasted just long enough for Green to get in there, and then their men were put in. So then we came back to Rockford, and my father did come back and union again. Now I think he must have been union all along. Definitely my father would be union. But there was some opposition though from all the factors about unions. I don't remember my father talking about it at that time. It was all past then, I suppose. It was in the 20s. And in the early 30s there was more. I don't remember my father talking about any problems at all, but I know my father's always been a union man. My husband's a union man, and we better be that way is the way his attitude is. So then my father came back from Springfield and after a couple years and went back into carpentry work until he retired. So was he still active within the political circle? When he came back he was not that active in it then. By gosh, he must have been, because that was at that time that my father ran for alderman. And at the time that my father ran for alderman on the Democratic ticket, there was another Oscar Hallberg that lived farther up on 19th Street that also ran for alderman. Whether this was done deliberately or what, I don't know. But my father lost out to the other Oscar Hallberg, and my father always felt that there was something there that wasn't according to all of us. He started the questioning system perhaps? Yes he did. So you have a relationship with Mrs. Frank Wilson, Rapp for your wife? I do. So you remember... I remember handbills, giving out handbills for my father. Door to door? Door to door. I can remember my sister and my brother, and I think I might have had some cousins that helped me too, helped us. You went door to door or you just ran some... Just all up and down our streets. Regardless if they were Republicans? We knocked on the door and handed it to them. And I can remember thinking that was the greatest thing in the world, was that I was handing out these things for my father. I think my sister and brother were very upset with the whole thing. They were much older so they were more shy then? Yes. And of course at my age, you know, that was exciting to run up and hand something to somebody at the door. Your brother, now he was 12 years older than you. Did he become interested in politics? No, my brother didn't. Not at all? Uh-uh. Was he the only boy? He was the only boy. For four years? I don't know why. Maybe they were so busy trying to make a living at that time that we were a close family. I can feel that. I can sense that we were close. But I suppose at the time that my brother was growing up, my father was so busy making a living, and my father constantly, if he wasn't working, he was downstairs building and making things like that. And my brother never had an interest in that, never had an interest in woodworking at all. He went to school and turned to cars, and I can remember him working in a gas station, earning enough money that when he was 18, they did, with his cousin and another friend, went out to California, got out there and had been there for about six or eight months and had to send home for money to get back home again. Then when he did come home, I can't remember if my brother, I think we all went to Springfield, so my brother must have gone with us to Springfield, and he must have gotten a job in a factory down there then. Because my brother did marry a girl in Springfield, and then when we came back, my brother must have followed shortly after and then went into tool and dye work here in Rockford. He must have been going strong because then he did go into that. Was that after the Second World War then or after the war? That would have been, that would have had to have been after the start of the war because I can remember the day that, I can remember in Springfield was when Hitler started to bomb. I can, I think, you know, it's funny, I'm sure you come across this, everybody's, it's foggy, dates and stuff like that, and I was pretty young at that time too. So then he did come back to Rockford shortly after, but I don't know why my, no one else in the family went into, I wished I had known about it years before because I think I would have, as my husband says, when I get on it, I'm a rabble rouser. So you had your discussion? Oh, yes. With your dad? Oh, many. My dad and I could get going and we could sit for hours and talk. He read everything on Roosevelt. He read everything on Stevenson. And of course then when Truman came along he was very pleased with that. Eisenhoover he called him, he wasn't so sure of him, he didn't know. But of course there he was, a Republican, so. So the New Deal at Roosevelt, that was a good thing in your dad's... Doesn't, yeah, it doesn't, didn't, don't they label Roosevelt's New Deal as more socialist than anything? Yes. Right. And that was right up my father's alley. Was he called a socialist or Roosevelt? I don't know. I don't know. This is just... I thought at the time and when I read it seems to me that it's Max and it's socialism. Do you remember his 500 chats for the radio in the early 30s? I vaguely remember, yeah. I remember, what I can remember is that we had to be quiet. That I can remember. When he spoke on the radio we sat and we were quiet, I can tell you that. I can also remember that my father was the first one that got the newspaper so he could read the news before anybody else messed the paper up. It was very important to my father and we respected that. After all, he was the head of the household. What kind of paper did he have then? I think that was... Did he have another paper except outside Rockport? The Chicago papers. Chicago. And then he read the Chicago Swedish paper too. Which one was that? The second one. Yeah. Yeah. He read that too. My father would read the paper, both of them, and he read papers from the left-hand column over to the right, every page. He did not miss a thing. He must have had a memory that could have retained because he would... his recall was so good and would tell me when he read this and stuff like that. How about your mother? Was she interested in the same thing that I was? No. No. My mother was an extremely nervous person and was very fastidious and regimented. And if Monday you did this and Tuesday you did that and Wednesday and it was right on down the line. So I don't think my mother had much time for anything else. I think that my father and mother discussed things, but I think my mother pretty well let my father make the decisions. My mother was interested enough that she was always interested in working in a small way with the election boards and things like that. She was always a judge and things like that. So maybe she did have an interest with my father. Maybe I just wasn't attuned enough to understand. Did they belong to any other organizations here in the Swedish? Like Voss or Viking? Well, they belonged to the Scandinavian fraternity and my uncles belonged to Viking and Baltic. So if they were not... and then Vossa too. Someone was in Vossa. So I think if they were not actually members of the other ones, they interacted with the groups and stuff like that. So they were not any members of the IOGT, the Ten Prince? Nope. Because quite a few socialists belonged to that one. Nope. My father was not. I can never remember that. Can never remember that. But I know that my father with Banner Lodge, that's how come Frank has the records is because my father had some job with them. From the time that I can remember hanging on the coat racks in the meeting hall down there. So they were active in that. When it was lodge meeting, we went. That was it. And quite a few people attended the meetings at that time. They sure did. Well, that was their only means of entertainment at that time and the only means of seeing the other. So they brought the children with them down there. Sure did. Sure did. When there was secret balloting going on in there, we had to hang out in the coat room. You couldn't be in there? Uh-uh. After Frank took over as president, there are now three members, four members left. Frank and I and Anna Johnson and Hildeberg. And Frank is hanging on, so those last two, oh, I take it back. Hilde is not. It's Maya Carlson. Because when they get sick, they call up and they ask for their sick. And you know it's peanuts, really. But Frank says, as long as I can keep up with it, they're going to get their little pittance. And then when they, those two die, then we are finished with it. But in the course of not being able to pay rent on any place and just Frank and I would go and sit there, he was told to clean out the locker by the district. And there was a ballot box that he found in the locker. And so Frank took that home and mentioned it that he had cleaned out and that there was a ballot box. And he did not get any answer back on that. So we have that downstairs. And to me, I can remember how it was, how exciting it was to go up after the meeting was over with and slip in that black ball. Because I knew the meaning of what that black ball meant. You knew that? Oh, I knew that. Somewhere along the line, my father must have told me what that meant. So our attitude is, and of course we tell the kids the story of this box and I remember this box. So it's very meaningful to our children because they had never ever come across anything like that, you know. And they were really secret then also. They didn't let anybody in? No, they did not. Oh, no, they did not. There was a doorkeeper and a password and a whole bit. And you couldn't go into the meeting either? The kids couldn't. No, no. Not that it was that secret, but I suppose you don't go in and disturb, you know, that was it. But there were doorkeepers and everything. And I don't know why they had that. There was nothing secret. But who took care of the children, though? I mean, if you were a mom? We played by ourselves. Oh, we played by ourselves. By that point. But you never behaved good enough, so I mean, you would think, you see, when the kids come together, all the children will tear up. Oh, that was fun. That was fun. We'd be in the Coke room and go into the kitchen area. That was a great time. It was just as much a social thing for us as it was for the, you know, the adults. And as to what they did secret, when after Frank and I got into it, never could understand what it was that, you know, we had to have a doorman to knock to have the password to get in, because they never did anything that was, you know. It was a social thing, really. Social and then... There was the benefits, though. The benefits, right. And the sick list and everything like that. Yeah. At that time, it was quite a bit. And it is even to this Maya Carlson now that's still a member of it. It means quite a bit. It means quite a bit. And if she doesn't get it, I can get a telephone call and I know who it is, Maya Carlson, and I want my money right now, she said. So it's... I met with two, three men in Rockford. That's where I picked up the records from you. Are they dead now then? No, but that must be... There were three clubs in the fraternity. Banner, Harold, and... Harold is the Norwegian. Is Harold a Norwegian one? No. Well, is it Harold is the Norwegian one? I think it would be, wouldn't it? Right, right. Yeah. And so there were three lodges for that. And then there was the Danish. But the Banner is only four left. Yeah. That's all there is. I don't know if Harold Lodge is still in... Is it? Is Harold Lodge still... I don't know, because it's three years ago now I was there. I have no idea if that is... if there's any books on that at all. They are falling off one after another. Yeah. But it was a good help though, because there was no other means of protecting yourself for sickness or staying home from work. It was very important to my mom and dad to pay the dues and to pay for sick benefit. Because if you stay home a day, you're dead. He was out of pay. Uh-huh. And he was sick a week. It helped. I can... that's why it was so important to my father to keep that up. And after we got married, my dad just didn't insist. He just told Frank and I, you are going to join and be members now, and you're going to take over if we can, because it has to be. And it must have been awfully important to him. And like I say, I think the social aspect of it was great for them too, because they had no other... What's the mean of... Of entertainment and sociability and, you know, the whole thing. So... How about... did they belong to a church or the parents? My mother was a member of First Lutheran. My father never joined a church as children, and when they were young, we would go to Tabor Lutheran, because that was up on 19th Street. And we went up there, then I was confirmed and... Oh, then we moved to... when we moved to Springfield, we did get into a Lutheran church down there. And my folks did join the church down there, because I was confirmed in the Lutheran church down in Springfield. Then when we came back, my mother and father sporadically went up to Tabor Lutheran, and then Frank... after Frank and I married, we married in Tabor. Then we bought the property out here and realized that we were going to live out here, so then we changed and... at the time that we changed to Alpine, then they moved in and went into that. But my father, his attitude of church in Sweden was not the best. And I can understand it. After reading up on the church situation in Sweden, I understand what went on. My mother, having not been exposed to that, had always been at First Lutheran. So... Now she was born in Rockford. But her parents came from Sweden, though. Do you know where in Sweden they came from? I think my grandfather came from Småland. Somewhere along the lines, shortly after you came here again, I did find a piece of paper that told where my grandfather came from. So you never met your grandparents, though? My grandmother I did. Oh, yes. She was living in... My grandmother I did. I remember her, but my grandfather I don't. He must have died when I was quite young. I can remember my grandmother keeping her house down there on Ninth Street, and my grandmother had hardening of the arteries, and we would have to take as a family and go and live with her for a week at a time. So it was six weeks in between that we would live with her. So then you had to learn to speak Swedish. Yeah, I guess I did as a child, and then after Grandma died, well, then Mom and Dad didn't talk it that much. Did your parents talk Swedish? When they didn't want us to understand. And just like every other young kid, it didn't bother me, you know, to heck with that old bit. So I didn't bother to learn. Now Frank, he did not know any English at all. They had, when they went into school, they could not speak English, so they had a heck of a time first, Frank and his sister. So Frank's Swedish is or was purer than what his mother's was towards the end. When we have relatives that come over, they can understand Frank, but they could not understand my mother-in-law. And this was their aunt. They couldn't understand her. So I think Frank, you know, used the pure Swedish, and he does speak Swedish real well. And his sister is good, but not as fluent as Frank is on it. But that's all they spoke in their family. Because there were a lot of Swedes, and I'm sure at the meetings and in churches they used it. Now Frank's mother and father were not church members. She again said the churches in Sweden were corrupt, as what she called it. And I could never understand it, never could understand it until, again, rereading The Emigrants and reading the whole thing through. And then the new movie Fanny and Alexander. Did you see that movie? No, I never seen it. Oh, that. And seeing the bishop, as to what power the bishops had in Sweden. I can understand why Frank's mother and father wouldn't have a thing to do with church. Wherever they lived, they sent the kids to church. And I think part of that was to get rid of them on a Sunday morning. I'm sure that's what it was for. What happened? Did you learn, for instance, table prayers or hymns by heart? Hymns, yes. Table prayer. My father every once in a while would say something in Swedish when I thought, you know, I'm not sure. You heard it. Oh, yeah. I'm not sure what this whole thing is about, but I guess it's okay because my dad is doing it. Until I got older and then I understood what my father was doing. And my father's table prayers are more like what we have started in our family. We do not have a table prayer that we say by rote that much. We thank for many things and the grandchildren like it. If my husband says, and we're so happy that Becky's cold is gone and things like that, and we thank you, Lord, at this time that we're sitting down at the table here. And my grandchildren think that's pretty special when Grandpa sits at the table and does that. So, but his parents never had table prayers or anything like that. At the Christmas time, now, there was a holiday. How did you observe it? You had a Christmas tree and your dad brought it home? When we were little, we always decorated it the day before Christmas Eve. We never had it a week before. The day before? We always did it the day before. I always thought that was so unfair to do it such a short time before. But then we had it up for quite some time afterwards. And isn't it the 16th of January is when they used to take them down? Do you follow that ritual then? We did a lot then, yes. And we had the traditional Christmas paper things and stuff like that. Now when I recall in reading on the things that I'm interested in painting and stuff now, now I realize that we had an awful lot of those traditional things in our home. We had the candles on the tree. We never lit them, but we had the candles on the tree. I can remember the tree towards the end of that period was absolutely bare, but the needles were all on the floor. Never could understand why my dad wouldn't do it before. But we always had Christmas Eve, and if we could do it, we'd get up and go for Yuletta services. That was, my father did that. How about Christmas presents? You got them on Christmas Eve or on the morning after? We did ours on Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. And Santa Claus came then? Yeah. Yeah, always did it on Christmas Eve. And even as my mother's family, my mother had six sisters and the one brother, and I can remember we gathered at my grandmother's house down there on Ninth Street, and that was always done on Christmas Eve. The children were lined up on the stairs, and that was quite a celebration, Christmas Eve. It was planned for a long time before, and it was quite a... And did you invite some of your relation then? Everybody. Everybody. Gathered everybody. And we still do that in our home now. If there is family or people that are without family, we gathered them in, and we did then too. So you had the Christmas cooking from Stockholm, I suppose? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Everything. All of it? Just as traditional as we could get. Everything? Everything. Just as traditional as we could get. Every year my father would get sick on the silt and the blood quiver. Every year my father did. But every year we ate it again, and we had the lutefisk and the whole bit. There was a period after my folks got older that I dropped some of those things, but now I have, you know, brought them all back again. And my children really think that's great. I suppose they may go through their stage where they'll forget them too. Although they say they think it's great that we have the tradition and the dupegrita and, you know, Christmas morning and... So Dad went to your hotel? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. In the first luthrum or taber? I think we must have gone to taber. Must have gone to taber. Would be no sense for my father to go all the way down there and bypass taber. I can know, I remember that. And we did in Springfield when we went down there too, although that was not a Swedish church down there. There were more Germans in Springfield. But I can remember establishing our own Christmas in Springfield, a Swedish Christmas, to the extent where my father on a Saturday afternoon had glukk parties for the people, for the old Germans. So he prepared a glukk then? Oh, that was... My father was not a drinker. We had a bottle of wine, Mogan David was the strongest that I can remember, and my father would have a bottle of whiskey way up in the cupboard, and that was only used when we got a bad cold. So my father was not a drinker, but come Christmas we had to have glukk, and that was all there was to it. So you were served, and the whole family was served the glukk? The most vile tasting stuff you'd ever come across. Yeah. So my father carried that on, the tradition even down in Springfield. I can remember him telling the men that he was going to do it and have this glukk party, and they wanted to know what that was, and he told them it was a drink, and then my wife makes cookies, and they thought, boy, that was going to be something different. So they came, and I can remember being told that the men were coming that Dad worked with, and that worked with Dad, and that I could be there, but I better behave myself. So I can remember quite a few of the men were quite happy when they went out. My father only did that about three times, because we did not stay long in Springfield after he was let go by Governor Green. I think we stayed long enough that I finished up my schooling or year or whatever it was down there and then moved back, because at that point then my brother had married and my sister had married a Springfield man, too, so it was just the three of us that came back to Rockford then. So there was a political job then, so? Uh-huh. When the men came in, then he went out. Mm-hmm. And I don't know who would have given that job to my father unless it was the Democratic committee here in Rockford that my dad must have worked for or done something for. Was that how you used to counsel with the hard working men? I suppose. Once in the precinct and delivering handbills? Yeah. We thought it was quite great that my father was given a job like that, you know, inside all the time and steady work. It was quite a boost to my father. I don't know, I don't think my dad worked for that, in the party for that reason. I know he didn't. It was just something my father believed in. So you have a better memory of Springfield than the Hays v. Nevaska? Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. That was, we rented a half a house down there, and it was a big house, and so it was a big apartment that we had. But that was good times that we had down there. My father made good money at that time, and with the political things down there, we had tickets for all occasions and got to see so many things. We reaped the harvest down there, a patronage job. There was a livelier town than Rockford? I don't know if it was. It wasn't as big, though. Huh? It was not as big as Rockford. No, I don't think it's as big as Rockford, nor was it as lively or as industrialized as Rockford. It wasn't. It was political. At that time down there, it seemed to me that that was the real big thing, if you worked in the state government down there. All the politicians were working together down there. Rockford, now, they always said that the Swedes didn't let the people over from the west side. Is that true, you think, going way back? I think they made it uncomfortable for those people that came over and did it on this side. I went to school with an Italian girl, and that was in East High, and at that time it was unusual for the Italians to live on our side of the river, too. They came, I can remember at the time of Carolyn coming into high school, and she happened to live over in Rockview area in there. We thought it was quite unusual that an Italian family came over on this side of town, and in talking to her about it, she said, yes, they were uncomfortable living there, that there were neighbors, they were very unfriendly to them. So they had to live then on this side to go to East High. They couldn't live on the west side, for instance, of the side of the river. I think, no, I don't know how the borderline was on that. No, it, well, now, down on 15th Avenue and down in there, there were a lot of Polish and Italians. I didn't think Italians come in, though. I mean, the Polacks were on this side of East High. Yeah. Well, this is all countries around the Baltic Sea, so maybe that's why they were more acceptable than the ones from the Mediterranean. So they could be more comfortable with the island. There were a lot of Lithuanians and Latvians and Polish in the southwest section of the earth. Yes, but they said they didn't even try then to locate on this side. Very few. Very few they were. They were. Very few. Well, when they did come in, they just started moving in just across the river then, right? Madison Street and North First Street, North Second Street, that's where they moved across the river and started working farther and farther east. Yeah, they did, didn't they? It was not until after the Second World War, though. After the war. No, it was before the war, just before. They started moving? Yeah, yeah, I'd say the late 20s and early 30s, then they start moving in.