 We have 6th of August 1987 and I'm sitting together with Doris Warn in Lapeer, Michigan and she was born 24th of May 1918 in Anaconda, Montana. I can't, oh. 5-24-18. I dag klokkan 9.45 föddes vår liten dotter Doris. Jag har varit brev från Sigi Hans en korporal Karl S. Hilmer 665 aerosquadron aviation corps Hempstead, New York. Sigi's identification number is and then his number. Jag har idag 6-1-18 S. S. Hans klokker och 50 ett brev. I can't read it that well. The Doris is referring to you. Yeah that's me. And on 1-21-1919 dag har blevet dopt idag. So I was baptized in Montana. And there was some several months later though. How long in between was it? You were born in May. I was born in May and I was baptized on his birthday. Because his birthday was January the 21st of the following year. Yeah. This Sig now he's talking about his brother? That was his brother. He had two brothers Sigfred and Ernest. Ernest who now lives in California who is 92 I believe. And Edith was his sister and Lydia. There was two boys and two girls. They came over? No no no. Edith stayed in Sweden. She is still over there. But Sig came over was the first one to come over and he lived with us in Anaconda. And then when we moved to Detroit Sig came with us. Then later on Lydia and her husband Edwin and their son Carl Ebert came on my fifth birthday. They came from Sweden. Since then Lydia is deceased and Sig is deceased. And Ernie and his wife Elsie live in California and Edith is still in the family home in Sweden. In your father's family home? Yes. Yes. So what was the reason your father come over? He came in 1912. Well he came over because my mother was here. Oh yes they knew each other in Sweden. So she came over when she was 16 and she went back I think two or three times before my dad came over and they were married in Butte Montana. So she came with her parents or alone? Well no her father was over here and he sent for her and she came over here when she was 16 years old. Her mother had died then? No her mother lived in Stockholm. She worked at St. Eric's Briggery in Stockholm. But her father was in Montana and he had remarried and he had four children through his second wife. So when she came then 16 years of age to Anaconda she took a job then? No she worked in the boarding house. Yes that my grandmother and grandfather had. There was miners? Well not really miners but there were the smelters? Yeah they were the yeah they were the men that worked in the smelters and they had roomers and boarders in this great big house that was on 5th Street in Anaconda. And my father during World War I worked as a deputy sheriff. He walked the flues. I don't know exactly what that is. It had something to do with the mining because they were afraid of sabotage and possibly being bombed or something. So he worked as a deputy sheriff. And he was deputized for the Deer Lodge County? Yeah. He was a regular sheriff then? Yeah. He had a pistol he had to take out the registration form? Oh yeah. But you don't remember that because you were in the job? No I don't remember that. And so when he came there and your mother he had almost a security job for him? Oh yeah he was all set up when he came over because my mother was living there in Anaconda. And then they got a small house that was on 924 5th Street which was down the street about a half a block or so from where my grandmother and grandfather's place was. So then he has written this daybook and day by day, not a day by day, but he has taken in different happenings and written on it. Sig took Vernon, he enlisted then. Yeah. Was he also working at Anaconda, his brother, when he came over? Oh I imagine he worked someplace there in town but I don't know what he did. Then he enlisted and he was in the service. And he was in the airplane division? Yeah. And then he tells in 1919 he was selected a deacon, kyrkvärd, of the Swedish Lutheran Church. Yeah that was in Anaconda. So were they churchly then your parents? I mean religious people? Oh they were the average. Oh but he was interested in... Oh yes he was very interested in the church. Yeah. And he seemed to lose a lot of that when he came to Detroit. But they belonged to, they belonged to the Vasa Lodge out there. In Anaconda? In Anaconda. So then he, in 1921, then he decides to leave Anaconda and he's asking for three months of leave absence. Yes. So he was only to go to on a fact-finding tour. Yes. And to come back again. Yeah. Well he came to Detroit and liked it so well that he sent for my mother and I. And we came on to Detroit then and we've lived here ever since. You came three months later. Yeah. So he never went back to Anaconda mining again? No he never went back there. He, we had visits back there but he never went back there to work. But then when he came in as a Detroit he stepped up on a lot of different working possibilities. Oh yeah. He's working for different companies. Yeah. Chalmers and Maxwell, Continental Motor Company, Liberty Motor Company. Yeah. And it was all the short time work. Yes because, yeah. What did your mother say then? Did she comment about going back again to Anaconda? No. She went back to Anaconda once because she was sick and tired of Michigan but it didn't last very long. She came back again. She thought it was going to be better in Montana. Yeah. She and I went back there and then we came back here and then we've been here ever since. So what he, he managed to stay afloat anyway. Yeah. He works several hours when he can work but then he is laid off and, but then he also tried New York Stock Exchange. Yeah that didn't work. He lost money on that. He made $22 profit in the month. And in 1921 he finished the year with writing that he congratulates or wishing Alma and Doris a Happy New Year. Yep. And everybody. Yep. And he signs his email. Yeah. And then he made money on the stock exchange. Yeah. He must have felt pretty good then that year. Oh I think he did. So did he continue to play the stock market? Never. Never? Never. That was the only time he ever played the stock market was in that one year. Why didn't he continue? Well because he lost everything he had made. So he put in more money to it than. Yeah and then he lost that. Then he makes a loan of $500 to Albert Johnson. Yeah. Then presumably and the 7% interest. Yes. He did that quite a bit. To friends. To friends. Yeah. And. So he had. He was able then despite the shortage of long term employment. Well it wasn't so much my father but my mother was the most frugal person you would ever in your life meet. Oh she took care of the. Oh yes she took care of the finances and I don't know of a woman in the world I have ever known that could make a penny go any further than my mother did. And see they had quite a few roomers at the house. Here in Detroit. Yeah. When these young men would come over from Sweden they moved into our house and they would rent a room. We had one two three four bedrooms on the second floor one on the third floor and then we had a lighthouse keeping apartment in the basement. So they had quite a bit of the house that was rented out. So when he decided to buy tickets to Sweden he had made it pretty good then the first during the year. Yeah. Yes because the house was full and mother had it rented out at all times. And then. Do you remember that trip? No I don't remember that much of it. I can remember being at my grandmother's in Stockholm and there was a bakery downstairs and I was told that when I came into the bakery I could have anything I wanted for them just to put it on a bill and my grandmother would pay for it. I think she went broke on my my running in and out of the bakery shop. Yes. So that's what you remember. Yeah I remember that and I remember a copper bucket that I got from my great-grandfather down in Småland that we went and picked smelt from. So I do remember that. So you visited your mother's home place then? Yes. In Trekiv. Yeah. You don't think there was any intention of your parents to stay in Sweden at that time? No. Oh I heard my father say. He must have had it very very difficult when he was in Sweden because when people later on in years even after my mother died they asked if Emo wasn't going back to Sweden and he said I wouldn't go back to that godforsaken Sweden for anything. And he never did go back after that trip that we had when I was five years old. He had brothers and sisters still in Sweden? He had a sister. The parents were dead? Yeah the parents were dead. So he had no longings in his heart? No he didn't want to go back to Sweden. And then when they came back they bought another house for eighteen thousand four hundred dollars. There was a lot of money at that time. Yeah. There was a bigger house then. Yes that's the house I'm talking about that she had all the rumors then. Yeah. John R Street? No that was on Beersford. Yeah in Highland Park. And there you were growing up then? Yes that's where I grew up. And I stayed there up until just fourteen years ago when we moved up here. But it was a good hostel for that time. Yeah. Was it a Swedish neighborhood there or was it? No my mother was I think one of the first Swedes that came into Highland Park and then one by one these Swedes that came from these young men that came from Sweden married and they located in that area. So they were all near where she was because they knew her so well and they all located in the same area. Your parents became sort of pioneers then for that Highland Park? For Highland Park yes. And then when he came back to Sweden he started to work for one company where he invested one thousand dollars. Yes and that was. He was no good. Yeah that was the general fender supply company and that company folded and he lost his money in that. What did your mother say then? Oh my mother was the type of person that she just rented out another room and. And my father also I don't think he put it in there but he worked for an auction house that he would buy house folds of furniture for this auction house and then the prime pieces and the best of the furniture that was in the house went into our house and the rest of that went down to the auction. The auction house and then he worked on a commission on it. Was that in the 20s? Yeah I think it was. Wait let me see. No that was in the 20s I would say up until around 29, 30 around in there. Depression? Yeah. Well you've gotten old enough now in the 30s to remember when the depression hit. Oh yeah. And he is without a job there for almost three years. Yeah and he used to there was a car agency on our corner on Woodward Avenue and he took the oil out of the old cars that they used to throw out and he would take it out in the garage and he made a paint. I don't know what the formula was of it but he used to make up this paint and he would walk five miles downtown and paint the tops of touring cars with this black paint that he made and they paid him 25 cents a roof for the car. And he invented or developed this paint himself? Yes he developed this paint himself that he made up. He used to boil it out in the garage and he made up this paint and he would take his bucket of paint and walk downtown to the parking lots downtown and he would paint the tops of touring cars which they paid him 25 cents a piece and then at night he would walk back home. And it was kind of steady then pretty much so he could make a living on it? Well it was a while but there would be days that he'd make 75 cents and maybe days that he might make a dollar and a quarter. So it wasn't big money. But he was not sitting idle? No he was always doing something. But he arrived there about different years. The 32 was the worst one of course and the 32 was not better than the last one right? And the 33 is getting a little better. For three years your mother in law still had the rumors? She still had the rumors. And they had no trouble keeping the house? There was no foreclosure? No as I understand it I don't know that much about the financial end of it but I think she did borrow some money from my grandfather out in Montana so that they could hold the house. Because it was an expensive house? Yeah. And there were a lot of neighbors that had to move out? And we kept that house for 51 years and got the same price for it when we sold it as they paid for it when they bought it. Why hadn't they gone out then during that time? The change of the neighborhood. See Highland Park now is 90% black and as the neighborhood changed the valuation of the property went down. So even when the colored people moved in or whoever moved in it didn't raise the price or anything? No. As a matter of fact it lowered the price of the house. Did your dad live there until he died in this house? He lived here with us? Yeah. And he was in Ferguson's a convalescent home in Lapeer for two years before he died. But he lived in Florida a good share of his life after my mother passed away. So she died what year? What year did my mother die? 44. And there was one thing I forgot to ask you I remember seeing in the day book 1931-32 he was deputized as the sheriff also here in Michigan. Yes he was the sheriff of the Vossa Country Club here. He never mentioned the Vossa Club though but he was still active coming up here with the Swedes? Oh yes we would come up here every weekend. Was he one of the founders then? No he came in about three years after. In the 30s then? Yeah. And you went up here every week? Yeah we'd come up on weekends. Do you remember when there was a big brush around here? Oh yes I remember the first time I came up here the bridge wasn't in. We waited across the creek. So they had to leave the cars then? Yeah they left them on the other side. And there was no road to drive on? No. Other than in the summer. Yeah. Didn't you think or your parents think it was too far from Detroit at that time with the cars? Oh it took us two hours or more to get up here. I guess as young people it was so important for them to have the comradeship of being with the people up here. The people of their own kind that spoke their own language and everything. Did they mind the distance? No they didn't mind the distance. Did they stay overnight? We had a tent. A large army tent. Was it pitched during the week too? Or did you take it down? Oh no we just left it there. And then we had a wooden floor that had a wooden table on it and we had a box with a slant top with a lock on it that we kept all our dishes and silverware in. So but during the week there was nobody here during the week then? Yes there was one family that lived here. Sven Liddell who built the first cottage that was over on the other side. He stayed here during the week? Yeah he stayed here during the week and they had the farmhouse rented out. So you didn't have to be afraid of people coming in and stealing anything from your house? No. Because nobody knew there was anything in there? No. There was no sign of the road? No nothing. A lot of people still don't know it's here. People that have lived in Lapeer all their life aren't aware of the fact that it's here. You can't see it from any main road. So then was he on the board also then your father? Yes. Later on? Yes. When they made up the bylaws and the constitutions and everything? Yes. And there was no problem to get interested parties to come up here and do it? Oh no. Did they have a waiting line at any time? Or did you sell them immediately? Oh they sold them immediately. I think weren't the first shares $100 Herm? No. So they were able to raise $5000 dollars to buy it? Yes. From this farm of Ron? Yep. And then they had parties every Saturday night of the summer season down here after they built the pavilion. They had parties down here every Saturday night and they sold coffee and sandwiches and that to raise enough money so that they could pay for the place. And then other people came in too, not only the stockholders, everybody from the Swedish side came up here. And then they found their sweethearts later on. Yeah. And it's still one of the stipulations to become a member here you have to be a Swede or of Swedish descent. One of the two. So this was used in the summertime for dances and parties. Yes. And in the wintertime it was idle here. Yeah, there was nobody here. Then they went to the Danish hall. Yeah. And there was three Swedish churches in Detroit at that time. The west side and the east side and then the one that was in the downtown area which was about four blocks from the Danish hall where Hofstein was. I was confirmed in that church. Was that a Lutheran church or a Methodist church? It was a Lutheran church. No, no, no. Emmanuel's on the east side. No, this was downtown. And the mission covenant is on the west side. Yes. And there was another Lutheran in downtown. Yes. That's where Hofstein was. And he confirmed you. And he confirmed me. Was it in Swedish then at that time? No, it was in English. The only time they had Swedish was at Jyllåtta on Christmas morning. Was that church located convenient for the Swedes? Were they living around down there? It was next to the Danish hall. Oh, so they had members then from there. Yeah. So why did the Swedes didn't build a hall in Detroit down there then at that time? It was only the Danish. No. Were they more numerous than the Danish people or the Swedes? I don't think so. I think it included all Scandinavian people. But they called it the Danish hall. Why? I don't know. About what time can you remember back when Arpi Swedish Club organized? Arpi Swedish. Yeah. In 1932 they organized. Was it? Arpi Swedish Mail Corps organized and they opened a Swedish club up on East 7 Mile in Detroit. 1932, that's right. Yeah. So 7 Mile, is this 7 Mile from downtown then? Yes. And the street behind the house that we lived in, Highland Park, would have been 5 Mile Road. Oh, I see. So, and the Swedish Lutheran Church was, I would say, forest would be probably halfway from our house to downtown. About two, two and a half. Yeah, that would be probably two and a half mile. So how did you meet your husband, Herman? Well, I met him in a drug store. In a drug store? Yeah. In a Danish hall, having a Coke. Yeah, having a Coke. He was working at WJR, the radio station in Detroit. And I was working at Ford Hospital. And it was my afternoon off and I had stopped at Shuttler's Drug Store to buy a package of cigarettes and he was in the drug store with a friend of mine who was one of the staff announcers at WJR. And he introduced me to Herm. That was your downfall. It was. How did you present him now to your mother and father? Oh, my mother just loved him. She just thought he was the greatest thing in the world. You know why? I ate everything she cooked. Did she tell you that? Did your daughters tell you that, to do that? No, no. No, I was batching at an apartment downtown and I was always hungry. But you were not used to Swedish food, though? Oh, no. I don't think you ever in your life knew a Swede until you met me. Was this the first Swede you met? Probably. Because your background is English, German, Welsh. What kind of religion did you have in your family background then? We were Methodists, I think, in my hometown. But I sang from the age I was about 16 and I think I sang in every denomination of a church choir that ever existed. Sighto, continuation with Doris Warren. Sighto. So you had no trouble then to adjust to Swedish? No. The only problem in my head with Swedish was eating lutefisk. I made the big mistake of putting ketchup on it. Oh, good. Was it a mistake? Sure. You put cream sauce on it. But I put ketchup on everything. And it doesn't blend too good. I don't know. They didn't think so. I thought it tasted good, but the Swedes... Herm has become such a great Swede that everybody thinks that he's the Swede in the family and I'm not. So how did that come about, Doris? So Herm is a very, very active person and from being up here at the lake after we built the cottage, Herm was on the board. He was treasurer for the club here for 20 years. And he directs the Swedish male chorus, Arpi Chorus, in Detroit. When did you get engaged with the Swedish singing in Detroit? Was it after you met them? I came back out of the service in 1946 and went to work at J.L. Hudson Company. And one of the men at J.L. Hudson Company, Carl Mustonen, directed the Arpi Swedish Male Chorus. And he got me... Yeah, he was of Finnish descent. And he got me to sing with the Arpi Swedish Male Chorus. And then when he retired... Oh, it must have been 18 years ago? Probably about 18 years ago I took over as director. And still live, still there. So when you came out here then, your father had this property then? He had the membership, but he hadn't built a cottage. No, it was just a vacant lot. And then Herm and I built the cottage. So what do you talk about when the first time you arrive to Vasa, Kanskislavater, Libonis? Oh, I don't know. I don't know what happened yesterday. I don't know what happened when I met Dors and 39 or 40. Well, there should be memories, you know, that will last forever. There should be, but... There's nothing that they need as an everyday experience. I do know one thing. It is the greatest place in the world to raise children. Because every child up here belongs to everybody up here. My neighbor watches over my child as closely as I do my own. I speak of my child. It's my grandson now. But when Karen grew up here, and the children grew up, we had craft classes and we put on plays and we did very interesting things with the children. I had swimming classes and diving classes every day. So the children had a wonderful time. They still come back. On the 4th of July, they come from all over the United States just to be together with the kids that they grew up with. How about the older people now? If I ask you now, Herman, was it easy to get along or get introduced to the Swedes? Oh, sure. They have a special mind of their own. I learned to say, ja, sure. Everything they said to me, whether I knew what it was or not, I said, ja, sure. I thought I was a good Swede. And then you'd sing Heilongor. I'd sing Heilongor. They liked that. This was not the temperance of them. No. Very definitely not. No, not one bit. Although they did have Sunday school classes for the little kids. June Jones had Sunday school classes down there every Sunday. But no religious services, though? No. Once a year, Pastor Truett would bring, they'd have the picnic from the Swedish church, Emmanuel Lutheran Church out here. I see. So quite a few from the Swedish church are members here, of course. Oh, yes. But not being on the border, is it easy to please everybody? I mean, when they come in, do they have a different idea? No. No. Then the Swedes are no different anyplace. It's a peculiar situation with this place up here, and I was telling somebody the other day, she said, I can't understand when people get up here, there seems to be so much gossiping. I said, well, really, to tell you the truth, that's all we have in common, is here and what happens up here, because there are people that I can truthfully say are my very dearest friends, that I have never in my life been in their homes in town. I don't even know where they live in town, other than the fact that they're in my address book and I send them a Christmas card. So really, when you get out here, all we have in common is each other. And when you have spent six months, probably, out of your life, every year of your life with a group of people, you get to know them quite well, sometimes too well. But still, it can be the experience, you've never been in their house? No, in town. Why is it like that, you think? Do you like to keep the privacy? No, it's just, when you come out here, when the children, when school was out in the summer and you would come out here, you would be here until September. That's from the early part of June until the first of September, you would be here and you don't think about your home in town. Herm would have Fridays off and he would come out here on Thursday night. So you and the children, they stayed out all week? Yeah, they stay out here during the week. Oh. And then when everybody went home in September, you would see them at the yearly meeting in February, some place in Dallas, either at the Dainey Shawl or some place in Detroit. And then you wouldn't see them again until the first work day in May. And then everybody would come out. And then the rest of the people you met at the meeting hall? Yes. So you didn't have to go to each other's homes? No. And see, I was coming up here a good many years before I met Herm. I'd come up with my parents. And you didn't have another date then with you? No. I'd come up with my parents. And you didn't find any other parents who would have believed it? No. You know, really, I knew them too well. Like brothers and sisters? Yeah, it's more like brothers and sisters. One big family. It's no good either if you know them too well. No, that's not good. There's got to be something unknown about the person. But here you still know each other quite well. Yeah. But you have all kinds of people here. I mean, professionals, metal workers, machinists, painters. Oh, yes. And then you have Ed Erickson. That's right. Was he one of the first here? No, I'll tell you. I think he – how many times did he try and get in here before he finally made it? Yeah, but here it's a suite, though. Yeah, I know. But you have to have – you have to be voted in by the membership. You mean they have a black ball among the white ones? Oh, they've got them. Oh, sure. Yeah. Well, there are quite a few people up here that haven't gotten in on the first try. He's in now. He's in now, and he's going to be here until his dying day. He's different. Well, see, our grandson. You have one daughter. Yes, I have one daughter, and she has one son. You don't have a son. You just have one daughter. No, just one daughter. And she has one son. They come up here, and that's the fourth generation of our family that have been coming up here. See, there was my mother and dad, Herm and I, Karen and her husband, and now Josh, their son. Eddie Erickson joined the club in 1950. Well, 1950. Yeah. He'd been here a few years then. He got in after he married Violet. I see. So there was actually an Irish lady that got him into the Swedish club. No, she was married to a Swede. Yeah. Yeah. She was Irish. Yeah. Yeah. She came from Chicago. She was closely associated with Mayor Daley. She was? Yeah, some way or another. Some kind of secretary. Secretary or something. So you met in class, then. Yeah. But this club has been self-sufficient of being a traceman. We take care of our own roads. We take care of everything. We don't ask the county for anything. So you have a schedule, then, you have to do so many months a year, or how is it set up? They have three workdays a year, two in the spring and one in the fall. Each member in each house, or? No, everybody comes out for workday. Yeah, but how about the lady living alone, for instance? What is she doing? She goes down in the kitchen and cleans the kitchen and washes the dishes in the spring. Or furnishes. Or furnishes a man, a son or a cousin or something. Or pays somebody if she can do it herself, then. Yeah. So everybody's turned on their own. Yeah, and then we have two picnics a year. We have a 4th of July picnic and we have a Labor Day picnic. And everybody works on the picnics. You either work on one or you work on the other. Now, I worked on my last picnic, the 4th of July. I will be 70 years old in May. And when you have been a member for 25 years and you have reached the age of 70, you don't have to work on the picnics anymore. But most of them go down and help anyway, as long as they're able to. So everybody pitches in them and makes it. And then the income, then, for instance, they go to the common treasure. Yeah, that goes to pay the taxes and the upkeep on the property. What are the taxes? $350,000. Oh, taxes? Yeah. Oh, God, I don't know. Last time I think it was something like $23,000. $23,000 a year taxes on this property. To the county. Yeah. To the township for this property. It is kind of high, though, isn't it? Well, you see, it's prorated back by all the members, and we do rent out the farmhouse. So with renting out the farmhouse, it's a non-profit organization. We end up with nothing when they pay the taxes. And then all the members. But shouldn't you be free from paying the taxes if you're a non-profit? No. Because you are renting out the land. Why are you doing that? Because you're using it. You're a member of the club. Yeah. The club owns 360 acres of land, and we are charged on an acreage. Not per house, then? No. The acreage, and we have 52 houses, 55 houses, and they are assessed for valuation. How big they are, in second order? Yeah. Whether they're worth $5,000, $2,000, or $25,000. I see. And that's part of the assessed evaluation of the property. But everybody pulls in, then? Yes. Everybody pays the same amount. Then the taxes are, say, $23,000. That's divided by the 62 members. I see. So they won't be there paid anyway, then? No. Well, this year. What we get from the farmer and what we make on the two picnics, and what is prorated back from the membership is what we use to pay the taxes on. And the water supply is your own? Yes. You have your own well? Yes. You have your own well. Each person has their maybe two picnics on a well. We have no city water, no city sewage. We don't ask for any city water. We don't ask for any city sewers. We are self-sufficient. And the well has kept all the time? I mean, you never had to drill it to make it deeper? No. Well, what's the depth of these wells? It's below the rock level. Level. Somewhere around 200 feet. Yeah, that the wells are. Well, different times. Different times. Different people put in wells at different times. Oh, I thought you had the common well. Oh, yeah. Oh, I thought you had the common well. Oh, no, no. The club has their own well, dotted by the pavilion. I see. But each member up here, or maybe two members, or a group of members, have one well themselves. And everyone has their own septic tank. And their drain field, which they are accountable for. They take care of that. Yeah. We maintain our own roads. We pay for the snow plowing in the winter. We take care of our own garbage in that. Would you drive this dump truck? No, no, no. We have a company that comes in and picks it up, but we pay for it. We ask nothing of the county whatsoever. We are self-maintained. How about fire protection? Oh, that comes from Lapeer. Yeah, that comes from Lapeer. But, see, that would come out of your tax money. They are compelled to take care of us in the fire situation. We've had, in 62 years, what is it, 65 years, isn't it? Or is it 61 years this year? No, it's 60, or 25 to 85 is 62 years. 62 years we've had two fires on that gunwood. In the houses? Yeah. And they made it safe, in other words, from being destroyed, or what happened? Yeah. Well, they came out, but they were small fires, and they put them out. We've had a couple brush fires. And a couple lightning strike fires. Yeah, but other than that... How do you do now when some of the members, like we take Ed Erickson, he's living alone now. Yeah. There must come a day when he's going to be a little bit more careless with fire and stuff like that. Yeah. How are you protected? Does somebody look after him? Oh, yeah. He sees Florence every day, and Pete sees him every day. We do pretty much take care of each other up here. You tell them what you're doing. Yes. If there's a member that's sick, there's somebody that goes over once or twice a day and brings them food and that. And we very much take care of our own members in that. So when they get sick, now, so they can take care of themselves, then they have to go to a home or... Yeah. Then nine times out of ten, if they have children, the children take over and take care of them. But if they want to sell, they've got to be to a recommended suite by the board. Yep. That's the approval, yeah. Yes. Well, most of these places are handed down from generation to generation. Like Arnie Lagerquist here on the corner, his father just passed away two years ago. So Arnie took over the membership. Art Berg took over his parents' membership. Jacobson took over his father's membership. So it's... And they have children in tow to take over theirs. Yes, that will eventually take it over. So your daughter and others, she will... She will take this over if and when anything happens to us. And she lives in the area in Detroit? She lives in Birmingham. Birmingham. So there was a good thing, the sweet store then in the... Yep. 1925, or... Yeah. Well, they were so lonesome and they had so little money that they wanted a place where they could get together and dance and have their parties and that. And they looked for a long time before they found this property. So they picked up 360 acres there for $5,000? Yep. And the man that sold it to them got drunk and ran down the middle of the street in Lapeer and he sold the swamp to a bunch of damn Swedes. So... So they got good advertising, but nobody knows where it is. Nobody knows where it's at. And we have practically unlimited credit. No. Because nobody has ever failed to pay a bill out of this organization. So you have a good... We have a very good reputation and a good name in Lapeer. But you are never bothered by salesmen coming in here? No. No one comes in. We don't allow it. You don't allow it. No soliciting. Does it say it on the sign? No, but we soon let them know. Why? Now. The only thing I think we've ever been bothered with soliciting... What was that church group? Oh, that was Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses came in here a couple of times and tried to sell Bibles or something. And we just ushered them right back out again. Even... Did they never return? No. We have newspapers delivered up here. We get the Detroit papers, the free press and the... Do they come through your door or...? Yes. They have boxes out here. They put them in. And we get the Flint Journal. And earlier on... When Karen was just a little girl, she had a man that used to come out here with a truck that had milk and bread and a few staple items. And they used to deliver milk out here every day. But that didn't last too long. Because now everybody goes... Everybody goes into town. And it's not... We pick up our mail. We have a post office box in Lapeer. And we take turns. Gladys picks it up some days and Herm picks it up some days. Oh, I see. So they don't deliver it off to the road then? No. Oh, yes. So they put it out there? Mm-hmm. Up on Lippincott, they deliver up there. Now, like today... To everybody? Yeah. The mail is there for anybody that wants it delivered in here. And today I picked it up up there and brought it down to the central mailbox down here. Oh, I see. In fact, Jim Brown yelled at me and says, I see you're up here. I was just about to call you and tell you your mail was here. He's our farmer up on the road. So then everybody picks up what they... Yeah, out of the mailbox here. So that works out fine? Yep. No problems. No problems. How about... It was called the Vosthof Country Club from the beginning. Yes. Do you think it was the intention to be a subsidiary to the Vosthof in Detroit? No. It had nothing to do with it at all? No, except the people, most of the charter members that came out here and picked this place out, all belonged to Vosthof. And I think first they called it the Vosthof Farm. And then they dropped the farm and put in Vosthof Country Club. So there's never been any Vosthof meetings out here? No. Have you had any pictures of you from large? Oh, they've come out to people's cottages. People that are members now, like Helen Olsen, where you stay. She used to have the lodge out once a year for a picnic. Oh, I see. Because there are so many people in here that belong to Vosthof. So did Eben Nelson, too. Yeah, Eben Nelson and Ingeborg Nelson used to have them quite often. In 1935, your dad, he writes in the book, you know, it was a pretty good year. He made $1,647. It was increasing from previous years. Then he went out to Montana for the first time. Did you go with him then? Yes. And your mother also took a trip off? Yeah, we all went out. So then he visited the old place? Yeah, and everybody. How were the conditions of it at that time? Pretty good, as far as I would know. Well, my grandfather never had any problems anyway because he was wealthy in his own right. So you never would have known that there were any problems, if there were any. In what business did he make his money? He was a sheep rancher. In Montana? Yeah, and he had this very, very large sheep ranch. And he sold it to the Anaconda Copper Company, and they made a man-made lake for their water supply, which is Georgetown Lake. For a matter of fact, my grandfather drowned in that lake. He went through the ice in the winter and drowned. And that lake was originally the property that he started his sheep ranch on. And your grandfather's name was? Ed Gustafson. And that was on your mother's side? Yes. He came from Vistafjallaturnen down there? Yeah. So he drowned. What happened? Was he out ice fishing? He was out ice fishing, and he went through the ice. And your mother inherited him then? Yes. Because then your father, you said, he was traveling quite extensively after he retired? Yeah, that was after he retired. He went out to California, and he was down in Mexico, and he was all through the South, and he finally settled in Florida. Did he drive himself then during the time? Yeah. So he had adventures with Ainsley's body. And he ended up down in St. Petersburg, Florida. Pinellas Park is where his home was down there. He bought a house down there? Yeah, and he lived down there. All year long, for a while? Oh, yeah, he lived there all year round. We used to go down during Easter vacation, Karen and Herman and I, and do his house cleaning and paint the house. So we used to go down and visit him. And then at the last end of his life, he came up here and put him away? Yes. He was up here, I think he was, what, 80 when he came up here, and he was up here with us for 10 years before he passed away. So then he spent his last leg of his life in the Detroit area? Yeah. He didn't continue writing like he did in the 20s, though? No. And you had no knowledge of why he dropped it off? No, I have no idea why he stopped right there. Because he seemed to have an easy way to write and detailed happenings. No, and he just stopped at that time. Did he talk Swedish, or did you talk Swedish with him? Oh, yes. Of course, I didn't get as much of it after my mother died. See, I was 26 years old when my mother died. She died just shortly after Herman and I were married. We were married in June, and my mother died in October. But I would get the Swedish because we had so many people living in the house that would come over from Sweden that couldn't speak English. And then when I was five years old when I went over to Sweden, I couldn't speak any Swedish when I went over. I think I said three words, kittbullar, kruppkrocker, och tacksenäcke. And when I came back, I had forgotten all my English. So I had to learn English all over again. So the Swedish vocabulary that I have is the vocabulary of a five-, six-year-old child. But since we've had so many people coming over from Sweden, I have picked up a little bit of the Swedish slang. But other than that, my Swedish is just very basic of what you would hear from a child. But when you read his day book, you probably know what's in it. So you have no problem to understand it? Oh, no. I can't write Swedish. And I have difficulty reading it, but I can understand it. And I've had a lot of people tell me, ask me what part of Sweden I come from, because they tell me when I speak Swedish, I speak Swedish with a Swedish accent. It doesn't sound like an American speaking Swedish. So do you have any contacts with Sweden nowadays? I mean, by letters or correspondence with some of the persons? No. I have written to people that have been up here that were from Sweden. But every now and then, I'll get a Christmas card from my aunt. She has, I understand, two children. I have never met them. And I haven't seen her since I was five years old. If she walked down the street, I wouldn't know who she was.