 I'm sitting together with Anna Manghill-Larsen, who was born 1896, 31st of May, in Høgerstad, Skåne, and came to the United States in 1914. And we have 10th of June, 1986. Can you tell me now, why did you come over here from Skåne? Well, why I come over here, I didn't have any choice. My father, my aunt was visiting here, and she wanted one of the girls with back to Moline. So I came home and visit from where I worked, and my dad said, my dad said, do you want to go to America? And I never thought of it, I didn't even know my aunt was home. And so I said, yeah, like that. And then my aunt said, oh, you will have it much better there because you don't, I worked in the farm, and she told me that I get Thursday off and Sundays off, and that sounded good to me. It sounded good. So I went. So your aunt now, was that a sister to your father? That was a sister to my mother. Oh, a muster. Yeah. A muster, oh yeah. Yeah. And she had been here how many years? I don't know, she had been there many years. Here in Moline? In Moline or Rock Island? In Moline. Moline. Yeah. I don't know, on 5th Street they lived. So that's, that's all. So we went, and it was under the war started, started, you know. Now I don't know who they fought. So my aunt was in a hurry to get back home. So we went, she couldn't get a Swedish boat, so she went on a Danish boat. That was Helig Olaf. Helig Olaf? Yeah. And so that's what it was. And then when we, I was sick the whole time. So there was a bad journey? Huh? There was a bad journey over? Yeah. Bad, yeah. And, and they, they stopped those, I don't know if it was the Germans that stopped those, but what, what, who were they fighting? I don't know. Well, there was the First World War, one. First, first. The First World War. That wasn't Hitler, was it? No, no. No. It was later. When they stopped the boat so they could fight whoever they were, you know, they were mad at what you call it, I don't know what to say. But you were sick? Yeah. The whole time? And then, of course, we landed, now I don't know if I talk too much. No, no, this is fine. And we landed, so we landed in Ellis Island. And that was terrible. I'm glad they don't have that anymore. Because they took me in with a bunch of other people, and we had to undress down to the waist. And then, they, my aunt, she told, they told my aunt, she was waiting, she, she, they told her she was in the hospital. And that wasn't so little, I wasn't in the hospital, and pretty soon, I come, come out, and my aunt, well, my aunt said, I will never leave here until she comes. And so, then, I come out, and my aunt was glad. So then they had to go and show what money I had so I could get in here. And then, of course, then we went to, to Mulla, you know, on the way to Chicago. We went to Chicago. On the train? From New York. Yeah. And, uh. So you were the only one then, and your aunt came from Sweden. There was no more sisters and brothers with you? No. You were the only one. How many sisters and brothers did you have home? Four, no, three, three sisters and one brother, and those four girls and a boy. Oh. Yeah. My children, yeah. Were you the only one that left to United States? Yeah. The only one? Yeah. Oh. So what happened now when you came to Moline? Huh? What happened now when you came to Moline? Well, come to Moline, here on 13th Street, they had a, an old station, station there. Yes. And so my, my cousins met me, met us there in that old station, and then we went, went, took a streetcar they had then. And went home. And had, had some poems, but I don't know. In Chicago, we had a funny experience, not a funny, but I was going, oh, my aunt said, now you sit here because somebody had to, to watch this, the suitcases, so I'm going to go in and have supper and I, and I order your supper and you can go in there then. And so when I was sitting there waiting for my aunt, when some men come and said something, I didn't understand it a bit because I didn't understand the word. And so I, I said, well, I don't know, I just did like that, I guess. And so then when my aunt come and I went and had my supper, then, then when my aunt said, I'm going, when I come back, then my aunt said, now you, now you sit here, I want to get a, get a postcard to send to somebody. So then some other men come and he said something, so my aunt told me, if somebody else told you, you say Moline Illinois. So I said, Moline Illinois, I don't know what he said. So it's hard, it was hard. But then, of course, I come to my aunt and that was all right. So that's all. So you lived with your aunt then? Well, I stayed there for a while and then I went to, they had, she had some friends that had a lady in Davenport that needed help. So I went there for a week, I think it was. I can't remember. But then I got, I got a place down in Rock Island to Dr. Anderson's. He was a doctor for, oh, what do you call that, that big insurance in Rock Island, you know, that's down by the, by the water. Martin Woodman? Yeah. And I stayed there, oh, I guess, I don't know, not a year, I don't think. But then I got, then I got another job to Mitchell's, you know, that was one of the boys, of his boys that had the Rock Island, what do you call that, bank, that bank on 17th Street. Yeah, so I stayed there for seven years. Seven years? Yeah. Doing the cooking and taking care of the house? Yeah, yeah. To care of the house? And then after that I got married. And so that, then here I am. Yeah, very many years. Your aunt now, what was her name? What? Your aunt's name. My aunt's name was Ellen Nielsen. Ellen Nielsen? Yeah. What was her husband doing? Her husband, what was he doing? Her husband? Yeah. What was he doing? He was working at, that's one of the big jobs downtown, down in Third Avenue, not Deer's. Moulin-Plau? No, not Moulin-Plau, but I can't forget. One of the factories? Yeah, I forget now. I should remember, but I can't. So then you married, you say, after seven years you married? Yeah, yeah. And... That was 1922. 1922? Yeah. And there was Larsson, what was his name? That was Olof Larsson. Olof Larsson? Olof Robert Larsson. Oh, where was he from? He was from Sweden. He was a Swede? Yeah. He was born there. He was born in Helsingborg. Helsingborg? Yeah. Oh. He... Excuse me. That's fine. How many years was he here before you? Yeah, he came 1908. Nineteen-eight? No, no. Maybe that's wrong. Nineteen-eight. Yeah, I can't remember that. Yeah, around... So... Nineteen-eight? Yeah, that was right, I think. Nineteen-eight. Nineteen-eight. So he was born in Helsingborg? Yeah. But I don't know where or anything. So, what was your name? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. So, then when you married, then you quit work? Yeah, not right away. I worked a little bit after that, too. Yeah. But then I had to quit. And then you rented an apartment or did you buy a house? No, we rented. We rented a place on 7th Street and 19th Avenue with three rooms. Three rooms. Yeah. That was right in a Belgian neighborhood. Yeah, it was. A lot of Belgians there. Yeah, yeah. And now that's funny, too. I come here and I... The Belgians are my best friends. How come you settled down there on 7th Street? Well, I tell you, my cousin had a place there and so she was gonna... They were gonna move over to his brother's. He was... His wife died and so they moved in to him and to take care of him. And so I got the place there. Yeah, that's how. So there you stayed in for a few years? Huh? So there you stayed in for a few years? Yeah. On 7th Street and 19th? Yeah, and then I had... And then, of course, then... I don't know where we moved after that. I forgot. Oh. And your husband, how was he doing? What kind of work was he doing? Well, at that time when we were married, he worked... he was a toolmaker. And that was later, but before that, he worked at Boy and Beck's. That was a little place down on 3rd Avenue. And so then International came in here. So then he quit down there and went to International, which was a good thing. Yeah. So he worked there? So he worked there for 29 years. Yeah. So when you got married now, did you go... where did you marry? What? Who married you? Well, we went to Davenport, but I don't remember. The preacher was Miller, I think, or something like that, or Mueller or something. We went there and got married, but we didn't... some friends went with us. Oh, I see. Yeah. So you didn't belong to a church then? Huh? You didn't belong to a church then before you were married? You didn't belong to a church then? It was a Lutheran church. It was a Lutheran church? Yes. Oh. But you didn't belong to a church here in Moline, like First Lutheran or Salem or... Salem, I used to go to Salem, but I wasn't too good of a church member. We weren't too good, which I wish we had been, you know. And I changed. Was it? I changed since. It probably works out anyway. It probably works out anyway. Yeah. Yeah. Well, he was Lutheran too. He was confirmed in Lutheran church. That's Swedish, big, Swedish Lutheran church. Yeah. But I was confirmed in Sweden. Yeah. Your father, now, he had a big farm in Sweden. Your father, did he have a farm in Sweden? No, he didn't have a farm. He worked for a big, big place. They had many, many acres, it seems like. They, wherever you went, they owned. He had a grave. Yeah. And so, dad just worked for him, for them. There was a lot of people worked for him. So dad always had, they furnished the houses and all that stuff. I see. Yeah. So your aunt, now, she told you it was going to be easier for you when you came to Moline. Yeah. Did it? Yeah, it was easier. Much easier? Yeah. You liked it over here then, compared to Sweden? Well, now, they have it better back in Sweden. Yeah, but I mean, at that time. Yeah, better than here, I think, in Sweden. No, but at that time, when you left, you didn't want to go back here after a while, when you... No, I was never lonesome. Never homesick? My aunt, she went back after that, because she got so homesick. So she said, Anna, don't you... That was after I was married. And she said, Anna, don't you want to go with me to Sweden? I said, no. I liked it here. I never was lonesome. Yeah. So it was easy then to... it was easy for you to move then to this country? Yeah, it was. It was easy. Yeah, and I never even thought of that, when I was in Sweden, until that afternoon, when I come home to visit my dad. He said, now it's time to go. Yeah. Uh-huh. So that's the way. And you know, in Sweden, you had to tell them that you can stay another year. They don't do that anymore. Oh, not anymore. No, I know. What happened to your sisters and brothers that left in Sweden? Your other sisters and brothers, now, what happened to them in Sweden? They stayed in Sweden? Yeah. Oh, they married, or... Well, one sister married, and one sister died when she was in her thirties. And then another, my oldest sister, I was home in 1955 and visited, and she was still alive then, and I was to my home, home there. And she and her brother lived together. They never married. Oh, I see. But that one sister, she married and had, and he had a big farm. Did they also work for Grieven, like your father? Did they work on a big farm, too, like your father did? No. My oldest sister, she learned to be cook, so she went all over, all she was in Malmö, in a big hotel and cooked in a lot of different places, you know, like to do. Yeah. So you were home 1955? You were home 1955? Yeah. That was for the first time? And I, that was the first time, that was 40 years I was, that was the first time I come back. It was 40 years. Were you alone? No, my husband was. Your husband? Yeah. He went with you? Oh, yeah. I wouldn't have gone otherwise. How about the children? Children? Yeah. I got a girl and a boy. Did they go with you to Ireland? And they are so good to me. Did they go with you then, 55? They didn't go with you, 1955? No, just my husband and me. And then we went, he liked it so well in Sweden, so he said, we got to go back again. So we come back 1962, went back and seen him. And then, then my father was dead and my mother was dead and my oldest sister was dead. So I just had that one sister and my brother. Yeah. It changed quite a bit then. Yeah, that's my life. Her brother is still alive. I just talk too much. No, that's fine. I think so. How about now, did you and your husband belong to any other Swedish organizations here in Moline, like Vasa and Viking? Well, my husband belonged to Vasa, but I guess he quit because he didn't, I don't know why he quit. Yeah. But you never joined though? No. I joined before I was married, I joined Ladies of Switzerland. And that's all I think I joined. And I went to a meeting one time and, is that still on? Yeah. Oh, then I won't talk. Well, I went to a meeting one time and all they did was, oh, we don't want that and we want this. And I got kind of disgusted with it, so I never went anymore. Oh? Yeah. You got tired of it? Huh? You got tired of that kind of business? Yeah, yeah. So I never joined. Oh? I mean, I didn't ever go. So I... Did you have any Swedish-American paper in your home? Newspaper? No. No? No, I don't. You never had that? No. When I moved here, I just threw everything away. Only... Yeah, I mean, but the years ago, when you first came here, you didn't have any Swedish-American newspaper? I think I had Svenska Amerikan. Tribunen? Yeah. Oh, I see. I had that, because I threw everything away. I had a lot of memories, but I either gave it to Dorothy or Leah. I don't know. I don't know what become of my stuff when I left the house and come up here, because I thought, what's the use to keep it? And that's the way it went. And I didn't take very much with me either, because there isn't so much home. What the kids are... How was the depression years? During the depression? Oh, yeah. Then... Well, we never... We never... We ate all right. We ate... We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate little. We ate a lot of rice, risgrünskröte. Risgrünskröte? Yeah. And just... So, we could barely make it, but we got back on our rent a little bit, a little bit, so we had to pay that off after he started to work. And so that... It wasn't... it was bad enough, but it's not like some people. I never... we never had to go to the city or county for help. So you and your husband, you both came from Skåne? Yeah. Were there more people here in Moline from Skåne? Huh? Were there more people here in Moline from Skåne? I don't know. You never met any? Yeah. Yeah, I never met any from Skåne. And I, you know, I used to go to dances and... Cause I met a lot of fellas there, you know, girls. But I never... Yeah, there was a... there was three girls that was from Skåne. But now I don't know where they were from, you know. And I don't remember their name. And I know one is dead, I know dead. And the one went back to Sweden and got married. So that's all I know about them. No. Yeah. So there was not too much... I never asked them where they were from or anything, because they could always tell where I was from. They always said, you're Skåne, ain't you? So I never asked them what they were from. So that's all I know. So you settled down in Moline and you never moved somewhere else. You stayed here all your life then? Well, I was in Rock Island. In Rock Island and worked there for... And that's all, I worked there. You didn't go to Chicago or Rock for... No, no, no. No, I was staying here all my life. And I like it. And I like it here too, cause it gets pretty lonesome sometimes. But that's all. You have a good view here though, over Moline. You are high up and you can look far and wide. I sure am. Yes, beautiful sunset here. Yeah, I like it. That's all I don't think I know about them, I think. Your husband's family? His brothers and sisters, they were seven children. There was only one left when we'd come to Sweden, 1955. Only one left? One left. And he was, he had a hotel in Öland. No, not Öland, Gotland. Gotland? Yeah. So we went there. And your husband, was he the only one from that family? Was he the only one from that family, your husband, to come over here? He was what? He was the only one that left Sweden, your husband? Yeah. He was the only one? Yeah, because he was adopted. And so his stepmother and father took him with here. And the father, his real father, he drank quite a bit. So they kind of took him away from here. And then the other children, they were all right, they were living, but then they all died. All but one. But he's dead too. Since he was here, they were here, I forgot, 19. Do you still have it on? Yeah. I'm just checking. They were here, 1970, I forgot, do you remember? 78 or something? Yeah. I think it was, I don't know, I can't remember. It's the year. The years go too fast, so it's hard toÖ They came here to visit us, and they stayed four months. So then you had to talk Swedish then for four months? Huh? You had to talk Swedish then for four months? Yeah, yeah. And my husband, he didn't know very much Swedish, and of course, when we come to Sweden and visit there, he didn't know much. But after a while, we had been there, we were there three months, and after a while, then he talked pretty good Swedish too. And so did I. First, when we come there, I kind of forgot, you know, but when they start to talk to me, then they come to me. So did you talk English all the time, you and your husband in the home? Yeah. After you got married? Yes. Only English? Only English. We talked all that. You never talked Swedish? Oh, once in a while, sort of. This is side two, yes? It must have been Burberry, I suppose, to sixth grade, I don't know how it would be in Sweden. Well, I was confirmed, and then I had to go out and work. So it was 15, I think, I was 15, 14 or 15. But you didn't have to work on the big herregård, though? I know what? Did you have to work on the big farm too, like your father? The big farm your father worked on. Did you have to work there too? No. They had little farms that they got, the högsta gården hade, so they rented them, I guess. So I worked on one. First when I was 13, I went to a farm, and then I was there one summer when I was 13, and I had to work pretty hard, and milk cows and everything. So then the next year, I went some other place to another farmer, and I did that way. So I had, and the last one, I belonged to högsta gården too. So I was there, I think I was used there a year, and he had to stop me. You know what that means, you know, kind of, kind of ask me if I wanted to stay the next year, and I said yes, and then my aunt came home, so then I had to pay him back. So she saved you. She saved you from hard work. Yeah, yes. You and your husband, you never thought of being farmers in this country? You never thought of buying a farm in this country? No. You and your husband? No. Was on the farm. Not a, buy a farm? No. No? No. He worked all the time in the shops. And you didn't care about milking cows either? You didn't care about milking cows either? Care about? Milking cows. Cows. Cows. Cows, no, I should say not. I didn't have to do that. I had to do everything. So what happened now when your children came into your world now? When you got your children here? You had one boy and one girl? One boy and one girl? Did you talk Swedish to your boy and your girl when they got big enough? Did you talk Swedish to them when they were small? Yeah, no, I didn't talk much Swedish, did I? No. No, but I don't know, because sometimes we talked. Talked a little bit. So they could understand what a kind of what we talked about. I see a shirt there, Tryggare kan ingen vara. He has a shirt there, Tryggare kan ingen vara. Oh, yeah, Tryggare kan ingen. They were in Sweden last summer, and they got so Swedish after that. They did. So they have to buy everything like that. They like Sweden. They do? Oh my, yes. How come? My daughter, she liked it. She said, and it's true, it's so clean and nice. It's nice, nice country. Yes, and so, and it isn't so rushing like they do here. It's so calm and so nice. Yeah, it is. So what did you tell them now about Sweden? What did you tell them about Sweden when they were small, growing up? Oh, we didn't talk so much about that to Sweden, I don't know, because we were kind of poor. You know what I mean? We didn't have, well, when he worked in Børjamberg, he didn't make so much money, you know, but when he went to international, then he got a little more money. So then it went better for us. But we never had any big apartments or big place. We just had three rooms until we moved to 17th Avenue and 18th Street. And we bought a house, and that was 1934. We bought a house with five rooms, upstairs and downstairs. And that's where we lived. And raised your family. And I lived there so long as, until I come here, until I had to give it up. And I love, I hate it to give it up, but you know, when you get old, you have to give up a lot of things. Yes. Yes. But I'm satisfied, and so, just, so God forgives me for if I was dead. I hope. Well, I'm sure he... I hope. But I don't wish I wasn't dead bad. No, I don't think so. I don't think you had to worry about anything. No, I hope not. Yeah, well... How about your children now? How about your children now? They went to school here in Moline? The children? Yeah, they went to school here in Moline. Yeah. They went. Why don't we ask him? They went to... you went to Lincoln. No, you went, you went to Lincoln. I went to William Carr. Did you go to William Carr? And then Lincoln, and then Irving. And then? And then John Deere Junior High, and Moline High School. And Dorothy, Dorothy went to Lincoln. And Dorothy, she went to, to William Carr too. Lincoln. John Deere, and then high school. Yeah. So, and you lived in the same place and, or you moved once there? We lived on 19th Avenue and 10th Street in a house. Then we moved to 5th Avenue and 10th Street. And then we moved to 1810 and 17th Avenue. No. Where did you live then? No, from, from 10th Street we moved to Erickson's. Oh, well, yeah. Do you remember? I didn't go back that far. She remembers. On 19th Avenue. Yeah. And 9th, between 9th and 10th Street. And then after that we moved down to 5th, 5th and 7th. And then we moved to Lincoln. And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then? And then we moved to 5th, 5th Avenue and 10th Street. And then we bought, then after that. So we had... We got our education in this country. My sister took some Swedish in high school. At Mulligan High School. Yes. But then they dropped it by the time I got there. So there was no Swedish program. I took a little Swedish at Augustana, but not too much. So you went to Augustana and after high school? Yeah. I took a little Swedish at Augustana, but not too much. So you went to Augustana and after high school? Yeah. Both of you? No, I just, no, oh no, no, no. I just took some Swedish courses. Oh, I see. Yeah, she worked for an insurance man, wasn't it? It was an insurance man. And she, oh, she worked in Bokensund. Augustana Bokensund. And she was Ericsson's secretary and she had to write letters to Sweden, you know, for him. And stuff. So I think that's really where she learned most Swedish. Because she writes, can write to Sweden, but it's kind of hard for her, you know, so. So what did the parents tell you now? Leo and Larsson about Sweden, for instance, where you start to wonder where they came from? They talked about Sweden quite often. Often, did they talk Swedish to him? Sometimes, and so I picked up a few words. Of course, when my dad hit his thumb with the hammer, I learned a few other words. But they talked a little bit of Swedish and we picked up words here and there. And he told us about Sweden. So when I went into the Army, which was after World War II, they sent me to Germany, which was after the war. And I had a chance to go before they went back for the first time. I went up to Sweden and saw some of my relatives. And so I was so thrilled going up there and writing to them about seeing all of these relatives for the first time that it sort of got them started. And so that's how they went back to Sweden the first time. And so they went back twice. And then just two years ago, we went, my sister and my wife and my two daughters went back to Sweden. Now my oldest daughter, who just graduated from Rock Island High School, she was so thrilled about Sweden that she is now this fall going to Gustavus Adolphus up in St. Peter, Minnesota. And she's going to study Swedish and hopes to go back to Sweden. So you have cousins in Sweden, don't you? Yes, we had one visit, one boy from Schmiergaham, which is in the southern, very southern most tip of Sweden, visited us last year. A young boy who was just in high school. He came over here and visited us and we took him around all over Minneapolis and St. Louis and Chicago, and of course Bishop Hill. And now this year, the end of June, we got a man and lady coming from Malmo to visit us. The end of June and the first week in July. And then in August, we have two men and two ladies from Stockholm going to come and visit us. And they are related to you? These two that are coming are related. Two of the four from Stockholm is related, very distant to my father. His name is Leif Eriksson. Swedish name. Yeah, that's right. So the contact with Sweden then has never been broken? Never, no. When they came here, they continued to write. She wrote to her parents of course, and brothers and sisters. And then you are continuing now. Yes. My daughter is learning to write Swedish. So she's writing to the young boy who's here. His name is Joakim. So that's, keeps the two continents together. Yes. So you never lost your homeland and you always been corresponding, writing letters back and forth? You have always written letters back to Sweden? Oh, I always wrote letters. You have wrote letters, yeah. Yes. And they wrote to you? Oh, yes. What do they said in the letters now from Sweden? What did they ask about? Were they worried about that you worked too hard or something like that? No, my dad never wondered how I was because he knew that my aunt would take care of me. So I, hey, hey. And we wrote all the time. My dad wrote to me and he kind of wished that he hadn't sent me again. Oh. Yeah. But that was all right. And sometimes I sent him a little money. Of course, at that time, you didn't get much for working. The first place I worked at was that to that Anderson and I got dollar and a half a week. Yeah. But the last one I worked for seven years, she paid me $5 a week. And then finally she raised me to $13 a week when I quit. Yeah. So that wasn't much to live on. I mean, to live, I got my Roman, I got my board. So it was just, but you know, when you're young, you like to have nice clothes and that cost a lot of money too. And when we used to go to dances, you know, we like to be kind of have nice. So you like to dance? I just love to dance. I just love to dance all, but not anymore. Where did you go to dances though? Was it a temperance group? In Moline, they had every Saturday night had dance too. Yeah. Art fellows? Well, I went there too. And then they mostly, they went to, yeah. I can't remember. There was a place downtown in Moline. I forget. The Vikings? The Vikings? No, no, they didn't have anything. Well, they didn't have any dance. Dance is there. Yeah, they had dances, but it kind of, it wasn't, I can't remember now. I will remember later. Cause that's where I do remember. Out by the Rock River too. Out by the Rock River. They had a place out in the Rock River. There was a noble lodge. Noble lodge. Noble lodge. Yeah. Noble lodge. Noble. Noble camp. Yeah. Noble. Noble, yeah. Yeah, they had out the Rock River. Yeah, they had it then, but kind of also, when, I don't know. Not so good anymore, I guess, I don't know. I never belonged, but I used to go. So. Oh, Turner Hall. Oh, Turner Hall. Yeah. I don't think. I don't think that's still anymore. I don't know if it is. There was a German group, wasn't it? There were Germans. Yeah, but they rented for Saturday night. They rented the place for dance. So all the Swedes used to go there all the time. Every Saturday night. And less like they had other place, you know, than, and they didn't have that. So that's all. So you. But now, there isn't very many living that I used to go with, so. Your aunt now. Huh? Your aunt, she died many years ago. Yeah, I don't know. I remember. Because she was much older. She was nine. I think she was 90, 90. I don't know if she was 94. When she died? I think. When she died. Yeah. Yeah, that was a good time. Yeah. The good old time. Now I don't remember anymore. But I don't know. It seems like my memories, memory is getting, it's pretty good until lately, after I come up here, then it's not so good. I can remember, that's all. You know, a lot of things that happened. But like, like tomorrow, I maybe forget. Maybe forget. You know? But I never forget when they call me. He calls me every night, and about quarter after six or so. Six o'clock. Yeah, and I am looking for that. Yeah. And every Sunday night, they come here, and have coffee, little coffee once. But now I can't even make that. And so, that's all about me. New York. We stopped in Buffalo, and had supper. We're gonna have supper. And we had ordered soup, and they never come with it, so we went out, and went, got something. And then in New York, I think it was in New York, I tasted my first ice cream cone. Yeah. And grapes. Yeah. What year was that, 1914? Huh? When you first came here? Yeah. 1914. In New York. In New York, yeah. I got my first ice cream cone, and it sure tasted good, because they didn't have that, so much ice cream in Sweden. Well, out on the farms like that, they didn't, you know. So, that's all.