 We have 23rd of September 1987 and I'm sitting together with Arnold and Dean in Sweetsburg, Iowa. He was born 1910, 9th of May in Sweetsburg. You Arnold, you are in May, you live in Sweetsburg. All right, yes. Can you tell me a little bit about the beginning of your family, on your father's side? Well, now how far back do you want to go? Well, I understand you can go back all the way to 1635, but you start with the one that came from Sweden. Okay, my grandfather, O.L. and Dean, came from Sweden in 1862, I believe, and he was fortunate enough, well, he came on a steamboat, which was unusual at that time. They were just starting to be, so it only, it didn't take him more than, well, I guess the whole trip took maybe the better part of four weeks, but he was only on the water about two weeks. And then he, when he came to America, why, he went, and I would presume by train probably, part of the way at least, to the Woodhull, Illinois area. And he also had a partner, they had been partners in Sweden, it was the, it was a cousin of his, S.P. Morgan. And so those, those men started farming over there in, in the, in the Woodhull area, and they raised primarily broom corn. And that is a thing which, particularly during harvest, it's a, it requires a tremendous amount of labor. So they were, they hired quite a number of men to help with that broom corn harvest, because it was all done by hand. And they farmed over there for several years. Both of them got married, and they got married the same, same day, and they remained friends over there. Then in 18, I'm not just sure, maybe about five years later or so, they came out to Sweden, bought a farm out here, and lived together and farmed together. Now they had to bring all their stuff over with horses and wagons. So they had a regular wagon train to haul all their equipment. And now I doubt that they brought any livestock. I, I don't imagine, but they brought equipment from Woodhull, clear to Sweden, and went, went by a wagon. And their families, their wives and their children, they went by train. There was a train that went from Galesburg to Mount Pleasant. How did they get over to Mississippi though, with their... That is something that I've often wondered about. I do know this, that there at Burlington, there was a ferry that operated. And I would imagine that's where they went. So then the train came over there also? Well, the train, yeah, the train, the bridge was in for the train. Yes. But not for people. Now, there were some who came in the winter, and they took a chance and came across on the ice on the Mississippi. But that to me would be risky. But I know there were those who did. But I don't know, but I'm guessing perhaps they took, they were steam ferries that operated there at Burlington. So I, chances are, with their horses and wagons, that that's the way they came. And I don't know how many days it took to come, but it's... But you don't remember your dad talking about this, if he knew about it, what happened or... No, no, I don't know. Do you remember your grandpa? Oh yes, yes. What did he talk about? Did he talk about the old times? Not really, no. It seems like very few people ever mentioned much about Sweden. I think they were so glad to be in America, because they were so poor in Sweden, and America was the land of the opportunity. I noticed in that letter that Grandpa Lindin wrote at home, he said, here we get wheat bread every day. And that, you know, was, we just take it for granted we're going to have bread made out of wheat. But apparently they must, the bread in Sweden must have all been made with rup grains, like barley and so forth. So wheat bread was a real treat to him. And... He came from the Kristall area in Sweden. Yes, that's right. How were they able not to transfer over? Like you mentioned, they were raising broom corn. It was completely different from... Oh yes, yes, that's right. How did they learn that? Well, I would presume they probably were raising broom corn in that area when they came. That is, people ahead of you. So they started to help out... Yeah, there must have been a factory someplace not too far away. Bishop Hick was a big broom corn... Yeah, well, that's probably where it went to. But most of their grain was broom corn. Then he also mentioned about in Sweden, it was almost impossible to find pasture for your cattle. He said, here, he said, you can have endless amount of cattle, no limit to the amount of cattle you can have. And he was so pleased about that. They felt they had a lot of land and they were... Yeah, apparently they must have been just pretty much on the loose because he did have a branding iron. And that is, it wasn't just he, it was he and Morgan, ML Branding Iron. So they branded their cattle, I suppose, and that way in the fall, they probably ran everywhere for pasture. And in the fall, they probably brought them in. And that's still in your possession or in your family's possession? That particular branding iron is, yeah, yeah, my cousin has it. Here in Sweetsburg? Yeah, yeah. It's going back many years. Yes, yes, that is right. The thing that rather amazed me too is that they don't... They apparently didn't write very much or their people over there in Sweden didn't write very much because he wrote, in the two letters that I have, he encouraged them to write to him. He wanted to hear from them. This last letter, does my old father still live? Well, he was about 90 years old when he wrote that letter and he lived another 10 years. He lived to be almost 100 years old. Okay. But how about his other siblings, like sisters and brothers? Did he leave any of them over in Sweden? Well, his brother Andrew came with him from Sweden, and he apparently stayed over there a while. And then we do have on the record that he went to Sweetsburg and lived here a while and married a lady, Håkansson. And then they went up northwestern Iowa in Webster County and eventually ended up out in Holdrege, Nebraska. And that's where that family stayed. So as far as I know, it was only those two that came to America. But there were his... That would be his sister's children. They were Nelsons. That's the name they had here in America now. Several of them came to America. There was one girl and three of the boys, Carl and John and Axel and then Hilma. So they would be... I know they always called Grandpa and Uncle, which was a proper name to call him. And one of the Nelson boys, John, didn't stay here very long. He stayed here a few years and then he went back to Sweden. But the other three lived out their lives here in the Sweetsburg area. How did they get the idea of moving to Sweetsburg? By ads or by some travel? Well, now Håkan Olsson, of course... Who was the guy? Yeah, well, no, he wasn't... I don't know if he was yet then or not. He may have been. But he was a layman. He was from New Sweden. He was a layman though. No, Håkan Olsson was a real pastor at New Sweden and he came to Sweetsburg and he thought, this looks like a pretty good place for a settlement. And then there was another man who... I can't take his name off hand. But... Friedhof? Yeah, Friedhof. He got interested and he bought a little place here and then he went over to Biggsville and over to Galesburg and told those people, come out here to Sweetsburg. We got good land out here. And it was good land, it was poor land. There's one thing I wonder about here. Today, of course, it's the most excellent area you can think of. But at that time, the Swedes usually looked for hills. Oh, yes. Yeah, that's why they went to New Sweden. Yeah, and... Yeah, Widdows Hill there north of Widdows. They call it Kristallabacka. Yeah, the Kristallabacka in Widdows. So you heard about that. Yes. But here, when you come in from the north now on Route 218, you're going through Crawford... Crawfordville. Crawfordville. There are hilly areas, but was that land already taken? It must have been. It must have been. I would imagine so. And this was the only land available. Yeah. But you see, it was extremely swampy here. Terribly wet. It was really wet. In fact, a mile south of Sweetsburg or less, they had to put a bridge across the road because it was so wet, the ponds were there and you couldn't even get through with team and wagons. They had to build a bridge across the road. So the vegetation at that time was almost like a sea life then. Yeah. Well, they said that the grass was so tall that a man walking through it, you wouldn't even see him. But I know my dad spoke of that. Of course, that would be... I don't know if it'd be during his memory or not, but a lot of times, that was before they had any tile, they would lay up what we talk about laying up a land, you know. All right. They would plow in and then they'd leave a furrow and then they'd just a small, maybe it wouldn't be more than 8, 10 feet wide and then they'd lay up another land. And that way, that land that was up above, the furrow would kind of take care of the water and then they'd plant on top of that land. So, but then when they got started putting in tile, of course, then when they... that's when things started to bloom here. Then it came on. Yeah. Like Winfield, now there was a village already in 1862. Oh, yeah. East of here. How is the land around there, about eight miles east of here? Is that flat too? Well, east of Winfield, quite a bit of it is. Of course, it's like it is, you know, it comes and goes. You drive along, pretty soon it's hilly and then the first thing you know, it's flat again. But when the Swedes came here, then there is a saying, if it's true or not, they said that it's good only for the Swedes and the Ducks. Yeah. Well, that's what some... Writers. Yeah. It was a surveyor, surveyed this area, you know, for roads and so. And he said that it probably will never be settled there, he said. But he said there are a few Swedes starting to move in, he said. So he said it's all it's good for is Ducks and Swedes. So the rest of the nationalities, they stayed away then? Well, apparently. Apparently. Of course, the thing is, you know, they were clannish and you can't blame them. They had a common language and they had common ideas. So this was the Swedes. Now you can go 10 miles west of here and we've got Germans. Wayland. That was a completely German area. Was it there before the Swedes came here? I really don't know, but I would guess probably somewhat same time. I really don't know. So, no, I know my dad said there was a storekeeper, owned a store here in Sweden, a man by the name of White. Now, he was not a Swede, but he had to learn to talk Swede, or he couldn't, he couldn't sell anything because nobody could talk anything much but Swedish. Another thing, the men, the men learned to speak English. Not good. It was badly broken, but they did. But now the women, I, my grandma, Lynn Dean, I can't ever remember hearing her speak an English word. Well, you see, the women, they didn't get out. The only contact they had was with other Swedes within their family, within their church. They go to church. Well, it would be all Swedish women. So they talked Swedish to each other. And of course, it was a simple thing at home to talk Swedish. But I suppose when the kids started going to school, maybe, but now it can vary. Now, for instance, my, my grandpa Sandberg and my grandmother Sandberg, they talked pretty good English. Of course, grandpa Sandberg was a tradesman. He was, he was a blacksmith. He came to Biggsville, Illinois first, and then he got a, he worked over there for that Weir Fruit Company. Then he got a job in Burlington working in a factory there. And he was a blacksmith by trade. Well, then he came to Trenton and Trenton, Iowa, which is a little town, but five, six miles away. Yeah. And anyhow, the Turney Wagon Factory was in Trenton. And after he had been there a few years, well, they moved the wagon factory to Fairfield. So he said, Well, I didn't want to go to Fairfield. So he came to Sweden, but the blacksmith shop right here, right here in the village. And he was he was a village blacksmith. And now his wife, Grandma Sandberg, she came as a fairly young woman, about 16 years old or so. And she apparently worked around in different homes as a Pika as a hired girl in American. Yes. And she talked she talked English quite well. And of course, Grandpa Sandberg, having worked around English speaking people all the time, why he he talked English quite well. So the people living right here in Swedes, where they picked up English faster than on the farms. Well, I don't know if living in Swedesburg alone, but you see, like I say, Grandpa worked down in Burlington, he worked in Trenton, and he worked different places where no Swedish was spoken. So he had to and the same would be true of my grandmother. But like Grandma Lindene, she came from Sweden and she lived in Swedes and she married a Swede. There were no real good reason why she should talk English. What about Grandpa Lindene? Well, he could talk it but not not very good. He talked quite broken. So he favored speaking in Swedish? Oh, yes. Yeah, definitely. He talked to him in Swedish. Yeah. Well, sometimes I would talk to him in English and he would answer me in Swedish. But yeah, you tried to talk Swedish to, you know, a funny thing. Practically all the old Swedes, I call them old Swedes, they weren't old then, they almost all had beards. And I remember being with my dad out at Winfield when I was so maybe five, six years old. And my dad was talking to a man with a long beard. And that guy was talking just as good as English is. I couldn't believe it. How could it possibly be? Here's a man with a beard and he talks good English. He happened to be, you know, he was a Quaker. His name was Russell. His name was Russell. And he'd been here for many, many years. He was a Native American. And I thought, well, I just could hardly believe it. Here's a man with a beard and he's talking English. How about your dad? Did he have a beard too? No, no. So their generations? Yeah, none. As far as I know, none of O.L.'s sons or daughters, sons or daughters, sons had a beard. No. That generation, hardly any of them did. There were a few. And the same way with people my age. Well, now, of course, some of them will have a beard or a mustache, but not very many. But there was probably a practical reason, though, they had to stay away from shaving every day. Oh, I suppose, yeah. It saved a lot of time. And also, they didn't have the tools. Yeah, yeah. They had to be here. So your dad and this Morgan, they came almost simultaneously to Sweden? My grandfather. Your grandfather. Yes, yes. They came together. And they're about four, five miles east of here? No, their farm is three-fourths of a mile east of Sweden. Oh, I see. That close. Three-fourths of a mile. Yeah. And how did they, they just picked it on a map? Well, I imagine that somebody had influenced them and told them, why don't you go out to Sweden and see if you can, you could buy a farm out there. I'm sure. And there was 160 acres? Yes, 160. There was no homestead land offered in this area? No, no. They bought. It was all gone. Yeah, that's right. They bought it by the acre. How much did they pay then? Well, I'm, my thinking is $25 an acre, but I'm not sure on that. I'm not sure on that. And they lived in rather a small house, which we called a bo. There was no bo before they came? Well, I don't know. I doubt it. But anyhow, it was about a, oh, maybe a three-room little small, small house. Well, then grandpa had two or three kids and Morgan had two or three kids. And they said, this is a little bit too much. They lived together? They lived together for about three, three years or whatever it was. So then Morgan bought the farm right across the road. And, and he put up a real big house and grandpa and Dean put up a big house. They both put up real big houses then. So then they had, they had room for, for all the kids. So when they came in here, they had to break the prairie sod then? Or did they burn it down first? I really don't know. I really don't know. You have no recollection? No, no, I've never heard him say, but I know there was no tile then. So they had to. And there was nobody been farming there before they came? Well, that I really don't know. I don't know if the previous owner was, had farmed it or not. But I would rather doubt they had. Yeah. Yeah. So did they have horses or mules? I think mostly horses. And according to his letter, he had a pretty big farm. There were eight horses. Yeah. Well, on 160 acres, you would need eight horses. That, that would be. So he had hired men and he peaked. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And they had, they had both. Yeah. You see, generally speaking, you would put four horses on, on a disc. Maybe you'd put five on a plow or you might go with four. So it was pretty necessary. But they didn't use discs at that time though? There was only, uh, I don't know if they had walking plows and they had a turning plow or, you know, breaking plow. I don't know if they had a disc or not. I really don't know. And then when they came this far west and they, they forgot about the broom cord. Yeah. I believe they did try it. I think they tried raising a little broom corn, but it just didn't work out for them. I suppose for one thing, the outlet, and plus you got to have certain machinery to, to clean that broom corn. You know, they, they just cut the tops off and then you bring your tops in and you push them into some kind of a machine that's, that's got a lot of little wires on there. Scratches all the seed off. Then you pull it back out and you've got what's left is what becomes a broom, the heads. But I, I think I am right on that, that they did try, but I believe it did not work. So then they went to cattle and hogs. I know dad said that, uh, of course almost all, there was no timber here. So most of the Swedes would buy a little patch of timber down like north of Olds, down between Olds and Crawfordville or out some other direction. And O.L. and S.P. Morgan, they, they bought 10 acres down there on the creek bottom between Olds and Crawfordville. And dad said that quite often in the wintertime, his dad, grandpa, would take the team and the sled and an ax, drive down to the timber, cut a load of timber and bring it home. That would be the day's job. It was for the firewood then? Yeah, that was, that was the only thing they had to, yeah, to burn. There was no coal nearby here? Well, I don't know. I suppose you could get coal, but then you had to pay for it. Yeah, you had to pay for it. And the wood, of course, if you owned the timber, why it was free. And then too, they got, there were a lot of oak down there so they could, they could make rail cribs. They could make fences with it. And so it was really necessary to own some timber. Do you know about approximately what time they got the fencing posts in? No, I don't. Were they still letting the cows out here then? Because they had too many neighbors. I would guess that, I would guess perhaps they had the fence, fence in. They used, they used hedge fences a lot. That was growing? Yes. And they trimmed it every year? Yeah, yeah, and you trimmed it. And that was a bad job they said to do that. It was a sucker, yeah. And you could either trim it in the winter and then burn all of it, or you could cut it in the summer when it was green, you know, and then you could just let that stuff drop down. But if you cut it in the summer, you would cut it maybe once every two or three weeks. But if you didn't cut it, it didn't serve its purpose. In other words, it was too, Yeah, it would just, yeah, that's right. You had to cut it. Yeah. You didn't know, I understand they used colored people coming up, helping them out. You mean they did at that time? Oh, is that right? You don't know if any colored people came up in this area? No, I doubt there was ever a black man here in Switzerland. I never heard of it. No, they had plenty of kids. They had plenty of kids. That's a good job for the boys. Yeah. So your father, and he remembers the hedge cutting and trimming. Oh yeah, well I trimmed hedge. You did? Yes, my dad had some hedge on. And they were actually good fences. Well, yeah, but the trouble was then we got hogs. So you had to put in, you had to put the woven wire in with it too. And then when you were cutting, well, sometimes you'd hit that wire and that sure took the edge off of the corn knife in a hurry. But they, yeah, it helped and you didn't have to put any posts at least. You didn't have to put any posts except at the corners. And like barbed wires, for instance, that was much later in the 90s, 1900s. Well, I would presume so. I would presume so, yeah. Especially when they got barbed wire and woven wire and posts, well then you were all set. They had dairy farming then apparently because they had so many cows. Well, I doubt it. You don't think so? I don't think so. I think maybe they'd have plenty of milk cows for their own purpose, you know. But I would guess maybe that some of them were beef. I don't know. What year did they start the dairy here though later on? Well, of course the thing is that every farmer, and even I did, had two cows, three or four cows, maybe 15 sows, and a couple hundred chickens. That if you didn't have them, you just weren't a farmer. So every farmer had them and I'm sure that that was true all through the years. But you didn't have separators? I didn't. My folks did. The only separator we had, they had, because I never had but two cows, and it was what they called a water separator. You'd put the milk in and then you'd pour in about that much water and then the cream would come to the top. So then it had a spigot at the bottom and you'd drain off the milk until you got to the cream, then you caught the cream. I see. And I mean they sold for just a few dollars whereas a separator was expensive. But if you had several cows you'd have to have a separator. And the cream was sold at the store up here in Sweensbury? Yeah. And they sold it on to Mount Pleasant? Oh yeah, to Creamery somewhere. So there was no Creamery or dairy operation here in Sweensbury? No, no. Never been there? No, just you could sell it at the store. So dairy farming was not a popular type of farming that they were on here? No. Now the bigger dairies did not come in until they got started using trucks. And they'd pick it up? Trucks, you know, where they could pick it up every day. And then you would have to have, well at first you could keep it in five gallon cans, ten gallon cans, and keep it in cold water running on it. But now of course everything has to go to a steel container, stainless steel container, and it's kept cold all the time and it's pumped out and pumped into a truck. There's only one, and there used to be several people that had fair sized dairy herds. In Wayne Township there's only one dairy herd left. One dairy herd. And hard, well, no farmer, you might say, no farmer has a cow. If he does, people say what's the matter with him? What does he got a cow for? Good heavens, you can't afford to have a cow. There's a trend we have to follow. Yeah, in a way you can't because, you know, it's a chore to take care of even one cow and you got a milker twice a day regardless. And you got to take care of that milk and keep it cold and so forth and so on. We're up to the store, wherever, buy a gallon of milk and bring it home. It's the easy way. The modern farmer doesn't want to be a prisoner. No, that's right. One problem with Switzerland here, we still like to make oosterkake. Oh, okay. Well, that is a problem. Like I say, you'll find a farmer here and there, maybe you got a cow, maybe you can buy milk for him. Otherwise, this man who has the big dairy, you can't get milk from him. He'll sell it to you. So we can still have oosterkake. So you get the real old traditional stuff then? Yeah. There's nothing pasteurized, you get it direct from the farm? Yeah, yeah, that's right. The grain and the crops, now they were raised here, there were corn and oats. How about wheat and... Not very much wheat. There was a little wheat, some wheat, but... It didn't grow good here? No, I guess not. I guess not. I don't know. Wheat never took hold. But there's corn and oats, and then of course, they would have clover. A rotation, I think, perhaps, which most of them followed, was you would have oats, next year you would have clover, which would be hay, of course, and then you would have corn, and then you would take a second year of corn. And then you'd start again, oats, hay, corn, corn. And every farmer followed that trend then? Pretty much so. But then of course, along in... I'd say in the early 30s, probably, a few people had started having soybeans. And at first, they cut it with a binder, chalked it just like you did oats, and run it through a threshing machine. Well, then they started getting combines, which made it easier. So then pretty soon, everybody was raising a few beans. And now, of course, there's a tremendous amount of soybeans raised. In fact, it's soybeans and corn. Of course, now with your program, with diverted acres, where you don't put everything in the corn and beans, why, they have grass of some kind, alfalfa, clover, something like that, on those acres that they're not allowed to farm. You said, mentioned clover. Now, how about alfalfa? When did it come in? Alfalfa didn't come in until later, because you can't raise alfalfa in this area without putting... you have to put lime. You have to put lime on it. Now, if you're in northern Iowa, Minnesota, they don't need any lime. They can grow alfalfa. But here, we have to lime the soil. I see. Have to lime the soil every so often in order to raise alfalfa. But the rest of the minerals are pretty good in this area. Oh, yeah. For growing. Yeah. Because it's known throughout the nation that this area is a tremendous producer of corn. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's true. You have test spots of 200 in a bush and a lake. Yeah. Why is this? Is it very deep topsoil? Yes, it is. It's quite deep. You have to go down long ways on the flats to find anything but black soil. So, there's very seldom you have a complete loss of... Well, I would have thought that this summer, I thought, my gosh, we won't raise any corn, because it stayed so hot. And it stayed so dry. We just had hardly any rain. But now that they are harvesting, well, it's not a full crop by any means. But it's a good crop. It was not a heavy crop. No, not at all. No. No. It was not in Nebraska and Kansas where you had drought like that. It just dries up. Yeah. Of course, Nebraska, they don't have droughts anymore because they've... Irrigation. Irrigation the whole thing. Yeah. Yeah. And then your grandpa, he came in here and he raised according to the old... What he had picked up in Woodhollow, of course, and so on. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And his neighbors, they also... They were Swedes. Yes. One Swedish family after another. Yes. Yes. And they built their homes. Where did they buy the building material? Well, no, I think Olds probably at that time. So Olds was a little... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think maybe that they had lumber. If you go back far enough, of course, you had to go to Mount Pleasant. Now, I don't know just when... I couldn't tell you when the railroad went through Olds. Well, then, of course, you could buy most anything in Olds that you could buy anywhere else. That I couldn't tell you offhand, just when that railroad did go through. But it's way back, though. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Before 1900s? I would say yes. I'm quite sure it was before the 1900s. And one of the most important thing when they came to a new area, the Swedes, they... They wanted to have a church. Oh, yes. Yeah. So they became members then of the Swedish... Oh, yes. And there was no other denomination, no covenants, no baptism, no... No. It was always been 100%. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. And Håkan Olsson was the one that started... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In 1936. Yeah. When he... Site 2, continue ensuring with the......on Lindén, Switzerland, Iowa. Site 2. The schoolhouse, you said? Yes. Yeah. They had a schoolhouse a mile south of Sweden, Liberty School, they called it. On 218? Yes. And they met there. Well, in fact, even after they organized the church, they met in schoolhouses. And Håkan Olsson would come, well, once a month or once every three weeks or something like that, conduct a service. He was still living in... He was still in New Sweden. Yeah. And then... Then they finally decided to build a church. Yeah. And after they got the church built, they called Håkan Olsson. We stole him away from New Sweden, I guess you might say. And... And so he was our pastor. But now, he was quite an entrepreneur, too. Did everybody understand? He built his own house and... Yes. That's right. He bought about 40 acres or whatever. Well, in fact, I think he got it for a little bit of nothing. Somebody had bought it at a tax sale and they didn't want it, so they sold it to him. So he got this 40 acres. Where was that located? That would be where we are, this 40 acres right here. Not where the church stands, on this side of the road. 40 acres here. So he had the whole Switzerland. He had the whole Switzerland, yeah. And he sold out to different... He'd sell a little piece of land, you know, somebody wanted to build a store, that's fine. And he donated this block there, where the parish hall is. And with the stipulation that a... Some kind of an academy should be built there. Academy for women was his preference. Well, it took a while, but they finally did build a building. And they started an academy there. But it was for everybody. But it only lasted about three years. That's why we always used to call that... That's the schoolhouse. When I was a kid, the schoolhouse. It wasn't the parish hall or the Luther League hall. It was the schoolhouse. But then the congregation took it over and used it for a meeting place. And it has been that ever since. And it's been a great thing for us. Yeah, there was... I remember seeing the records of the Switzerland Academy. Yeah, it was called. Was there a continuation of the regular school then? Well, it would be more like a high school, you know. Of course, it was only grade school here. But it was also for boys? Yeah, it was for both men and women. Both men and women. Although Håkon Olsson's wish had been for women. The women's academy is what he wanted. He didn't reach for something like a deaconess institute or anything like that? No, no. No, no. It was an educational thing. Yeah, absolutely. And it didn't have to be particularly religious then? No, no. But it lasted, like I say, about three years. And then, of course, then they started... They got an academy in Mount Pleasant. And they started to get high schools, you know, in the different towns around. So that took care of it. So there was no need for it then? No, no, that's right. Håkon Olsson, did he stay all his life here in Switzerland? Oh, no, no. He moved on? Yeah, yeah. Like I say, well, you mentioned that too. He built his own parsonage. Yes. Built his own parsonage on his own land, of course. Is this still standing, his parsonage? No, no, no. There's been several since then. And then, of course, when he moved on, I think he got a call down in Kansas or somewhere, but it doesn't make any difference. So he moved on? Yeah, so he moved on and they bought the parsonage from him. But the first church was built when he was here, I guess. I'm pretty sure. So when he came from Sweden to meetings here and services, how far is it? I believe they say 15 miles. 15 miles, right, yeah. And of course, there's no roads, nothing. No, and there's the Skunk River. Yeah, he had to ford that every time, or he'd come horseback. Now, the story is that sometimes when the water was too high, he would tie the horse and swim across the river. Well, personally, I question that, but then that's all right. If that's a legend, why let it be a legend? Could people swim at that time, you think? Oh, I don't doubt it. Probably could. They probably could, yeah. But they were not swimming too often, I mean, in the summer? No, but I think, well, probably anybody who came from Sweden is more likely to be able to swim than one who was born here. Because you got so many lakes and places where you could swim over there. Between Skunk River and Mississippi, do you have any rivers and streams going across the landscape? No. So there is no drainage outlet then? No. No, there's no other river, not the Des Moines River, but that's west of Skunk. Of course, we got all kinds of creeks, all kinds of creeks and sloughs that run into creeks. So if your farm has any kind of a rolling at all, you'd tile right to a creek. When you get out on where it's completely flat for miles and miles, then they have a problem. I don't know. Somehow or other, they get it drained out. They get it drained out. There may be a fall there that you can't see just by looking. So years ago, that was the biggest problem, to get rid of the water. Yeah, that's right. I think there may have been some of them that had to dig a well and let their tile run into the well. I know you hear of that, particularly in northern Iowa, and I'm sure there must have been some of that done on the flats around here too. How could they get rid of the overflow, though? What happened to that one? Well, a well, of course, probably won't fill within ten feet of the top of the well, so if you run your tile into it, that's fine. It runs in there, but the well won't get more than so full. You can't fill a well up. It dissipates the water out. And of course, but there isn't any in Wayne Township. They do have drainage ditches in some places where they run the tile to drainage ditches. So this idea, there were barriers in the beginning, in other words, the flood and the rain took away more crop than the heat and the drought. So how did it start? I understand there was one Sven Olsson, he was the first one that went down to Mount Pleasant and bought some drainage tile on a promise of pay with the next harvest. I really don't know. Who gave you the idea? I don't know where they got the idea. And, you know, there was a tile factory north of Olds about three miles. There was a Browns tile factory there and Winfield had a tile factory. So after they got going, you didn't have to go so terribly far for tile. Of course, you did a lot of digging. It was all by hand, yeah. It was all by hand. When did they get started now? Because this idea was not directly from Sweden. I just wonder who gave them the idea. I don't know. I don't know. There were no Dutch people living around here? Well, no. The Germans over at Wayland, but they're not really Dutch. They are Germans. Did they do tiling early? Well, I don't know. They probably wouldn't need to as quickly as us because they had more rolling land. Their land is more rolling. Although you get east of Wayland, you've got some flat land. So some of the people over here, they moved west? Oh yeah. To Nebraska? To Nebraska. Was that because you think of the wet situation here? No, I just think it was cheap land out there. Most of them could homestead out there. Most of them could homestead. I'm sure the Sandals homesteaded their land out there. I don't know about Andrew Linden, but I would guess he probably did the same thing. They could homestead their land out there. So some of the families split up then? Oh yeah. Some of the brothers stayed here? Yeah. Oh yeah. Then there was a, that was later on probably in 1910 to 1915, there was an exodus from here to Minnesota. Quite a number of people went from here to around Redwood Falls, Minnesota, which is in southwest Minnesota. I have, well, one of the Lindens, Joe Linden, went up to Minnesota and bought a farm up there. And then on the Sandburg side, I had three uncles that bought farms up there. They moved in the Hulk West. There were different ones that went up to Minnesota. Land was cheap up there, and land was getting high here. And most of them did pretty well up there. But when they went up there, there was nothing but small grain. Nothing but small grain. But the people from Iowa brought with them the idea that we can raise corn. They had 90-day corn. They got ahold of 90-day corn, so they started putting in corn up there. Never got very big, never yielded a whole lot, but it was better than putting it all in small grain. Of course, you go up there now and they can raise corn just as good as we can, almost clear up the Canadian border. It's the fertilizer, I suppose. Well, it's the fertilizer, and then the corn. I think the seed, the type of seed. So there was the children, then, of the immigrants that moved up there. There was too much expansion. Yeah, that's right. And then, of course, land was kind of in short supply here, and up there, there was plenty of it. And that was about the time when you were born? Yeah, somewhere, I'd say, yeah, about 10 years there. So that spreads pretty fast, and if somebody goes up there and buys a farm, and they go all over and everybody looks for something. Yeah, that's right. Something better. Yeah. When those people are moving out to Nebraska, that was in the 1870s, I understand. Yeah, I think so. But according to the records of the church here in Switzerland, in 1875 they had a collection of collecting money for the suffering people in Nebraska. Well, that's entirely possible. Of course, that's a terrible country out there. So they didn't fare too well then. Well, I know one of my wife's aunts, she was a widow, seven straight years, and that was later on, never got a crop at all. Seven straight years, and she finally lost her farm because of it. You know, they say in Nebraska you can have a beautiful field of corn one day, and comes those winds, those strong, hot winds, and it'll just burn her up in a day or two. But of course, now with irrigation, that's no problem. But at that time, of course, there was no irrigation. But you wonder, how could they keep going though for seven years? I don't know. They still had hope. I guess, I guess, yeah. How about potatoes? Did they raise them here in Switzerland? No, just for your own use, that's all. This was not a potato country then? No. And no fruit trees? Well, just... In the yard of your own... Although, I mean, there are apple orchards that make a good deal of it, but then I don't know of any around here. But a lot of them had, well, I know we used to have peaches, apples, apricots, plums, raspberries, grapes, all kinds of fruit, pears. My dad was a great person for fruit, and of course, it made a lot of work for my mom. You canned all that stuff, but that was the only thing you had. You know, you canned stuff that you were going to eat the next winter. And the same way with meat, you butchered in the wintertime, and you preserved it so that you could eat it all through the next summer until the following fall. You know, I feel sorry for the men, but I felt even more sorry for the women. I'm telling you, they had a lot of work to do, several kids, probably a hired man, and patch all those clothes and prepare all that food every day, plus preparing for the coming season. It wasn't any snap. You had three, four sisters? Three sisters and a brother. So your sisters, then, when they were... They had to help out, then? Oh, yeah, sure. Yeah, when they got a little older. And when you got old enough, you had to help your dad out? Oh, yeah, yeah. And do you remember taking out the cattle? You didn't have too many, so you didn't have to watch them? Oh, no, no, no. There was not one to watch them? No, but we always had... We generally had about four cows, and they would be out in the pasture in the summertime, and of course, you'd have to bring them in at night and morning to milk them. And my dad always had to watch them. And my dad was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. He was a good milker. So he was singing then? Oh yeah. Did he have an instrument? No, no. There was a piano there, but then he generally would just start off and everybody sang with him. He had a piano. Was your grandparents very religious, going to church every Sunday and particularly about the... Oh yes, oh yes. On both sides. That was a must. And they shouldn't have to go with? Oh yeah. Sunday's work. Yes. And you know, it was a little longer. Now you don't have your services. Well, you got a ten minute sermon and the whole thing takes less than an hour, but it was a mighty poor preacher that couldn't preach at least 40 minutes. And you know, that got a little lengthy for the kids, but then they had to endure it. Didn't they go to Sunday school before the service? Yes. Before? So that was actually longer then for the kids? Oh yeah, yeah. You had an hour of Sunday school first. Yeah, but how about the old grown-ups now? Well, the grown-ups, they were all in the church. They had adult classes. They had adult classes. Like I say, well, my Grandpa Lindeen and S.P. Morgan and different ones, the old ones, they taught a man's Bible class in Swedish and there'd be a woman's Bible class in Swedish. And then there would be, they called it the young man's class. That was in English. They would meet over here, like at the parish hall. And of course there was a lot of them that didn't handle Swedish very well, so this was fine. They would also have a women's Bible class in English. And then of course it just kept tapering off until finally it all ended and it's all English. Nowadays when you have these grown-up classes, there's a lot of discussions going on for the pupil and up to the teacher. At that time, there was only one talking and doing the reading and stuff. Yeah, although you were free to make comments or he might even ask you questions. Did they do that, all the other people? Well, yeah, I think they did. I think they did. And there were probably several in the class that liked to volunteer things, you know, and say, well, this is what I believe or this happened to me. So, yeah. But in general, they listened to the preacher when he was talking and they never questioned his opinion. Yeah, that's probably true. Your dad, did he serve on the council here in the Swedesburgs? Yeah, he was a trustee. He was a trustee, yeah. He was a trustee several years. And he served on the, I don't believe he was, he may have been a trustee or maybe not, but when they built this church which is standing here now, he was on the building committee. I remember that and I don't know if he was still a trustee or not. It was built in 1927 or 28? 27, it started in 27, completed in 28. So your grandpa was still... Oh, yeah. Oh, yes, yeah. Yes, all four of my grandparents were still living then. Yes. They had retired from farming though. Yeah. Were they living in a separate house then on the farm? No, no, they owned a house south edge of Swedesburg here. They bought their own house? Yeah. And grandpa had a horse, Tony. That was his means of getting around. He never owned a car. Of course, he would have been probably pretty old to try to learn to drive a car. So Tony took him down to Mount Pleasant and... Well, I don't know. I think if he went to Mount Pleasant, maybe one of the boys took him in the car. I see. But for just driving around here, he had this horse and buggy. So did he make any comments about the farming, the technical side of it? In other words, there were so much different changes taking place now. No. He didn't have a tractor. He didn't have a tractor when he was farming. Oh, no. No. It was all horses. Yeah, that was all horses, yeah. But your dad, did he buy you a tractor? No. In 1936, when I started to farm, I bought a tractor. That was the first tractor that we had. And, of course, we used it on... Together, you might say, although he never drove it. He never drove a tractor. So the Prussian then put a stop on everything, making improvements on the farm. Oh, yeah. It slowed things down. It was pretty rough there for two or three years. But your grandpa, he tiled his land. Oh, yeah. Yes. And how many acres was he able to tile? Well, I suppose he tiled the whole 160, I don't know. The whole thing? Because he had a slough running right through the whole farm, so it was no great problem. So he had no problems to get not tilled? No, no, no. He got a slough right almost in the middle of the farm, runs through the whole thing, so he could tile right to it. And there was no old Swedes living here that said that the tiling was bad or a bad idea? I never heard of it. Never heard of it. Like we see the result of it. Oh, yeah, sure. Tremendous. Yeah. And they dug them down about three feet? Well, what you... Yeah, it would depend on the slope of the land. Now, sometimes you might have to go through a place where it was completely flat. Maybe you would have it deeper there. Maybe you started two feet up here at the top. But you had to have a level, and as you went, know what you were doing, keep track so that you always had a little bit of fall. And there was black topsoil all the way down to the bottom? Yeah. Maybe if you got into a hilly spot, you might hit clay. But there was no stone or anything like that? Oh, no, no. There is absolutely no stone. No stone at all? No stone at all, no. Did you comment about that, people from Småland? Well, I don't know. Yeah, I know there, Småland, like they are up in Minnesota. They had to pick up their rocks every spring, didn't they? The lamb and the fence line. That's true up there in Minnesota where my relatives are. So they went into Småland again? Yeah, yeah. But here you have to go far away to pick up a stone then? Yes, yeah, that's right. Once in a while when they drill a well, you might hit a stone. That's what you hope you won't hit because they are hard to get around. How about the size of the tile? Was it 2 inch, 3 inch? Well, they started quite small. They started quite small. There were 3 and 4 inch tiles. Then as they kept going on, well, then they made them a little bigger. How about the topsoil running in between and making them sludgy after a few years? How long did it last, all this first tiling, before you had to redo it again? Well, you never redo it. They never had to clean it up? No, they are still using the same tiles that my grandpa and Dean put in. Yes, you never… A tile can break, but you'll see it because it pushes the water up. So you dig down and you fix the break in the tile. No, the original tiles are still there. Are still in use? Yes. That's a tremendous investment. Yes, that's right. They are still there. When they took this step to tile, financially, it was an outlay of money. Oh, yes. I have no idea. I never heard anything about that. Of course, when I was a kid, everything was already tiled. Sometimes they put in… So 1910, they had… Oh, yes. They might have put in additional tile, maybe had a wet spot in the field, so you run a tile up to that. So your dad, he was actually working with them? Well, I'm sure that when my dad started a farm, he bought a farm, and it was already tiled. So he maybe put in an occasional strip of tile to tile out what we call a spout, something like that, but the main tiles were already there. But on his father's farm, he was born in 1876. Your grandpa had it already tiled, and… Well, I don't know. I think… Well, he probably had. But I think you hired a tiler rather than do it yourself. There were people that just made their… That was their business, tiling. Did they push sand on the first layer on top of the tile, or just regular topsoil? Just dump the dirt right back in on it, yeah. And the next few years, was it different in harvest and in profit? Of course, there are still people that tile yet, you know, because they want to make it that much better. Ideally, you probably have a tile every, oh, a few hundred feet, which they didn't do at first. Now they'll just go in a field and they'll just lay a tile string here, here, there, and there, and a big tile here that it joins up with. And now they're using plastic tiles. Yeah, yeah, they use them quite a lot. They suck up the water as good as the… But was the clay here, though, enough to make all those field tiles? Because some of the factories starting up here in… Yeah, you go over to Little Hilly, you had no problem finding clay. You had a lot of material that worked. Were there any Swedes that were running those factories? Not that I know of, not that I know of. Or Yankees? Yeah, Yankees, that's what they used to call them. American ingenuity. If you weren't a Swede, you'd be considered a Yankee. Anybody that wasn't a Swede, he was a Yankee. Okay, so did they refer to him as a German or… Not too likely. Yankee was a pretty broad term, of course. And now that would be… Of course, if you were a full-blooded German from Weyland, that would be different. But then out, well, there was people living all over, you know, that you… maybe they weren't even full-blooded anything, but they'd been in America for many, many years. They were Yankees. They were Yankees. And to many of those pioneers, they were not able to correspond with those Yankees. I mean, talking to them. Well, I think they had to learn to. They had to learn to. If they were out in the business, but on the home front. They kept to this business. Yeah, that's true. Were there any cooperative ventures started here in Swedesburg? Not that I know of. Or trying to sell the grain and crops? No, no. They were always done on a private basis then. The nearest thing, and that would not be a co-op, it was a corporation, there was a store, Farmers Union Exchange. It was owned by an individual, had always been owned by an individual. And then this last man, he wanted to sell out. So they organized a corporation. And you had stock in it. So it really was not a co-op. It was not a co-op. And that lasted until, oh, not too many years ago. I see. And it was a good venture. They did real well. So they hired a manager then. Yeah, hired a manager and clerks and so forth. But when it got to a point where, well, farmers didn't have cows, they didn't have chickens, they didn't have eggs, well.