 We have 6th of August 1987. I'm sitting together with Erik Jacobsen in La Per, Michigan. He was born 31st of March 1919 in Stockholm, Sweden and came to the United States 1924. Your parents now, Tage Jacobsen or Emil Tage Jacobsen and his wife, Britta, they lived in Stockholm. Yeah. And you were born. That's where I was born, yes. And what was his occupation? He was in the army. He was a captain in the army. So he had taken enlisted and... Yes, he was an enlisted man, yeah. What regiment in Stockholm? As far as I know, it was in the king's... It was in the king's regiment. Because from what we heard, he was on horseback and he had all the plumage and everything, you know. And so I understand that it was in the king's guard's regiment. So it could have been Livregimentets Dragoner. Have you heard that? No, I don't believe I've heard that, but yeah. Livgård, Göta Livgård. You never heard of them? That sounds familiar, yeah. But he spent quite a few years there. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And he came here in 1923, a year before we did. What was the reason he... That my wife asked me this morning and I don't know. I don't know why he came here. Because after his military duties he... After his military duties he was a automobile dealer. He sold Dodge products, you know, the Dodge brothers. And he used to sell them in Germany and Russia and Sweden and in that area, you know. And then he used to race them too. We have some old pictures of him in race cars. Dodge? Yeah, in the Dodge race cars. I see. Was it some kind of endurance races then? Yeah, I guess you'd call them endurance races. Something like the Indianapolis 500, only maybe 50 miles instead of 500. So he had a pretty good job then, he was traveling around. But still he wanted to go to this country. You had no idea why? No, I couldn't tell you why. I really don't know. So he left in 1923? Yes, he came here in 1923. And then you had one brother. They were both born in Sweden, in Stockholm. Yes, his name was Taeg. Taege? Taege. Taege Oswald. They called him Taege. Yeah. You don't remember when he left for the first time in 1923, your father? No, no, no. Well, we stayed with my grandfather, I remember that. He worked for the railroad and he was retired. Did he live in Stockholm too? No. He was about, well, from what my mother said, he was about 50 miles north of Stockholm. He lived on a little lake. And he was retired from the railroad. So you stayed there for a year until you... For a year, yeah, until we came here. And that was in January 1924? Yeah. And you have no memories of that trip at all? Just that everybody was sick on board. It was a rough sailing. Yeah. Journey. So you came here to, or he came to Detroit. How did he arrange now his traveling? Did he have any cousins or brothers? Yes, he had a brother in Minneapolis, Eric. And he was supposed to come along with two other men, Eric Johnson and Gunnar Pearson. And they were supposed to go to Minneapolis. But they got off the train in Detroit and he said, well, I imagine he said, the hell with it, we'll stay here. What was the reason? Did he know anybody here? No, he didn't know anybody here. And then they looked up the Swedish church on the east side and then they got acquainted with people. So he stayed here. All three of them? Yeah, all three of them stayed here. Eric Johnson is dead now. Gunnar Pearson is dead. And of course my dad is dead. He died in 1968. And what kind of work were they looking for? Did they have no... They had no idea what they were going to do. My dad got a job at Packard Motor Company. And I really don't know what the other two gentlemen did. So they didn't follow each other into each workplace to look for a job? No, no. Spread out? Yeah. So how long did he work there at Packard? Oh, I think about ten years. Ten years? Yeah. And then he got into... Let's see, that would be... Yeah, about ten years. No, no, no. No, I'll stand corrected. It was about five years because when I was eleven years old, he took over his first apartment building. And that was in the 1930s? Yeah, yeah. Was he laid off then from his job? No, no, no, no. Due to depression? No, no, no. What do you remember now going into the depression? You were in school then of course. The one thing I remember, I had... I had a paper route and I had about twenty dollars in the bank. And I was mad when they closed the banks because I lost my twenty dollars. I do remember that much, but being in real estate management, the depression never hit us because Dad always worked all the way through it. And he always made good money all the way through the depression because the company he was with at that time used to buy apartment buildings and four family flats and things like that for about five cents on the dollar. Was there a local investor there? Yeah, yeah. The Langheenan Company. And then he would walk in and they would bring the building up to whatever needed to be fixed and things like that, you know, and put it in good shape. And I remember a lot of times that people couldn't pay the rent, didn't have the money to pay the rent. Okay, he had them working. He had them doing things in the apartments there so that they could work off their rent. And then as things seemed to get a little better, well then they would sell these apartment buildings and they made good profit on them, real good profit. And that was in Detroit? Yeah, in Detroit. Right in the city. Yeah. Did you start to help out with your dad in this business too when you got old enough to go to school? Yeah, I used to paint and fix screens and do things like that, yeah. He made me work, yeah. Your other brother, he was a couple of years older. Yeah, he was six years older than I was. Six years older. Yeah. So he had to start school also then? Yes, yes. But when we came to this country, I think we came here into Detroit on a Saturday, the way I remember my mother telling me. And Monday night, my dad took us down to night school, all three of us, to learn English. So all three of us had to go to night school to learn English right away. Every night of the week? Yeah, we had to go every night of the week, yeah. And then my brother, of course, caught up in school as he learned the language. And then when I became, well, let's see, that would be that fall, I was eligible for school and I started school here. So you had no trouble to pick up the English? No, no. And how about your playmates outside the neighborhood? Oh, they were all good kids. We never had any problems. Were there any other Swedes around? Yeah, I think there were, yeah. We lived over near Mondaliet and Van Dyke and in that area, and there were Swedes around there. What was the biggest Swedish settlement in Detroit? Was there any clans, so to speak? Not that I know of. It was spread out? Yeah, yeah. And you went to school then, and your brother, he was six years older, so he was not actually going to the same school then? No, no, no, no. You were completely separated? Yeah. Did you keep up the Swedish, though, during this time when you went to school? Just around the house. Did you talk Swedish most of the time? No, no, we talked English. My dad wouldn't let us talk Swedish. Yeah, but how about your mother? Oh, yeah, she'd talk once in a while, you know, and we kept it up. Did she answer back in Swedish most of the time? Yeah, but if my dad wanted her to speak English, he wouldn't answer. He wouldn't even listen to her. And then she'd have to say it in English, you know, and... So you learned rapidly? Oh, yeah, yeah, uh-huh, yeah. There was no way out? No, no, not like today. We didn't have special school teachers to teach us like they do in schools today. You have to have all different kinds of school teachers for the different languages. Did you join the church? Yeah, we belonged to the Swedish church. Emmanuel. Yeah, mm-hmm, yeah. So how about the Sunday school there? Did you go to the Swedish classes there or English? I don't remember going to Sunday school. How about confirmation? Were you confirmed? Yeah, yeah. Was it English? I don't remember. I don't remember, really, yeah. But there was up to 30, 35 of you in English. Yeah, yeah. So, and then you met a lot of other Swedes, of course. Oh, yeah, yeah. Did you associate with those people, like lodges and clubs? Yeah, we joined the Fram Lodge in Royal Oak, and then I was with the Swedish dance team of Detroit, and then I was with the Swedish Glee Club of Detroit. So we, we, and then we used to go down to Danish Hall on Saturday night, dancing. And that was for all the Scandinavians? Yeah, all the Scandinavians, sober and drunk. And that was in the wintertime, every week there then, or? Yeah, just about every Saturday night. Did your parents go down there too? Yeah, yeah, they used to go down there. And what kind of music did they have? Liebeck and Schelin. Local people? Yeah, yeah. With accordion and? Accordion and a violin and a piano player, yeah. Do you remember Skrattur, no, Udi Skrattur came in here at any time? No. You never heard that name? No. He had a theatrical ensemble or group. Yeah, no, I don't remember him. Your parents, like your father Emil Jakobsen, he was also active? Yeah, yeah, he belonged to Norse Civic and he belonged to the Swedish Glee Club and he belonged to the Fram Lodge. Was he an officer there at that lodge? Do you remember? No, no, he was not an officer. He was knighted by the King of Sweden once, wasn't he? Yeah, yeah, yeah, there's a plaque down, we had a plaque. I don't think he was really knighted, I think he was just honored. I don't think he was knighted, no. He was honored by the King of Sweden for his work in the Scandinavian. He was to the consulate in Chicago? No, Detroit. So there's a vice consul in Detroit at that time also? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And when you got old enough then, what kind of work were you getting into? I was in engineering. Engineering? Yeah. How did you get into that one? I'm a graduate engineer from school. So you went to college then after high school? No, I went to a technical school. Here in Detroit? Yeah, and then I went to Ford's training school. So you went to the automotive school? Yeah. And that's been your life? Yep, engineering. You went to Ford Motor Company? No, no, no. I stayed with Ford for about three years, and then after that I went to work for Detroit Tap & Tool, and then from there to Colonial Broach. And there was a Swedish background in the company? Yeah, the Lundell family. They have organized that, or what do you call it? Well, the way Detroit Tap & Tool and Colonial Broach started, there was two gentlemen, Anderson and Lundell. They started down in downtown Detroit during the First World War, and they manufactured broaches. And then they got into the tap business, and then when they got into that, then they got into machines and hobs and cutters, and then they got so big that they split. Anderson took Michigan Tool, and the Lundell family took Colonial Broach and Detroit Tap & Tool. So they split up then? Yeah, because it got so big that it was getting too much for them to handle as a group, so they split up individually. So they started already during the First World War, right? Yeah, they started during World War I. And they came right in the automotive explosion, in other words, with Chevrolet, Chrysler. Yeah, yeah. So a lot of those small shops or companies, they started in the garage with one room and half a machine and grew out. That's right. Bigger and bigger. Yeah, and then I worked for, well, after Colonial folded up, I worked for U.S. Broach, and then Detroit Broach, Gus Von Rees. And then I worked for, I ran a company called Diamond Broach. And then after that, I started on my own. Your own company? Yeah. And it was named... Well, no, I was doing engineering work and sales work. Oh, I see, as a consultant. Yeah. That's kind of interesting. Yeah. So when they started off with small companies, now growing up more and more, and they were ready for more work in the 30s, then the Depression hit. Some survived and some went under. And there was no union before 1930, so... That's right, yeah. Everything was quiet and harmonious. Were the workers really happy, though, during the 20s, without the divorce and the mercy of the shop owner? That I couldn't tell you, because I didn't work in the shops at that time. But have you talked to some of those? Yeah. The old-timers, now like at Colonial Broach, we had a couple old Swedes that worked there that retired when I was there. And I used to talk to them. And they would say that the old-timers, they didn't want the union. It was the young guys. They wanted it. And they were the agitators. And, of course, you've got to remember, I was only getting one side of the story. So... But... No, I could probably say that in the smaller shops, they were quite happy. They were like a unit, and they knew each other. Yeah, they were almost like family. And they were like speaking terms. Yeah, yeah. But when you got big, though... When the big companies, when they got the big companies, well, I don't know, maybe there was a lot of agitation in there. You know. But how were they able to succeed with higher earning? Because they seemed to me that they never asked for any raise. They were only when they told them, I'll give you three cents more, an hour, an hour, five cents, and they could take years before they get that raise. Yeah, yeah. So they worked completely to the shop owner's mercy to... Yeah, but you've got to remember that butter was five cents a pound, too. Yeah, but it was the same thing for the one that made money, though. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, you've got the same thing today, too. Your car might run... Well, my car out there ran $18,000. Okay, I'm paying... Well, we don't use butter, but butter is almost, what, almost a dollar a pound, isn't it? Or over a dollar a pound. It's the same thing for me. It is for the guy that made the Ford Motor Car Company, the big officials there, and they're making, what, two, three million dollars a year. So if you scale it down, what I make now, as a consultant and everything, probably is equal to what those guys were making at 25 cents an hour. And the owner of the shop was probably making $10,000 a year. So there hasn't changed much, then? There's always this gap between... Yeah, yeah. But if the union had come in, then there would probably be more, a bigger gap. I think there would be, yeah. Yeah. To begin with, in other words, they had some... But the old Swedes, it seems to me, they were consent to come and make a living. But one thing... They had to work. One bad thing that I know about the union is that it destroyed the incentive of the worker. It was further up in time, though, in the 70s and 80s, though. Yeah. In other words, a guy in a shop today that shows an incentive, he can't get anyplace. He's supposed to be at the... Yeah, he's at his level, and he takes his turn getting up, which I don't think is right. In other words, if a man shows an incentive and is able to come up with ideas and things like that, he should be advanced. But don't the company do that, like making him a foreman or something like that? Then the union hollers like hell. Too many foremans. No, uh-uh, no. So that's always a struggle, of course. Oh, yeah. But then during the Depression, your family didn't feel any pressure then of being out of work? No, no, no. But how about some of them that were out of work? Do you remember any hardships for the Swedish group in particular? Not really, because we weren't that well off. Now, my wife's family was probably harder hit with the Depression than we were, because her dad was a factory worker at that time. And from what she says, yes, they had hard times. But I can remember one time when Dad quit his job here. I don't know, there was some kind of argument, but he quit his job here, and that was during the Depression, and he couldn't find work here, so he was going to go to Chicago. Well, all we had was enough money to get to Chicago and also to buy a bag of potatoes. And Mom cooked that potato, we had potato soup, and then ended up with potato pancakes afterwards. So that was the only time the Depression hit us. He was looking for another job there in Chicago. And when he got there, yeah, the company was all set up and everything, they were all set to go, and then they went bankrupt. So then we came back here, and then of course he got a job right away back here. So he never went into the automotive industry again? No, no, no, never after that. He didn't care for that kind of a job? No, uh-uh, no. He liked to be independent. He was also in something with movies or films? Yeah, he was with Jam Handys. What was that? Advertising. And he did a lot of General Motors advertising on trucks and things like that. And then he made, I remember one picture he made during the war, during World War II. Well, basically it came out that you gotta keep your mouth shut. During the war? Yeah, yeah. Because you never knew who was next door to you. And I remember that movie. But mostly it was advertising. And it was short strips then? Yeah. Set on TV or on the big screen? No, no, no, it was... In the movie theaters? No, it wasn't in the movie theaters, no. They would take it around to the different plants, or different offices and things like that and show them. To the employees at various... Yeah, yeah. Like one he made for General Motors for Chevrolet truck, they took that around to the dealers and showed it to all the sales people. Things like that. How long did he do this? Oh, he did that for a good ten years. So he was active? Yeah, very active. And he continued to stay here in Detroit? Yeah, yeah. And he also died, what year did he die? 1968. 1968. Died in Florida. So they took the wintertime in Florida? Yeah, yeah. He would be up here in the summertime and then he'd be down there in the wintertime. Was he working down there? No, no, no, no, no. He was retired. Retired? Yeah. And his wife was still living? She died in 66. Oh, I see. Did they go back to Sweden at that time? Yeah, they used to go back quite often, yeah. And we used to get a kick out of when they would come back, we'd come out and see them. And of course my wife don't speak Swedish, you know, but my mother, she would start telling her about things and then before you know it she was talking Swedish. And then English and then Swedish. Did you go with them to Sweden? No, no, never been back. Never been back? No. What did they say then after the return? You mean going back to Sweden? Yeah, what did they find? Oh, they liked it, they saw all their relatives and they really enjoyed it, yeah. But they were not ready to go back to retire in Sweden? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. Neither one of them ever said they wanted to go back there and live. How old were they when they came here, in their 30s? Well, let's see. Late 20s? Yeah, yeah. Dad died 68, he was 80 years old. That meant he was born in 88. Born in 88 and he came here in 23, so that's 12, 35 years old. Do you remember now when the Swedes made some pilgrimage up to this neck of the woods? How old were you then when you went there? Well, that was, they started this club in 1925. That's when they bought this property. Of course, we'd only been here one year. But we used to come up in the 30s. We used to come up here quite often. And they had something doing every Saturday night here, every Saturday and Sunday. They had picnics going. Yeah, we used to come up here. At that time, though, was it more open for the public? It was every week, you said? Yeah, every week, yeah. It was not established only for a certain group of people? No, no, no, no. Every weekend they had something doing up here. And the women worked in the kitchen and the men behind the bar. Other lodges used to take it over, too. Who? Other lodges. Yeah, other lodges used to rent it for picnics and things like that, you know. So there was a board of directors then in the 30s? Oh, yeah. They took care of it, the management. Same as we have now, yeah. So did you, but it seems to me at that time it was quite far away from the people. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. It was like a tremendous ride. Today it's nothing, but I mean... Yeah, well, we didn't have an expressway. Why did they pick this site so far away? That I don't know. I don't know. Now it's perfect, of course. You like to be away from the big cities. But I can remember when we had our 50th anniversary party. They read some of the articles from the newspaper up here, and it said that, I think his name was Farmer Brown, had sold so many acres of swampland to a bunch of dumb Swedes for $5,000. He said that? Yeah, that was what they said that was in the paper. And now look at it. It's worth millions. So it was not easy to take that, I suppose, for the board of directors to read it, to listen to it. Yeah, but... Well, I suppose it was overgrown then with a lot of brush and ink. Yeah, yeah. They used to walk down from the farmhouse. They would walk down here, and they had a wooden bridge going across the river. But if one watches, you know, you have a lot of big oak trees. Yeah. And that means there was no swamplands all over because... No, they planted a lot of these things. But the big oaks that were here... No, the big oaks were here. Some of these are a couple hundred years old. They refer to swamplands for probably the lowland. Around the lake and things, you know, yeah. So they had to be cleaned up then? Yeah. Well, we take, we leave all the land around the lake, except for where we have our swimming. All that is left natural. We don't touch it. Natural setting. Yeah, and that's a bunch of swampland around there, you know, wetland. Wetland. Yeah. And, but the farmland itself, you rent out to a farm? Rent out to a farm, yeah, to a farmer. And this 360 acres... This is site 2, continuation with Eric Jacobson, Lapeer, Michigan. Site 2. 360 acres. Uh-huh. And they paid $5,000 for it. That's what I understand, yeah. So there were personal impact with some of the board of directors. So how did they scrape that together? They, each one put in so much money, and then they divided up the lots and charged so much for each lot. And then there was yearly dues, and they... They didn't take any bank loan at that time, then, because they... Not that I know of, no. No collateral to enter the bank, and... Not that I know of. This was before the Depression, though. Yeah, this was in the 20s. What did they say then, 1930 and 31 and 32, when it started, though? They didn't have any problem up here. They were still going strong up here. They did everything to keep it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. They used to make good money in the kitchen and good money on the bar, and... There was nobody living at that time. There was... Not in here, no. Not all the work, for instance, stayed in tents also. No, the only thing was a farmer. He was... Yeah, they used to rent that out to the farmer. In other places, you know, like Rockford and Worcester, it was usually when they had a campground, a lot of unemployment people, they tented all summer at a site like this. But you never had that here then, did you? Oh, yeah. They used to put tents up around here all summer long. And they stayed all summer? Some of them would, yeah. Some of them would stay all summer, and... So the family stayed here then, and the men went back to work? Yeah, yeah. They built wooden platforms, and then they put the tent on the wooden platform. Oh, I see. Yeah. Uh-huh. So they were... Getting scaffolds away from the swamp, so... Yeah, uh-huh. And your kids now, what were you doing? Dancing and playing around, what kind of...? Oh, yeah, we'd dance and play baseball, yeah. We'd play baseball, we'd run in the games, and... We'd dance, drink. But not the young people. Oh, yeah. They were almost as bad as the old ones. How about the church people? Were they also interested? I mean, there are two groups, you know, you have the high church people. Yeah. They go to church every Sunday and obey the house. Were they participants in this adventure? If they were, I never noticed them. They caught with the idea. Yeah. Because there are some that are against drinking and some against dancing, for instance. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But they all, everybody that came here, they stayed. Yeah, yeah. See, when my wife and I got married, she was, her family was... predominantly Catholic and we were Lutheran, so we ended up Methodist. Wife and I are Methodist. Yeah, and of course, they don't believe in card playing, they don't believe in drinking, they don't believe in dancing. But... we had a minister in Birmingham that... he would always look the other way. And he'd say, I don't care if you smoke, but don't expect me to come to your house smelling of cigarettes. Yeah, and then I sang with the Birmingham Mail Chorus too. And then I sang with the First Methodist Church of Birmingham. I sang in their choir. So how did you meet your wife now? She's a French background. Well... Camera or... No, no. Her dad came out here... You want to come in and correct me if I'm wrong on this? What? I don't know what the question is. How did I meet you? Her dad came out here to start a plant. He was with Greenfield Tap and Dye. And he moved the family out to Royal Oak. Well, down the street from them was a Swedish family called Nordinz. And they had a daughter... My age. Her age. So she asked her one time if she wanted to go down to Danish Hall dancing. And she did, and that's where I met her, down at Danish Hall. And after a couple of times, then I started taking her down to Danish Hall. How long did it take before you brought her home as a date to your parents? A couple of months. A couple of months. It was longer than that. Wow, it was close to a year. Yeah, probably. Because in the beginning we were just dating. Were you afraid to bring her too fast or you had to gradually... No, no. You were afraid to tell your mother you weren't going to get married though. Because she wanted you to marry a nice Swedish girl. Yeah, and that don't happen up here too often. What did your mother say when you introduced her as a French background? They were probably all right, but the Catholic, it was probably... Well, no, see, her mother... I wasn't raised Catholic. No, her mother was a Methodist, but her father was Catholic. But he wasn't a staunch Catholic. So she was brought up more in the Methodist church or Christian faith than in the Catholicism faith. Episcopal. Yeah, Episcopal faith. That's the way my mother and father saw it. How did you meet your mother-in-law now? How did you introduce yourself? What did you talk about? Well, gee, I don't know if I can remember. Must have been down at the apartment building. No, I think the first time was down at Dain's Hall. Maybe it was. Well, you've got to realize Eric's mother was a wonderful person. She was very gentle and kind, and she was very nice to me. Right from the beginning, she was very, very nice to me. So she was welcoming. I mean, I never felt unwanted from his parents. It was a very nice relationship. As far as that goes, I've got a sister-in-law that's part Indian, and she treated Claire just beautifully. Well, it probably works out wonderfully. It's harder to introduce to an older generation, because they are set in their ideas. I come from a background that's not too different from his. I mean, my father's family is all Canadian French, and they spoke broken English. My father spoke French to his mother, never spoke French at home, so I'm not bilingual either. So that part wasn't so different for me. But I can remember going back east, and we went and visited Grandma Lapeer, and she spoke very broken English. I could understand her real easy, but Junie couldn't, because I was used to broken English. So you were not surprised by it? No, uh-uh. But I never had any trouble with your mother. No, uh-uh. I was telling her when she'd go to Sweden and come back, she'd talk half Swedish and half English. I knew enough Swedish to pick up a word here and there, like I do with the French. Tell me now about Lapeer. Yeah, it's Lapeer. You've got the French pronunciation. Some of your forebears came here long ago? Well, the town here is named, if you look at the thing uptown, that plaque that's on the courthouse lawn, the name of the person that came here is spelt like my name was, with two capitals, and, you know, L-A and then a capital P-I-E-R-R-E. That's the way my mid-name was spelt. But the English pronunciation is Lapeer, and that's probably why the spelling is different for the town. But it is one of your ancestors, though. Well, probably, because there's a lot of Lapeers in Canada, and that's, you know, where my forebears came from. They're all Canadian French. What happened, Oliver, when you were introduced to herring and lutefisk and all those crazy things? Well, I was brought up to try things, and I like herring. Lutefisk is something else. That I don't like. Why? I don't like the taste. It's too bland. But I like a lot of the traditions that they do, except that first Christmas Eve I spent with your parents, and we all had to down a glass of something. Aquavit. And I wasn't even drinking it straight. But outside of that, I mean, I like Swedish pancakes. I like the meatballs. I like most of that stuff. I like most of the stuff your mother cooks. She doesn't like pig's feet. No, I don't like pig's feet. I love them. And I don't like lutefisk. But outside of that, I like everything else. How about the Swedes now in your generation? In other words, the second generation. Well, you were the first one, though. Do they like lutefisk as a general rule? Yeah, the people about my age, they do go for... They do like a lot of that. With the white gravy? Yeah, with the white gravy, milk gravy. But you haven't shown your wife on it. No, no. Not the gravy either. We like herring. I like herring. And we go down to the Swedish club, have herring breakfast quite often. I don't like the cooked herring. I like the pickled herring. And then, of course, where she comes from, they have a lot of shrimp and lobster, and I like that, so that makes us even. Well, he tries things that I was growing up with, because I'm an Easterner, and a big boss to bake beans and stuff like that. And his mother wasn't great for cooking vegetables, odd vegetables like parsnips or brussels sprouts or anything like that. So when we first get married, I'd say, do you like parsnips? I don't know, I've never had it, but he's good at trying things too. So that way we sort of solved it. The raw vegetables that we are doing today, like salads, that was unknown when you were growing up though. We never had salads that I can remember. No, because that generation didn't. No, uh-uh. It was rabbit food. Yeah. So they was introduced by the second generation. But I can remember I'd sit down and listen to the radio, and I'd eat on a raw carrot or something like that, you know. Well, your mother told me one time when I asked her about that, she said they couldn't get them. No, because of the climate. Yeah. Oh, yeah. They can fly them there in six hours for gosh sake now. But even in the summer it was never used, you know, like a salad you ate. Yeah. How about your people now? We were vegetable years. Salads. Yeah. Way back, way from the time that I was small. In fact, my mother was the kind that tried anything. I can remember having to eat dandelions one time because somebody said it wasn't good. Yes. Those are terrible. Her mother is 91 years old and still living. Here in Detroit? No, no, in Massachusetts. Massachusetts? Yeah. Yeah. So your parents, they came... Well, both my parents were born here, but their parents came from... No, they were born in Massachusetts, not here. No, my family is all in the east. My sisters and everybody. So you became a Midwesterner by marriage. Yeah. But it's interesting, you know, when two cultures come together. Oh, yeah. We got a lot of them out here. Almost all the Swedes here are married to non-Swedes. What's Al? Is he French? I don't know. Bon Al? Bon Al doesn't sound French. Yeah. Well, anyway, he's not a Swede. She is. Wood's up there. Now, he's a Swede, and she's Polish. So Christine Ruth. And Christine Ruth, yeah. Now, there's another... What do you want to call it? Mixed marriage? Yeah. Well, the thing is what you do is just say they want Swedes that are married to Swedes, and there aren't very many. Maybe four couples or something like that. How does it work out not to be together with Swedes? How do you find them? Well, not so bad now. The older generation was another thing. Oh, yeah. So they were more stubborn. Yes. They, I mean, for all that, Eric's mother was all right. I mean, a lot of them didn't accept me for a long time. And it was too bad. It's like I told Pete one day. I said, you know, I'm as French as Eric is Swedish. And I said, my family welcomed him with open arms, but it took me a long time to be introduced. So you had no trouble to be introduced to her family? No. No, no. They took me right to heart when we got back there. They didn't come out for the wedding. Well, because they didn't have the money. Yeah, they didn't have the money, and travel time was longer and all that. They didn't have expressways. And when we went back there, they had a great big reception for us back there. No, we had a great time. Never had any problem meeting. So there is a bit more to work on. It depends on yourself also if you're outgoing. If you're a clueless yourself, then you're in trouble. That's right. You've got to fight back. That's right. That's right. You've got to be a fighter. But you've got to be done at the right time at the right moment. That's right. You have to prove yourself more. And I find that here, most of the non-Swedes go along with the bylaws of the club. I mean, that sort of thing. We have served the Swedish foods and things like that, because that's the way this club was brought up. Furthermore, I don't want my children to lose their heritage. There is another question about the food. Does it say in the bylaws, for instance, that it was to be Swedish food? No. So you can serve anything you want. We can serve anything we want. In fact, the last picnic we had chicken dinners. We also had meatballs. Yeah, we had meatballs. So it doesn't say anything about food then? No. So that makes it a little bit open. That's right. So Norwegians can come in with lefse and anything they want. Yeah. And then my one son, the oldest son, he loves herring. God, he can sit down and eat a whole bowl of herring. So he gets that part from us. Well, we introduced them both ways. Yeah. And for a while there, they wouldn't eat either way. I mean, they're going to eat American, that's it. Remember when your mother used to have Christmas dinner and horses? We'd eat it. They'd sit through the first three. And there's probably kids today like that. Oh, yeah. They'd definitely do it. Well, she'd have prosciutto and all that, and they wouldn't eat that. They wouldn't even try it. They didn't like baked beans either. Years ago, there was no choice. In other words, the food you served on the table, this is it. Today, they have a little bit more. They say, I want to eat it. But years ago, nobody said no because there were so many around the table and everybody was grabbing. Yeah, everybody was grabbing. So it depends on the time. Today, there's too much money. The kids go up to McDonald's and they eat all that junk. Well, it's not good for them. We've got a young man out here now that's probably somewhere around 18 to 20 years old. He's got a high cholesterol level and he's got a heart condition. Eating too much of that junk food. It doesn't pay off. No. So now you are the president of this Vasa. Was it called Vasa Country Club also in the 30s? Yes. Right from the beginning, it was called Vasa. And your father, was he the president at any time? No, he was never president. He was on the board? No, he was never on the board. He did chairman a lot of the picnics though and things like that. But you are not unfamiliar with when you took this post as being a president. You had good knowledge of the Swedes living here and the customs and ideas. And the tool shed, how they looked like with crooked nails. So they want to save everything. They save everything. You can go back in there and you can find stuff from 1924. And there's your agenda to save in other words for the next generation. No, no, no, I don't. I don't. If I take some nails out of boards and everything, I throw them away. I even throw the board away. I'm bored of new nails. It's much easier to work with. That's what you do with your tool workshop too. Yeah. You don't look for a nail, you just go buy a new one. So a lot of the first nails brought up here was probably from Detroit then. Oh yeah, yeah. Some from the building sites and from the constructions. A lot of carpenters I suppose. How many carpenters have been living here over the years you think? And painters? Oh God, I couldn't. I don't know. I don't know. The old timers, I don't know. I do know that Breedenburg had his own shop. Falkenlimburg had his own shop. Pat Dilleen had his own shop. Not Pat Dilleen, his father. I can't think of his first name. Eddie over here worked as a tool and die maker. Pete had a grocery store in bowling alleys. Axel, he worked in a tool and die shop. Anton Johnson, I don't know what he did, but his son Herbie Johnson was a carpenter. I really couldn't tell you what all the old timers did. But the whole group were self-sufficient and they did everything themselves? They did everything themselves. Plumbing and carpentry? Yeah, yeah. They were very frugal. They liked to straighten the nails. Yeah, straighten the nail. Some of them they wouldn't even straighten. They'd take another drink and pound the nail in. How about the young generation? You usually look up to the older ones. You didn't catch this, though, how they do the same thing. Did you tell them sometimes to...? Well, it seems like every work day somebody will come in, some young guy will come in, and we've got to clean out the tool shed, Jake. Okay, go ahead, clean it out. Then all of a sudden he'll come back. Well, they wouldn't let me throw this away. They wouldn't let me throw that away. Okay, just put the damn stuff in there and forget it, you know. It's like a museum now. Yeah, yeah. You can get some real old nails and old screws. It's like good, real Swedish thinking. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, they were brought up during a hard time. Yes, yes. There was no way to throw away anything that could be used. That's right. But there comes a time when you have to change gears. That's right, yeah. Couldn't tell them any. Well, I just replaced all my tools downstairs. They got too damn old, so I replaced them and gave all the old ones away. Oh, some of them were burned out, you know, that I had used quite often were burned out, and so I'd buy a new one, and drills and saws. But the generation that you were growing up with, they had a different idea. That's right, yeah. They would never think about doing things like that. No. Don't forget the older generation, they had hand saws. I got power saws, you know, and things like that. And they were very careful to have a chisel in them. Oh, yeah, yeah. And don't let it out to anybody that saws your nails. And now, you see, on my power saw, when the blade gets dull, I can go get it sharpened for $3, or I can buy a new blade for $5. So why get it sharpened, you know? It doesn't pay any more. No, throw it away and get a new one. So it's a complete new world. Yes, it's a complete new world, and it'll be another one when my son's generation. How about your kids now? Do they think you are out saving things that is unnecessary? You must have some talent. I think they do. Maybe I had better ask your wife. I think they do. I don't know if they've ever really seen that a lot. Oh, once in a while they'll go down and, Jesus, Dad, what the hell are you saving this for? Did you tell him that your dad built this place? No. The original house here, when he started, when he was 60 years old. Yeah, I came out and helped him, and this was a one-story house, and it's cement block. And, yeah, we built, well, I helped. He had another gentleman with him, Ray Walters. And they did the majority of the work. Then when we moved out here, well, when we were thinking of moving out, we added the upstairs. So he lived here then? Oh, yeah, they lived here for about six, seven years. And then go to Florida and the way down? Yeah. So that was a pretty good deal. Yeah. He started this house when he was 50 years old. And, no, when he was 60. 60, 60, 60, yeah. I was trying to think of the date, yeah, 60 years old. So he had it for 20 years. And then we moved up here in 1975. In 75? We took it over in 1969. And that was, we had to wait for the court to transfer everything. And he died in December of 68, and we became members in January of 69. Oh, you had to be a member first? Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And then you continuously have lived here? Since 1975. All year long? Yeah, yeah. So you had to travel back and forth to? Yeah, I did that. I traveled back and forth. I had an office down in Detroit, and I used to travel back and forth. One day I says, why in the hell do all that traveling? An hour and a half each way? So I quit. Wow. Well, and then I just kept a couple of people that I would sell for. And that's it. That's all I do now. It's consulting and selling. Engineering? Yeah, yeah. In brooches. I see. Specialized in brooches. And then you have your Swedish ancestry hooked into the French. Yeah, yeah, yeah. My kids think they've got the best of both worlds. Yeah. I got two great sons, two good daughter-in-laws. How do they marry, your sons? They're not married to Swedes. No, neither one of them are married to Swedes. They're just married Americans, you know, with the lineage all mixed up. Yeah. Kathy's Irish, and Cindy is? Part French, part? Part French. And what's Frank? He's English. English, yeah. Part English, anyway. He's Italian. French, English, yeah. Just American. Yeah. And they're both successful in their businesses. So they live in the joint area? No, no, no. One lives in Troy, and one lives out just about 15 minutes from here in Ortonville. Are they members, or they don't have to be? No, no, they're not members out here, no. But our will gives the house to one and the other lot to the other. Oh, you have two plots? Yeah, yeah. They can build on later on? No, no, you can't build here anymore. You can't? The township won't allow it. They're too small. The lots are too small. They won't allow it. So this is the last? Yeah, you can't build. The only way you could build would be to buy an old house and tear it down and start over, yeah. Like Andersons did down there, yeah. So how many horses are here then? Oh. Fifty? No, no, not fifty. I'd say around thirty. Thirty? Just guessing, yeah. Well, you said we had 58 members. Yeah, yeah. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen. Halfway, counting halfway, about sixteen, so I'd say thirty is probably pretty close, you know. So the township of? Elba. Elba. They said that no more? No more building. Not big enough. What do you think the tax increase would make it favorable for them? Well, we're taxed on a recreation area and a farm area. We're the biggest taxpayer in the county. I mean, not in the county, in the township, yeah. We're the biggest taxpayer in the township. And we rent to one of the township commissioners. So that helps us, too. Well, you're convenient to town here, it's very close. Oh, yes. Post office and everything. And we used to live in Birmingham, and it takes us forty-five minutes to get down there. We like the restaurants down there. Her dentist is down there. We got friends down there. I like the best of both worlds. So it takes us forty-five minutes to get down there. But to Detroit it takes about an hour and a half, you said? About an hour and fifteen minutes, an hour and a half, yeah. So years ago there was too much to go back there on the same day. Yeah. What did they do then? Well, some of them would stay in the hotel uptown, and some of them would stay in the barn. And they would charge twenty-five cents to sleep in the barn up there. And then we had the bachelor's club. Well, there were people that were unmarried, and did they have their own club? Yeah, the bachelors, they started their own clubhouse. Oh, I see. On this property? Yeah. Is it still there? No, Lyle Haskell owns it now. He and his wife own it. They're all married, so they're all in the clubhouse. Oh, yeah. No more bachelors. Amazing at the farmhouse. Why that barn didn't burn down. Because those old Swedes, they'd be half drunk up there, and they'd be sleeping in the hay, and they'd be smoking, and it's really a miracle that that place didn't burn down. He went on the loft, and he walked, and he fell on the floor. The farmer, he wanted a quarter. And they would say, some of those old guys would say that you'd be sleeping there, and people would be walking over you. So this was not the temperance to... Oh, no. No, no, no, no. Oh, no. Far from it. This is where the whiskey makers made their big profits during the summertime. You hear Svea talk about them being uptight.