 You know, I'm sitting together with Bengt Ernstson in Moline, Illinois. And he was born 18th of August 1927 in Axfall, Västergötland, Sweden, and came to the United States in 1928. And we had 24th of April 1986. So if we start now with your father, he was what we say, Amerikafarare already 1910, you said. He was a young guy then. He came over here by himself. Yeah, he was born in 1889, so that would have made him 25, 26. Yeah, well, 21. So he came here alone and... He came here alone and he settled in Keewanee, Illinois. And he must have been there two years before he came to Moline. Did he come to anybody in Keewanee? His brother, Carl, was here two years before he was, so that's why he came here. And his brother, did he have a farm there or did he work... No, he worked in... Boiler factory? Boiler factory, yes. So your dad, he took a stint at that too then? I think he was a farmhand in Keewanee. That's what he did in Sweden. So he came over here and farmed, worked on the farm for two years before he came to Moline. And he started with International Harvester. No, that was after we all came over in 28. But I think at that time he was a farmhand most of the time. And in 1914 he became a citizen. And the next week he was drafted in the Army. For the First World War? Yes. And he served in France for about 11, 12 months. And after that the war was over. And he came back here? Yes, he came back here. And in 1918, or 1919 he went back to Sweden. And that's when my mother and dad got married. They knew each other from childhood so to speak? Yes. Both from Bornheim, West Jutland? Yes. They went to school together and they were confirmed together. So they knew each other from childhood. And then they married in 1919 or 1920? No, they married in 1921. So he stayed in Sweden then a couple of years? Yes. He stayed there until 28. And between that time they had two boys, my brother and I, and he's older than I am. And in 1928 we all came over. So what was he doing then in Sweden between 1919 and 28? He had a farm. He rented a farm. I can't recall the name of it now. Huggeskog in Bornheim. But you were born in Axvaldo. Did they work up there at that time in 1927? There were so many small communities around there. They moved around? Yes. They worked, they lived on a farm and when that didn't go so good they moved into town I guess and that's when I came along. So your brother now, he's how old? He's two years older than I am. Oh, there's just two boys then? Two boys. Two boys. So he got the urge to go to America again? Oh yes. He wanted to come back? He knew from being there before how well off they were here. We all packed up and came I guess. Do you think your mother tried to stall it from 1919 to 27? Do you think he was talking about it earlier to go to the United States? And she didn't want to go? I don't think Mom was the type that wanted to come here in the first place. Because my dad had been here before and I guess he had talked about it so much she was willing to make the sacrifice and come here. To make a try at it? Yeah. So the whole family then came? Yeah. And of course you were only a few months old so you couldn't remember too much. Then the depression was in 1929 so the times weren't too good at that time. So they came to Moline? Moline, yes. But he didn't, how about his brother now, was he still in Kevaune? No, he was in Moline here too. And he worked for? John Deere. John Deere. Yeah. So you stayed with your uncle then for a while? For about six months. Six months. Yeah. And then they got their own flat or apartment? Well we rented a house for my uncle. He had another house. And that was downtown Moline? No that was over on 17th Street and about 15th Avenue. A lot of Swedes there. Oh yes. So you were growing up there during the depression? Yes. And it was tough times. Your dad now, he was laid off during the summer? He was laid off from 29 to 34. In one stretch? Oh yes. And then at 35 or 36 he got a job at the Arsenal because he was a veteran. And he started sweeping in the shop. The floors? The floors. And when he retired he was a machine operator. He worked himself up. So there was a plus then because he served in the Army? Yes. He got the preference to work in the house. So he stayed then with Rock Island Arsenal all his life? Yeah until he retired. He retired in 57 I believe. And he died in 82. 82? 82. Yeah. I see. So he was retired for many years. Many years. He didn't work anything after that? No. So he made a pretty good move then. It was tough going in West New York. Oh yes. It was tough also here in the beginning. Yeah. Did they talk about going back like your mother now? Was she homesick? Well, I think up to the second World War she was homesick. But when that broke out I guess she didn't like it. Your mom was always homesick? Yeah. She was always homesick. And you know it was an interesting thing about her was she visualized Sweden that it was still the same as when she came here as a young woman, you know? And we went over there in 1975, our family. We took our children and spent five weeks in Sweden. Was she with them? No, no. She was dead. She was dead by then. But it was a funny thing because everything that she had told us almost about the relatives and everything, it wasn't hardly anything like she, you know, she had apparently kept a little picture in her mind, you know, of what it was like when she was a girl. And she never thought that anything had changed there. And it was very interesting because it had changed a lot in Sweden and the people had changed too, you know. But she stood in the same time frame. So they never came back to your parents in Sweden again? Yeah. In 1951, wasn't it? They went back in 1951, yes. Both of them? Yes. And they spent three months there. What did you say about that trip then, though, your father? Were they pleased with what they saw? Oh, yes. They said they had a good time. They also took the ship back there, the group's home. And they spent 12 days in the ocean coming and going. But they had a real nice time. But that was the last time that they made that trip. And your mother, now, she was the only one from her family to come over? No, she had a brother that came here to Moline also. He stayed there? Yes, he stayed there the whole time. He worked at the post office. What was his name, Benjamin? Yeah, Swen. Swen was his name. When he came to America, he changed his name to Swen Swanson. Swen Swanson? No, Swanson. Oh, Swanson. Yeah. Why did he do that? He had a nice name. Well, a lot of Swedes, when they came over at that time, they changed their names. If they had an odd name, they would change it. My dad was Oscar Anderson, so he didn't want to change that, but my uncle did. So he changed it back? Yeah. Tell him about when he went to Sweden and changed his name back to Billier. And then his family wasn't very happy. His son had grown up with the name Norman Swanson, and his wife had always been Mrs. Swanson. And he took a trip back to Sweden one summer and came back Swen Billier again and decided he liked his original name. And then his family didn't like that too well. How could he do that? I mean, was it possible at that time? That was quite a few years ago, though, he did this. This must have been in 1955 or 1956. So he died with that name then, Swen Billier? Yes. So he had a name change in the middle of his life. Well, kind of late in his life, really. The odd part of it, his wife died on my birthday, and he died on my wife's birthday. So did they have any children? They had one boy. And he's still around? We don't know where he's at. We think he's up in Wisconsin. He had marital problems, and he worked for a deer company. We haven't heard from him since my mother died. And his name was Swanson? Swanson. Yeah, Norman Swanson. And so during the Depression, then, he was off from 1929 to 1934, you said? Yes. What kind of work was he doing then? Odd jobs on the farms, perhaps? Well, he was doing, he had a Model T Ford truck, and he would go out to strip mines and haul coal to people here in Moline, and that kept him busy. So he got odd jobs to support his family. He sold most of Halston to a Swedish family, so... Well, he knew people that needed coal, and he'd go out. Those days it took all day to go out there and come back with a load of coal. Yeah. So that's what kept him going. And finally he got the job at the Arsenal. So there was nothing going on at the Arsenal during the Depression, was there, more or less? Oh, I suppose there was something going on at that time, but they didn't hire anybody. It was a free zone, more or less. Yeah. It started booming in 1939, in the Arsenal. Right before the war, then. About that one employment picked up. So you went to school then in Moline? Oh, yes. John Erikson School, or...? I went to a grade school, and Erikson School, Lincoln School. Junior high, I went to John Erikson Junior High School, and a Moline Senior High School. So you had Margaret Swanson as a teacher? Oh, yes. Did you take Swedish...? Yes. I had a teacher named Satterdahl. You had? Yeah. I thought it was a family name, but it's not related, but it's the same name. Oh, that's all right. I see. I didn't know that. He was a professor over at Augustana College. He was? Yeah. And his wife taught Swedish in high school. And I also had Margaret Swanson. So like Swedish now, did your parents push you into taking Swedish, or was that just...? No, to me that was the easiest subject to take. Because you had Swedish for the...? Well, at home, my parents talked Swedish all the time. So it was quite natural for me to pick it up. You answered back in Swedish too? Not all the time, no. Not all the time? Uh-huh. But like your mother, she talked Swedish longer than your father. Yes, yes. And your mother, she never worked outside the home? She stayed at home then? Well, she used to clean the houses once in a while, during the war, but that was about it. So she didn't come out like your dad, for instance? No. She came out in the work field? Yeah. And did they belong to any lodges here in Morin? Yes, they belonged to Vasa, 288, yeah, Noble Lodge. And Dad belonged to Vikings at one time, and Ingalls. They belonged to Salem? Salem Lutheran Church, yes. So you were confirmed there? Yes. And like Vasa and Vikings, was he an officer there or helping out on the board? No, I think he was on the board at one time, but he never did hold an officer. Your mother was active though, I think. Yeah, she was in some guy's drill team. Oh, I see. With Vasa? Vasa, yes. And she was also a member of Lutheran Hospital Auxiliary, and active in her church too. So the Lutheran Hospital, there was voluntary work then. What were they doing? They were doing the work? Well, when she belonged to it, they used to have rummage sales and make bandages. And send those eat to... Uh-huh, do all that sort of thing. So most of the ladies at that time had to do things like that when the war was going on. They belonged to different auxiliary. Well, yeah, it was volunteer work, I guess. Oh, yeah, they weren't paid for that. No. It's still a volunteer work. Yeah. So you went through high school then, and then you picked up some kind of agriculture or horticulture? No, I went two years to a community college. 400 to Black Hawk? Well, it was a modeling community college at one time, and then they changed to Black Hawk. Black Hawk. And I took two years there. Then I went to work for John Deere. And when I got laid off there, I went to work in Chicago for Marshall Fields, the store. When did you go to work for John Deere? 1940? No, it had to be... 49. 49? Yeah. And they had layoffs, and I thought it was fully rushed after the war. No, they had layoffs in about 51. So I worked there for two years. In about 54, I got a job with the city, and I've been there ever since. How did you come into this plant and... City Forester? Yeah. Well, at one time, we had a lot of elm trees here in Moline. And they had a disease, they called Dutch elm disease. When did they start it? When? Yes. What year? When did it start occurring? What year did it start to occur on the trees? Oh, I'd say about 56 or 57. And before that, there was nothing noticed? Well, we had other... We had other bugs or beetles on the trees that weren't harmful to the trees, but they would weaken the trees. So in 57, I believe, Dutch elm disease started in the elm trees. So what was the first remedy? Was it copper nails or... No, no. They tried it in some cities, though. You sprayed, didn't you, first of all? Yeah, we sprayed, and we... I don't know. There was nothing coming out of the trees? No, there was nothing coming out of the trees. There was nothing cut down, or to begin with? No. No, they tried to save them for a few years, then. We sprayed, and we trimmed trees. And dead branches. Yeah. See, these beetles would hibernate in dead wood, and if you didn't get rid of the dead wood, you would have a new brood of beetles the next year. But we sprayed, and we had sanitations, and there were two or three other remedies that we tried, but to no avail. We had pretty good hold on our trees, the boulevard trees, but we had so many ravines that was full of elm trees. So the beetles would hibernate in these elm trees, then they'd feed on our trees. And that's how we... They all died. But why do they start on the top, though, in a few branches? Because that's where the soft wood is, and these beetles can... These beetles can feed on the soft wood. And this disease they would carry on their bodies, and they would rub off wherever they fed, and they would get in the sap-conducting vessels, and that's how it started. We had over 49,000 trees here, Moline. 49,000? That had to be cut down. Big trees? Oh, big monsters. Beautiful trees. Were they planted in the early 1900s, then, or even before? Oh, even before then. They were lined street after street with elm trees. And nothing could be saved? No. They were all wiped out? Yes. Moline's not the only city. Oh, Rockford was the same thing. Well, all over the United States. All over the United States. It's out in Colorado now, it's out in California. But they didn't have as many as we did. So there was no way to get rid of the beetle? No. No, the beetle was not the vector, it was whatever they had left on the tree. The wound, then that wound would start to grow and cut off the water supply from the roots. It's been so many years ago that we had it, I almost forgot. There's nothing left now? Well, we have a few elm trees around, but not too many. And it was a dreadful disease? Yes. So what have you been working with them since? Oh, about 1960, I'd say. And you're still working with the city foresters? Yes. We're planting trees and removal and things like that. So about three years from now, I think I'll retire. Can you plant another elm tree and see what happens to it? And watch it grow? There's a few elm trees, the newer species. They found out they won't get that chelm disease. A new variety of trees. So what do they plant now in the city? We plant about 40 species of trees. We plant a few elm trees that survived. They're called the abusement elms. And there's an elm tree across the street. That's a Siberian elm. That's hard enough, though. It doesn't get that chelm disease. It's a special brand that doesn't be affected by it. Oh, I've got an abuse elm tree right here. filmed over there. Next week, when it comes out, that's going to be my sister's. I'm new to this. You can't complain. Yeah. And there'll be lots to see. I like to go out now. The first couple of days, I'm here at the prairie. Making these tea bags. put a sign on the side of his building a couple of years ago in the spring when the trees were new. Thank you Ben Anderson for making Moline beautiful. Which I thought was really nice. So that'll be his legacy I guess when he's gone someday all the beautiful trees that line the streets of Moline now. So you are safeguarding yourself then with different priorities. There won't be another white pot then. No, no. We have learned our lessons. Well we did, forefathers. In 1938 the tree ordinance read here Moline was the only species of trees you could plant here Moline was elm trees, maple trees, and oak trees. Just three varieties? Three varieties. And we changed that pretty quick. It was a drastic change. So how many years did it take to cut down 49,000 elm trees? About 15 years. 15 years. And you couldn't use them for firewood? Well you could but they were so spongy inside from being decayed so fast that there was a much less of it. They were all burnt down there? Yeah we had a we had a big dump out here by Coolidge Junior High School. We burned a lot out there. That was a big dumping ground for them. Yeah, one year we took 2,000 elm trees down. One year. How many workers were employed then by the city? Well no we contracted most of that work out. And at that time Moline was beginning to widen all the main streets here in Moline and they were lined with elm trees. So maybe it was a good thing that this disease came along. They would have been cut down anyway. But we're planting trees now that elm trees is considered a forestry. Because it gets so big. The trees that we plant now are a lot smaller. I just came up 25th Street. Oh yes. That was planted by the city. That was planted by me. That's one of the most beautiful streets I think. Well nine streets the same way and there's quite a few that are nice. It's about four weeks before they should be out. But we had such a damp fall that we went into it. Then the spring broke out early too. So you know one February. In January I think too. So that's a good start for it. Yeah. So this has been your livelihood then. Yes. A few more years you can take off for Mediterranean for a sailing trip. When did you go to Sweden though? 1975. So you saw Oxfam and Varnhem. All the places. We rented a car and we drove ourselves. And we planted goers. Maybe not next year. Maybe a couple years or so. You have cousins then. One aunt living yet. One aunt. And the time we went over. All of them practically were living. Yeah. It was six on my dad's side and five on my mother's side. And there's one on each side now alive. They all died the year after we were there. So we were really happy. The next year several died. So we were really happy that we went the year that we did because we got to meet them. We wouldn't have if we would have gone later. And we took our children. I'm not Swedish at all, but I took a real interest in learning a lot about Sweden. And I studied Sweden for two years before we went over there. And I planned our trip myself. And I feel like children today, a heritage is important. And a lot of children aren't even aware of who their grandparents are. Have never met them or don't know what their background is. And I think that's a shame. So I made sure we've always sang Swedish songs and eaten Swedish food and gone to Swedish things. And been exposed to it. I've made sure our children were exposed to that. And now I've exposed our granddaughter who's four. I made her a Swedish costume for Christmas and I sing. And she went with me and she's learning Swedish songs. And she went with me and sang at my Christmas programs this year too. At the church or? We went to the retired people's group and to some rest homes. And so I just feel like that's a shame not to pass on that heritage. But this is Swedish heritage. You're all Scots and things. I'm French and Dutch and German and a lot of other things. And my parents......grew up with me. Side two, continuation with Bengt Andersson, Moline Lannoy. Side two. So you have clinged on to the Swedish heritage then on your husband's side. How did you meet now? Oh, that's a really interesting story. My parents bought a home when I was in nurses training. I was in Lupern Hospital. I was a student nurse. And they bought a home two doors from his parents' home. And I came home one weekend from the hospital and we were emptying garbage. I was emptying garbage at my parents' house and he was emptying garbage at his parents' house. And we started talking and that's how we met in all the strange ways. And then we had a date and started dating after that. He showed you all the trees he planted? Well, he hadn't done that yet. No, I hadn't done that yet. That was afterwards. And then you met your mother-in-law. What did she say? Well, she was always sorry that I wasn't Swedish. Well, she said that? Yeah, I think she was always very sorry. And my other sister-in-law, his brother's wife also, was very disappointed because she isn't Swedish either. And her family originated from the southern part of the United States. And she was always very disappointed that her two sons did not choose Swedish girls. But we managed to... No, it turned out fine. It turned out pretty good, basically. Probably, I think I probably ended up with more knowledge of Sweden than she had. Now, that's the next door. What church did you belong to, now, your parents? Well, they joined Trinity Lutheran here in Moline. Your parents? Yeah, uh-huh. And, but then I joined Salem when we were married and I've belonged there all these years and been active. So there you took an interest in the Swedish cooking, like your mother-in-law. Yeah, my mother-in-law was an excellent cook and she baked wonderful cookies and homemade breads and whatever. And my mother was a very, very good cook too, but she was a plain country American cook. I mean, she didn't make all these, you know, fancy breads and cookies and things like that so much. So I was really interested in that. And his aunts also took me under their wing. And they were all very good cooks and very good bakers, you know, too. So I learned a lot from Ben's mother and his aunts about Swedish cooking and looked up things in the library. And then I went to Augustana College and took another interest in other Swedish things by going to Augustana College. And then, of course, Lutheran Hospital has a Swedish background and our church, Salem, has a Swedish background. So it felt like I was always kind of in the middle of it and it interested me, you know. And you were curious to find out more and more. Yeah, yeah, because it was something different than I had grown up with. So you had prepared yourself for a trip to Sweden then? Oh, I knew very, yeah, I was all prepared when we went in 1975. I knew exactly where to go and what to see and in all the countries over there. It was fun. I really enjoyed it. I loved the relatives. They were so warm and friendly and I got to learn how to do all the Swedish dances and it was great. We went to Midsummerfest when we were there. Were they able to come with you? Yeah, I had managed to learn to understand what people were saying in Swedish, but I can't speak Swedish well. I can't say that I'm a good conversational Swede. But when a bunch of Swedish people are sitting around talking, I can understand a lot of what they say and I also can read the letters that they write. I may miss a few words. I don't know what everything is, but I can manage to read their letters. And I can, you know, I can read the signs like when we were traveling and menus and things like that. And you have two children? Yes. What kind of interest do they draw from your background or thanks to? Well, John went to Augustana College and he graduated from Augustana College and he is a literature, he was an English major and, you know, hopes to be a writer someday. He lives in San Francisco now and he always, I think, enjoyed the Swedish background. And then my daughter is a nurse and she works here and she lives here in Moline and works at Illini Hospital. She takes an interest in Swedish food and music and the clothing and whatever too and she and her husband took a trip to Sweden after they were married and she did quite a lot of research. They went around to all the cemeteries and took pictures of all his family's, my mother-in-law's family's grave sites and kind of got a formative history of the family and whatever and took a real interest. But she's divorced now, but her ex-husband was Neil Johnson's nephew. And so they were, Neil was quite, Neil and Viji were very interested in the fact that they went to Sweden because they went before, I think, Neil did, my daughter and her husband, and they, I know that he interviewed both of them and looked at all their pictures and everything when they came back because he was really interested in doing that sort of thing, you know, so. I see. Yeah, it was kind of interesting. So you had a fruitful visit to Sweden then? Oh yes, wonderful. Just wonderful. I'd love to go again. Did you join any organization like your dad in Viking or Vasa? Well, when I was younger I belonged to Vasa, but right now I belong to Vikings, which is up the street here. Next door almost. Yeah. So, and then you belong to the church? Yes. The Lutheran Church. How about now in, during the Depression, did your parents buy a house? No, they bought a house after the Depression, 1935, I believe. He got a job at the Arsenal the same year they bought a house. So where you live now, around 17th Ave, you said, or 17th Street? Here? Oh. I mean the first place where you were. Yeah, 17th Street and 15th Ave. Yeah. They were all Swedes. There were not too many Belgians around there. They were further down to 9th and 7th Street. Oh, there were a mixture of people there. Not too many Belgians. Oh. Like you say, they were over on 7th Street. Didn't the Germans and the Swedes kind of make a difference? The Swedes kind of intermixed. Yeah. The Danish and the Norwegian and the Swedes and the Germans kind of, you know. But the Belgians were kind of off, you know, to their own. To themselves? So the Swedes were never by themselves like the Belgians in Berlin? No. They were mixed in with others. Yeah. I see. So how did you manage now with the Belgians in school? Did you notice that they were different than the Swedes or? No, I didn't notice that. I suppose the language was different. Did they talk Belgian even in school to the Samoan kids that came from their homes? No, not too much. Not at that time. Not in your time? No. They were all talking English, huh? Yes. Oh. So, and... There was quite a few Mexicans going to Ericsson School. That was all Mexicans down... They were coming in then? Down below the hill. Oh, I see. In the late 30s? Yeah. Before the war? Yeah. Late 30s. Because the Mexicans, they lived first over at the Silvers. Yeah. Also, they lived on the west side of Moline, down below the hill. Yes. That's all Mexicans. Oh, they lived there all when you came? At that time, too. Yes. It is a very early Mexican. And they worked at the International Harvester? Yeah, they were in the International Boat. Yeah. So, there was a little bit mixture there. Yeah. Of various nationalities. How did they vote on the Swedes, your age group? Were they Republicans or Democrats? Like your dad, for instance, was he a Republican? Oh, I think he was a Democrat. Oh, yes. So, after Roosevelt, most of them turned over to the New Deal? Yeah, the New Deal. But before, it was a lot of Republicans? Yeah. Like your parents, now. How did they... Oh, my father was a staunch Republican. He was? Oh, yes. He hated Roosevelt. My father was kind of a prejudiced person, I remember. He grew up in that time where you called Italians wops, and Irish. You didn't like the Irish Catholics, and that sort of thing. I remember growing up with that idea that, by golly, I'm going to learn to like every man for what he is, not what his background is, just because of what I'd heard when I grew up. And I think I always have felt that way, that everybody's special, and it doesn't matter what their background is, or their religion or anything, because of that prejudice that I heard. I suppose it was a tougher time, though, in the 15... 1915, 1920s. Yeah, oh, yes. You had to fight your way out of the workplace, and... Oh, I think... So they made them bitter, you know. I think in the big cities... Moline was probably different, but I think in Chicago, New York, and some large metropolitan areas, I still think that prejudice existed, even in our day of growing up. It didn't here, but it did, I think, in large metropolitan areas. There were still Irish Catholics, and they were all segregated into their own little groups, I think. But we weren't... I don't think we were aware of that in our schools and in this community so much. We were lucky, I guess. Oh, there were smaller units, yeah. Before the unions came in, I think it was almost like slavery to work for John Deere. What did the old-timers say, though, when you started at John Deere? Did they warn you for a tough job, or...? No, not for me, but with my dad, they did. Like I say, it was almost like slavery, going to work every day. And there was... Before the union got old, yeah. And the union came in later at John Deere. It was... Well, I came in after my dad started at the Arsenal, so he really didn't... So you never joined the union then? No, no, he never did. Yeah. And before Roosevelt, you couldn't even talk to union. That's right. You were a pusher off. That's right. So they had you over their head all the time. Yeah. So you couldn't do anything about it. I can't realize how bad it was, but I kind of remember my dad telling me how bad it was. If you miss... you almost dare not to miss any work, else they lay you off. So even if you felt a little bit low one day, you still had to go there to protect your place? Nowadays, if you got a headache, you take off. It seems like, but... Oh, it turned out that way? Yeah. And that's no good either? No, it isn't. So when you started, your dad was still living when you started for John Deere then? I had worked for John Deere in the summer months when school was out. What did you do then? Well, I swept floors. I did everything just for a summer job. Then when I completed two years at community college, I got a job as a timekeeper out to John Deere Harvester. Timekeeper? All you were doing then was that... Well, keeping books. What they did, performers and... Yeah, yeah. That guy, he was not liked too well, though. No, I didn't time the job. I was in a pattern maker shop, and these people worked hourly wages. So I kept their time. So it was a piecework. There was no interference with the speed of the work? No, no. So there was a slow period in 1951 before the Korean War? Yeah. Then, like I say, between 1951 and 1954, I did odd jobs. And that's when I started with City and... Where did you get into City now? Did you know some alderman or part-time... No, I just applied for the job, and they hired me. Well, this man, of course, is of Swedish background, but has there been any more of a Swedish background that you worked under? Johnson, Paul Johnson. What year was he in? He was in about 56 and 7. We had one mayor that was killed out on the highway. So this Johnson was pro-Tempe mayor, so he took over. Now, when he ran for re-election, he was defeated. So that's why he was only in there for about a year and a half. So I've served under about seven mayors. Sieg Anderson, you remember him? Oh, yes. He was a pro-Tempe mayor also. Yeah, yeah. He goes to our church. Oh, I know Sege Natho. He is a Republican, isn't he? Yes. So the city government of Moline is Republican, isn't it, most of them? Almost half and half. The mayor is Republican, and there are seven Democrats and seven Republicans right now. I see. So that's pretty good. So any time that they have a tie vote, the mayor has to break it. So after the Swedes and the Belgian people came in, I suppose, there has been the Swedes and the Belgians controlling the city of Moline? No, no, no. Yeah, but there are not too many Irish votes that direct the leading on one way or another. Well, I don't think that has much bearing on our city form of government. Our form of government, we have a weak mayor and a strong council. So the mayor doesn't have much say, so unless, like I say, it's a tie vote. Then he comes in. Yes. And we also have a city administrator that oversees the day to day workday. We've only had that for about 15 years. But now when the Swedish mayor, for instance, Paul Johnson, and you had Oakleaf, that's probably a good one. Oakleaf, yeah. Do you remember him? John Oakleaf, yes. He's the one who was killed. He was killed? Yes. Did he need a lot of Swedish votes to get him somebody's head? There were enough Swedes to elect him. Oh, I don't think so. Yeah, but I wouldn't think the Belgians would vote for a Swedish. Oh, it depends. There probably weren't enough Swedes. Well, no. I don't think that had any bearing on it. You know, the Belgians, they are Catholics. Yes. They wouldn't vote for a Swedish Lutheran. Oh, I'm sure they would. Huh? Sure they would. Nowadays they would. No, not back in the 30s and 40s. No, not back in the 30s. Probably by the 40s things had started to change. Well, 50s they had changed. But earlier, no. You couldn't see any religion background or anything like that when I first started with the city. No. No? No. So the Irish never had any foothold in Wadden? No, not really. No. So there has been the Belgians and the Swedes and some Germans. Germans, yeah. Mostly. And the Italians, you're finally... No, not very few. So it would have been a peaceful city you'd be living in then. Oh, yes. Planting your trees in and... Really nice city, I think. That's right. Yeah. So what... Rock Island had their racial problems with the Negroes. But they never been in Mourine? Negroes. Yeah, I mean in the number that you... They're spotted here and there. Garfield, where is it? Garfield, Scottsdale. And we have some on 27th Street and 8th Avenue, a few families. But they're not in one section of the city like the Irish and the Swedes in Rock Island. They're spread out. How could they be avoiding resettling in Mourine though? I really don't know why that... Because they used to come in the big numbers. In groves, yeah. Yeah. But they never have been in Mourine. No, not in Mourine. There have always been a certain number of black young people in the school system. Yeah. And whatever, but we've just never had a huge influx of blacks in Mourine. And I have no idea why. Does that mean that if they come in, for instance, a colored family or two, that doesn't make any panic of the neighbors and they still stay there? No. Yeah. But other cities, they usually get afraid and one moves out and another moves out. But it never happened in Mourine. No, it never has. And it seems as though a lot of the Negro families that we did have that settled in Mourine were educated, probably a better class of Negro maybe than the lower class people. I don't know why that is, but a lot of them that did live in Mourine had educations and good jobs and whatever. And the kids were dressed well. So we either got the better ones or something. I don't know what... it was really strange. There was one old man, he said, he remembers 1921. There was a colored guy down on 3rd Avenue. He was speaking Swedish. Oh, is that right? So they were well-educated. Yeah. But the Rock Island, though, they have a cluster on the website. Rock Island and East Mourine, too. Oh, East Mourine also? Oh, yes. They have a lot of blacks and Mexicans in East Mourine. So that's an island in between. Sort of. So how is the outlook now for Mourine? I mean, you're in the city government. Do you see a thing for that? You have YMCA now up for sale there for 100,000. It looks like a dirt cheap price, though, for this. It is. It looks like a castle. Yeah. And it probably won't be sold to 100,000. No. But to maintain it, that's a big problem. Maintenance is more than it costs to buy it. There used to be a Mourine Elks Club there one time. That was a nice building. It was an expensive building, I understand. Yes. So that's the... The economy in this area, the farm economy, it definitely is having an effect on this part of the country and on this town. Yes, because you see a lot of storefronts are empty. Yeah, and downtown Mourine is just almost nothing. The same thing in Rock Island, I see a lot of storefronts. Yeah, that's the same thing down there. Well, you have John Deere and International and J.I. Case. That's all farm implement companies. And when they go down, everything goes down. So hopefully it's going to pick up now. So that's something drastic, I'll imagine, that happened to turn it around. And then you have the big shopping centers taking all the business away from downtown. Yeah. So it is actually easy now to travel downtown. You can always get a parking place. Oh, yes. A lot of service when you walk into a store. Yeah, definitely. Well, downtown Mourine, years ago, what they should have done is centralize their parking facilities. But what they did was go out by a lot here and there, and now they have 13 empty parking lots that they can't get rid of. You mean the city of Mourine? Oh, yeah. The city owns the parking lots in 13 different places? Downtown Mourine, yes. But what they should have done is what Rock Island or Danforth is doing, they double-decked these parking lots, and they're centrally located. Of course, it's I helping Rock Island, they're moving out too. So it's a wait-and-see program. Yeah, that's right. It's not easy to call in a consultant to get advice because they don't know more than you. When I was growing up, Mourine downtown was the busiest place there was. They had two, three big stores, and they had grocery stores and everything. A lot of service. Yeah. And this was when they dressed up on Saturday and they went out for a meal. That was back in 1940s. So they were still coming out and the whole family taking a walk down there on Saturday afternoon, going to a picture show. Yeah. We had three movie houses downtown. Now there's nothing. All closed off. And big buildings, Le Claire Hotel is another one, yeah? An expensive building. Yeah. I suppose the heating cost must be astronomical. Oh, yes. Even to start a furnace with the pilot's life. Well, it's been empty for six years now, and the cost of things just to maintain it. Of course, Oscar Ellis, he's got a lot of money anyway. He owns it. So those buildings now, like Le Claire Hotel, there's an outside owner of that? Moline Consumers. The president of Moline Consumers, he owns it. Himself? Well, it's been in the family for years. But YMCA is owned by YMCA? Yeah. But they're all penny stores and... They all moved out to South Park. But who owns those buildings? Are they local investors? Yeah, mainly local investors. There's another one for Chicago. Oh, there might be a few. So they are losing money too, because I suppose they have to pay taxes every year. Oh, yes, yes. And certain maintenance costs too to keep it. Sure. Yeah. Keep it in pretty good shape. Your dad and mother-in-law, did they have a Swedish-American newspaper of any sort? Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, they had that. We remember that. Did you read that at any time? Not very often. You couldn't read it? I can pick up certain words in Swedish, but that's about it. So when you went to high school and learned Swedish from Margaret Swanson, you were not able to comprehend reading Swedish. You could talk and understand. I can speak it and understand it back here. But you couldn't write it? Write it, no. Because you didn't get any practice in that way. When my mother and dad would speak Swedish, it was a slang Swedish. It wasn't a real Swedish language. They mixed it a little. Like when they said the gas range, it was spisen. Is that right? That's right. Or was it ståvund? No, no, ståvund is... That's what they would say, ståvund. They never said spisen? No, ståvund. See, they would intermingle the... So there was certain English word that comes easier to learn, to get fast reaction. So she turned from spisen to ståvund. Are there other words that you remember that they mixed? Kars? Kars, you know, karsen. Karsen. It's the plural. They made a plural of one. Karsen. There's a few others. Are you going to tell him about what you taught me to say and that you're in Swedish when the first thing I learned? You tell. When we were dating, he told me one night, he said, I've got something really nice. I don't know if you want to record this. He said, I've got something really nice. We were going together one night on the way to his parents' house. He said to me, I'm going to teach you a nice Swedish greeting, and I want you to go in and say this to my father. You would like to have a nice... Yeah, it was a nice Swedish greeting. He told me, and he made me practice it, you know, and I practiced and I practiced. And we walked into the house, and I shook hands with his parents, and I said, hello, du. Hvittes du? And his father fell off the sofa laughing, and I couldn't figure out what I said. And I found out afterward what it meant. What did your mother say then? Well, she just looked kind of shocked. But then she kind of started to grin because she said, did Bink teach you that? And I said, yeah, that's where I learned it. And I said, he told me it was a nice Swedish greeting, and then she started beating him up on the arm and saying, oh, you should never have told her that, you know, or whatever. But his dad was just rolling in the floor. He thought it was so funny. You had some experience in the beginning, then. Mm-hmm, right. Your children, they remember your parents? Oh, yes. They were old enough to be able to talk with them. Oh, yeah. Did they pick up also a few Swedish words? Oh, yes. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Yeah, the kids can do really pretty well. I thought they did well when we took our trip to Scandinavia. I thought both Linda and John conversed quite well, you know, I mean, as well as I did. I mean, they probably didn't, you know, know it that well. I mean, they could understand what people were saying, and they knew enough Swedish words that they could converse a little bit. They still do, and they both know Swedish songs, too. So that's been a pleasure. So they will carry on some of the Swedish, and they will carry on the meatballs. How about lutefisk? Well, I cooked lutefisk the first couple or three years we were married, and it made the house stink so bad I've never cooked it since. Did he prepare them for you? No, I learned how. But see, all the things that his mother told me that he loved so well, the Swedish dishes, you know, and I worked really hard learning how to make them, and I found out afterward he didn't like a lot of them. But he never had the courage to tell his mother he didn't like them, but he told me when I learned how to fix them that he didn't like them. Oh, I liked them. Some of them, yeah. But we did have a lot of traditional Swedish meals. How did you carry on the Christmas time now? Do you celebrate Christmas Eve with the gifts to the children, or do you do it on Christmas? Well, we've kind of had to do it. I've always been a nurse, and I've always worked.