 Cassette two, side one, continuation with Mrs. Helga Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. So there has been, you've been familiar then with the Lander Home since 1950s when it started? Yes. To get going. And your husband was on there for many years. He's had two terms as a president. Yes. And then on the board. And on the board we've helped a lot of ways. Everybody's donated, everybody's given, not one individual, but lots of people have given. So you never had any trouble then to get people on the board? They've always been interested? I don't know. We had quite a large membership and I think we have pretty good membership right now. And you have to have your doings all the time to keep it going though and restoration. If they're going to spend a lot of money on it, we've got to keep going. Myself, I've had my day. Yeah, but you are still looking into it though, I mean to see if you're interested in it. Well, you can't help but be interested in something you've always done. How about your son now? Is he interested in that part? In the Lander Home? Well, he's too busy. Last night he's on TV every Monday night, the aldermen are on. And there's meetings to go to and he's pretty busy for that. He went through high school and through college. Where did he go to college? He went down to Lincoln College and then he went a little bit to Rockford College. Lincoln College, where's the location? Lincoln, Illinois. Lincoln, Illinois. So, and his line was a business or? Well, he's running a little, he's selling it now, a little automotive business. He sells car tops, but he doesn't put them on, he just sells them. Here in Rockford? Yes. And then he got interested in politics, was this through his father? Oh, he was interested in politics first. So. So, is he able to get as many votes as his father? Well, my son had arthritis. And arthritis so bad he didn't walk for six years. When he was young? Yes. Oh, I see. He got it when he must have been about 15 years old. How did it happen? How did you? It just came. It's a terrible thing to have happen to anyone, let alone a young kid. But. What did you do then? You had to have a specialist? I've spent seven and a half months up at Mayles in Rochester. I have taken my son up to Iowa and up to South Dakota and you name it, we've been there. We've spent an awful lot of money on my son. But as long as it helps, we went to this doctor, which I think he'd done us wonders, up in Canada, Dr. Leafman, and David has had his both hips replaced. After Dad died, he had that done. And like he said one day, Mother, how lucky I've been, he says, to think that I can walk and have no pain. So he couldn't walk for six years? That's right. He just sat, he used crutches. Life hasn't been easy, but we've been busy. So what happened then? He got the medicine to help him along? Well, and he had the hip operations. They did first one hip, I think they completely replaced it, and then he had the other one done. So then he was able to walk again? Yeah. So how is he now then, after? Well, okay. And he's in the 40s? He's 41 or 42. So when he got started in the politics then, he was an alderman in the 4th Ward? He was alderman out in the 8th Ward, that's the rolling green area, and they liked him very much out there. And then he ran, I don't know how many terms, he's never lost an election, he's a good campaigner. Then he ran for alderman, no, for city clerk, and the people out there didn't want him to get it because they didn't want to lose him as their alderman, because he was a good alderman. But he did, and he won again. So are there many Swedes now, if you can call them on the board, city council of Rockford? Oh, there's a few. But the mayor, he's Irish? I think so. I think so. So he is able to get his views across then, as a good Swede? Oh yeah, David's a good boy, and he's a good alderman. Because this is a Swedish town though? Element, yes. You have Hallström and Blom, and the police chief was Burk Bargrain, and Folke Bengtsson, and Bengtsson, or whatever his name was? My brother worked for Bengtsson. He was there for many years? Yes, he was a good man. But politics is different today than it was yesterday. Oh yes. There's more money involved. Well, look what they spend for a campaign. It's terrific. Is that necessary, though, to spend so much money? Well, I don't know. Who was it we had that won, and he did all his campaigning on foot, and walked from city to city? I'd vote for that guy. You mean in Illinois? Yeah. Yeah, there was Governor Walker. That's right, and he walked, I think. Didn't he? And not spend all that money. You are also a life member of the Rockford Women's Club. Yes. What kind of organization is that? What function do they have? Oh, it's a very social. Sometimes they have a tea afterwards, but it's a very nice thing to belong, and they have good speakers, and people come from all over. They're professional women, then? No, this is the Women's Club, not the business professional Women's Club. It has nothing to do with it. My husband gave me this membership for my Christmas one year, and I think right now a membership is about $1,000 to get in. So this is the lead group, then, of the Rockford Women's Club? Yes, and they have their meetings every Tuesday afternoon at 1.30, and they always have a good speaker. I see. And sometimes, like I say, tea, and very lovely. Are there many Swedish background people in there, too? Yes. Is it more Irish, Italian, Polish, Lithuanian, or Swedes? No, I think we're most Swedes. Most Swedes? Yeah, I think we're still holding our own. So how do you have any... What do you talk about? What is the object? Well, they have all the speakers. We, as audience, do nothing. We just listen. But they have sometimes dancers and people who have traveled, travelogues, and the program is very interesting. Where do you meet them? In Wersham? No, we have... Women's Club owns the building. In Rockford? Yes. Where is the location? It's on Church Street. Church Street? Mm-hmm. It's very lovely, and they have a cafeteria... They have a lunch place. You can eat there. How far does that date back, the organization of it? The Women's Club? Yes. Oh, I don't know. It must date back quite some time. I don't know. Early 1900s? Oh, I wouldn't say that. I don't think so. Probably in the 30s, or I don't know. So when did you become a member then? Well, I've... 50s or 60s? 30. Probably somewhere in the 50s. Mm-hmm. Do they have any qualifications then to belong to that club, or...? Not special, unless somebody wouldn't want you in there. They can blackball you? Yeah, but if you can get the money, you can usually get in. Oh. So what kind of organizations do you belong to now? Any Swedish... Swedish historical society you remember? Yes. You've been there for many years. Yes. And how about the others, like the singing groups, Svea? No, I'm sorry, I'm no singer. No singer. How about Viking Wars of Svittjod? No. None of those? At one time, when we were kids, we used to belong to Good Templars, but... Oh, IOGT? Yeah. Oh, your family? No, us kids. Oh, only the kids? Mm-hmm. But not your father, or...? No. Did they join any organization of Swedish background? No. No? They were not any joiners of any groups then? No, no. But your father, no, he went back to Sweden several times. Yes, my mother too. And the first time you went back, then, when did it happen in your life, after World War II? Probably in... probably in 24. Oh, 24 you went back? No, I didn't go back. I didn't go back with my parents, but I went back in about 58. 58? Uh-huh. That was my first time back. Did you go with your husband then, or with your...? Yes. I couldn't help, when that boat left, I couldn't help but cry a little bit. I thought my mother coming, it was a necessity for her to come. My trip was absolutely a luxury one. And when I played Anchors Away, it really touched on the old heartstrings. So you went back then to Ficka Hall, where you were born? Yes. So you... do you use any cousins or...? Oh, yeah. I've got cousins. Yes, I've got cousins. So you visited them in 50? Oh, yes. My husband had a cousin who had a costume jewelry business, Igamostan. In Stockholm? Igamostan. And he has... he become a very, very wealthy man. He has given millions for heart and... for heart and what? Research? Research. Research. What was his name? David Huggelin. Huggelin. Very wealthy. Very lovely person. And... You met him then in the... Oh, yes. We went there and stayed. And then the last few years, they lived for about 10 years in Canary Island. And so we went to Africa and that. So we went to Canary Island three times. So there was that side of the family that stayed in Sweden then? That was your husband's cousin? Yes. On his mother's side? On his mother's side. And they came from where in Sweden? Västergötland. Västergötland. Skövde? Skövde. So you have contacts then with both your son and your husband? Yes, and my husband. Yes, yes. And you keep them up? Yes. And your son, does he... has he been in Sweden? Oh, yes. He's been with us. Does he speak Swedish? No, but you couldn't talk, he would be able to understand. So you and your husband, you Swedish then, you're home occasionally for him to pick up Swedish? Or how did he learn it? Who? Your son. Oh, just hearing us talk. You know. But you didn't talk to often. No, no. But if we want to say something that we didn't want him to know, we'd talk Swedish. And so now, if you talked Swedish, he could be able to catch on. Not that he speaks, he is a few words in that. But he gets the hang of it? Yes. Oh. So how Swedish is he now? Do you use any Swedish customs, for instance, and what has he... Oh, we get together, like Christmas Eve and stuff like that, but otherwise I don't think they use the customs. Oh, we used to. Is he married? Yes. With a Swedish girl? No. So he doesn't practice any Swedish in his homeland? No, no, no. It's all American? Yep. And her background, what nationality? Spanish. Oh, Spanish. From Rockford here? Mm-hmm. I see. Oh. She wasn't from Rockford originally, but she is now. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So, your parents went back to Sweden so many times? They went, yes. So he was able then to get a good job, your father, and... Oh, he saved. He saved. And he had interest to go back there, but no, and he stayed there for good. Well, he got caught over there, over the war, you know. Yeah. And so he stayed. So he died then during the war? He died in... 1944, 45? I don't know, but anyway, he must have been, about 40 years would be, about 35, 40. And your mother went back then to Sweden after he died? No, no. She never did? My mother never liked Sweden. My mother liked... She never did that? No, she had it so much better in this country that she liked this country. So she never felt homesick then? No, she went back with my father, and they all went back. My two younger sisters and them, the four of them went. But otherwise, my dad would come home from work and he'd say, I think I'm going to go to Sweden for Christmas. So he'd take off and go. I see. So he was more homesick then? I don't know, homesick, he didn't have any... But anyway, he liked to go. Your mother never talked about there was something she missed in Sweden? No, no. No, no. She was glad she came here. And she didn't leave any families behind that were close enough to her? Well, she had sisters and brothers, one sister and about three brothers. Did she write often to them? Oh, we heard, yeah, and still do. Now I, of course, write and write to their children. You write in Swedish then? Yes. So how did you learn to write Swedish? Just picked it up. When you can speak, you can write. Well, not necessarily, it's a hard language to... So I just wrote today a letter that my son will have it mimeographed, and then I can't sit down and write to everyone. So he mimeographed this, and I put a piece of that paper into the mail, you see. And sent them for Christmas? Mm-hmm. They want to know how you are and things like that, and that's what else can you write. So your parents were not on you to learn Swedish or read Swedish or go to school to learn Swedish? Who? Your parents. Well, I suppose they went to school. Yeah, I mean, they were not on you particularly to continue with the learning. No, no. They didn't stress that fact? No, do as you want. Of course, I think if you live in this country, learn to speak it. How about your sisters and your two brothers now? Did they keep up with the Swedish? Not as much as I did. Are they still living your... No, there's only three of us girls left. We were five girls and two boys, and we are three girls now left. Living here in Rockford? Mm-hmm. Do they have connection with Sweden like you? No. They always say, don't fall down because if anything happened to me, then we'd lose all contact because I'm the one that's got the contact. So you keep it up then? Yes. So you had the opportunity to visit there. That makes a lot of difference. Oh, yes. You meet them head on. I was there a year ago, and I was there in 81. My husband passed away in 80, and in 81 I went to Sweden, and then I went last year, we went to Swedish Historical. I'd been a lot of those places, but it was still enjoyable to go, and it was nice people to go with, and I enjoyed it. And your mother now, when did she die? She lived not many years after your father. No, no, my mother died very young. She was only 52 years old. So my mother died young. She died in 1930, I think. Oh, I see. She died before your father died. Mm-hmm. So he went back then to Sweden to visit. To visit, yeah. But she never had any longing for Sweden? No, no desire to go back. Thank you.