 The 11th of September and I'm sitting together with Har Lindstrom in Rockford, Illinois And he was born 1912. That's why it's a June in Rockford And your parents now call it what Lindstrom and also your mother Helen They were married in Rockford. Oh, yeah Right Well, it's a little bit of mystery there she was 13 years old when she came over and Two families became involved because of a death of her mother and I Think circumstances were such that she had to make her own way so she had a sponsor over here by the name of Oscar Nielsen a distant relative so he's he Saw to it that she was She got a start She worked in the knitting factory you know Socking and stocking factory And I thought think they call it Zia company back in those days And she paired socks and general factory work but she was an ambitious woman and She made her go but So she lived with this Oscar Nelson after a while yeah for a while yeah, then She got married of course and after that and they established a home and we had myself and a sister constituted the kids in the family And your father no he was born in the Rockwood yeah Yeah, both of them, but I have no information on them at all He was growing up down on the Old Quarter Rockford. Oh he lived On 6th Avenue and 6th Street down in that area yeah, you bet and And great fisherman and He had three brothers or three sisters in himself But First factory work was Was the standard of the day in that group he was apprentice in the Woodworking business became a hand carver That's an art now, which has gone by the boards. I think but he was a good one we have some Some representations of his work at home a clock shelf and sundry things And he was a good one Yeah, yeah a lot of grade school young Because the great education beyond grade school in those days was practically unheard of in that particular Group Yeah, that's right They did it by golly Yeah until the factories There's quite a number of factories engaged in furniture manufacturing In those days, but they went by the boards because of the market conditions and they all moved south They were undersold in the marketplace because of the labor situation down there I suppose and other factors in the economy and what was Originally about 50 furniture factories diminished to practically nothing now gradually over the years Did the Swedes own them then when they moved south? Oh, yeah, yeah, they did They haven't sold them before No, they were all privately owned companies A couple of Swedes would get together or or one Swede P.A. Peterson. You perhaps heard of him he was a pioneer in that business and He had the furniture business tied up for a while, of course, but then others came in naturally But so he was one of the ones being instrumental for moving south well, I don't know he had some influence on it because the Swede had a Faculty for wanting to keep all the money himself, you know, they weren't Going to give anything away. They didn't have to I don't know what they did, but they couldn't be competitive and they didn't make any attempt to and I don't think they paid Unusual wages to the to the help it was just there The administration of their business was sort of close to the belt type of thing And that wouldn't go in the marketplace and because it's beginning to open up Competitively and there was a lot of competition And that wouldn't go in the marketplace and because it's beginning to open up competitively and away the furniture business went The machine tool business stayed however Because it was different different climate They've been there for about 60 70 years and it was going in the same rhythm all the time. Yeah, but they didn't want to take any chances of expanding or I guess not. Yes, brother. They sold out and Yeah, then the other was off Yeah, the the machine tool business Prospered. Why did they come up then after the well, it's a I Couldn't like put my finger on it really unless Because they started in right after the depression, yeah Unless they hit the marketplace when it needed that type of product And they probably saw the handwriting on the wall what happened to the furniture industry. So they probably had made some Protective provisions in order to not go down the same path And the war of course made the difference for the metal industry. Oh, yeah No, no had nothing of course to do with it but they had a high quality product the Rockford was was known throughout the country as a as a the premier producer fine furniture So they trained the toolmakers then right here in Rockwood. Yeah, I think yeah, that's right They'd be higher on as an apprentice and then gradually work up in the ranks And a lot of them were sweets, yeah, yeah green sweet stick in the 20s. Yeah So, how do you see you were born in 1912? And your dad what did he settled on what he married in the same area? What did you know? We lived up? In the high was known the Highland area Up on Gardner Avenue and State Street than that area. There was a new section that'll talk. Well comparatively out Comparatively, but we didn't have any of the refinements they have today. We carried coal up to the second story to a base burner And we had an icebox that we emptied the pan every night. I remember that and the wood shed shed in the back to to handle the fuel for the kitchen stove a very very Primitive type of existence Oh, yeah, there were a few of those too. Yes indeed They were allowed and to have you know a few horse by this too, yeah Yes You grew up then they went to school up in the area then I went to Jackson school and graduate from Central High School, but it wasn't customary in those days to go to the college Especially the depression hit us in the 30s and we didn't have the wherewithal to pursue the education How did you get the contact with the Swedes? Because you didn't speak Swedish in your home Well a little bit. Yeah, we fooled around with it nothing Like your mother and father did they speak Swedish to each other? Well, no, they didn't my mother became quite a she would had a perfect English delivery and but she She could speak Swedish too, but she didn't carry on with it. Only when the occasion would necessitate other people and so on The occasion would necessitate other people and so forth But I fooled around with it and in the music business I got into that Well, I I Dabbled with an orchestra back in 19 1936 I think it started and as a vocalist And I continue that up until now even we have a band called the shenanigans I also auditioned for Lawrence Welk. You've heard of him. I got the job and then I didn't show up because of Disinclination to leave home and I always more or less regretted that but It's been good to me a nice It's been good to me a nice little abdication along with the other No, they weren't musical at all No It's a little something that came along saying of the boys choir, of course a church and And then did a little Little solo work on on the popular songs of the day Yeah, we did some Swedish numbers Yeah, I can't remember now what they might have been Okay, I'm not just wearing on and tooling And some of those did you join? I joined the the this 50 and a Sphere Center. Yes. Yes. Yeah. I was there for about 20 years As a vocalist also, yeah Now they had a great organization going So then you came together with the other sweets. Oh, yes indeed. That's your life Well, yeah, they were well organized with the various clubs around when they must had a dozen of them Well, they're strong there. But now of course they've gone by the board sphere sooner burned down and Although they are still existing as a as an organization active, but they have their quarters wherever they can find it Well, you were growing up now in the 20s and 30s It was very usual to hear people singing and whistling the popular tunes, but you don't hear that today No, you don't why well that was a that was a great change the popular I don't know this this thing changed of course and it's a it's a tragic thing to have this rock music and all this other stuff Invade the city and the people and the people This thing changed of course and it's a it's a tragic thing to have this rock music and all this other stuff invade the scene because I know I'm not conversant at all or that that kind of jazz and it's it's it's it to me it's It's degrading It's an abortion. I can't I can't stand to listen to it. There's no character to and I associated with the drug culture I think they're very closely related And I think music can't call it music. It's just mayhem So I don't have anything But even the young people they don't do anything themselves like you remember years ago they were whistling Yeah, isn't that funny? Yeah, they make that you make an interesting observation there It's completely dead. Yeah, all they can do is clap their hands and roll their head around and and what have you Big goof. Did you take any lessons then or yeah, I studied with two college professors at Rockford College and I got some of the techniques of course of the vocal production But I didn't go for the classical side of I was interested in the in the popular music and This organist and I in 51 produced a record called Was on leaf records. We got a little song that's been Given throughout the generation Selma and we wrote some words to that and made the record of it and Alfredo was on the other side Or using the board of Swedish lingo in there and it did it sold some records But it was not classic or anything that continued on Were the Swedish people receptive enough or oh, yeah, they still are as a matter of fact wherever we go they want to hear Selma and Selma and it has some men some longevity to it Did you change to over to religious music at any time? I sang in the church choir, but and did funerals and weddings But that was the extent of it and this Testing the Lawrence Welk Well, I was a The arranger fellow executive in a paper company made the arrangement for a nightclub up in Wisconsin And he got me up there that night and the things all prearranged and I did the number called stardust And intermission Lawrence came to me. He said say we'd like to have with our band That's when Janie Walton was with him. He says you see us at the air gone next Tuesday. I wanna Do your first performance? I did a number of stardust for their for the audition But then Tuesday came and went and then my mother kind of talked me out of it She did you don't want to leave home and all the comforts and so forth and I was gullible enough to take that So that was in Yeah, of course they were yeah, that's That's a big part of that on that game to be traveling all the time. I may not have liked it, but it was Yeah But this performance is now you had with the singing Different thoughts of rock where there was locally then You had this orchestra No, I went with several orchestras most no Quinn Bowens and Larry Nordstrom and then When I got into the shrine They had a band. They called the shenanigans 18 piece on the basis of Of the popular music of that day and our director was with it. I don't know if you remember that The Breakfast Club with Don McNeil He was a trumpet player with that band and he organized this group and he had all very fine musicians. I Don't know if you remember Wayne King I heard a name. Yeah here that trombonist was with Wayne King and and had some good talent but today We're all in our 70s. Some of them have passed away, of course, but they're still blowing on those horns And we're still doing the vocals students of that era and we do have some pretty good acceptance Hotels around Chicago for special Events conventions and so forth But this was only off your regular work day those oh, yeah, sure. Oh sure No, I didn't know I didn't go to college You start the work then yeah, I probably could have if I had the incentive but then the financial backing but I Didn't give it much thought as a matter of fact what we did in those days and then our culture in our particular level You know, I got and get a job and That was the main thing Oh, yeah, they didn't they weren't doing it they didn't object to it. No, no, of course Oh, yeah, man, you're Lutheran Church. Yeah. Yeah, that was baptized there and still go there and sing in the choir Yeah, so what did you start to work then if there's school all after school I started to work right away at a See, what was it Barbara Coleman company? And the inspection department and from there I went to various jobs. I was kind of a job hopper Until I met up with mr. Hillman at his at his daughter's wedding And I sang at the wedding at the little stone church in Rockton And he said what do you do by the way for a living and I told him I was at the time of manufacturers agent He said well, I think we could use with our firm So I went out there the next Monday and got a territory and it was there ever since until I retired Little over 30 years. So you didn't work in the factory and you were in no Selling what kind of products were they Wood screws metal screws the fasteners of all kinds special pins Nuts and that type of thing and there was for automotive industry. Well, that was a big big customer, but they had Various companies that use assembly companies He was a great simple guy his home he was a Raw bone big hands. He was a man's man. He had a personality that was homespun type None nothing put on about him And he was respected in this town boy. If you could work for him boy, you've made it So I was tickled to death to get selected to be on his team And We made some records with the company to Through my efforts. I'm happy to say not in a boastful way But because we were in the right place the right time. I Find I found one account It has since become one of the major accounts of the firm. It's called National Automotive Parts Association then APA. I Ran into that account and from a modest beginning they do seven million now But I wrote the script and I had presentations made visual an audible that we put on little skits and They're real good. This was back twice one. Yeah So, but you had three hands then to To arrange this in the producer. Oh, yeah, you bet. Yes, sir And And of course at 65 was the Was the usual age of terminating employment in those days and that was at 70 1977 I became 65 and I retired but I worked with other firms for five years one in Chicago and one here but There was no longevity to the arrangement. They worked a couple years until they got what I could offer and then they They terminated the arrangement See it wasn't the 60s. Yeah, it was 68 I think I'm not mistaken Yeah How was he able I mean, this usually it is hard To run a big company like this. I mean nowadays you gotta have a degree in Yeah Administration everything and he had absolutely nothing He had an end he had a fantastic insight And he surrounded himself with people that had no how in the accounting field in the accounting field, but he was an exceptional engineer not through formal training but through his experience and And he was able to have a staff that he could rely on. Oh, yeah In his purse Swing a lot in a short time. Oh, yeah. Well, he was a He was a shrewd individual And he attracted people because of his talent and personality and he got some good engineers and that's how the company came up and I Had no No airs about him. He was a plain Swede and they respected him for that and in his common Common way homespun way. He was a great salesman Again because people are attracted to him. They depended upon him because he had that sincerity about him fantastic Was he in this group of the PAP? Well, he Only they were his predecessors. He was a big he was acquainted with him to some extent But after they have departed the scene he carried on in that tradition and with others to of course that were The same ilk at the time that got into other industries But he held the whole clique together. He was mr. Rockford And this one human respected name even to this day And he also belonged to Oh sure You bet Join the people as he had a brogue Swedish brogue, which is this is a warming Thing Interesting How about the workers know they have their own union at the Rockford products they were non-union they never he didn't sympathize with Absolutely not ain't having until this day. Oh He was bitter about that It was still the he was able to attract the people. Oh, yeah Well the union wages. Oh sure, if not better Then he had Yet employee plans for their pension plans and a little extra city through into the picture Yeah, it was fantastic man But it was one person this told me that they raised the price of coca-cola once and he bought the machines and I Never heard of that, but they have some yarns they spin about him, but very very interesting They should say so he could get away then with non-union. Oh, yeah. Well that in that era. I think that there wasn't such a Such a pressure Some of the industry in Rockford were able to avoid that involvement fortunately Oh, yeah, they did then I think they're down now considerably but Now he was death against the union movement and I can understand why look at what it's done to the city now strikes and so forth Sad situation. So he saw the writing on the wall. Oh, yeah You bet he had foresight and he had a perception that was uncanny Yeah So did he How much the percentage now in the 50s for instance of Swedes Pardon me. How many Swedes were working there you think at the time? Oh, yeah 50% anyway, I'm sure and that's course they were well along when the company when I started But of course The Swedish element has has been lessened Because of the influx of other Why do you think it was the reason that the Hillman or he was a sweet himself because he Had sympathy for them, but they hired on the skill or Morris. They were a Swede. So they should Well, I think he failed bird them but that Over and above for what they could produce naturally. No, they didn't they were they were gifted in the mechanical sense and And they were trustworthy people. They're religious people and they were an asset to to a company or anybody could get them What happened and when the other groups Italians and Polacks and the Queen In the 60s after war. Yeah. Well, they are Accepted by the Swedish Part of the world. Well, there was seem to be no problem there Instead of being the well, they were still the predominant nationality But they didn't dominate the other Well, I think so, yeah, they more or less were but they proved themselves and they ping up came up to the level of the other group They came for me. Oh, yeah Yeah, it was an interesting interesting study to Reflect upon the growth of this town and especially it's 74 years old. I can I get the picture pretty well connected the various neighborhoods and and the concentration of one ethnic group here and there and How they moved and consolidated with other? groups Until we have quite a conglomerate now. No, no, no, no, no consolidated with other groups until we have quite a conglomerate How was the family picture that you were done on 7th Street, of course the family come down there for yeah Oh, yeah, they were Swedish store drag good stores and And things would go down on 7th Street. That was the No, sir. It was a marketing Place for the But the family was more close together in the 20s than later on like in the 50s Oh, yeah, but we went down there as a family through the to the stores Eckerberg's That's began to diminish. Yeah So the teenagers they were more on their own then. Yeah Prove themselves to be individuals and we took streetcars and and buses when they came into this or walked for the most part My family was a walking family dad would walk to work From Gardner Avenue all the way out to Empire Manufacturing Company is way out on Harrison 11th Street And they didn't think anything of it and when I grew up I'd walk out to Sinnicipi Golf Course from my house. That's a move for a mile Thought nothing about it. Now the kids got to have a ride wherever they go Transportation got to have a transamp on the act those crews around it. That's sad But that's progress so called so You're dead and when he did he buy his first car? Oh, he was proud of that was 1926. He bought a Ford used Ford Model T And now he'd polish that thing and it was used only for certain. Okay. Well, we go up to the cottage and my Uncle's cottage up at Lake Delavan And dad being a great fisherman. Did he take off at week? Well, they had to sometimes in a vacation a week vacation And that was a highlight The jump in that tin Lizzie and go up to weed homes cottage Lake Delavan and he was a great fisherman my dad. Oh Fantastic So he continued in that factory and all this life or no, yeah when the furniture business left he went into the National Lot company as a dye polisher which was Related in some remote way to the wood carving business, but he that made good adjustments Worked by the hour never did make much money, but My mother was a great administrator. She could handle it No, no, well she did cleaning and she took cleaning jobs During the Yeah, young women started working factories, I guess so yes When they married they stayed home. Yeah How did you notice in your home? Not if there was any Swedishness? Like your mother did she cook? Oh by all means we had a crop caulker flesh pound caulker and all this silly potato Well, she learned it out east when she lived out in Connecticut from this family out there And of course, she carried some of the information from Sweden being 13 years old. I think she had a part in it But boy, that's my favorite grub blutfisk and all the rest of it Hmm and she do it She did it with a flare and a favorite flavor That was fantastic So the holidays were highlight. Oh, yeah press ultra If you know that in coral green called potato score of an all the carbs. Oh Can't get that stuff anymore. Oh, they are hearing breakfast out the clubs, you know boss apart Flavor the way she made it is not there anymore Yeah, that's right. It is the old tradition is gone Yeah Yeah Yeah Burn up Side two So you married a nun sweet. Yeah, what did mother say then? Well, I'll say yeah, they're critical about it, but they got over it Because well, maybe at that time in the 50s that were more all this beginning to spread. Yes good gracious Yeah, they were quite clicky about it. Sure. They were Yes Different people than the average sweet though because you were in the entertainment business. Yes, that's true You were able to meet Yes She's part German and Other things mixed in English But she supplied me two great kids. I got a son. That's 34 and a daughter 32 my son's a lawyer up and Up in st. Paul. Yeah, st. Paul Then he was in Sweden a couple of years ago and went through all the places He had a law case over in Amsterdam. So he made a trip to Sweden And he's he favors a Swedish line. Oh, he's strong On the Swedish customs and so forth. How about your daughter? Well, she goes along with it, but she's not as As strong as he is on that point Are they looking for? Both sides of the background and also the German is there interesting. No, none of that's that's pretty much the same No, not in the least not in the least my son named his kids and meals and Kirsten No, that was my son's he he rules the roost and these These Swedish right up to here He's a Swedish man. He's a Swedish man. He's a Swedish man. He's a Swedish man And these these Swedish right up to here They belong to a It belongs to a Swedish church up there. Of course, he lives in Marina on st. Croix Which is close to middle Lindstrom, Minnesota and Scandia and the Swedes are an abundance of Swedes in that area. I just love to go up there Lindstrom especially because they predominantly Swedish They have the Swedish restaurants and the old folks that are on the tables there. Oh That's great. He married the Swedish girl. No, he married a German girl English I think she is Crazy, you know, thanks English So both your children that went to college. Yes, they did Yes, they did They were in a new era then. Yes The kids had to go to school too Your children are they musical? My son is a great trumpet player and my daughter Has a talent along that line too, piano Do you play an instrument? No, I don't I played piano years ago, but I was too lazy to pursue it And I regret it now So what do you think happened now with the Swedish organizations and the Swedishness in the rock world has it faded out? I don't see any hope for them now. They're in poor shape financially membership is down and There are other And there are other interests that people have. But people are more affluent than there were 50 years ago for instance, they belong to an organization Yeah Now they go to the country clubs. Yeah, I suppose that's a distraction Well the whole society picture has changed and actually influences on it But that was important in those days because of transportation and what have you they had to have a focal point to to Carry on their social events and so forth But that's hardly necessary now because of the widespread Interest that's in our society Did you join any organizations than you were Svea Søren? Oh yeah, I joined the Svea Søren Svea Søren and the Vasa Order and they're still in operation the Vasa group Vasa group But you were not active I mean going to meetings often or? No, no, I belong to the shrine of course, which is Taken up a lot of my time Or interest at least Yeah He'd kid me about Sweden for the Swedish he says the Swedes have the greatest incidence of venereal disease of any country in the world now he may I don't know where he got his fact his figures, but He said well, there's general knowledge, of course they had been quite Liberal in their sexual behavior, but I didn't know they had established a record like that. Have you heard that? No, I haven't heard that figure. Were they also there in Rockford? Pardon? Were they there also here in Rockford? Yeah Were they sexually liberated in Rockford? Oh, oh Well, I don't know just how it carries over They were more reserved when they came I think so they were trying the thing out. Yeah Yeah, they have they organized in a church generally that was quite Quite strong on principle They were the first organization to join you yeah, and like the free church in the mission church and Lutherans a straight and demodest for if they had any ideas about Playing around they got out of their head. No, right. Do you remember? Yeah, I think My dad had some some Association with them, but it was long wasn't long life. There was Yeah Yeah, it faded out of the picture, but my dad was swept up with it Why do you think it faded off? Were they too abusive? I don't know I think that the I really can't say I think it was a Union movement background to an association Socialist I think I don't know if one influence the other what it was but the socialist yes, my dad was Involved in that order and some of the doctors in town to her. Dr. Olson I Think faded fast though after they lost ground and it was extinct in a few years Because the time was right for the depression and bad. Yeah situation all over But you don't remember any Fire meetings they had no But my dad was in the cook's like clan to that was a no one. You remember that? Yeah. Yeah, but he went around his bedsheets and what have you? I think they lost they lost their credibility to they got took the sheets away. I mean they were part of business Yeah, but he didn't stress it to you in any way no, no, no, no he kept that under under wraps He used the word Geez I can remember the years ago much better than I can they the current scene I Don't know if that's you haven't been affected by the Young age, but I I find that's true with a 70 year olds we We can remember the past but we by God we can't remember what we had for lunch yesterday or that particular thing And names disappear And I struggle and struggle. I see a guy coming down the street that I know And I'd be darned if I can think of his name And I get excited about it nervous about and then uptight about until I call nobody this the other that and as soon as they Calm down why that name pops right? But I guess that's a concern with me But the old times though is more vivid. Oh, yeah, I should say Yes Yeah Yes, sir, yeah, there was Swedish doctors and lawyers and yeah workers and socialists. Oh you bet And this town is very church oriented. You have all this. Yes it is I don't know. I took good question and they pack them in especially the the first preachers out here They've got a massive building built incidentally through the funds of a Swede all Dean who established American cabinet hardware The old deans were great contributors there And Also the the let's see All deans, let's see they're all deans and That's another family I was trying to think of what that might be you know, they didn't stint when it came to supporting the church and They have the mission church and the first free there that There the real dedicated, you know Save your soul born again type of concept And the Lutheran is a little low lower key and there's a concept but they don't have the crowds Oh, but you can't get into the church Oh, yeah And I respect them but they have sort of looked down the nose at the Lutherans if for some reason you can feel it They don't about come out And say it but there's an inference said that you you guys haven't got it And they want to save you they want you to come up and testify. Well, I'm not about to do that And of course, they don't smoke Or spit on the sidewalk. They're all Clans and you can see this in them Oh, I didn't know that I wouldn't be surprised at some of them do But they have Was that the general rule years ago the manufacturers the big guys like I'll be in And how about him? Was he also a church religious man? Not too much. So not to know sir He was a covenant But he gave to the church, but he wasn't Overboard on it What's that the plus when you came to a manufacturer years ago and the Bible job that you were? Belonging to a church. What was it? What if you come on a square job, for instance in? 1947. Oh, yeah, and you said you'd belong to so-and-so church was there plus for you or oh, yeah, I think so Yeah, we had to it's a matter of fact Rockford Scripps Products the vice president's name was Johnson he It was a great figure in the employment picture at the corporation and he attracted a lot of free church people Yes, sir. Johnson He and he had control over that and Swan wasn't too involved as to who he picked and Oh, we had a we had a bunch of first three people in there because At that time it was not against the law to have a checkmark If you were Lutheran or Baptist, but no, I think that yeah. Oh, yeah, that's right That's right No, Eric Anderson was Rockford Forging and stamping. Yeah Yeah, there's another sweet Time is going to come back again with figures like Peter's and I wonder if that's gonna be Eric Anderson, I think was he was with them It was the forging No, there's another one prominent Anderson out there. His daughter is still in the company. Pardon? Wife yeah, that's right. Oh, yeah, but I think it's a good thing. Yeah, I think it's a good thing Yeah, that's right. Oh, yeah, but I was trying to think of this other outstanding sweet Here Anderson his son runs the business now and they've done a tremendous job It's out on the Samuelson Road 20, I can't think of it though As a matter of fact Their international out in their scope and the son the grandson is a real Administrator and he's been in a different markets. He's acquiring corporations and he's built a Japanese garden up by his home and he's had a core of Japanese gardeners there from Seattle Working all summer and his wealth is unbelievable. Oh What the heck is the name of that firm? Thank gosh I can't They make So he is the second or third generation sweet, yeah He is an outstanding businessman and It gets a gift I suppose from his family's dad and his grandfather This guy this firm makes restaurant supplies, I think And the international in scope I'm surprised you haven't heard of him because he is number one on that. He is number one in this city then we have the others at wood manufacturing company, which is a Non-Swedish, of course, but this Anderson, it's got his firm by the airport Yeah, well they have done quite well the old deans No, he had no No survivors to take over none whatsoever And Eric Anderson has daughters Yeah Yeah, Eric Anderson And then there was a dog run that had us back to right close by the Daughters. Yeah But they worked hard oh, yeah, they sure did from the bottom. Yes, he Had a gift. Oh my gosh How long time did you work for this it was over 30 years Oh, yeah quite a bit some On the few Funerals of an old swede or a Swedish lady. Do they ask for a Swedish? No, they don't surprisingly but Very few is the trigger a cunning and Laura of course my daughter my granddaughters baptized Sunday And I did that song at the church over there the Good Shepherd Church He get a cunning and Laura and did the two verses of that two verses in English Then the the congregation sang two verses was very interesting Yes Today got a cunning and Bora He then live In the born a scholar In the born a scholar I had to have the words before Because I forget in goods Lila born a scholar Shannon a poor Him the fest it Pogon air push and the nest I said Many years ago Many years ago. Yeah. Yeah. No Like you know, they never did know they never had any any desire to know or any means to All my wife my mother talked about it a lot Oh, yeah, she did correspond Yeah, there was a Simba got something about her home life in Sweden. That wasn't what? It's too desirable and I think that influence you're coming over at 13 years old to a relative in Connecticut and Then she made enough money to send for her brothers mind you David and Henry So she would she had character and they came into that. Yeah And she sent them the money and folky those three she got them over here It's unusual person Determined poor marriage too, but she put up with it Yeah Oh you bet your life she did You don't have any connection with them. No corresponding Well, I have with One of the nephews over there. I don't not too often But I don't if I go to Sweden on any kind of a trip or whatsoever I'd certainly Try to find out about it There are those people that write the whole family trees and dedicate a lot of time and money to trying to figure this thing out all the way down to the bottom of the list Maybe your grandchildren will do that. Yeah Yes, so your children are do they ask any questions about They met my mother of course my kids They were rather young though when she passed away, but they thought grandma was really something Yes, sir Yes, indeed. She just loved the kids Yeah Yeah Well those old grandmas they were sit on my lap type of people, you know, and they They had little gimmicks that they used so just like they do today to interest the kids Yes Yeah Yeah Yeah Well, there was an interview with Harden Lindström Rockford, Illinois and interview