 So, yes, you mentioned something about the… Well, I buried now, and we're on North 4th Street. On North 1st Street is the northern Italians. They're the ones that are from Rome and Verdi society and Lombardis. They're all northern, and then you have the southern Italians. Well, most of the southern Italians are buried by Gasparini Oliveri. They're Italian. But the northern Italians, use me, and I have for years buried all of them. And gone in the generations, you know, kids had grown up and so forth, and I buried their parents, and their parents had me bury their parents. So it's, they're, they've been very loyal to me. And then I bury, like I say, the Jews, the Belgians, the Italians, the North 1st Street Italians, and I was burying Negroes there for a while, but I didn't like that because I got into the wrong end of Negroes, you know. The good ones are the Rockford born, or that northern Negroes, all right, but you get the southern, they're ignorant, you know. And so, but my friends would take care of them. That's good, and I didn't want to. So they've been, these people I have at different nationalities have been very good to me. I buried a lot of Irish out of the St. Patrick's Church, and I bury everything at St. James and at St. Edwards. Father Emmett Murphy, who's dead now, but his nephew is now Jimmy Murphy, and he runs the church, has a church there. Is he on the west side? No, that's on the east side, up on Leaven Street. Oh, that's it. Yeah. So they've been kind to us. So I'm grateful for the loyalty. When these foreign groups, they form regular little cliques. They stick together, you know, and they help one another. And that's the way these North 1st Street Italians are, and the Jews, I remember a lot of them that were like the bears, pushing push carts. Now they're a huge outfit. I mean, it's million-dollar outfits, you know. They have iron, they have shirts and Navy stuff, surplus. They get a lot of that. They're really a big firm now. Is there a big continent of Jews in Rockford? Pretty good size. I don't, if you go by the population, I think they bury about 25 or 30 a year. But nobody else buries any Jews. Now and then they'll get one, but it'll be then they have to come and get equipment from me and that. And there's only one synagogue in Rockford? One synagogue and one temple. The temple is for the Reformed and the synagogue is for the Orthodox. And I support them naturally because they support me, you know. So Rockford's been good to me. So the embalmment is the only difference, the difference from the rest of the people there? Yeah. Well, there's some people that don't believe in it too much. The Mormons don't. I bury a lot of Mormons. I don't bury all of them, but I bury a lot of them. And different cliques like that, Mormons. How would they embalm you then? They embalm now, but they didn't used to like it, you know, embalming. But they can see when they embalm, they can have a funeral three or four days and not have any problems. Otherwise, they smell, you know, if they get going. So there's no visitation, in other words? No, but now they have visitations. Now that whole thing has changed, you know. So they've been fine. And there's Catholic families that I've buried the second generation, as they say, and some are the third, you know, old folks. A man from Belgium, a man called me from some town in Belgium, and his wife had died. And he says, he says, Collins, I have my wife out to Calvary. Now, I have a lot at Calvary Cemetery, but my wife died here, he says, and I don't know what to do. And he said, well, you take care of it and bring her back to Rockford. And I said, well, wait a minute now. If she's over there, her family, her father and mother have lots. And he says, yeah. I said, why don't you bury her there, and then when you die, I'll send you over. That'll be easier for you now, and then you'll both be in your homeland, you know, like the Swedes want to go home to be buried, see? And so that's what he done. We buried her here, and of course, we buried her in such a way we can send her to, back to Belgium, send him back when she dies, or he dies. So she's buried here now, and I've sent people all over the world, you know, to Q So you have sent Swedes back to Sweden, too? A Yeah. Q So you A And now they cremate them. Why, then there's no problem. It's easy, you know, in any of these countries. But when they send the whole body, then that's a different thing, see? So we have to send them in sealed caskets, glass seals that shows them you can open the cover, and they're in glass. And of course, they've been embalmed, so they last over there. So I've sent, you know, quite a few. Borås, Sweden, was the last one. There was a Hilding Eklund, and I sent him back to Borås in Sweden in a casket. And the Swedes didn't know exactly what to do, but they finally okayed everything. I got our ambassador to Sweden to intercede for us, see? Q So there's a lot of paperwork then, then? A Oh, sure. Yeah. Then I've sent them back to Russia, and I've sent them back to Lithuania, and sent them in all different countries, Hungarians, you know, different nationalities that I've sent back home. Q So you have to go through the consulate center? A Oh, sure. I work with them, and then our Swedish or whatever country they're from, our ambassador contacts the State Department and makes the arrangements for us. So they've been very cooperative. Q The winters, you know, they can sometimes be very severe. I remember up in upper Michigan, there they store them over the wintertime and bury them in the apron. Did you do that? A No. We bury every one of them. But used to, in Greenwood Cemetery, they used to have a great big vault, and they'd put them in there until spring, you know. But now we bury them all because they have the jackhammers to dig the graves with and strong machines, so they can dig graves for them, see. Q So you don't? A They put a heater on the grave, you know, this gas heat, and that takes the moisture right out of it. It's just dry like sand. And we dig down that far, and then we put the heater down again, and we try to get the depth we need for the vault. Q So you take care of the digging of the graves in order to A Yeah. Well, we see to it that the cemetery gets a guide, but we sometimes have to get the grave diggers for them, see. So they're very cooperative. Q The Scandinavian Cemetery now, is that full or are they still burying? A Well, it's filling up fast. I think what they should build out the Scandinavian Cemetery is a mausoleum type, you know. And, of course, a lot of Swedes have gone to cremation because that's what they do over in Sweden and England. Q And the Swedes go more to that than the rest of the nationalities? A Well, no. The Polish do that, too. And Bohemians, you know, they do it. And Germany, of course, has had cremation for years. And England has had it. So when you have cremation, you ship the cremains, you have no problem because they put them through a light that sees if there's anything in there, and they can tell right away if there's anything other than ashes. And ashes are sterile, so nobody can become infected. So it works out pretty well. Yeah. Q So many cities have problems to get cemeteries to open? A Well, yeah. They say, but we buried grandma over in Sweden in a church cemetery there. And about two years ago, I got a letter from the minister of the church. And, of course, he works for the state government. They're civil employees just like motor men and whatever they have. They're a socialist country. And he said that for 900 and something dollars, I can keep grandma from going on the bone pile because they take them, dig them up, and use that grave again, you see, for another burial. But I had heard my uncle talking about it, that he had paid for a lifetime place for her to lay in that cemetery. And then he bought a big black Swedish granite, and that covers the whole grave. So I'm going to try to go to Sweden this year if I can get my leg going here and go back and see my grandmother's grave. That's on my mother's side. My father's side, I don't know. He never mentioned much about cemeteries. But my mother, the boys have been active, her sons. And so I'm going back and see them. And I have a cousin in Stockholm. He's with the newspapers over there. And he tried to get me to forget my dislike for the Swedes, what they'd done, you know, when we had our boys over in Vietnam. And this Palmer, Palmer, what, Palmer, what the hell his name is. But they said that, he says, that's politics. He says, you got it right here in the United States. If you only look around, you'll see where they've, and he says, you said the war was interrupted by liberal people or Russian inclined. So he says, come to Sweden by all means. Now, I'm going to have my cousin, the girl, is coming here with her, I think her husband, is coming here in July or August to visit the United States. And they're going to stay with me in this house. And I invited them. I said, you can be glad to. And I have two cars, so there's no problem in transportation, you know. You can drive a car. You can drive here all right. And so they may come. I may have them come. Evelyn, my sister, is making up the arrangements. She's been to Sweden. My mother, when she was living, she got some, inherited some money for her brother, and she gave me a thousand and my sister a thousand to go to Sweden with. Well, I didn't go, but my sister went, and so I give her my money, see. And she rented a car over there and drove through Sweden and West Germany. I don't think she got into Russia, but she got into, went up the boat on the big river and went, runs through, not Seine, but runs through Germany and goes up to Switzerland. Q Rhine? A Rhine. She said the houses are much different over there. The rooms are smaller. The beds are smaller. They're kind of bunk beds. But everybody has a stuga, you know, and they go on, it's on the lakes, and they go up there for the summer. The Swedes enjoy themselves, see. Q You also have a stuga. A Yeah, that's my stuga there. That's the first piece of building I had on the property. Q How did you design that one? A I didn't design it. I bought it from a used garden healer, and then I painted it red, and we trimmed it off and got, you know, shutters are all the Swedish stuff that we're able to find out about, and then the roof is clapboard, you know. Yeah. Q And then you have a sulbak. A Sulbak. And my mother always talked about Karlsson's Sulbak, yeah. And they used to slide down it with their sleds. In Sweden, when she was a girl, you know, a little girl, and she always talked about a sulbak. And so when I got this house, then I named it, you know, and that was I've been here 27 years, but I had the property for about six years. I bought the lot. I took 72 trees out of here. We had an elm tree disease. Q This is a high spot though, isn't it? A Yeah. See, that's up a little higher than we are over there. That's a church parsonage over there. And then the other is a garage. I have two poodle dogs, but they're not Swedish. They're French. Q French? A Hunting dogs. Q Oh, hunting dogs? A Yeah. I bought one. I called this gal on the telephone and talked to her up in Wisconsin, and I says, you have standard poodles? And she says, yes. Well, I says, I want one. And she says, well, that's fine. She says, I've got a litter here. And so I says, well, how old are these? She says, some of them are about six months old. And I says, well, that's all right. And they've never been out of the kennel. So one is named Andre and the other one's name is Lisa. And they're brother and sister. And they were all spaded and looted and spaded when they over there, up there rather in Wisconsin. And she brought them down one day, and she brought a bunch of other dogs. She left eight or nine of the great schnauzer, let's say, the big schnauzer, and she sells them, and then she brought my dogs down. Well, she took this schnauzer of hers and brought it into the yard, what they call a pooping yard, where they do their business, this gravel in there, and it washes down in the ground. So we took them over there, and she carried them in, and then she went back and got a couple of puppies, these great schnauzers. And when she came back to the yard, there was no dog. And she looked all over the yard back there, and they looked up here for it, and then they went down along the driveway, and they couldn't find that dog. When she returned to the car, there the dog was sitting in the seat waiting for it, see. Now, how he jumped the six-foot fence, that's what they are, six-foot chain-link fencing. He didn't have much space to run in, but he jumped over that fence and went in the car and sat and waited for her. He thought she was going to leave him, see. And that was her puppy, and that's the one that she showed, you know, in dog shows. Her name is Jane Campbell. She's quite a gal. Q So you are interested in dogs and— A Well, I've always had dogs. Q Hunting, too? A No, not hunting. I belong to the Humane Society. I don't believe in it anymore. And my fur coats that my wife had, she had a mink and a sheepskin, you know, the curly head. What the hell do they call that? Anyway, she had three fur coats, and I give them to my nieces and nephews. Give all her clothes away, got rid of all of it. But she liked, but in the Animal Welfare League, that's—I was president of the Humane Society here for seven years. No, I belong, when I was talking to the Society, I belonged to the Swedish Historical Society and the, what's the club? Well, I belonged to about 15 different Swedish organizations. Q How many board of directors then for the banks and— A No, I haven't got into that. I didn't want that kind of responsibility, but I've served on boards with various organizations, but I never got into the banking business or that. I never had any desire for that. Q How about the school board? Have you been active in that? A No, I don't. We have no children, so I don't, and I don't like the way the schools are run anyway. If I had children, they'd be going to a parochial school. They wouldn't be going to this madhouse that they have downtown. The way the kids are, giving out condoms to the kids. You know, we used to use them years ago when we were young because we didn't want to get caught, see? Then it was shameful. Now they think nothing of it. Now they live together and they're not married. That's crazy, you know? Q It's a shanty world. A Yes, it is. And the Swedes are just as guilty of it as we are. Got it in. They say the body's beautiful. Well, it is, but Jesus. You know, flouting around, bathing in suits with just trunks and bare upper part, you know? Q There's Swedes in the politics in Iraq. Were there quite a few of them? A When the Swedes were in there, there was Mayor Blumen, Mayor Hallstrom, and they were all Swedes. And all the Swedes worked for the city, you know, in the sewer department, water department. They were all Swedes. Now the Italians got in. Now it's all Italians. Q So the second and third generation Swedes, they're not interested in politics, then, though? A Not too much. Q What kept them away? A I don't know. They just don't want responsibility, see? But the old timers, they did, you know? Q He was a socialist, Hallstrom. A Yeah. So was Blumen was a socialist. Q They came in on their ticket. A Progressive ticket. Hallstrom was on a progressive ticket, and so was Blumen. And Hallstrom, he got all the empty cement sacks, and he sold them for ten cents a piece or something like that. Made a fortune. He didn't work. He's dead now, but he didn't work after that. He made so much money. But Blumen was a little different stripe. He was a squeaky voice guy, but he studied, you know? He was after the utilities, electric company. Q So he was more educated than Hallstrom, then? A Yeah. Hallstrom was a bricklayer, and Blumen was a druggist, see? So he went to college, you know? When you think of the old days, these guys were something else. Hallstrom was a friend of my father's, and they were comrade. Camaradi? I don't know. Q Camarader. A Camarader, yeah. Q So was he a socialist too, then, your father? A Yeah. He was. Q He was. Did he belong to? A Well, he belonged to the Republican Party, but he was socialist inclined, you know? Q So he had those ideas. A Oh, yeah. Q Was he in that parade they had during the war, for instance? A Yeah. Q When his daughter went to Bridewell for a year. They resisted the draft in the First World War. A Oh, yeah. No, he wasn't mixed up in that. He was too old or he wasn't in it. But he was on St. Charleston. Of course, they have Swedish Day, and he had his Viking uniform on. He rode a horse. And so in their parades. And that's where the Belgians knew him from, you know? Q Oh. A Well, that Baltic Lodge, you know, there's a sweet – there's several Yngve Lodges in Sweden in Chicago. And that's where my name came from, I think. I don't know. He was quite a guy in Sweden. Q He had a Viking name. A Yeah. And there was a Svensk – he had Sven Duva. I used to recite that, you know, in Svensk. And then I got a nickel from these guys going to saloons and pick up dough when I was little, you know. Sven Duva stood for Bryggen. He wouldn't let the Danes across. I guess they fought with the Danes quite a bit. Q He was actually a Finn, though. A Was he? Q He was Runeberg, you know, the author. Had a poetic writing about him, Sven Duva. A Oh. Sven Duva stood for Bryggen. Nobody got over the bridge, and he stood there with that big sword. Yeah, that king, he was really something that – he was over in Poland when he was killed. He was trying to conquer the Poles, that darn fool, you know. I don't know why he fought. Q You mean Gustavus Adolf II? A Adolf Gustavus. Q He was German, a Lützen. A Yeah. Well, he had Hessian soldiers, and they were German, see, professional soldiers. He had them. Q So you have read that history, then? A Oh, yeah. I had a whole series of Swedish books. When we moved, we lost a lot of things, and we had about 20 volumes, but it's written in English. And this is where I – well, I was really for the Swedes until that happened, that Vietnam thing. Then I got – Q You were all for the Swedes up until Palme came along. A Yeah. Palme made me mad. And my cousin said – he makes me mad, too – but he says he's a politician. He says, you just don't vote for him. Well. Q So you have to have some discussions with your cousin when he comes over to Zumwalt. A Yeah. So they should be here this summer. Wicklund down here, he has people from Sweden that come to visit him, you know. He's really fixed his place up nice down there. I'm going to finish that road. If they don't city come in, I've deeded the property to the city, and if they don't take advantage, I'm going to get my friends that have a cat and come in and dig up the road and fill in gravel and then open it up, and they can drive it. Because Wicklund wants it now. His garage goes right out to the – he didn't want it at first, but now when he fixed up this garage. I'm surprised he doesn't drive a Volvo. He's so sweet. I'm surprised he doesn't have one. That's quite a car, you know. That's a Cadillac of Sweden, I think. Q Oh, yes. A And then there's another one that's a Q Saab. A Saab. And they've made that into a bigger car. But you see, with a Chrysler plant over here close by, and they're building cars here in the States, I've never bought a foreign automobile, but I'd like to. I'd like nothing better than owning one of those English Jaguars, I think. They used to have one with 12 cylinders. I don't know what they have now, but they go like hell, you know. All leather upholstering and every – Q You still have the young Jaguar? A Oh, yeah. I drive. I got a Cadillac Eldorado here. It'll do 120 miles an hour or better, you know. Faster than hell. It's front-wheel drive. Q You must belong to the Sheriff's Club if you can – A Well, I used to be a coroner, yeah. I know the Sheriff real well. But, you know, I had a Chrysler, 1965 Chrysler LeBaron Imperial, and that was a huge car. And I liked that because it was comfortable in it, but my wife didn't want me driving it. And I had this big motor in it and plenty of room in the seats. I was very comfortable in that car. Drove it for many years when I was coroner. And then this guy come along and talked me out of it. And then my wife got along and she says, you get rid of that. She says, I got another car for you. She bought me an Eldorado convertible and then made me sell this Chrysler I had. And I – we were coming back from Door County. That's – they say like Sweden. And we were coming back from Door County and she says, are you crazy? And I says, what do you mean crazy? No, I'm not crazy. No, I don't think so. She said, well, look at the speedometer. And I was doing 125 miles an hour in that Chrysler. No end to it. I mean, it maybe run 165, but I didn't have the accelerator all the way down. I didn't think it was going that fast. Now they'd get you in ten minutes, they'd pick you up the cops because they watched that. You'd get – you stay at 55, boy, or they're on your neck. And the only way to do that is to follow a truck. And they have a speaking system and they can tell you where Smokey is. That's the cop. So I drove up to Mayo Brothers. I was up there for 23 days. And going up there, I drove past Madison. I got all tired out. And so the nurse that was with me, I asked her if she'd mind driving. She said, no, no, that's okay. So she got in the car and she drove all the way to Mayo Brothers. And then she drove around Mayo Brothers. And then the doctors told me I shouldn't drive. My sugar was too high. And they said, when you get your sugar down to a level, then we'll give you an okay and you can get another set of glasses. So that's what I'm waiting for now. I got two cars I can't drive. I got that Buick 125 Electra. That's one of the finest cars, you know, in the world. And then the Eldorado, that's no slouch either. So I got two nice cars that I have driven some, you know, but nothing since I went up to Mayo's. I think I came back on the 23rd of February. Came back to here. Q So you still have the business? A Oh, yeah. I get down there every now and then and I'm going to get more when I get this leg broken, see. But it takes a while to break them in, see. I've got it off here. Q And it was because of the sugar? A Yeah. It's a horrible disease. And you got to be careful. A lot of people have it that don't know it. And these people, if they're overweight, why, they better get themselves checked. Because I told our office girl, I mean, our housekeeper, and she's been with my wife 20-some years, and I says, why don't you get checked just one year down and the next time have the doctors check you. And of course, she went to Tanya, I think her name is. He said, Nellie, you're running sugar. She went on a diet and she's staying on it. She's losing more and more every day. She's lost about 25 pounds. But she could lose another 25 or 50. She's like a beer belly, you know. But she says she's had that since she had the children. But it sure woke her up because she saw what happened to me, see. Q So you were a big fellow in your teens. You grew fast and A Oh, yeah. I'm 6'3". And I used to weigh, when I finally settled in as an adult, I'd weigh 225 to 245. I weighed 267 one time, and I got scared then for some reason, heart problems. And so I went on a diet and went down to 211. Yeah, 211. But that was too much. And so I went back up to 225. And I've stayed that way for quite a few years. Now I weigh 174 pounds. In my sickness, they had me on a diet and they got me down to 130 pounds. Q 130? A 130 pounds. And I thought I was going to die. I didn't get enough to eat. I'm on a diet now. But I eat five times a day. The only difference is, you see, you got to keep your stomach full. You got to keep that sugar satisfied. So I eat five meals a day. Let's say breakfast and lunch. And I have a snack in the afternoon and a supper at night. I have a dinner before I go to bed. Just small portions.