 We have June 19, 1986, and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Linnea Willits, Rock Island, Illinois. Yes, this is Rock Island, and I'm living here with my sister right now. We're both widows, and so we stay three months of the year here, three months here, and then go to Alabama, where my home is, for about three months. And then we come back and forth. So you live down in Alabama? Uh-huh. That's where my home—I have a home down there. Now this was home as far as being born and raised up here. But my husband and I got down into Alabama for his work, and so that's really what I call home because I have my son down there. Well, it's wonderful where you can spend the wintertime and let the birds sing. Yeah, that's right. So your parents know. Your father, Frank Arnold Peterson, he came from close to Squirvdy. Squirvdy, uh-huh. Do you know the reason why he left Sweden? There was three out of the family that came to America just about the same time, another brother and a sister. And I think—I really don't know. As young people, I guess maybe curiosity and to see what this world was like over here. Was he the only one from that family to come? No, there was two others, a sister and a brother. Were they here before him? No. I rather think some of them—I think the brother came at the same time, but I'm not sure about the sister. And there was several more in the family, though, that stayed over there. I think it was a family of eight or so children. Do you know approximately what year he came over here, early 1900? Let me see if I could figure that back. I think maybe in the very late years of 1800. I don't really remember the year that they were married, even. That must have been about 1903, possibly, that they were married. I was the oldest of the two girls, and it was just the two of us in the family. And your mother, now, she was born in Moline? In Moline. You really don't know the background of her parents, where they came from? Well, no. That's the sad part. A person don't think of those things until it's too late to find out the details. We never did actually know enough about her family. We knew grandmother and the grandparents and all, but as far as knowing where they came from, none of that we're not familiar with. So your parents, they never spoke too much about Sweden? Not a whole lot, no. They didn't speak Swedish. I think maybe our dad did for a spell, but as we grew up, he was in business, and so he had to know the English language pretty well. So he came over there as a young guy? Yes, he was young. I think his trade was over in Sweden. I think he must have learned the shoe trade, mending of shoes. Because after he came in, I think even before they were married, that he had a little shoe store, a shoe shop down on Fifth Avenue, across from the Lutheran Church in Moline. I remember when they got married that there were signs, and they had pictures taken of the store windows, and there were signs to that effect in the windows. So I don't know. Did he continue with that? Yes, that he kept on. He continued to have—he also went into a shoe store where he sold new shoes, other than just repairing. As he got older and the Depression came on, I believe that's when he finally sold out his shoe business, and we were still in school then. Well, what else? What church did they belong to? Mama was a Methodist. Now, just what Papam's religion was, what church, before he came over, I don't know. But then they were married in the Methodist church. The Swedish church? That's right, the Swedish church in Moline. We were raised up in the Swedish church, even though neither of us could speak the Swedish or understand very much of it at all. Do you remember the Swedish sermons? Oh, yes. We had to go to church. We were always taken to church. What about confirmation classes? Were they taken in English or in Swedish? I think they were in English by that time. But I have heard more recent that there was a lot of them that had gone through in the Swedish language, but I'm sure they must have had more Swedish in their homes than what we did at home. So you didn't practice the Swedish then at all? No, not at all. Took it in high school to try and learn how, but neither one of us did much good at it. Do you remember if there were any Swedish papers in your home? No, I don't remember that. I don't think so. I don't recall any Swedish papers. How about organizations? Did your dad belong to any of them, the Swedish-American organizations? I don't know. I don't recall him ever going out to any kind of an organization, unless it was the two or the four of us. No, I don't recall of any kind of an organization. Was it common to get insurance for hospitalization, for instance? Oh, I see. No, I don't think he ever did. Not that I know of. So where did you live now, down town, Moline, or on top of the hill? Where did we live? Up on top of the hill. Well, first, when my dad had the shoe store, it was on First Street and Fifth Avenue, right on the corner, and there's still a store building on that corner. And then we bought a home up on top of the hill on 11th Street and 11th Avenue, and they remodeled an old home, and that's where we lived until they passed away. That is, my dad passed away from there, but Mama was living longer, and she lived here with my sister part of the time. So how old were they when they passed away? I think Papa was 72 and Mama was in her 80s. But I was just thinking this morning, and I've got a record of it somewhere from the cemetery, the gravestone, so as to know how old she was, but I haven't had a chance to look it up yet. So his business then was in the shoe business until he retired? Until he retired, practically, uh-huh. So after high school, then, did you go on to college or business? No, I worked in downtown in a dentist's office, and neither one of us went to college. We just didn't seem to care to go to college. We helped at the store. We helped the folks, mostly. And then you got married? Uh-huh. Not until 1932, I believe it was. So how did you meet your husband? He was not of Swedish background? No, not at all. He was a little bit of everything, English and Irish, or English and Scotch, I believe it was. But no, I met him just through friends that introduced us. He was a civil engineer, and so we were with the government and traveled around a good little bit. And he was from the Quasidiyar area? His home was here in Rock Island. He had been raised. I don't think he was born right in Rock Island. I think it was out in Kiwani, but he was raised up here. And so was my sister's husband. He was raised here. He was an Apple. I mean, Apple was their name. And I guess that is that is their Swedish people with the name of Apple? Have you ever heard of it? They were Swedish. They were Swedish? Uh-huh. So they've taken the name Apple, then? Evidently. Swan Apple was his father's name. And your sister's name is Helen? Uh-huh. So you are about the same age group, then, two years or three years apart? Two years. Two years. She was two years younger. So then you moved away from the Quasidiyar. I did. Helen stayed at home, stayed here all the time. But I moved when my husband got work in the southern states. And we moved around quite a little bit down in, oh, from Tennessee on over to Oklahoma and then back again east to Mississippi and Alabama. So you were saying a great part of the country? Uh-huh, that part of the country. And that was interesting to do. So how were you introduced to any Swedish customs in your home? Did you have any of those in cooking, for instance? Like lutefisk? Mama, yes. Papa would make lutefisk and potato bologna. We always had that. We do yet to this day. Every Christmas there's one market here in town that sells the potato bologna. And I guess the fish, too, but we never bought it to use. But Mama used to do a lot of baking, and it seems as though somehow or other her skills didn't rub off on my sister and I. We aren't that much for cooking. But we still have what my dad made as a jysukruna, and we use it on the table for Christmas. And at Christmas time you had a Christmas tree? Oh, yes. We haven't here in the house in the last couple, three years because there's so much work to get up and take down. And we're just not young enough to do it anymore. And your children are all my support in different places. My son lives down in Birmingham where I do. So you have one son? I have one son. My sister has two daughters. And one daughter lives right across the ravine from here, and the other daughter lives out towards Aledo. We just met her this morning up at Village Inn and had breakfast together. And then I brought my sister to the beauty shop, and I came on home. We took the dog along because it just thought it was cool enough this morning, but then it's beginning to get kind of hot. So your boy now, has he asked any questions about the background of your family? Well, yes. I'm sure he'd like to know more than what we've been able to give him. We do have a lot of pictures that we often look at, and that kind of brings back memories and things. So he has questions about your background? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. Have you been in Sweden? Yes, but not at any age where we would remember anything. My sister was just two and I was four. We went over on the boat, and it was, I'm sure, lovely. Do you know the one thing that I can remember of that trip was all the smell of tea on that boat. It just seemed like that was the only thing that they had. Was it a Swedish boat? I don't know. That I can't tell. I don't remember. Maybe it was. I don't know. So there was a peculiar smell of tea? But just had that tea. And somehow I never, I lost the liking for tea. I never have cared for it since. Were you seasick? Do you remember that? I remember hearing about it. Now, I don't know, I can't recall. I couldn't say whether I was or not, but I have heard about being seasick. So I'd rather imagine that. Did you mention this to your parents, I suppose, sometimes? What did they say about it? Do you remember any? Well, that's where we heard it from. I mean, that they were seasick. I see. I think perhaps the weather wasn't all that good or something that caused it. But you don't remember anything in Sweden because you were only four? No, I was just too young to really remember more than what is told. And I think that way a person wonders if you remember it or if it's just what you've been hearing. And your parents didn't tell you afterwards what place you visited or who you visited? Oh, I'm sure they did, yes. Because there's pictures of relatives and friends over there that were taken. So I'm sure we were told a lot about that. So they had correspondence with them then occasionally? Yes. And your parents were there in the home? Well, now, yes, but mostly my dad, I imagine, because of it being his folks and he would have done the writing. I don't know whether Mama would have been able to write in the Swedish language because I know she never took it in school because, well, she had schooling almost up to high school, I think, but nothing in just a Swedish language. And her parents, for instance, what was he doing? They were farmers. Outside? Outside of Moline. Which went... Your father met her then? Well, maybe it was through church that they met because the church was downtown. And it could have been through the church that they met. I really don't know if my sister would know. I couldn't say. Now, you were speaking of Rehnquist girls. Their father helped my father, our father, in the shoe store. He worked for our dad. Well, we go to the same church yet up over in Moline. On 12th Street? On 12th Avenue and 13th Street. It is the oldest Swedish church in Koiseris. Yes, now, it has no Swedish left to it as far as services at all. And another church, the Wesley Church, maybe you read of it, has merged. And there were not any Swedish-speaking peoples there. I think our church was the only one that had the Swedish. Well, other than the Lutheran, I know that they had the Swedish services there and the Salem Lutheran up in Moline. But you didn't grow up in any particular Swedish ways then? In other words, you were all Americanized? No, very much so. Because of your mother's birth? I guess that is perhaps one reason. Other than just what was Swedish at church, that was the most of the Swedish that we got. How about table prayers? About what? Table prayers. Did you say any of that in Swedish? We used to, but I have forgotten. When you were little? Yes, we always did. So your mother taught you that or your father? Well, I have an idea. It was our dad that taught us that. But I hadn't given thought, but I can't even remember them anymore. That's terrible. We have our others to say, I guess. I couldn't repeat one of them now. I sure can't. So your sister, she married Swan Apple? Well, no, that was his father's name. D'Armond was her husband's name, which is more French, I think, than anything. I don't know where that name comes from. No, Swan was his father's name. And whether he came from Sweden, I haven't the slightest idea. What kind of business was he in? He had mercantile business. He had a store in Rock Island. I knew him. In fact, he died very young before D'Armond and my sister got married even. Did he somehow carry on that? No. No. After D'Armond got out of college, he went into the insurance line. He died very young. He was only 44 or so when he died. I see. So your sister had been a widow a long time. A widow a long time. Many years. Yes. And he had cerebral hemorrhage so that he died very suddenly. My husband has only been gone about six years. So now you spend time together. Now we spend our time together. Take advantage of the southern climate in the wintertime. So where in Alabama do you live now? Birmingham? Birmingham. Just south of Birmingham, really. It's in Vestavia, a suburb of Birmingham. There is a place down there that's called Thorsby. Have you ever heard of that? What? Thorsby. Yes. Thorsby. I have heard of that. And it's just south of that. And the Aussies settled that. Well, of all things. I never knew that. They raised strawberries. Is that right? Yes. Well, for goodness sake. Huh. Back in the early 1900s. Uh-huh. I've heard of the town. I know approximately where that is, but I hadn't... It's not too far from Selma, I believe. That's right. That's right. It's south. I was there a few years ago. So there were some Swedes that settled down there. Well, of all things. It's funny how they'll pick different places like that. Well, I suppose it's just what they come... what they find as they come over and what looks like it might turn out to be a good spot. Yes. And the climate probably was one. That would be one thing there that... A few winters up in Minnesota, they... Uh-huh. They'd be glad to go south, wouldn't they? That sounds very... Yes. So... I should say. So this is your background in the quarters. Just about as far as... Did you have any... You know, when the Swedes came in early, they had the Belgians to compete with on the job market or anything like that. When you were growing up, did you feel any tension between the Swedes and the Belgians? Not a bit. No. No? No. I never noticed that at all. Never heard of it, really. Oh. I didn't. It was more at the factory. Yeah. And there is quite a few Belgians in Moline area, I remember. Because we... We lived near a Belgium area. Over in Moline. But they were for themselves there more or less because they were Catholics and belonged to the church. That's right. I think that's maybe one reason. Did most of them go to a private school, you think? They didn't attend a public school. Did they go to... You know, that I... I don't know. I would say... I would think that they went right along. Unless they had a Catholic school and then... Is that what maybe you meant by private? Yes. Well, yes. I believe you're right with that. I think that's what... Because you don't remember any Belgians in your classes in the school, right? Not exactly that I knew of. Now, there could have been and I didn't know it, but then... No, I don't believe so. And we at that time would have been down on Fifth Avenue and going to Erickson School down there where it could have been a Belgium neighborhood too. The Catholic school wasn't too far away from there. Do you remember going to the church school in the summer for a private school? Oh, yes. Any Swedish lessons? You know, they could have had, but... I don't remember that we took any Swedish. I wonder, though, if there wasn't maybe some taught there. I can't say for sure on that. I don't know for sure. And you mentioned Rindquist. He was the one that raised a lot of berries and... No. Rindquist helped... was a worker in the shoe store. But also, didn't he have a lot of land, if I remember right? If the girls told you that, maybe so, but I don't know that. Yeah, I didn't know the family all that well until later in life when we'd been in church. You met in church. Yeah. But I didn't know about that. But that could have been so. I mean, that's no doubt right. Politically, how was your father interested in being a Republican or a Democrat? I never heard of anything but Republicans, so I think that... Why was it like that, you think? I don't know. I have no idea. Was it because he was a businessman? Well, maybe that would have something to do with it. I never gave that a thought. I don't know. So he voted Republican, then? He was... that's all I ever knew of. Even during the Depression, when it was bad times? Yes. Uh-huh. Yeah, as far as I know. On their life and things around here. So you don't have any correspondence or contact with Sweden? Well, yes. I forgot about that. We had a cousin. Our cousins. My father's sister's boy came over and lived at our home in Moline for about five... between five and ten years, somewhere. And he was... I was in high school, finishing high school at that time, so Richard must have been around 25. So that was your cousin? He was a cousin. And he went back then, after having worked over here in this country for... and he was a cabinetmaker, but he wanted to go back to visit, and so when he got back, he met a girl that wouldn't leave Sweden, and so he had to stay. And so he died in the last five years, somewhere. But he was one of ten children, I believe it was. So you have any cousins over there? Yes, and he was the first to die of that family, so there's still a lot of cousins over there. And I do write. We used to correspond or keep in touch with Richard all the time. And then about eight years ago, he came over, came back to visit, and brought a sister with him that was a widow. And so I write to Martha. And Richard has a daughter, and she has two children that are in Sweden, and I have corresponded at Christmastime anyway with her. But those are the only ones over there that I write to. Papa's brother that came over with him settled in Iowa and farmed, was a farmer all the time. Where in Iowa? Spencer. Oh, Spencer, northwest. Northwest corner. He still has, there's still three boys of that family there out in Iowa, out in that area. Do you have any contact with them? Oh, yes. We visit. Well, the last time I've seen them was when Richard was in this country and visiting, and we took him over there to visit with them. And I do write at Christmastime. I'm not a big correspondent. I'm poor at writing. I like to get letters, but I don't answer them. Yeah. Thank you.