 We have August 3rd, 1987. I'm sitting together with David Nelson in Grand Rapids, Michigan. He was born in Gnoshe, 1899, the 12th of August, and came to the United States, what year? 1923. 1923. Your parents are Mrs. Nelson, Nelson, Larsen and Christina Larsen. Did you have a farm? Yes, we lived on a farm. Gamlebo? Yeah, right. That's right. Did you grow up in, you went to school in Gnoshe or in a small school outside? Yeah, the primary school was in Leed, Gnoshe, Leed. And then I also prepared for college in Katrinaholm. So I took courses with a minister, a minister in Gnoshe, and tutoring, what we call tutoring here in English, you know. What subject? In mathematics and related subjects, you know, to mathematics, including English. And geometry and related subjects to mathematics. And I intended to take technical education to become an engineer. Was this your own idea or whose idea was it? Well, it was my own. I had, ever since I was 12, 11, 12 years old, I wanted to monkey with electricity and things like that, and chemistry. I wanted to study chemistry and get to be chemical engineer was my goal. Was there any in your family that was interested? Yeah. My schoolteacher, over the latest years, she recommended that I study because I had very good scholastic record in grade school, we call it. So I took my high school as a tutoring form, you know, and also my correspondence. I took a lot of correspondence in geometry and things. To Herbert? Yeah. Herbert in Malmö? Yeah. That's right. So your father, was he interested in electricity and... No, he wasn't. He didn't know anything about it. I have to do that all by myself. There was nobody else in the family, no uncle or... No, no. Except, oh yes, my older brother. He went to a school for farmers, you know, what we call... Agriculture school. Yeah, agriculture, yeah. And I studied his books, you know, and there was chemistry in there and there was physics there, things like that. I also studied books in pharmacy too. That is... At the same time? Yeah, yeah. I was still living on a pharmacy. And then in 1980, 17, 18, I think it was, then I went to Katrin Holm Technical School and I was there for three years. I skipped the first year because I had sufficient mathematics and so forth. So I graduated in 1919. With a chemical engineering degree. Were you the only one from the area down there? No. There was nobody else interested in that kind of... No, no. No, I had to do everything myself. I always had to do... paddle my own canoe. Did you have your own little corner now in Derkstaden? Yeah, well, yeah. I used to take away, take all kinds of machinery apart, like all these such things as watches and all kinds of timepieces, you know. Sewing machines? Yeah, sewing machines and so on. I liked to repair those, you know. So you repaired them for people around? No, no, just at home, you know. Whenever something went wrong, they always called on me to do the fixing up. So you were studying now during the First World War, wasn't it tough? Yes, yes. It was tough times at then. We could hardly get anything to eat. And living in Katrineholm, I had to eat in restaurants, you know. And they had poor food. We had bread cards and sugar cards and cigarette cards. I got my cigarette cards, although I didn't smoke, see. So I traded mine for bread cards. Some people would rather smoke than eat, so I took advantage. One was dead, the other was dead. You took advantage of that. But here's one thing. I had to write to the authorities about my vanplicht, you know, because I was getting to be 20 years old. And I had to have upskov, what do you call it, with the last, the course of it. So I had to go in 1920. I graduated in 1919. In 1920, I did my vanplicht. So where did you go then? Then I couldn't get a job anyplace. Vanplicht was done in Jönköping, E12. That was later moved to Ekfurt. And in the vanplicht, in the service that I did, I was picked out because I had this graduation schooling. I was picked to the office Signal Company. So that's where I did my, I had to learn to build telephones and send messages from one. It was right in your alley, so to speak. I mean, it was right in your alley. Yeah, yeah, sure, sure. So the military service for you was actually a benefit. Yeah. But a lot of young people that were against the military, though, during the First World War, were there? There was, we had one bearish engineer in our company, and we had other, several, who had done the college, general college, and some schoolteachers there, who had graduated as schoolteachers. And there was just mostly college-educated people, we call here, you know. So we had a lot of fun in the Army there, in Jönköping. We were in Jönköping, and we were just outside of Jönköping, so we went downtown and had a recreation, you know. But at that time, after the First World War, there was a... Depression. Yeah, depression and a movement against the military, wasn't it? Yeah. Nobody wanted to go into the military. They said they'd rather go to the United States. They cut it down from three years to eight months. So you were in for eight months then? Yeah. And no month of repetition afterwards, or...? Yeah, we had two repetitions. And you served both of them? Yeah, I served both of them. That's only for 30 days. But I tried to get a job after I had done my Vanplicht, and I couldn't for the life of me get the job. Everybody was laid off. People with jobs for 20 years, good jobs, they were laid off. And there was a terrible depression. And people who had professional jobs, they had to go and knock stone, you know. They were knocking to fill on roads, you know, macadam. Macadam. Yeah. Just to be able to live. And I had to go back to my parents' home, see. And there I wrote one... Oh, I wrote oodles of applications, you know. No answer. I couldn't... I tried to get in other things like paper industry too, and that was out of my actual study, but it had something to do with chemistry, you know. And no, they were closing, laying off, right and left. So then the school board, my dad was on the school board in Gnouw, and the board asked him. They ran out of teachers too, because there were school teachers... one of the school teachers got sick, had to go to the sanitarium for a year or two. So they asked my dad if I wouldn't... he wouldn't ask me if I couldn't substitute and teach, you know. So I substituted for one term in the school until they got somebody else in the grade school, one of the higher grades there. It was 11, 12 year old. Folkskolan. Folkskolan, yeah. Folkskolan. So your field now, was it chemical or electrical or both? Yeah. Well, our course included mechanical, some mechanical. Besides the chemistry and the physics and the drugs and that, it was... it includes electric, it includes mechanical, also mechanical drawing and things like that, and how to make metals and develop these furnaces for making irons and so on. All that we had to go through. And also, yeah, also the composition of alloys too, and so forth. Besides water power and tool, we also had water power too, Wattenbüchner, they call, Wege Wattenbüchner. That was, of course, that's much smaller than those who took that as a main. They had a lot of that, you know. That was one Falkskolan for Wege Wattenbüchner, and one for architecture. We had to take, so we knew how to read a drawing and all of that. It was in general engineering, plus a lot of chemistry and a lot of organic chemistry as well as inorganic, and some physiology and some related to that we could take. So you substituted them for... For the school teacher, yeah. And with the impossibility now to get a job, were you afraid you were going to lose touch with what you had learned then? Well, I was afraid that if time goes by, I would lose what I learned. How about the school now in Katheinoren? Didn't they try to place you out? No, it was impossible. Were there too many? Yeah. Yeah, there was all kinds of people that couldn't get jobs at that time, even related jobs, you know, lower work. You couldn't get work, any kind of work. So... So I decided I'll have to do something else. And it so happened that a friend of my dad's who he had known for years there, he lived in another part of Gnouff. He had been in this country since 1912 and had become a minister of the church, Covenant Church. He came traveling on vacation. He was actually retired. He was a retired minister. And he came visiting us in Sweden because he was a good friend of my mother and dad. They said that he used to be my mother's boyfriend in time. Well, that was way back in the 80s. What was his name? Joel Olin. J-O-E-L-O-H-L-E-E-N. Joel Olin. He was a pastor, had been a pastor in the Covenant Church. Here in the United States? Yeah. But he passed away in 1933. So he was an older man than you usually met? Yeah, he was an older man, retired man. And he came traveling to Sweden. And I thought that I'll ask him how the market was in America for people who were in my training. And he said that, I don't know, he said, because that's so outside of my work that I don't know anything about it. But I know a person who does, he said. And I could talk to him and let you know by letter how things, chances were. So when he went back, well, I didn't know if he would remember to do it or not, see. But I waited and I tried to get jobs here and there, besides what I was doing, teaching, you know. I didn't want to be a teacher. And so, because they didn't pay the teachers anything here at that time, you could hardly live on the salaries they were paying. So I asked him if he would do that. And he said, yeah, I'll do that. Now, he went back to Minneapolis where he was living, and he talked to a principal of a high school who had a university education, you know. He was the principal of a high school. His name was Teddy Anderson, Theodore Anderson. And he went, now this Joel, Joel Olean went and asked him if there was any chance for a fellow with my education to get here. This is what Teddy Anderson told him. He said that, tell your friend in Sweden that if you have schooling in Sweden, they have excellent schools and they are very well considered in America. There's all kinds of chances for people like that if you come from Sweden with education, he said. That's the way he wrote to me, so Joel wrote to me. And then I got busy. Right away I tried Vita Skværlingen. And I tried Kronerslingen. I could not get in. It was all taken up. So I had to go through a Norwegian line. What did you find out about Norwegian in Jönköping? I don't remember. I think I got hold of it from advertising in paper. I think there was paper advertising. So I wrote to them and asked. I think they had an office in Göteborg. Before you went to the ticket office, you had to go to the minister to get a dismissal letter. Oh yeah. I had to even write to the military. You had to write to who? Kungliga Majer States. Even if you had done the service, you had to write to them? Yeah, because I was still on the roll. I was still on the roll. You were on the roll years after that. So I had his permission. The pastor helped me with that. What did the pastor say when you came to ask for Fridtnigs Batig? Well, Pastor Olsen in Gnukur was the one that handled it. He wrote me Fridtnigs Batig and everything, all that. He took care of that. And I wrote to the office in Göteborg for the tickets, you know, and for more information, when I could get on and so on. I could get on in July about – but there was a quota. They had to wait until after 1st of July. So I couldn't come in before on the quota before. That was full. But after the 1st, that's the U.S. government deadline, you know, for years start. Their years start, the 4th of July. So I came at the 13th. The boat came to – was due to come in New York the 13th of July. And I had to get on in Oslo. So I packed a trunk, you know, that stood about this wide and so long. And I packed that and I packed hand baggage, you know. Three by two? Yeah. Three by two feet? Yeah. What did you pack, then? Oh, I packed a lot of clothes and things, you know. And my mother, she was so concerned about that it would get cold. She packed down a couple of 100 percent wool blankets, beautiful blankets, gray with a little pattern in it, you know. And I had underwear and I had extra pairs of shoes and I had all kinds of books and stuff like that. That was a heavy thing, you know, very heavy. What did it say right now on the Fritids Boutique as your title or vocation? Ingenieur David Simon Andreas. I had a third name there, but I dropped that on my citizens' paper, see, because my initial would be David S.A. and they don't use that much in this country. They only use one. So I had David S. for Simon. And I changed it from N-I-L-S-S-O-N to N-E-L, Nelson. Everybody knows how to spell that. Otherwise, every time you talk on the phone, you have to spell it out. That's too much trouble. So there was no problem to come in as an engineer? No, no. No problem at all. And you had to have a sponsor, so I wrote back to Joel O'Lean and asked if he would sponsor me. I put him down as a sponsor. He didn't have to guarantee you some money or anything, just a name that he would sponsor you? No, that's right, sponsor. And he said, okay. He said, okay, you're welcome. He said he lived in a duplex in Minneapolis there. And I had to do all this arranging myself. My dad didn't do anything. He even, although he had money, he had money in woods and he was well off, considered well off, you know. Did he pay for the tickets or? No, he said that I want you to pay for your own tickets, he said. You go to a friend of his who was a rich farmer and borrow something like 700 crowns or something like. You go and borrow, I'll sign it with you, he said. So he made me go and borrow for the tickets. I had to do everything. How about the farmer? Did he say he object to borrowing money or he lent you the 700, the neighbor? No, that farmer, he knew my dad had money, you know. So he, well, he didn't have too much money, but he had so much wood that $100,000 worth of wood. So he was a safe character. Yeah. So I came, I had to start, well, when I first came, I came to Joel only. How was the travel now, the journey over? Oh, traveling? Yes, you took the train then from? New York? No, I mean from your home now in Bernamo or Ingenofer. Yeah. You went to Gothenburg? Gothenburg and then to Oslo. And I had to buy all the tickets and everything myself. I did everything myself. And you had no travel companion? No, no. Alone? And I got on the boat, Stavangerfjord. And that was a steam engine, you know, with where your soot was flying all over, you know, and you have to be careful when you walk on deck. You didn't get sooty. We had a cabin inside the boat with two other Swedes. We were three in a cabin. And it was a little choppy when we got on the North Sea, you know, which it usually is. And there it was jumping up and down. I got quite a bit seasick, you know, but pretty soon that went over in a couple of days. We came to New York and we saw the Friedrichsgadina. And we got to Ellis Island. And there was a mess, full of people. And all kinds of... you tried to talk to somebody and he had talked a different language, you know. You could hardly find anybody talking English except the policemen. So did you get straightened out then at Ellis Island? Did you have anybody to help you? No, no, they didn't have anybody. I had to do everything myself. Did you have to go through the medical examination there? Yeah. The only medical examination I ever had was this. I looked at my eyes to see if I was blind or if I had... And then I had to answer some questions, you know, if I had any sicknesses. No urine test or anything like that? No. Did they show any money for... Then there was a fellow from the railroad company. He got us together, those who were going west. And he got us on the train and this was the dirtiest train I ever saw. Boy, you put your hand on the upholstery and your hand gets black. And we were traveling at night, I remember, between New York and Chicago. In Chicago we had to... The car was a railroad car, a passenger car of course, that had to be switched on to another train from Chicago to... They called it Great Western Railroad, you probably heard of it. So we had to change trains. But I remember, especially on the way between New York and Chicago, we were sleeping. We got all sleeping. Everybody was sleeping. And we were all going to Minneapolis or west, out west. And everybody was sleeping and I was sleeping too. Here comes the conductor and said, holler out, sir, coffee and doughnuts, coffee and doughnuts. And some of them woke up and some of them, most of them, slept. And then the conductor woke up one guy and asked him, next to me, and asked, is there anybody here who can speak English? He didn't know, but he just pointed at me. He pointed at me. Oh, you speak English? A little, I said. Well, tell everybody to wake up. Next stop will be coffee and doughnuts. So I started to rouse everybody and holler and try to... One tried to wake up the other, you know, so they all woke up. And the next stop, we went out and we had doughnuts. That was the first food we had, you know. Sign 2, continuation with Dengden, Nelson, Grand Rapids, Michigan. Sign 2. So you think it was Cleveland or perhaps? Perhaps it was. It could have been, yes. So the first English expression you had to make use of was coffee and doughnut? Coffee and doughnuts. That was the first meal. Were they helpful, though, people? Well, I forgot to ask you, at Ellis Island, did you have to show any money to go through there? $25 or $20? Do you remember that? I think I did. I don't remember definitely showing them the money, but... But they didn't keep any money, or did you have to pay? No, no, no. We didn't have to pay. So then arriving in Chicago, your destination was Minneapolis? Minneapolis, yeah. So you had a long train ride then? Oh, yeah, yeah. And it was hot. There was no air conditioner there, too. And it was hot like it's now here. We were sweating like everything. The trains were sooty and dirty? Yeah, the train was sooty, yeah. Noisy, too. Could you sleep anything on the train? I mean, leaned on? A little bit, yeah. I slept a little bit, but... Soft seats or wooden? Yeah, no, there were no wooden. There were upholstered seats, yeah, on the train. So you had a pretty good train then? Yeah, it was pretty good, but it wasn't clean, you know. And the windows were dirty. But we could open the windows, so we had windows open. Oh, shit. And some of the soot flew out, you know, from the train. Then in Chicago, did you get help to take another train to Minneapolis? Yeah, there was a fellow who was with us, came in now and then, you know. And he was kind of like a... he was... A leader? Yeah, a leader. Were all the immigrants in the same... Same coach, yeah. They were all immigrants, and they were all... There were girls and boys together? Yeah, there was a few women there, but there was a family. They were from Nose in Dahlone, yeah. And they were going... but they were going to Chicago. They were going off there, you see. So we talked. I talked to them some, you know. And I talked to two fellows who were brothers from Dahlone. They talked a little bit Dahlone, you know, the dialect that they have in Dahlone. I think they were from the Rettwick area, and they were machinists. So they expected to... they could get a job right away. They were coming out for the first time, too? Yeah, they were coming for the first time, yeah. Greenhorns. Yeah, and they had left their families over in Sweden to earn money to pay for their farm or whatever they had. So they were all the men? Yeah, they were two men. They were machinists. So then arriving in Minnesota, you came to Joel Olin. Yeah. Did you stay with him then for a while? Yes. Now, here's what happened. When I came to the railroad station in Minneapolis, the first thing I did was go to Traveler's Aid. They were in the corner of the railroad station. Traveler's Aid. I saw the sign, so I went there. And I told them where I wanted to go. And I wondered if they could get me a bus. Not a bus, but a cab. So they got me a cab, and I got my stuff there. And she helped me to get the... She told me I could get the... She found out about my luggage, you know. And I could get that the next day. She found that out. She said, that Traveler's Aid is a wonderful thing. Was she able to speak Swedish, too? Or how did you... You understood? No, I spoke English. You spoke English? I spoke English because I had taken English. Did you understand it easy? Oh, well, it's a little different. English that they teach in the schools, you know. They learned more English English, you know. Like they say, pass, and advantage, and... And off and off. Yeah. And so on, you know. So it was a little different. But you could express yourself also in writing? Yeah, I could express... They understood me, see. But I sometimes missed some words, you know. But I could make myself understood. I asked her if she could get the cab for me. And she did. And the cab came, and I took my hand baggage. The other baggage I could go and get next day at the station. And we went... This was dark, you know. It was about 10, 11, I think it was 11 o'clock or so. It was dark. And the streets were bumpy. Boy, I thought that, boy, these... It wasn't a paved street. The duplex wasn't where I was going. But I had a number, and he... The cab got me there all right, and there was two doors. And I didn't know which door to go to ring the bell on. So I tried one, you know. And that happened to be the right one. The Paulines had already gone to bed. And he come down in his pajamas. Oh, he was so glad to see me. But he had misunderstood my letter. I had written the date when I was coming. He thought that it was the next day. So they really were surprised a little bit, one day. But I got up there, and Mrs. Pauline, she was so nice. And she asked if I had anything to eat. And I said I had coffee and doughnuts. Well, then she fixed me sandwiches and things, you know, and coffee. And we talked way into the night. And they had a second bedroom there, and I could sleep. I stayed with them for some time. And then he was building another home on 47th Street off of Lake Street. That's close to a high school. Covenant Church had a high school there. They called Minnehaha Academy. That was only a block away from Lake Street. And his house was in between the school and the Lake Street. And when he saw he was just on the verge of building a school. There was a little house on the back there with two bedrooms. No, one bedroom and a good-sized sunroom with a lot of windows. And a bathroom, of course, and closets and everything. So he said this, you can stay with me for a while, he says, because my doctor has put me in forhibited. Can you drive a car, he said. And I said, well, I have driven a few times in Sweden, a Ford. And he had a Ford. Oh, that would be fine. Then you stay with me and be my chauffeur, because my doctor told me that I am supposed to not drive a car, because I have trouble with the ear. He had trouble being... Sometimes I can't think of an English word for ear. What is it? When something... When things go around. So he was not supposed to, he was prohibited from driving his Ford, so he was stuck there. He said, you stay with me here. And then I went to the school, to that high school there, and I talked to Teddy Anderson, who he was the one that had told Orlean that I should come. So when school started in August, I applied for a special student status there at school. I wanted to take English 1 and English 2 to get more familiar with the American language. And that was good. I had no trouble reading papers and so on, but the dialect was different, you know. So I went there for the... I took English 1 and English 2. Did you have to pay then tuition for it? Yeah, I had to pay some tuition. Did you have money with you then? Yeah, I had some money with me left, you know, from... But you could stay then for free with Pastor Orlean? Yeah, Pastor Orlean. You could drive him and... Right. So I was his chauffeur there. Did you eat there too then? Yeah. He let me stay there for... from the 13th of July. No, it was a day later, you know, 13th, 14th, about 15th or so. So he let me stay there until I could get the job, he said. Well, I didn't think I could get the job so soon, but I took these courses in English, you know. It was only two hours a day, you see. And I was able to take care of his driving too, because he couldn't drive. His wife had learned to drive, but she wouldn't dare to get out in the traffic. Was there heavy traffic at that time in Minneapolis? Oh, yeah. There was plenty. Not like it's now. No. But it was still heavy for the... There was still pretty good traffic, yeah. In Strasbourg? Yeah. So I stayed and went to school at the same time. That's only a block away, the Minnehaha Academy was. So I took English I and English II. Then in December that same year, then I thought that it would be fun to go and see if I could get the job. So I had a cousin, first cousin in St. Paul, you know, that's next door to Minneapolis. And I had written him that I was going to come. And first, before I left Sweden, I had written him that I wanted to go to America, to Minneapolis. I had already bought tickets, I think. Do you know what he wrote me? He wrote me a letter. I got the answer right away from him, my cousin, Petrus Larsson. And he said, see, he wrote like this. People in Sweden who have homes like you have and like I had, see, I, he referred to his dad, should never go to America. People come here with college education and they can't get jobs. And they get so lonesome that they go back as soon as they earned enough to pay the ticket. So don't come here, don't come here. I wouldn't, if I were you, I wouldn't come here. I had to disregard that altogether, see, and decide for myself. I want to go and I'm going. But this was your best friend, or, I mean, the wrote this? Yeah, it was not Olin, that was not Olin. No, but I mean, it was his cousin. Cousin, yeah. Did you know him personally, or? Well, I'd heard that he, no, I didn't. He came 1912, too, I think, at 13, which it was. But, and I never, but I had his address from his parents in West Jutland, Ulrichshamn, outside of Ulrichshamn. Ulrichshamn. Yeah. Did you answer him immediately, or did you just disregard the letter? No, I answered, I, well, here's how it went. I wrote to him maybe about two, three weeks before I left Sweden, see. There was a little time there. And so he got my letter and he answered it right away, and wrote me not to come. How others, people who have saved money, try to get on. What did your parents say now when you showed, did you show the letter to them? Yeah, I showed them. What did they say? Oh, they thought that, I wonder if you should go. They didn't want me to go, really. But I had to go because I couldn't go home all the time, you know. Stay home for, or knock wood, or knock a stone, you know, with a hammer, you know. I wouldn't go for that. Or take some other job, manual job. I didn't want to do that. So I just had to do that. This cousin of Peter's... Yeah, Peter's Lawson, yeah. Peter's Lawson. What kind of work did he have? He was a machinist. Did he have work? He had work, and he had steady work. And he was married and had three children, and lived in St. Paul, in West St. Paul, and up in a duplex. And I think he only earned about $42 a week, yeah. That's what he told me. He earned $42. But that was plenty to live on at that time. That was a good salary. No, he learned, he got in with a Swede who had a shop that they took in old printing machinery, see, and they put new bearings and fixed it up so it worked perfectly like a new machine, and put their own little sticker on it. They called it Johnson Ice. His name was Johnson, who owned the shop. And they had about a dozen people working there. So they took in old machinery, and we did, and then they sold it for almost like new, you know. And he learned it so thoroughly that he got the troubleshooter. He got the best machinist they had. And finally they started him to go in trouble whenever somebody had trouble with the machine. He had to go and correct it, you know, and so on. Well, he told me not to come. So did you see him then? How soon after your arrival did you see him? Oh, that wasn't more than about a week or so. You let him know that the... And I let him know that I was coming anyway, so he knew I was coming in spite of it, but he didn't say any more about it, you know. But then he... So during that fall, you know, during that fall between the 13th of July and December, in the middle of December or something like that, I went to St. Paul on my own. I didn't go to see him, but I had been to his place before. He had come and... He didn't have a car at that time, but we rode the streetcar, see? He come and picked me up at Orleans, and we went to his house, and we had dinner together. He was just trying his nicest pie, you know. And I didn't say anything about that. He had... He knew what he had tried to do. Well, anyway, that's what happened. And then in the middle of December 1923, I thought like this, I would like to see how I could make out if I went to St. Paul. By the way, Petrus Lawson had given me the address or the name of this company, Noyes Brothers & Cutler. It was a drug man... wholesale and drug manufacturing concern. They had drug manufacturing as a subsidiary, you know, but they were in the same building. But it was a huge building. A five-story was considered pretty high at that time. Well, anyway, I got his address there, and I went one day, and I applied for a job there. And it so happened that they wanted to hire an assistant chemist there. They were making drugs, you know, and that's just what I wanted to get into, to get experience. And they needed me. They needed. And I remember so well the chief chemist there. He took the United States Pharmacopeia. That's a big book, about so thick with drug standards, you know. And each drug was a preparation. There was always an assay at the bottom, how to analyze it, you know. And the assay was to determine the strength. Like, for example, milk and magnesium or something, you had to analyze it. So he said, he opened up the United States Pharmacopeia and said, Can you read this? And I started to read. I had no trouble at all. And then he says, We need a man, you know, but the pay isn't too good, he said. It's only an assistant chemist. And I asked what the pay would be. Well, he said, $60 a month. It's about $15 a week. Well, I wanted to get in, get started in there, get experience. So I didn't care what, even if I had to pay. Oh, they'll pay a little bit. And I could live on that. So I took the job. They hired me. And the next day, the superintendent, there was a lady, she had an envelope, and she had written out the name of the school, Katrina Home Technical School in Katrina Home. And she had a letter in there that was, they asked, I had to, of course, I had to give them all the information, my, my between, you know, and everything. And so that was all recorded inside the letter, and I couldn't see what it was. I had just, I had to write the name of the address on the school. And I went out to the school to ask them if it was okay, if it was right. And it was. So I was already hired. So I stayed with them for five years. Five years. Yeah. You were still living with Pastor Lee then? Huh? Were you still living with Pastor Lee then? Yes, yes. I was living until March, I think it was February or March, I moved to St. Paul. Were you able to live on $15 a week, though, to rent a room? Barely, barely. But I had to go on, streetcar fare was only five cents, you know. I had to, I lived in the edge of Minneapolis, the same, the Lake Street went straight across on the bridge to St. Paul. And I only had to walk one block to the streetcar and then go right downtown to St. Paul. There's where the factory was, Neues was located. So I worked there for about three months there. But I lived at Olean still. And then all of a sudden they decided that they'll lay off two people in the laboratory, and I was the last one they hired. And then another fellow who had worked there for a year, they told us to quit. So then I lost my first job. I felt pretty bad. How long had you been working for them then? I worked January and February in part, yeah. Three months? Three months, yeah. During that time I was still living with Oleans, so I hadn't moved yet to St. Paul. But I worked in St. Paul for that drug company. Well, then all of a sudden they decided we were, you terminate, my employment was terminated. That's the letters, you know. Okay. So then I had to look for something else. So I told Olean. He was very unhappy about that, that I lost my first job. Well, but I could do the work, see. There was nothing wrong with my work. My work, too, was laid off, see. Did you learn anything new there? Oh, yes, yeah. I learned everything. I studied night and day. I studied night, the United States Pharmacopeia, oh, yeah, and other books, too. Now then Olean was unhappy about it, but he said that you can still stay here. During that time when I stayed there and didn't have a job, I went out looking for a job in Minneapolis. And lo and behold, there was a paint store. There was nothing in the pharmaceutical manufacturing. There was no factory like that. So I thought that they needed a fellow in the paint store there. They had a paint manufacturing plant upstairs in the store, and then the retail and the wholesale downstairs in the office. There was an office downstairs. And there were two Jews that owned it. And I never wanted to work with Israelites, you know. They always get scum somehow. Well, anyway, I started work in the office, and I had to take oodles, stacks and stacks of bills and figure them by hand. They didn't even give me an adding machine. I had to add them up and figure so and so much profit on it and everything. Perhaps there was a test, too, you think? Huh? Perhaps there was a test to your skill of accounting. Yeah, I suppose so. Well, accounting, we had taken bookkeeping at school. We had a short course in that at school. But I did the best I could, and I had to figure fast, you know. And you know, the Jews, no matter what you do, they want more. So I had to come in half an hour before everybody else and start working. And I had to stay half an hour after everybody had left. But no extra pay? No extra pay for that? No, no extra pay, not a cent. And then I had to give the noise brothers as reference, you know. So they found out how much they paid, you know. So they paid me the same, see, 60, I think, yeah, $60 a month. That was $60 a month, yeah. So I worked there for a month and a half. Then something happened over at the noise brothers in Kutlun. They had a chief chemist left there, see, and went with his father-in-law in business, in cosmetic business, down in Oklahoma. So they had no chemist there, chief chemist there. And the one that, the assistant guy that was laid off when I was, he was suspected of having stolen some platinumware, expensive platinum crucibles and things like that, that had disappeared from the laboratory shelves there. And they were, I got a call from them, or a letter rather. There was a letter from, I remember that. I was still working in the paint office when I got the letter at Orleans. And in the letter it said, we want to see you. They didn't say for what, what reason. We want to see you, if you can, make as soon as possible. So as soon as possible I went down there to St. Paul. And then they asked me, have you seen what, do you know what became of those expensive crucibles, platinum crucibles and things that were made out of a bowl, little small evaporating bowls, but so big and so deep. They cost hundreds of, they cost thousands of dollars. More expensive than gold. What are they used for? Is it what, three by four? No, they're only small, small things. Some of them were this small. What are they used for then? It's used for burning off when you want to find out how much ash is in. You take a test, test a certain powder, you know, that you want to know.