 Cassette 3, continuation with Wilbert Becker, Monine, Illinois. Cassette 3, side 1. I have the great pleasure and satisfaction of having many of my apprentices come back and visit with me. I have a little hobby shop in my garage. And they all come back and almost every one of them sooner or later come back and spend some time with me and talk about the old times. So they became tool makers and stayed there all their lives? Yeah, a good many of them went up the grade and turned into management in engineering and stuff like that. But I've had some good apprentices. So you worked with the Minneapolis Molines, or Moline Plowers from the beginning? Yeah. And they became Minneapolis Moline? Minneapolis Moline, yeah. How long did you stay with them? Oh, I guess it must have been 12 years. I mentioned to you, time went awfully fast. Until it dissolved? Until they quit. What happened there now? The New York Jews got a hold of them. And they figured they could make more money selling the buildings and the equipment off than what they were making. What happened to you as a worker now? Well, I was given a leave, severance pay. And as a matter of fact, I was sitting in my office at Minneapolis Moline and a group of people came in. I recognized them as former stockholders. Maybe they still own some stock, I don't know. But they told me that they had found out that the Moline plant was the only one that was making any money. And they wondered if it was possible to open the Moline plant up again. But it was too far gone. They had sold all the heavy machinery. So all the workers laid off then? Yeah, yeah. No, no. Did they receive any pension? No pension. But you had paid in? Oh yes, they had paid in the pension. There was one group, there was a date, there was one group of people that got paid a small pension. But for the most of the newer employees, they were out on the street. Because they had a union over there. Yeah, yeah, there was a union, but the union turned bad too. Yeah. So they were dissolved and split up? Yeah, that was a sad day. But... How many workers were affected? About five, six hundred? Yeah, I imagine it would be more like seven hundred. Seven hundred. Most of them old-timers. Yeah, it was a sad day. So what did you do then, after it happened? Then I went into the job shop. And I had no problem finding a job then. I was pretty well experienced by then. You didn't think about starting your own tool making? No. Oh, I considered it. But it was hard to get money. But then I kind of... The next thing was that I more or less retired. I had been in it a long time. Then that's the time I helped a guy across the alley build race cars. Just fooling around at night, you know. And he worked at Cartridge Pack over in Davenport. He wanted to start a business of his own. So he got a hold of me and told me he had bought a building in East Moline. A three-car... I guess it was a former garage. He had bought that building and he wanted me to run the thing for him. So then I got back in the saddle again. Then I worked for Machine Research. And we built that up until there were eight of us in that building. Then we got a government contract for some engine stands. Then we moved into the old Amatek building. Then we had lots of room. So then we got pretty big and we built some big machinery down there. And now they had moved to the Bayer Manufacturing Company. So I started another shop then out there that I was very happy with. My last days of working were wonderful. So you had the... The second chance. The second chance, so you were using your skill. Yeah. And with the racing car business now, were you making things then for the... No, it was this guy's hobby. I was more experienced and I made parts for him over here in the garage. You could do that in your garage? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. What we did, we made four-cylinder engines out of V8 engines. We cut the engine lengthways and used four cylinders. We built some pretty good engines, race engines. Three-quarter midgets, they called them. I had built a bandsaw, oh, 50 years ago. And it was a good one. So this fellow came. That's how I got acquainted with him. He came over and he... Well, I had been over to his shop right across the alley. He says, Where can I get this V8 engine cut in half? I says, Bring it down to the basement. So he went down to the basement with me. We got about three guys around the thing and we managed to saw it in half. And that worked out so good that then I moved the bandsaw over to his shop so we didn't have to carry the V8s. And we made 40 or 50 of them engines. And he raced them. He's still in the business of racing as a hobby. And then I moved that bandsaw out to his shop in East Moline. And we cut up tons of steel out there with it. So then I finally got it back home in my hobby shop. You should see his hobby shop. Oh, it's a mess. So how could you get this bandsaw? What kind of blades were you using? Well, I weld up my own. I buy them in 100-foot coils. Continuous run? Yeah. And then I can weld them up myself and make the band. And it was cutting straight enough to the V8 so you get two engines out of one? Yeah. Well, we didn't get two engines out of one half. It was scrap. But we used the one half. Because that made the right displacement and the right size engine for this three-quarter class. We made some fast engines. But the V8s you bought now, were they used engines? They were used engines, yeah. You had new sleeves in them or new bores? The bores were okay. Some of them we re-bored. Some we re-bored. The reason for doing that was that if you bought a racing engine as such, then all your connecting rods and your pistons and camshafts and all that were all high-priced stuff. But this we could use a standard Ford part to replace in this cut-up engine. So you were not only a toolmaker, you were also a racing fan? Yeah. And then as a hobby I built racing engines for boats. And that's when my boy was a good driver, so I was fixing up racing boats for him. So you had one child, one boy? One son, yeah. He's a good one, too. So this is grandchildren? This is grandchildren. Where is he located? He's in Phoenix or in Tempe. We were on a fishing trip there. So is he still active then? Well, I tell you, when he was here, he was selling insurance and he sold truck contracts and all kind of messed around. I think he made a pretty good living, but then all of a sudden he got tired of fighting other people. So he went in the lawn care business, ringing doorbells until he built up a big business, and he wound up with a real nice lawn care business. Hired three men? Yeah, he had three and four men. In Arizona? What's that? In Arizona, in Phoenix? In Tempe. Oh, Tempe. Tempe. So he was real happy with that, but then the doctor told him he had to get out of the sun. It was burning, you know, that hot sun down there. So he sold the business out, and right now he's kind of in between. He's going to manage one of these mini storage places, and that'll be what I guess he'll do. Was he interested in the same kind of business you were? I mean, tool making and... He was....sports, I understand, but... It ended there. He liked the boats, and he was good at working on the engines. We worked them together. But he had his chances, I think, to get in there, but I guess he's mentioned several times in passing that he wishes that he would have gone with me into tool making, because he's a good mechanic. Yeah, yeah. So you had many experiences from the beginning. Yeah, yeah. And you didn't even have an apprenticeship in the... No, no, I never did, no. But we always had a boat home here when he was home. On Mississippi. On the Mississippi, and we traveled the Mississippi up and down, and I finally wound up with a cruiser, and we used to go up into Wisconsin. And then I got a house, I wound up with a houseboat. That was the last boat I had. Now he has a bass boat, the one you see there. So I used to go down there. Before I became crippled, I used to go down there and... And spend a few weeks, was it? Yeah, yeah. So he married a Swedish background girl, or...? He married a girl from the Baptist church, and they had the three children. And then things went bad, and they got divorced. And he married a native down there, a girl, a wonderful girl, a wonderful woman. And he's happy now. He's very, very happy. So your grandchildren, they are grown up too now, then? What's that? Your grandchildren, they are also grown up? Oh, yeah, yeah, they're... So two of them are married? Yeah, two of them are married. One is single, yeah. All good kids. So your son now, did he bring some Swedish background culture into his family? Not really, no. No Lutfisk and Sultan? He knows, about all he knows is Grace at the Table. I see. And he's talked to his English wife. Oh, I see. Well, they pray here. So you say the Swedish one, one word together. Well, you all got it together here. I see. The one... The two that were real pals was... Grandma. Grandma Becker. And she died... In 1944. 1944. My father died in 11, 11. And my brother in 33. And my mother in 44. And a friend died just three years ago. It will soon be the anniversary. So she could look back on a long service of raising a family. She had a much better memory than I do. Well, you're all right. But she could look back on a long life and a lot of hard work. She never complained about anything. And my wife, see what year did she pass away? Sixty... 61, I think. And your wife's name was... Ruby. Ruby. She was a preacher's daughter. Ruby Erickson. Erickson. She was of Swedish background. Yeah. She was born in... She was born over in Iowa. What is it? Cambridge, Minnesota, wasn't it? Yeah, Cambridge. Cambridge, Minnesota. Well, Cambridge, Minnesota. Yeah, they traveled all over. Then he came here and I met her and we... But she became sick. She was sick for many, many years. But she was paralyzed, too. Oh, I see. But she lived here. We lived upstairs when Kenny was little and Ruby was well. And they lived... My two sisters and my mother lived downstairs. My mother and Ruby. Neighbors. They never had an argument. That's wonderful. You stuck together all your life. Were born in this house and you were actually born in this house then. Oh, yes. You had a midwife. I mean, your parents had a midwife. There's not many people living today, you know, that can say that. No, that's true. You were born in a hospital somewhere or... Yeah. You were raised here in this very house. So you remember then, Wilbert, going out to the chicken coop and gathering... Oh, yes. My job was to cut the grass. We had a lot of clover. And I made a kind of a hayloft down there, chicken wire. And I would store the grass up there and it would dry. That clover would dry. And then in the wintertime, them chickens would go crazy after that clover. Boy, they... That was more fun feeding. I used to get the biggest kick out of feeding them chickens clover because they acted like almost like it was catnip here or something. They'd go crazy over it. They'd go after that rather than the regular chickens' feeds. How many chickens did you have? Oh, it varied. Twelve and fourteen. And the rooster too? Yeah, we'd have a rooster. Waking you up in the morning? Yeah. But that varied. We'd eat them once in a while. You had some hens laying on the eggs. You had chickens, small chickens in the spring? What's that? Did you have some, what do you call it now, a hen that lay on eggs? You get chickens in the spring? Oh, yes. We tried it. So you got your own chickens then? Yeah. Yeah. Oh. I had one tame chicken. It was my favorite chicken. It was almost like a pet. Now you didn't have to learn to milk? I did a little of it, but not very much. But I drove the cows out to pasture, which was over on the other side of Stevens Park. There was a field over there. And I used to have to drive them across 16th Avenue and across 7th Street. And them 7th Street kids always used to throw, there was cornfields up and down here. They'd try to get the cows to go into the cornfield. And I'd have an awful time getting them cows out of the cornfield. So you remember the Belgian kids then? The what? You remember the Belgian kids then? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I had lots of fights with them. You couldn't talk Swedish to them? No. They stayed on their side of 9th Street, and we stayed on this side. And if we caught any of them over here, we did it to them. And same thing, if we got caught over there, we could expect to get a bloody nose or something. It was really... Oh, yeah. There was two different gangs. It was the 11th Street gang and the 7th Street gang. And they stayed apart or fought, one with one or the other. And they were Swedes versus the Belgians? Yeah, yeah. What did the parents say then when the... Oh, they didn't even know about it. They didn't even know about it? No. And the sisters? But I had a lot of fights with them Belgian guys over there. So they wanted to take your cows into the cornfields? Yeah, they'd... Though I was all alone, you know, and they'd throw rocks and chase the cows into the cornfield. And I'd have to go in there and get the cow out of the cornfield or get in trouble with the guys that owned the cornfield. But you were kind of a husky though when you were growing up. Yeah, yeah. I was... So you didn't have to take a back seat then? No, I didn't. I realize now that... I'm not trying to brag, but I could outrun any of them. I could outfight any of them. There was only one guy that could... Well, he couldn't run as fast as I could, but he and I put up some pretty good fights. He had big buck teeth on him, you know. But I was tough. I've been a good athlete. Were you running? I was a good football player and a good baseball player and a good swimmer, a good skater. I played a pretty good game of golf too. Did you play soccer though, Swedish soccer? Never played soccer. But I used to watch them out here. The Swedes had a soccer team out here on 9th Street Field. Oh, you never played that? But I never, never played that. Why didn't you join the... I don't know. They were a different gang. They were a lodge bunch. I had some good friends, so I used to go out there and watch them every Sunday when they played soccer out there. They used to play against the Chicago team that would come down here, Dolls Hill. I was a good soccer fan, but I never got into it. So, about football though, you played for... Moline High School. Yeah. And I taught my boy how to play golf, and he finally beats me. We had a foursome that... a kid my same age as Kenny, and his father was my age. Us two old guys, we were pretty good players. We took the kids out and we beat them pretty regularly. We had a standing reservation over at Duck Creek. We played pretty good, and finally the kids began to beat us. They took it so serious, we had to quit. So, did you play golf when you were young, working in the shop? Yeah, yeah. In those days, that's... That was unusual, wasn't it? Very unusual. For us guys to come out to a golf course, the bankers didn't like it. They actually... You're right, I'm surprised you realize that, because there aren't too many people realize when the shop men begin to come out to Saki Golf Course out there, they looked at us kind of cross-eyed. But you did. Yeah, we did it. Because it's a gentleman's sport. Yeah, that's right. Like wheeling and... It wasn't a common thing. How come you started with that one? Well, I had two friends up around 14th Street and 23rd Avenue that I went to school with. And they asked me if I cared to go out and play golf. And I says, golf? I says, they let you on away? I says, they don't like it. But he says, we go out there. Of course, you know, good able-bodied guys, they learn how to... And we soon became good at it. We didn't have to take lessons or anything. So... You had a knockdown for balls. Yeah. Yeah, the bankers and the doctor didn't like it when we started coming. There was a public... It was public, yeah. That's why we played there. But you didn't belong to the Oak... No, no. No, I didn't have the money for that. Don't you think it was kind of strange to Oak, the people, not at that time, 50 or 60 years back, but do you think that feeling is still on there when you have the money and you belong to a special group and you are sidelining somebody, they feel good at it? Isn't it surprising that people can live like that, you know, in our age and time? It was noticeable. It was noticeable. Yeah, yeah. Were you mad at it like that? No, no, it was just a different association, you know. You didn't... You didn't even question it? No. We accepted it. Yeah, we accepted it. Was it possible, for instance, for the... Like John Dee, you know, whoever was the president of the company, he never went down on the job floor to talk with people. Yeah, yeah, they did. They did? They did, but it was kind of a superficial thing, you know. Like when I was at the Wagon Works, I was a good friend of Mr. Bozeman, the manager. He liked me. The way I became friendly with him was sort of a happenstance. He knew I was a pretty good mechanic, and I was young. Well, he was very interested in cotton. So we started building cotton pickers. And I mean cotton strippers. There's a difference. So he would go down south, and I don't know what he did when he was down south, but he was from the south originally. He was a southerner. And I would come back here, and he would want me to build up a simulated cotton stripper. And I would do what he told me to, and he liked what I did. So I became kind of a personal friend of his. And it turned out that he and some other... He was a heavy drinker. He and some other heavy drinker went down south, and they'd been down there quite some time. And finally there came a... He sent a telegram describing a machine that he wanted built, and he did that in the telegram. Now, you try to build something from a word description of a machine, it's pretty hard, but it was addressed to me. And I was just a young kid. I understood all the terminology and all that, but I didn't have any particular engineering skill. Just do what you had to do. So I took the telegram around to the different engineers, and I'd say, You draw a picture of what you think that is, see? And then I would take it to another draftsman and tell him, You make a picture of what you think it is. So all of us together kind of decided what he wanted built. It was kind of complicated, building a cotton stripper mounted on the floor and then run from him line shafts, you know. So finally, and it was a deadline. I worked day and night for about a week getting that thing built up because he wanted it done by the time he'd come home because he said he was going to have company with him. So I worked like a slave getting that thing built. And finally, one day the guys all came and found me and said, Bozeman is home. I had this thing up on the third floor. I waited for him to come, but he didn't show up there. So finally I went and found him. I said, Mr. Bozeman, I have your cotton stripper built up on the third floor, and we have some cotton bales there that we could throw into the thing. He says, All right. So we went up there, and he took his company up there, and I run the cotton stripper for him. They stood there shaking and saying that was all right. Finally he sneaked over to me, and he says, Tear the thing down. He says, I was drunk when I sent that telegram. He was trying to impress somebody. I'll never forget that. And all the work you had with it. All the work I went through. I would work and come home and eat supper and go back down to the shop. No help. But he was a good manager. Yeah, he was a good man. He was a very good man. So if you had continued at John Deere, then you probably had good... I would have been retired by now. I don't know. I think I could have gone up if I would have stayed with John Deere. I just always had good relationship. I worked with him. Then during the war, I went down when we were building 75 millimeter projectiles down there. Then I had another long spell with him. So you were not drafted because you were too old during the Civil War? Yeah. The first time I worked at the wagon works, I was with him for 17 years. Continuous. Then there was a personality split between some new guy and I left him. And I don't remember where I went then. Well, that's when I went to Prophetstown. And I run a lawnmower shop out there. And then I got arthritis in the feet. So I quit that. Site two, Wilbert Becker, Moline, Illinois. Site two. We were sitting at the dinner table one noon. I was getting over the arthritis by now. I could go walk again. You were married then? Yeah. And the telephone rang and it was Don Wenglund, the guy that I had trouble with at the wagon works. And he told me, he says, Carl Bowers wants to see you. That was the superintendent. Carl Bowers wants to see you down here. Well, he asked me if I was ready to go to work. And I said, yeah. I had an appointment for another place. But he says, please go down there for my sake. Well, I told him, I said, Don, I can't work with you. You know that. We don't hit it off. No, he says, be sure and come down. So I went down there. And I went in to see the superintendent. And he said, are you ready to go back to work? And I said, yeah. Well, he says, we know, we found out after you left that it was Don's fault that you left. And he says, we want to do what we can. We want you back. And I said, well, he wanted me to take Don Langlett, that same guy's job. He says, we'll send him over to the plow works. No, I says, I don't do that. You, you've done your part. So I says, I'm sorry that it all happened. Well, he says, now you go down to the Vealy building. That's when John Deere bought the Vealy plant. He says, you go down there and you get a job down there. And he says, that'll be a good job for you. So I went down there and worked there all during the war. And then I stayed there till that place moved to Dubuque. What were they making down there? 75 millimeter projectiles. That was for the war then? Yeah. And I was in pretty much charge of all the equipment down there. So when they went to Dubuque, that's when I went to Minneapolis, Moline. So this Vealy now, what really happened there? The old man died? Yeah, they, and I guess the boys spent all the money. And they lived not too far from here? Oh, yeah. They lived a step of house down on 11th Street. Yeah. I was a good friend of Bill Vealy, too. So he was a mechanic? No, Bill wasn't. He was just a playboy. So he had it too good growing up. Yeah. But his father wasn't an inventor, or I have a- Yeah, I guess Vealy was a pretty good mechanic in the beginning. So they made it pretty good then with the car and- Oh, yeah. Monoplane and- Yeah, yeah. The car was a good automobile. But it was expensive, though. It was too- They only could sell it in Hollywood, you know. But it was a good car. They used to test them right out here on 13th Avenue, run them up and down here. I see. Yeah. So it was too expensive after the regular- Yeah, yeah. Like you said, Hollywood was the only- That's the only place they could sell them. Then they moved out to where the plantation is, you know. I remember when they- Very plainly, when they opened up their home out there, there was cars from all over the United States parked all up and down 7th Street. The chauffeurs sitting in each one. They were parked there while the party was going on over there. The party lasted about 7 days. He had invited all the- Yeah, all these people. They bought the car. Yeah. And there was Rolls Royces and everything else was there, too. And that was back in the 1920s? No, that I- I think around 1950. 1950? Oh, no, no. No. That was when Churchill got there. It must have been in the late 20s. Yeah, it would be in the 20s. Before the Depression. Yeah. Because then they moved the monoplane factories down to Central. Yeah, then- Where did they make the plane? I don't know where the plane, but they made the engines down here at the Vealy plant. And- because we used to recondition, even when the tractor works moved down there, they would come in with a bunch of the crankshafts from the monoplane, from the Monaco. And we would recondition the crankshafts down there and rebuild them. And one other thing, funny thing happened down there in the tractor works. That was when I was there. There was some Swiss guy, engineer, that was building a big diesel engine for a Zeppelin. That was a big thing. What was it? It was a 16-cylinder engine. And there was- he built that down there and we all did work on the thing. And finally he got the thing put together. And he was a nice guy to work for. And then he was going to try it out there and they built- they put the engine up on a stand out on the loading platform. And they had a big propeller on the thing, you know. And then they had a flywheel on here and they had to- to get it started, they hooked the flywheel with the belt up to the ceiling. And it was diesel fuel that they were putting in the thing. And finally that thing took off. That is, the engine started and the belt broke and it wrapped around and it tore everything up and that propeller blew everything out of the department before they got it stopped. Oh, that was a big engine. It was more like a piano, a great big thing, you know. And there was diesel fuel? That they were running that on, yeah. It was also kind of early for- Yeah, that was early for that. And it made so much noise, you wouldn't believe it. It had just a short propeller on it, but that propeller blew everything out of that department. They really revved it up. Yeah. And the Apple is Moline factory, where was that located, on 3rd Avenue? That's on- that was on 3rd Avenue between 14th and 15th Street. And part of it was on- they expanded some and built over towards 16th Street. That was a good company. It was too bad they shut that down. They had a good plow and good corn picker- or corn- not a picker, corn planter. They had the best corn planter in the country. And their stuff was very, very good. Did John Deere take them over then? They took the buildings. And the patents also? I don't think so. No? No, I don't think they would- They went all business completely? Yeah, yeah. Because their machinery, if I remember right, how they implemented it, they were a little bit more streamlined or smoother than the John Deere was having. Yeah, at that time. They had the best tractor in the world. Of course, we didn't make the tractor here. But that was a workhorse. No, that was a good one. And I- they had- we did all their forging for their gears and everything that went in the tractor. We did that in Moline. I built all the drop hammer dies for them. Boy, I was a busy guy. So there was a hostile takeover by the- Yeah, I think it was- Some stockholders. Yeah, it was a- The sad part of it is, the guy's- the head of Mini-Mole, his name was McFarlane. He was a cripple. And from way back, almost at the start, they would bring him down there and wheel him in that little wheelchair. And we would hold meetings, and he'd say, They'll never take us over. That was his boast all the time. They'll never take us over. Your jobs are all safe. And that must have been just a- just a scream. Because to keep the people there until the thing- Then all of a sudden, he was the worst one of the bunch. Was it the depression coming on then, or what were you- No, it was the- I think these people that got hold of the votes decided they could make more money by selling the buildings. My machinery that in my tool room, we had a good tool room, a very- just as good as Deere's. And that machinery was all secondhand. But they got new prices for that. There was a company came in, and they set up the sale. And they got- they got good prices for all the machinery. I had a jig borer, which is a very expensive machine, and that sold for more money than what we paid for it. So they made a good sale then, the stockholders? Oh, yeah, they did. They did. They really did. And it must have been a very, very complete surprise, because a good friend of mine was in charge of moving a big machine from Minneapolis to Moline, a big press. And he had to reroute that all over the country to get it here. And they built a special track, railroad track, and took out one big side of the building. And there was a concrete foundation as big as these two rooms here, sunk down to rock bottom, down there, a platform to put that machine on. And that machine came in that it'd come in on, I forget, five different railroads had moved that car. And a special car that it was on. And they finally built the railroad into that room, and they got that thing hanging over that, it was over that platform, and they never let it down on the platform before the thing was sold. And that machine was supposed to be a... We were supposed to use that, you know. There was a press or a... Yeah, a big press. And we had jobs picked out for that machine, what we was going to use it for and everything. And then the thing was all over with. They even... They didn't know enough to stop bringing that machine in there, and that was an expensive job. They started tearing the railroad track up that they brought it in there on. After they hauled the machine wherever it was sold, I don't know. And the buildings and machinery in Minneapolis went the same way? Yeah, yeah. The whole thing went. Some of the buildings John Deere used, but otherwise most of it was just tore down. John Deere had started building a machine for making plowshares, where they formed them and quenched, tempered them, all in one operation. And they had worked on that for, I think, something like four years. And my superintendent told me, he says, we've got to go into a quenching machine to compete with John Deere on the plowshares. On the mow boards, I mean, not the plowshares. The mow board, we've got to compete with them. So we went over to John Deere to see what they had done. They let us come over and see what they had done. But theirs was not in operation yet. They were having real bad troubles, and they had worked four years on that machine. And the superintendent asked me, he says, how long will it take for you to build a machine to quench our mow board? I says, well, give me a year. And then I got so much money. And I had that machine done before the year was up. And I only had to ask for $1,500 more money. And we got that machine going. And John Deere came over and looked at our machine then. Boy, I was proud of that. And we was making mow boards in high production. It worked swell. So you make a mow board now. They are not tempered before you... No, they're soft. They are soft. And they go... They're sheared out to the shape first. And then they used to put them under a drop hammer. And then after the drop hammer, it had to be corrected because they slipped a little bit. But this machine made... It went in a press. And the press would squeeze it, and it would go down and go into the brine. And then come up and open. Then another one would go in. So it was all done instead of two drop hammers and two furnaces. We did it with one furnace and one operation. And boy, we were making mow boards like you wouldn't believe. Why did you let John Deere come in and take a look at it though? They wanted to. They let us come over there, see. Nowadays, they are so secretive. The idea was understood by both. It was a method that was holding them in place where we beat them. And then, so that machine was going real good by the time this takeover came. And then a machine up at Rock Falls, or I mean a company up at Rock Falls bought the machine. It's still running up there. They're making mow boards? Yeah. Yeah. So they bought the patent then to do this thing on? No, there was no patent involved then, no. No, it's... So after they are pressed and the mow boards, they are tempered? Yeah. And that's, see, that's the trouble when they used to make it on a drop hammer. It took two fires to form it. Then they all was piled up. And then they had to go through another fire and be quenched. Then they would lose their shape in that quenching, see. But we did the whole thing in one operation. Did you inherit the Hilderstadt smell for good temper? Well, I must have because I didn't... That was the Becker. It was, yeah. It was... It was the Becker family. That skill, by the time I came along and would have had any benefit from, it's all pretty much by instrument now. Yeah, so... But you had the skill to work with fire. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I had... I could do blacksmith's work too because I had to. So you had to force two pieces together, you know? Yeah, oh yes, yeah. I... I did... But my... if there is such a thing as any accomplishment, I always felt most proud of the fact that I knew how to build forging dice. That is a... You just... that's a... There isn't too many people know it. And I kind of acquired that pretty good. And that was my main... That was my main thing at Minneapolis Moline. I knew how to... I knew how to design forging dice. They don't make drawings of them. It's somebody's skill or idea. It's in your head. And they call them dice sinkers, fellas. Dice sinkers? Yeah. So this making the moldboards now, this is actually your idea then? Yeah, yeah, pretty much my... I designed that. And... For instance, now when Moline... Minneapolis Moline closed up and dissolved, you didn't think about the... Well, you didn't have the money to buy this machine, did you? No, no. There was no way to take it over? No, it was pretty hard to take it over. If you had come down to the bank, for instance... If I would have had some backing or... I didn't have the courage for one thing. I've never been a good businessman. And... So if you had come down to a bank in Moline on 3rd Avenue there, or 5th Avenue... I could have bought that machine and got rich. Yeah, but would you have a loan, you think? No, no. You don't think so? No, I would have had to have some big name behind me. You couldn't go through the Jahneir Bank, I suppose. No, no. But it would have been less good. I oftentimes wonder... Of course, now, you know, we don't use but few mold boards anymore. It's a different ball game anymore. There's... I guess I understand the idea is now they plow one year, and then after that they don't plow anymore. They just... Chisel plow. Yeah, chisel plow, and that's nothing to that. So the mold board is kind of a thing of the past. But when they were manufacturing now the plow, there was a lot of heavy equipment on that plow. Oh, you bet. They were lifted by hand by every worker? Or did they have cranes to get them together to put more plows on? They pretty much had the cranes. They had cranes? Yeah. Oh, some of these new, these big four-wheel drive tractors, they pulled an awful big plow. Yeah, but you were working on 1950s, so they were the smaller units. Yeah, they were small. We had... We at Minneapolis Moline built a six-row. Six-row. Yeah. That was designed different entirely than the regular plow frame they had. It was changed completely. There was no horse-drawn plows at that time. No. They were all off. We were building some horse-drawn equipment for horse-drawn plows towards the last there for repairs, you know, repairs for guys, for a man and all that. You see, one thing Minneapolis Moline would do, they had good business up around Chicago where the Del Monte farms are, see? And the Del Monte farms are so big that they would come into our shop, into Minnie Mole, and they'd say, we need a certain kind of a plow. And we would go and we'd build it for them. Custom-made? Custom-made, yeah. We worked on a lot. I did an awful lot of that for... And they built so many, and so they... Yeah, they built... I don't think we made any money on them, but we were very, very... Because you needed big rondo to make money on it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. What happened over the spare parts division over Minneapolis Moline? I don't know what became of that. A lot of it went right into the junkyard. I know even after the thing had been announced that Minnie Mole was quitting, although we were still operating, but the word was out, you know, it's only a matter of time. Their basement was full of all obsolete cultivating plows and all kinds of plow parts from way, way, way back that they wouldn't sell anymore. And so we were selling that to the junkyard, getting rid of it, and getting it so much a pound. And there was one big bin that was full of a small cultivating plow, and there was a lot of them. There was hundreds of them there. And so they went to the junkyard with that, you know. I was kind of working at cleaning up a lot of that stuff then, and boy, I just sent a whole bunch of that to the junkyard, and a letter came in. There was a company who wanted a bunch of them, and they were worth quite a bit as a plow. And here it happened that practically the same day that the order came in, and by golly, I went back out to the junkyard and recovered enough of them, and we sold them one of the last days we were there. But it struck me funny as it happened. They hadn't had an order for one of them plows for years, you know, and here, after they were gone, why, then the order came in. I have a lot of different memories of things like that, things that happened. Yeah, I've been at it, was at it for so long. But you mentioned that you're a good mechanic, but the business sense is lacking. But how about your cousin, Becker? They were good. Why didn't you start together with them? Well, it was something about... I worked there for a while at the Hannoll factory. And they also made the toys. Yeah, the toys was a thing later on. You see, when they were making... They were working in a... at Dimmock and Gould's in an open-air factory. They were just... just, they had their foot-operated lathes down there, and they were known as a wood-turning outfit. And then the World War I came along, and they were given a chance to build, make a bid on tent poles. So that's when they put up the building that they got now. And it's in Moline, 51st Street. They put up that building, and they made good on the tent poles. And then after the tent poles was over with, when the contract was over, then they went and built... not toys, handles. They were a Hannoll factory then. With screwdrivers and... Yeah, screwdrivers and file handles and chisel handles. I worked there during that spell. And I worked with George Strumbick, chief engineer. All I did was hold a ruler for him. But somehow... They had good business, though. Oh, yes. They brought in good money for the... Yes, they did. They did real well. Then later on, then they went into toys. And then when Strumbick's boy took it over, by that time, the Beckers were out of it. Then he wanted to go into plastic toys, and he bought some old plastic... or some plastic machines. And they were a total loss. I mean, he broke the company. Then they called R.D. Becker back in, and he put it back on its feet again. And then he died, and it went down again. Now I don't know who owns it. But they were a good company. They were on the New York Stock Exchange. Oh, I see. They were big. Oh, yes. Yeah, they were big. So they employed how many, you think? Oh... A hundred people? Oh, yeah, it was a couple of hundred. Yeah. They had a good name. Very good name. But there's so many... Herman Nelson is gone. And... Moline Toul is gone. All good companies are gone. I don't know what Williams... Why did they go out of business? The second generation couldn't follow through? I don't know what happened. Like Viennese second generation didn't work. Yeah. And the same thing with Strumbick. Yeah. I don't know what goes wrong in a case like that. Changing times, I suppose. What's that? Changing times and ideas. Yeah. You have to modernize. But being a toolmaker seems to be a safe business because you always need new innovations. Even that's changed a lot now because... You take... Dysinking was a trade all its own. I was proud to be one of them. That's for you. You cut out a big chunk of steel, you know, to form stuff. And a lot of it was handwork. You do what you can with a mill, but, you know, it's pretty hard to make a square corner down in a cavity with a round tool. And that used to be a matter of... By hand. By hand, you'd chisel and file and type. Now they have an electrical discharge machine. You make a mandrel the size of the hole you want out of carbon, and you put it in the machine, and that keeps on plunging, and it'll burn that hole in there, slicker, no whistle. So that trade is gone. And on mechanical machines, when I was at machine research, the last work I did, I could handle just fine on the mechanical end, but then they would finally, to manipulate that machine, they'd bring in a big computer, then I'm done, see? And that's what's happening. A fellow visited me yesterday that was a crackerjack of a toolmaker. He says, I wouldn't even stick my head in the door anymore. Is it for better or worse? I don't know. The sound is all of it, I suppose. I don't know. It's... It's right at a stage now where it's, you wonder. I've even made the remark that... that this big combines that they make now, I don't know if they're the best thing or not. Our farms are all... I almost figure that they're... I know it's not true, but the way it strikes me is that they're too efficient. It chased all the boys off of the farm. They got no jobs in town anymore. So we almost have to come back to smaller machines again and do it the old way. We were reasonably progressive then, and now that's all gone. Those machines can do the impossible, you know. It's like the Union. They have been too efficient. Yeah, that's right. And I wonder, from that standpoint,