 This is cassette two, side one. We will continue with Mrs. Roy Gustafson, Barbara. Barbara Ruth Preston met Roy Gustafson in Moline, Illinois. How did that happen? He was in the service. I was in nurses' training at Lutheran Hospital, Moline. His sister went in for an appendix operation, and he came home on emergency furlough. And we met then, and you know, you correspond for– The whole time he was in service. And so it was kind of like a romance through letters for a while until he came home in 1946, and we weren't married then until 1949. But that's how I met him, at the hospital. And you were born in Westbure, Illinois, close to Sheffield. That's up really by– closer to Princeton, Illinois, which is, what, 20 miles from home, from Sheffield. And at that time, there was Westbure, and there was Bureau, and now it's all Bureau. There's no Westbure. And so, like I say– There was a farming community. Oh, yeah. Yeah, my dad rented a farm then, and I had one brother. He was four when I was born. But I was born at home. I was the only one out of us four kids that were born at home. And– But I don't think I've suffered too much from it. And your parents back home, they were– My parents were farmers, and– The nationality was– Well, dad– On dad's side, it was English and some Irish. We've gotten back to where his ancestors came to America, to New York. But I'd like to go back across the pond because, you know, I've probably got relation all over this world. And then mom, she was Indian. My great-great-great-great-great-grandfather was– or grandmother was a full-blooded Indian Squaw. And she married a full-blooded Frenchman from across the pond. And then among all those was some Germans from over there. And it's hard to trace some of them because of the name changes, you know, like grandpa did. Well, that was just one generation. But we've gotten back to a great-uncle. And he had changed his name, and he hadn't lived with his folks. So we don't know what his name was before, and we can't get back past him. But I'd like to get back to the Indians, you know. It's hard to say. Just kind of– I'm kind of proud of my Indian ancestry, you know, even though I've only got like a quarter of a cup of it in me now. You're still there. To be considered. But it's different than being one nationality, you know. I mean, both his parents were Swedish, and I've got a long ways to go with– So you are interested in the Indian background, and you've studied and tried to trace it? We are thinking about going to– what do they call it? What's that great big church, the Mormon church? They've got records from everybody from way back, yeah. And I would like to go back and check them out, you know. And I've got my great– great– must be third generation back. My grandpa was– fought in the Civil War, and he was in the Andersonville prison and all that. We've got stories on that, you know, written down. So it's kind of interesting to me. So when you met Roy, you came into his parents, and they were– Yeah. Both Swedish. Of course, I had more to do with them in the early years than I did with him, because he was gone, you know. Well, you met his parents when he was in service. I met his parents when his sister had her appendix out. So you went to their homestead. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I would walk over if I had an evening off, you know, and I'd walk over to their house, and then Grandpa would take me home before curfew if I didn't have to study and stuff. So I knew them, yeah, quite well. So you became familiar with Swedish cooking through– Yeah, but you know, Grandma, in those days, by that time, she cooked mostly American food, and a lot of the Swedish stuff, she would save and cook when it was just her and Grandpa, you know. I see. And during the holidays? Oh, yeah, but then if I had a chance during the holidays and stuff, well, I would go home to my home, which was Sheffield at that time, about 50 miles away, and I usually had to take the bus, which was fine. Everybody rode the bus in those days. What was the difference? Now, you came in from your parents' home– Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, and farm– Of course, it's hard. I mean, we were raised entirely different. Me coming from a farm, there was– I mean, we were poor in those days. I mean, I remember the Depression and wearing shoes with holes in them, which we had to do for years, and my mother made over clothes that had been given to us, you know. And one thing, we did eat. We worked for it. I mean, I think I was born working from the time I was real tiny, you know, and I learned to cook when I was six, and I learned to sew when I was six. And I said, by this time, I hate cooking. Because in those days, I mean, you had to do it. You were forced to. Where his parents, coming from where they did, the hardships they put up with, those kids did nothing. I mean, they were raised, you know, well, you're not going to have to work like I had to work in the World Odeon 11, and that's too bad because I think it left a mark, you know. And I mean, to this day, I can work my daughter-in-law's under the table. But nevertheless, I mean, it was just two different cultures, and I had to work, and he didn't. But, and he's that way today, you know. He can work harder to get out of things than if he settled down and do it, until I will go ahead and do it for him. And that's what he wants. So there's a different kind of... So it's different, entirely different. When you worked now from your age– Your husband's parents, they had to work also from very early age. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. If you made a few cents a week on your own, did you have to leave that to your parents at home, or could you do it yourself? Well, see, any work I did in those days, it was strictly family on the farm, and everybody worked together. Excuse me. So there was no money involved. No money. It was just to grab whatever you had. And when I was in high school, if I had, like, a study period, then I could go to the office, and I would type things for the principal of the school. Well, then I would get paid a few cents for that, you know. But it was so minimal– So you could keep to yourself. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Then I got that to spend, which was usually clothes, because I'd never had bought clothes, you know. So when you went to the Luton Hospital for a nurse's training, was they on your own, or did your mother and father tell you to go there? Oh, they– Encouraged you to go? They encouraged me, oh, yes. My mother– How many sisters and brothers were you? I had– There was one brother, and he's four years older than I, and then I was next, and then I have a sister four years younger than me, and then I have a sister who's 16 years younger than I am. So you came next in line– So I was second in line. You had to babysit, done the working, cooking. Oh, yeah, you did it all, you know. And thank God, you know, you–I think you have a different outlook on life and in the working world, you know. I mean, you dig in. Everybody had to work. And, you know, those days weren't easy. We had no furnace. We had no running water. And the house was not insulated like the homes are today. So it was a tough life, but I love it. I didn't appreciate it then. Now I appreciate what we had, because we had our own garden. Dad raised our own cows and pigs. We did our own butchering, and those days with no refrigeration, you canned everything, because there was no freezers. And, I mean, we had the fruit trees. We had every kind of fruit tree you could imagine, and the raspberry bushes, plus all the vegetables. But you worked all summer so that you could live all winter. And I said– We didn't have a lot, but we had a heck of a lot of love in our family, you know. Did you notice when you came to your husband's, Roy's parents' law, did they use any vegetables in their cooking or in their meals? Um– With their meals? Some. Not as much as– You had your meal in your family? Uh-huh. As I was used to. Was that eaten raw or cooked? Oh, we had– In the summertime now, we would eat the things raw as it came up, you know, and was ready. And then we would can what was left so that we could eat it in the winter. So you were used to, growing up, eating tossed green salad, for instance, and tomatoes. No. You know, things were just different. We had leaf lettuce in the summer, and we enjoyed it, you know. But in the wintertime– We were too poor to go to town and buy a head of lettuce. You know. And that was the way of life. But the one thing I did have trouble with when I came to the cities was, see, we turned our own butter. We made our own cottage cheese. And, goodness, nothing tasted good up here, you know, because everything was so commercial. Even back then in 1942, when I graduated and came up. And, of course, the hospital cooking– That's nothing like mom's home cooking, you know. What's the worst that– Oh, I had a terrible time getting used to the food in the city, from the farm. Yeah. But I was heavy then. So I guess it all agreed with me anyway. But, of course, hospital food, see, they used to give us a lot of, like, macaroni and cheese and all the fattening stuff. They had to keep us kids going, you know, because you didn't just put in an eight-hour day. You would work from 7 in the morning, many a times till 7-11 at night. In between, you had an hour or two, you went to class, you know. And then you still had to study. And you'd be up the next morning and be at chapel at 6. Eat breakfast at 6.30 and back on duty at 7. Was this the Luton Hospital? Right here in Moline. But then you were served Swedish dishes, too, during the holidays? Not too many in the hospital that I remember. I don't remember too much of that. Boy, it's been a lot of years. But all I can remember is a corn something or other they made, and, oh, it was atrocious. But it was filling. And the cod, you know, that they did have. They would have creamed cod and stuff like that. And, of course, any fish I had on the farm was caught out of the pond. And so, boy, it was years before I could stomach cod. Because you were not used to it? I wasn't used to it, you know. I still had my head, I guess, and my dreams back on the stuff that we had at home. So how about your mother-in-law's cooking of a Christmas when you got introduced to lutefisk and siltan and sausage? The lutefisk, I'm sorry to say, I can't even stand to be in the same house with it cooking. And so that's one thing. I told him, and told Roy, that if he won lutefisk, he'd have to go home to his mom to get it. And, of course, she hasn't cooked for quite a few years. So he doesn't get it anymore, but he doesn't mention it. But I'll fix anything else he wants. But, boy, cracky, I can't stomach that. What's the difference now between siltan, sausage, and fish and things like that on the Swedish Christmas table? Yeah. Compare with your background. What did they serve now in your home? Yeah, see, well, now, we would have probably pretty traditional, the chicken or the turkey. Whatever we had on the farm that was ready to butcher. I mean, you know, that's what you had. Mom had a few of them for a few years. They're kind of hard things to raise, I guess. We did eat a lot of chicken, I'll tell you that. But there was a good dish done for Thanksgiving and Christmas. But Mother would bake traditional cookies and everything. And a lot of it– Well, you came from a cold country. I mean, that would be like our farms here. One year, we were snowed in three months. Three months? Three months. Couldn't get out. And, I mean, I didn't get to go to school. My brother, he was, of course, older, and he was just, I would say, about seventh, eighth grade. But he walked the railroad tracks into town, and he stayed with my aunt. So he got to go to school, but I was not allowed to because I was–they figured I was too young. And–but, I mean, I had the froze feet and the froze hands because you wanted to go to school so bad. I had to walk maybe half a mile to catch the school bus. And Mother would bundle me up, but we wouldn't make it halfway, and we'd have to turn around and go home, and we had to frostbite, you know. But, I mean, that was– It was a daily life. That was daily life. You didn't think anything about it. But it's not too many miles away from Beaudoin or to Moline. And it was a different world completely. Entirely different. Entirely different. Entirely different. Of course, the farm life today is almost like city life. I mean, they had cars. See, in those– You didn't have a car then? We had a car, but my mother didn't drive. There was no drive. Yeah. I suppose it was a dream coming true. And see, Dad didn't have a tractor up until around 1940, I would say. So everything was done with the horses. And that was tough. But that's the way he wanted it. See, he didn't believe in– I'm almost glad Dad's not here today to see the herbicides and the pesticides and all this stuff. He says what comes out of the ground has to go back in. So all the manure and stuff, and that's what he used. And he raised beautiful crops. Of course, he didn't have the yields they got today. But, you know, it was good. It was good eating. Good food. Did you have to help out in the fields, too? No. The only time I did that is– In fact, I was in nurses training, and Dad was sick. So I went home, and I did some plowing of the corn. And having– Of course, I've always been very quick on the uptake and pick up, you know. And it didn't take me too long to know just how to do those corners and stuff, so I wouldn't take up all the corn that Dad had plowed and stuff. But that really hurt him to think that his daughter was out doing a man's work. And when we were growing up, Dad never wanted us girls to go out and milk cows or anything like that. You didn't have to do that? Did you let your mother do that? Nope. We didn't have to do that. So, of course, I had a brother, and he was a big, strapping kid. And, boy, he took over. And him and Dad did it. Well, then my brother left home. He graduated in 38. I think he left home in 40. But Dad rented. He only rented. He didn't own his farm because he got burned during the Depression, and he says, that's it. So from that day on, he had no faith in keeping anything of his own, you know. And it was too bad, but that's the way he felt. And so, then my brother told my dad, he said, now this farm isn't big enough for both of us. And, of course, at that age, you know, my brother was thinking of getting married maybe and all that stuff. And so he told Dad. He went in, bought him a tractor. And my brother went to Dixon. You've heard of Dixon, Illinois. It's not too far from Sheffield. And he got a job there. And he was there, I don't know how long, not too long, when he joined the service. Of course, he... I don't know how long he was in either. I can't even remember. But then he joined the Air Corps. He wanted to get in that so bad. Well, he was a good pilot. He begged to go overseas. He went in where the action was, and they wouldn't send him. And it was a good thing. They made an instructor out of him, and he was down in Texas. In fact, he was married down there and married a Texan girl. And one morning, he went out with his students and was ready to get in the plane to teach, and he fell over, flat-earned a pancake. When he joined the service, he was sent to South Carolina. And he took his basic training. It was on a sheep, old sheep farm field. And he picked up a bug at the time that he got it, back in 41 or 2. There was only four cases in the whole United States. And it's where it eats the liver up and is filled up with cysts. And so one of them evidently had burst, and that's when they took him in. Well, they called us and said, if you want to see him alive, you get here within 24 hours. When my dad couldn't leave the farm, I had my little sister, and my other sister was still home. So Mother and I, we took the train, and I had just been out of the hospital from an appendix, like only a few days, five days. Boy, that was a tough trip, that old train of rattling, bang and boom. But we made it down there, and the doctor said, well, if he lives 48 hours, and he doesn't do any work for the rest of his life, he may live 40 years. Well, he's 60. See, I'll be 62. He's 66 this next month. So he made it. Oh, he made it. And he was a workaholic, like me. I mean, we both, we loved to work. None of this messing around, sitting around bit, you know. And he says, if I have to live my life doing nothing, forget it. And he did. He's worked like a dog all his life, and he won't retire now. But he's made it. He landed in the hospital several times, and stuff, when the kids had hit him, or one of those cysts would be out, and the poison would go through his body, and he'd land in the hospital. But two, three years ago, about three years ago, he had a hernia operation. So he told the doctor, well, when you get in there, he said, check my liver, because he only had a fourth, less than a fourth of his liver left after those cysts had eaten it up. And his liver had grown completely back. And he feels wonderful. So that's a good medical thing, the liver does regenerate. So he went against the odds. Yep, he beat it. So you and him, you were trained from the beginning to work. Oh, yes. Work, work, work. Sure, and now my sister, who's four years younger than I, she had things easier than I did in the later years that she was home. See, just four years behind. So during World War II is when things started picking up, and Dad was coming back out of the humdrums of paying off the debts from the Depression and everything. But then my young, young sister, who's 16 years younger than I, I mean, she was just, she lived with the folks from the time she was, what, six years old. By herself, so she was just like a different child. And of course, she had everything. And I'm not saying that derogatory, but it's just the times were different, you know. And she didn't have to work like us kids did because the farm was better, Dad made more money, they had telephone, they had indoor heat, you know, and indoor plumbing and all that stuff, and a telephone, you know, we didn't have telephone. When we were young. So... And yet, Helen, the youngest one, even for everything she had being raised with older parents, made a mark on, left a mark on her, too, in different ways. So each one is different, you know. And you know, it's funny, with us three older ones growing up, all being four years apart, none of us were ever at the age where they wanted to do what the other one did. You were all independent. So it was almost like three different kids in entirely different atmospheres, you know. Even though we all had to work. Chuck was out in the fields in the barnyard with Dad, and I was the one who did the housework, or helped. I won't say I did it all. But, I mean, in those days, my mother– I mean, you washed every window in the house on the inside every week, and you were on your hands and knees scrubbing. I still do that stuff today, because I can't shed some of those things. You've got to be done. And my younger sister, she– I mean, not the youngest, but the one who's four years younger than I, Elaine, she was the one that wanted to be outside with the cats and the dogs and take the shoes off. She doesn't wash the floors on his own? Oh, no. Oh, no. She don't clean her house like I do. I mean, things bother me, but it doesn't bother her. Because it just stuck with me, that's all. I mean, that's what had to be done. What happened when you took away home to your family in Westboro? Well, at that time, we lived at Sheffield. And my mother and dad, of course– I mean, they were like me. They trusted everybody. They liked everybody. Give you a chance. Let's not knock you down before– You know, with Roy, I mean, if you weren't a Swede, well, you can forget. You know? And, I mean, I've been called a lot of things. Damn dumb farmer and all kinds of stuff, you know. And so– But, I mean, we were taught everybody is equal. It didn't make any difference where you came from. Did you tell your father and mother that he was a Swede? Oh, yeah. And that made no difference. I mean– They were broad-minded enough to understand you. Oh, yeah. Everybody in this world was created equal. How about the religion on your family? We were Protestant. See, being from a small town, you were either congregational or you were Methodist. And it started out free Methodist and then kind of liberalized a little bit. And then there was a Catholic church. Down at Sheffield, there was– At that time, oh, my. I would say 75% Catholic. Well, there are many. And to this day, there's still a palm down there. But I can remember– The old-fashioned Catholic? Yeah, the old-fashioned ones. The only thing– And I remember my mother telling me– And so one Sunday after church, we drove by the Catholic church. And she says, you watch. You watch. And sure enough, some of those old guys would walk out of that church and pull the bottle out of their back pocket and start drinking. Oh, my goodness. I thought my poor mother was going to have a heart attack. They brought– They went into the church? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And so my mother was free Methodist. And we went to Sunday school every Sunday, and we went to church, and we were in young people. And it was just a part of life, you know. And there's– I appreciate that I had that upbringing today, you know. Boy, I don't know today– Especially being out working now part-time and seeing things that goes on and embracing the three boys. If I hadn't had that background– Disability background. Things didn't bother me. Where Roy, he'd go right through the ceiling, and he couldn't handle things. He was sheltered in a lot of ways. And yet he was out in the world, too. It's hard to explain. But I had it, and I loved it, and I still do today. Roy's parents, though, they were Lutheran? They– What church did they belong to? When Grandma was in the old country– Now, I know she had to learn the New Testament or Bible or whatever it was. In fact, I've got it. She gave it to my kids when they were young, the older ones, to play with. So I cobbed it. I says, you're not playing with that. And it's written in Swedish. I can't read a word of it. But it was a beautiful little thing. And then they were nothing. Then they got going, which is now a Baptist church. But it's– Free meth– It was– Free church? Free evangelical church? Yeah. Free evangelical. That's what it was. Well, I don't know if they ever joined. But the relatives talked them into going and taking the little children to Sunday school. And then the Depression hit, and they couldn't afford to dress those kids like they were going to a ball or something. And she said, I'm not sending my kids in overalls. So they quit going, and they haven't belonged to nothing since. Where did you marry them? We were married at Salem Lutheran Church. See, when I was in Lutheran Hospital, I came from a Methodist– Well, every day we were required to go to– Chapel breakfast? Chapel every morning before we had breakfast. Before we had breakfast. And before we went on duty. So then I joined the Salem church. I had some friends. And we've belonged there ever since. That's where the kids grew up. They went through the catechism. I guess they don't call it that now. But the whole works, you know, except the younger one. Now, when the oldest one got older, he broke– Side two, continuation with Barbara Gustafson, Noli Noli, side two, cassette two. And he got going with her. They were married right out of high school. They were 18. And they got– His brother, who was just a year and a half younger, and he joined them. He still goes because they bought this church up here on 12th Street. The Central Baptist. And that's where him and his family still go. Then the youngest one, he started going there. In fact, Barry, who is now 22, he went to their school for several years, from fifth, sixth grade through about ninth. And then he went to Eastmoreland Christian School. But Stan and Susan were married, and they had little Barbie. And then Stan went to– school down in Springfield, Missouri, to be a minister while he was married. And I said, in high school, he was smart, but he didn't want– Let's not open any books, you know, and really get it in here. Let's get by with as little as we can do. He got through high school, but, I mean, it was just very average, you know. He goes down to Bible College, and the kid was on the dean's list, besides working to support a family and all that study. And I says, I couldn't pronounce half the words. And he was coming up with these fantastic grades. Well, it was something he liked, he was interested in. See, that makes a difference in life. And so now he's a minister out in Lincoln, Nebraska, and has a church out there. And it's an old, old church, and it was a Swedish church around 1900. Where in Nebraska? In Lincoln. Lincoln, Nebraska. And it's an old, old church. It's a big, big, big church, brick. And we got to looking on the cement thing out in front and dusting it off. And here it was a Swedish church. Lutheran church? Way back in 1900. And they live in a house that was built about the same time. And it's a big, big house for them, but it's nice. And they've got it fixed real nice. Of your three boys now, which one has taken after you as being a hard worker? Especially number two, Jeff. Stan has turned out that way. He started out the lazy route, you know. Oh, dear. Yeah. But Jeff, from the time, he was a little tight. He had the drive and the work and let's do things, you know. And he still is today. He's got a very good level head on him. Like they say, he's got his head screwed on right. But the young one, he couldn't do anything to suit his dad. So why do anything at all? You know, well, you get beat down enough, you're going to say, eugh, let's forget that. So, but Barry is 22, and he is manager of a Hungry Hobo. That's a fast food place. And I worry about it because he's so young. But the company, this winter now, has sent him to Blackhawk to take a course in something. So I guess they have high hopes for him. And he's doing very well, very well for himself. He just moved out, well, I guess January 1st, he moved with some friends out in Oregon. And now April 1st, he got his own apartment back here in town. In fact, he's up the block from his grandma's. And, but he's had a little tough time going, you know, making a, because money doesn't go, like, as far, he can't live in the style he was accustomed to at home when you got rent to pay and stuff. And he can't afford to get a phone yet. So I've just, we moved, helped moved him in. And he has no drapes yet, he has no stove, no refrigerator. But he's, I've got to let him, I've got to let him make his way. He's not suffering. He'll come home to eat. I said I'll, when he left home, I said, all right, Barry, I'm for you 100%. And whatever you want to do. I may not always like whatever you do, but I don't love you any less. I love you the same, no matter what you do. But I said, if you move out, I said, I will do your laundry. Because he works six days a week. I mean, I'm not a cruel, hard person. And I said, you can come home and eat. I will not give you money to go to fast food joints. He gets his lunch, he can get his supper. But after working with that food all day, I think it's a little hard maybe to sit down and take another taco salad home for supper. But I said, I will fix you food at home. And of course, Mother had a little thing in the back of her mind. Well, at least I know I'm going to get to see him. Because he's going to come home and eat, and he's going to bring me his laundry. That's Mother's thinking, you know. Because he's very independent, very independent boy. And so he hasn't lived a month up there yet, but he likes it. He does come home, and he's doing well. And the hardest thing for me is this tough love. I told him, I will give you no money to pay your bills. You've got to learn to budget that money. Is when he comes, well, I got a haircut appointment, and I don't have the money. I said, well, that's tough. You don't make appointments if you don't have the money to pay the bill. And that's the hard part, is this final no. Because when he lived here, you know, it's very easy. Well, you shell out two and five and ten, and the first thing you know, well, my goodness, some weeks you could shell out $20 and $30. That's not doing him any good, you know. So you were brought up enough to make an appointment just before you were... Right. Oh, yeah. Yep. You didn't depend upon somebody else to pay the bills. You'd be very independent. And my folks taught me from the time I can remember, you can be anything you want to be in this world, but nothing's ever going to be handed to you. You've got to work for it. And that's what I try to instill in the boys, you know. Hey, the world's full of opportunities, but you're not going to get there on someone's coattails. Get out and work. How about grandma? Do they cater to her or talk to her a little bit about... Roy's mother? Yes. Not anymore. And you know, the poor thing, I love her dearly. She lived very close here. Yeah, about four blocks. Many years. They've lived there– Well, ever since I've known them, and for years before. I think Roy might have been two or three when they moved in there. And they've lived there ever since. So this is his home then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's his home. But the boys– Of course, grandma was from the old school, you know. And she loved those boys dearly. And I was chastised if I would recommend them. Oh, you couldn't do that? Oh, my goodness. Don't you touch those kids. Don't you ball them out for doing this or that. Well, I can't see that. I wasn't doing the kids any favors. So they knew the minute we hit grandma's, ha, ha, ha, I can do anything I want to over here. Oh, one day– And Stanley was small. But the boy next door had– What did he do to grandma? I guess he had come up and kind of kicked her in the shins. So we were all standing out in the front yard, and she was telling me this, and I was getting a little uptight, you know. Boy, that kid was this and this and this, and he needed to be spanked, and he needed this and he needed that. And about that time, I could see the look on that kid's face of mine that he was going to do the same thing because he thought he was going to get by with it. So he reached up and he kicked her. And he was on his little tricycle. I hauled that kid off that tricycle, and I walloped his bottom, and I thought poor grandma was going to have a heart attack because I was really mean. She was going to take the kids away from me because I was not a fit parent. I beat my kids. I don't say spanking them when they deserved it is being cruel or mean, but that's... and they raised their kids that way. You know, boy, you can do anything you want because you are a Sweden, you're a Gustafson, and the world owes you a living. But the poor parents over there, I mean, they had a tough time. You know. It's strange that they let their kids be... Oh, yeah. Kids were like... Well, and yet, I mean, grandma, she'd love them, but a lot of times she'd have a knife in their back. See, she kept them under their thumb. His sister didn't get married. She will be 63. She didn't get married until she was 60. Sixty. Because she had seven engagements, and mother broke up every one of them. Because she... And that's why I think a lot of it is she... She didn't approve. She didn't approve of me. Because I wasn't rich. I'd been all right if you maybe married someone that was rich. But I took her son away, see. And she thought that those kids should stay home and take care of her for the rest of their lives. But don't you think that's a motherly field for anybody? Well, you know, I was wondering if it was maybe a Swedish tradition because so many... We had one across the street here. The daughter did the same thing. And there's one right out here, 7th Street. So many of them around here did the same thing. The girls... They listened to their mother. The kids stayed home and took care of the parents. And no... Away from the kids and everything. Oh, yeah. And I didn't know if they did that over there. But this one was almost like they crushed their independence. Oh, yeah. She had her thumb on them, you know. And she was telling them what to do and when to do it and how much did you spend and where to go. I mean, that was tough. They had no independence. Anything they did, they'd sneak and then maybe lie about it. What kind of life is that? I felt sorry for the kids, you know. But I can see Roy does the same thing to his kids. You know. How about this neighborhood? You don't have any... Yes, you do have some Belgians around here. Some what? Belgian people. Oh. Oh, yeah. We got a couple across the street. Yes. You have 7th Street not too far away. Oh, my. We got Belgians around. How were they then when you came in here in the 40s? Of course, maybe I was naive. Because, of course, you know... But you were an American. You didn't have any brogues. That's right. So you fit right in with the Americans. Oh, yeah. It was easy for you to come in. And so it was very easy for me. I had no quarrels with anybody. You had the language right to have. The Belgians, and there's a lot of them still around, some of the older ones, and they have their brogues. And they also have different ideas. Oh, they certainly do. And they are Catholics. Oh, yeah. Definitely Catholic. So, I mean, we had our Swedish Lutherans, and we have a lot of them around here. And then you got the Belgium Catholics. But over the years, I think they all pretty well molded together into one and be able to get along. So the national lines have rolled in on them. Yeah, kind of, I think. I hope so. Because... The better. Why can't people get along, you know? Don't knock everybody down. You know, not everybody's the same. Give them a chance. That's right. So your parents were open-minded then? Yeah, very much so. Outside of being... My mom, especially, was quite religious. What did they talk about, like your mother and all here, and your mother? What did they talk about when they met? They weren't together that much. Did they go to hospital? Because they went down to Sheffield, I think maybe a couple of times is all. But–and my folks were up several times. What did they talk about? You know, I don't even remember. I don't even remember. Everybody was on their best behavior. You know? But then– I know my–I used to upset my mother when she would hear how Grandma talked to me or something. She'd say, Why do you let her get away with that? You know? She went on to a fixed woman? Oh, boy, yeah. But why fight? Why fight? I mean, life is too doggone short for that, you know? And I said, well, that's just how she feels, and she can't help it. I would take things and take things and take things until I got up here. And maybe about every 10 years, I'd explode once, you know? But to show how domineering she was– When Roy and I got married, now, he built– I had–I mean, my money, I was in on it, too. Him and his dad built us our first house, and that's way out. It's all built up now, but– Well, at that time, it was down, you know, where Kmart is off 23rd Avenue? On Black– That was a dirt road going down there, and they built us a bungalow. No basement or anything, but it was a house. And, of course, she had said to me, when they were building the house– And I was out taking pictures one day with the fellas who were working, and she says, well, don't take too many pictures because you're never going to live here. And I thought, hmm, well, all right, we'll see about this one, you know. But after the house was built and we got married and lived out there– I guess we lived there about five years, you know. But when I was working at– Before I had Stanley, I was working at the phone company. I had a good job, and I was– You quit the nursing then? Oh, yeah. I didn't graduate. Okay. But I started with the phone company in 1946, and I worked until 1952, and I was in the business office. But she would go out and take mail out of my mailbox and read it while I was working. And the neighbors would all– They'd tell me all this stuff that was going on. And it hurt. It hurt at the time, but, I mean, here I was again. Well, I'm not gonna fight and argue. Well, she had it fixed, so the house was in her name. And Roy had no life insurance on me. So when I got pregnant with Stan, I thought, enough is enough. So I says, okay, you either put this house in my name– I was working, making more money than him, paying the bills. Now, I think I deserve something. You either put the house in my name and you get some life insurance on me. Well, he didn't want to buy life insurance on me– or on him, because if something happened to him, he didn't want some other guy using his money. And I said, well, what makes you think I'd ever get married again? You know, of course I was young enough at that time. I might have. But who knows? I mean, you don't look at life like that. Someone else is gonna take your money. How about Christmas now, when you– put in the Christmas tree, you use a spruce or a fir for the Christmas tree? You know, when I grew up, we had nothing but– At that time, it was an artificial tree. Artificial tree? What was it made of? I don't know, but it was pretty awful looking, I'll tell you. And it was used then every year? Every year we used that tree. And, of course, we had no electricity. So there was no lights. But we put candles on there, but we were never allowed to light them. But they were light candles? We had little candle holders with little– Never lit? Never lit. Never lit. Did you have the Christmas presents brought to you on Christmas Eve? It was– Santa Claus brought everything. And he came while we were sleeping Christmas Eve. And so we got up on Christmas morning, and there was our– So you never saw Santa Claus then? No. No. In fact, I don't ever remember them. I never saw him. It was just like a myth to us, you know. And, of course, they read books to us about him and everything. And seen pictures. But I don't think they had Santa Clauses around like they do now in every cotton-picking store. Oh, by the way, did you see Santa Claus when you were growing up? You, Tomten? Sure. He came to your house? When you were growing up, when you were a kid? No. No. No. As far back as I can remember, my parents would hide the– They would hide the gifts upstairs. And then we would have to go in and sit on the davenport there. And then my mother would sit with us in the living room, and then finally my dad would come down the steps and say, Yeah, he's been here. He left everything upstairs. That's the way they did it. Or in the shed, a lot. Oh, they didn't dress up as– No. We never did that at our house. Actually have somebody come there. Now, when our boys were small, we hired them. And, in fact, my father played Santa Claus for them for a couple times when they were real little, didn't know him, see? Oh, yeah, when Stan was– Let's see. He was a little over a year and a half. So they were started with your generation as Santa Claus. Well, yeah. Now, every home didn't do that. But, you know, when we were kids, I went along with what my parents did. I didn't know what it was all about, you know? Well, that was just their way of doing things. Did you receive the Christmas gifts on Christmas Eve? We had– Did I see the Christmas– Did you get– No, to get your presents on Christmas Eve. Yeah, you were– We got them always on Christmas Eve, yeah. That's what we always did. You got them on Christmas morning. Yeah, see, the Americans done it a little bit different. How did you do, now, in your family? Well, every family did it different, you know, sometimes. How did we what? With your family, now, with your boys. Well, you mean how we do today? No. No, when the kids were little. Oh, when the kids were little. We had it Christmas Eve, too. They had two Christmases. Because– Yeah, because– Two-sided– Yeah, that's right. But then, of course, when they grew up and got older, then we still held it here on Christmas Eve and opened the gifts here in the afternoon or so because their kids were coming along, and they were small, and they had to take a nap, you know how that goes. But then the next day, you see, they went to their wife's parents' place, as my boys did. And then they have another Christmas morning. Oh, yeah. Yeah, in the evening, yeah. It's worked out well. I mean, we just started it that way, and everybody's just kind of fallen into the same– Another story my father told me about the old country. I have to go kind of way back. I know you like that little later story. No, it's all right. But he said when they had a funeral in their little town, they would lay their eaves, get on there, on the road, you know, they weren't paid then. And they just had a bond and hesta, you know how they did in the old days. Oh, granrice. Yeah, granrice. He called them rice granr. He just turned it around. What did he say? You said granrice, he said rice granr. What is it? Whatever it is, you know. Granrice is the branches from the fir. Oh, all right. The fir trees, yeah. And Dad says the neighbors and the people along that road there, where that funeral was going to come down, they would lay them granr there on the road. In the road? Yeah. And I said, why did they do that? Well, he said it made the hearse, the wagon, roll quietly across there and kept the dust down. And that was an old custom they had there. Well, don't you suppose it was iron wheels? Well, sure. So it would make a big sound. They had to deal with the glass on the side, you know, old carriage like you, probably in the old days. They got one in the museum over there. Yeah, I don't know. Now, my mother came from a little town in Talmud, by the name of Tushos. Tushos? Yeah. Have you heard of that? That's the one. Where she came from, you asked her? Yes, I asked her. Tushos, yes. Yeah, it's spelled S-O-U-X or something on the end. Oh, I know what it's spelled. Spell it for me, will you? T-O-R-S-A-S, with a dot over the A. Tushos, that's it. Yeah, that's it. Well, it must have been a small town, huh? Well, a lot of immigrants came from there. Did they? Oh, yes. Okay, see, I helped you there now. That's very good. Tushos, but Dad came from Pugla Forest. Now, Harry Abrahamson, who's married to a cousin of my father, he's dead now, he'd come from that Boohuslan. Boohuslan, have you ever heard of that? Yes, yes. But there's lots of good skiing up in there. No, not Boohuslan, well, northern parts, because they have snow all over in the winter. Yeah. I see. Do you remember, now, Christmas, your dad, he got the Christmas tree down at the store somewhere, or did he get it? Yeah, usually he did. I think way back, I believe they cut one on a friend's farm, you know. Did you use artificial ones? No, we had always real ones. Fur or spruce? Well, I'd say it was one of the two, I don't remember now. But they always had a live tree, because my mother had a can with a button in it underneath and it would soak it. Did you get a big tree? Yeah, we had a pretty big one when we were kids, yeah. And what did they use for dressing it up? Well, they had a lot of ornaments that they had picked up here and there, and tinsel, we used to put that tinsel on, and then, as the years went on, we started to get quite a few ornaments from Sweden, too. Well, they sent... They sent some from over there, and we've got a few here for our tree from the old country. And they've got some over there in boxes yet. But we had a pretty big tree, yeah. Yeah. And you had light candles in it? No. No, we had the lights. We had the Christmas lights, and then, before Christmas, my father would decorate up the front of the house, too, the busch there, you know. So the small tree there, how did it... We used... We used to use that. So come back and put it there, and the gloves, you know, I took them. Oh, yeah. No, we had to read it, because it came to the air, and... It got bad. They took care of that. Yeah. That was a shame. I asked your wife and I about the Belgian people. What kind of confrontation did you have with them in high school and... Oh, I bet they had a lot more, you know. You were very close, you know, to the Belgian people. Yes, up on 7th Street here, you know, where they got the friend circle, and all them little saloons and stuff were run by Belgians, meat markets, shoe stores in the old days up there. Even the streetcar ran up there when I was a kid, and the old buses, too. But, yeah, I had a lot to do with the Belgian kids, you know, and we got along all right. And I used to see a lot of the old Belgians, they'd stand on the corners up there, speak only in Belgian, you know. I'm the... I'd miss the poems and that. And the Belgian hats, you know, and that. Well, they have special hats? Well, all kind of caps. They like to wear caps a lot, like the Danish. The Danish people wear caps. I guess Sweden does, too. I don't know. What do they wear over there? I bet they wore straw hats in them days, old. Or are they pretty much like here? Yes. So... So in school now, were there any competition of... No, we didn't. It wasn't partial as far as race. Oh? No, not amongst us, our generation. You grew up with the... I grew up with a lot of Belgian boys up here, played ball with them and so forth, you know. And we spoke English. Yeah, do you remember Mom and Dad back, saying anything about them before? I know on election night once in a while here, back in the old days, they would always have a big... I was going to put it on him. Election night, you said? Yes, on election night back in the 1930s, they always had a get-together on 7th Street up here in one or two of the old taverns, you know. But that was a sociable type tavern. It wasn't a bum place like they got now where the kids come in and fight and all that, you know. It was all grown-ups. And they would go up there, you know, and hear the returns on the old radio up there at that time in the tavern and have a few beers once in a while and play little cards and stuff. And they enjoyed that together. They got along good. Even my parents' generation, along with the Belgians, the generation before me, they got along fine. Once in a while, I'd hear my dad say, oh, there you have a Belgian over there. He'd put the food in for you. He'd kind of put their name in. It was Kalle Boon, huh? Kalle Boon, yeah. It was Kalle Boon, yeah. That was it. So, but politically speaking, were they united? Were they Democrats, the Belgians? The Belgians were heavy Democrats. Heavy Democrats? They couldn't say Democrat. They said Hem-a-Krat, you know. Hem-a-Krat. Hem-a-Krat. Hood guys. They still are today. Why do they pronounce it that way? Because of the language. Probably. The Swedish don't have the J right either. It's always J. Yeah, yeah. Soft. Yeah. I see. Hem-a-Krat. Yeah, Hem-a-Krat. And Hemla. Hemla Belgien. Yeah. Here comes the Belgians. They laughed a little. Is that on there, too? So, you remember when there was these mayors, Höglmodin? Yeah, the mayor election. Could they be elected by Swedes only? Or they needed some Belgare? It was a combination of the Belgian and Swedish people here at that time that elected the mayor, basically. The votes were mixed. No, that's not what he's saying. Can you– Could you elect– A Swede. A Swede. Or a mayor at that time. Without getting some Belgians on your side. In other words, what was the ratio between the Swedes and Belgians? Was it more Belgians or more Swedes? Well, I can't remember that we ever had a Belgian mayor in Moline. We had two or three Swedish mayors over the years. At one time, many years ago, John Deere himself was a mayor of Moline. Yeah. That was back in the 1890s or something. Yeah, that was way back. We had a Swedish man by the name of Sandstrom was a former mayor in Moline. And Johnson. And Johnson was a Swedish mayor. Oakleaf. Oakleaf was– He was a good one. Yes. He was a good Swede. Yes, but Oakleaf. How could he be elected now? He could play horse if he could. He did? He was on the– And– Yeah, but could he be elected by the Swedes only? I mean, the Belgians, did they stay away to vote or– No, they voted too. They were very faithful about voting for one party or the other. But they didn't stay away at those elections. And this area was called the Fifth Ward at that time. It has now changed to a different ward. But they were really united up here on Seventh Street and all the surrounding areas. That's where they lived. And there were Swedes and Belgians together in the North Ward? Mostly Belgians. So it didn't make any difference about– The Swedes were out south. Do you remember how the vote– the turn– or the turnout was for electing a mayor, for instance? How many votes? You will see that. I mean, how did they vote in this ward? In this ward, it was heavily demonstrated nearly every election. So it wouldn't make any difference on whether you were a Swede or a Polack or a Belgian. It would make a difference on what party you were running on. If you were a Democrat, man, you were in. And once the Belgians declared themselves Democrats, they stayed Democrats. They did. They never voted Republican. Even in those years. Now they do now. Yeah, if a Swede ran on the Democratic ticket, he'd be in. Yeah. Now, we have a mayor here who was elected, I think, three times. He was a doctor here, Dr. Henry Arp. Arp, yeah. He was a Democrat, and he would come up here to Friends Circle Club and give a speech, you know, with the flags up and everything, and the Belgians were there from wall to wall. And they liked Henry Arp, and he got elected two, three times. Wasn't he a German background or– Arp could be a German– yes, that would be German background. Reimann and...