 Well, we have 13th of October 1986 and I'm sitting together with William Gustav Johnson in Rockford, Illinois. He was born 1921, 16th of February in Huskana, Sweden, and came to the United States 1924. And they was together with your dad and mother. My dad, mother and brother. Also a brother, yeah. Yes, my brother too. He was older? He was three years older. Three years older. So can you tell a little bit about your father now, Elias Johnson was his name. What kind of work was he? Well, he was, there was a family of, how many of them? Dad's family. Well, he was the oldest in a large family anyway and they owned a store in Sweden and I guess the reason he came over here was that the whole family was trying to make a living off of the one store and it just wasn't enough for everybody to make out on it so he thought that the best thing for somebody to do was to leave and he was the oldest so that was part of the... And that store was a grocery store then? Well, it was like I'd say, we'd call it a general store here because he had a butcher shop there and he was, hardware and clothing and the whole works, yeah. And that was in the city of Huskana? That was in Huskana, right on Södragatan. So, but he apparently met your mother, Anna Lividsson, she came from Sandheim. Sandheim. Did she work in Huskana and how did they meet? I don't know how they ever met but I know that my dad would take the train from Huskana to Sandheim to visit with my mother, you know, for weekends and things when he wasn't working and then come back to Huskana again so and where they met, I don't know, unless my mother went to work for somebody in that area and they got acquainted that way. But that part of it I never did remember, never did say, they never did say. You were only three years old when you left Sweden and you have no recollections of anything that from that time? No, no, I don't remember anything about Sweden at all, no. How did they get this idea about the United States? My mother had a aunt that lived here in Rockford and when we came to Rockford. What was her name? Ida Anderson. Ida Anderson. Ida Anderson. And she worked at Burson Knitting, she was in knitting mills there. But so when we came to Rockford, we came and we lived with her to start with until we found a place on 8th Street across from P.A. Peterson School and then we lived there until I started school, so that would be two years. And I started first grade in P.A. Peterson School and then we moved to 9th Street by Broadway and I started Turner School there. And I lived there until my aunt died, Ida died, and I think about 1936. And then when she died, my mother and her sister inherited Ida's house. We had been renting up until that time. And then my mother bought out her sister, who was living in Chicago at the time, and I think part of that deal was that the place in Sondheim went to my aunt and then the house here in Rockford then would be my mother's. That's how they divided up the inheritance. So they were not too big of a family? Just the two sisters. Hilda and my mother-in-law, Anna. And Hilda lived with her daughter in Chicago and they later moved down to Urbana and they passed away in Urbana. Who took care of her father's farm then, or her parents? His son, him? And they just rented it out and when I was over there in 81, I met the fellow that bought the place and he was running a fish market in Sondheim. They called him Fisk Oscar. And he owned the place up into, almost into the 70s, and he sold it, and since then it had been sold to several people. But he did some remodeling on it and he explained all that to me when I was over there. So it didn't stay in the family then? No, it didn't stay, it was sold out. Did your parents tell you anything about the travel over now from Sweden on Drottningholm? Did they have any problems on the way through Ellis Island, for instance? They didn't go to Ellis Island because we were in a different, I mean, I'm not sure just how that works. But I know I didn't get sick on the voyage over, but I know some of them. I know my parents were sick part of the time. So you remember that trip then? Oh, faintly. I don't know what I remember and what they told me. But I do remember them saying that they did, there were some sick, you know, there were some of them that didn't make some of the meals, but I managed to make them all. And Ellis Island, you didn't get to? No. The way I understand it is that in 1924, the class that we were on, whatever it is, I don't know. Second class, perhaps? Whatever it is, yeah, went right directly to shore. They didn't stop at any immigration thing. So we didn't have to go through any immigration that I recall or my father ever saying anything about. There was nobody in New York to meet you? No, no. First, we got on a train there for Chicago and transferred over to Rockford, and the first I know is, I can recall my aunt meeting us at the station. But that wasn't too far away at that time. They had one there on 9th Street and almost 11th Avenue. Oh, they had two stations then? Oh, they had more, yeah. I know there was a station there that we got. Different stops. So this Ida Anderson, she helped out to get your living quarters. In other words, they were prepared for you when you came. Yes, we lived with her. Because she was... Was she not married? No, she was a maiden aunt. She and a friend of hers bought the house, and the friend died and left her share of the house to Ida. So Ida was living in the house downstairs herself and was running up the out the out the stairs, but we lived with her downstairs. How did your dad get into the working life here in Rockford? Well, of course, he knew just about how to do almost anything. He was a butcher. He was an excellent mechanic, and carpenter, plumber. I mean, he can do it all. We did... In fact, after we got the house on 8th Avenue, he put in all steam heat and all the radiators and everything. He did it all on his 12th with my brother and I help. And he worked for Matson Machine Works to start with. Matson? Uh-huh. And I imagine what he did was help build their machines, the woodworking machinery is what he helped to, you know, make them, build them. And his dream was to go out west and buy a ranch because he wanted a big farm. And his dream was never fulfilled until he did finally buy a farm just outside of Milford here in Rockford. And my brother and I still have it. It's 120 acres on Killville Creek. But he didn't get that until he was, oh, 60 years old. Then he bought that and he retired on it, and then he farmed it until he died. And he stayed on the farm then, or? Well, he stayed on the farm all but three months of the year, and then he moved back. He always kept the house in town. So the three winter months, he'd stayed in Rockford, and then the rest of the time he'd work the farm with my brother and I help, of course. So he had this in his head then? Always wanted, and he, well, actually, I think if we hadn't, after we got over here and he was working trying to save some money, he got sick. And about the time he recovered, the Depression hit. Then he wasn't working, he didn't work for, I don't think, for two years, actually. And just never recovered enough from that to do anything but stay right here in Rockford. So that probably is the reason we never did. But he wanted to go to Oklahoma or Texas or somewhere and get a lot of, you know, big acreage. He was, he had big dreams. Did he explore any of those possibilities of going out there? Never did. Never did. No, never did. Never got, I don't think he ever got past the Mississippi River. And at one time, too, he wanted to start a butcher shop. But and he had all the equipment with him, you know, he had all his knives and saws and everything but, you know, no big stuff. Yeah, he had that all with him from Sweden. All his tools with him for a butcher shop and never, the only, the closest thing he got to it, we'd buy a half a pig for around Christmas every year, you know, and we'd make our own sausages and silt and put some of it down in brine and, you know, and we'd always have that type of thing for the Christmas holidays. But that's as close as he ever got to get his butcher shop. He never worked at a butcher shop? Never did. Never did. How come? Was it always? Well, I think he could make more money as a machinist. I think, I don't know why not, because he never did get involved in it. No? So this Matson machinery, or machinery shop, he started with them when he came over in 1924. That's right. And then he was laid off during the Depression. Depression, that's correct. So then you were old enough, so you remember what happened. Oh, yes, sure. How did they survive then, the family? Well, we owned, we owned, no, no, I was just, yeah, I was a kid then, yeah. We had an acre out east of town that my dad bought just as soon as we got here, and he put that into a garden, and we had a garden out there. How far east of the town? Well, it was, no, it would be almost, about a mile east of Five Points, halfway between Five, Alpine. Five Points and Broadway. Yeah, and about halfway between that and Cherry Valley, you might say. We had an acre of land out there where the In Urban used to come by, there was an In Urban stop right there at the, right at the garden. So what we did there is we always had a big garden, a lot of raspberry bushes and a big asparagus patch, and of course all your other vegetables that go with it, and we had some apple trees on it. And did he plant the apple trees? Oh, yes. And what we did then is the asparagus and the raspberries and strawberries and things like that, we'd go to the Royal Blue Store on Kishwaukee Street, and they wouldn't necessarily buy them from us, but we'd put them there and then they'd write out a, you know, keep track of it. And when we bought groceries, they deduct the cost of the groceries from the produce that we exchanged for groceries. So that was part of the way that... There was no money handed in? No, no money changed at all. Yeah, it was just strictly a barter deal. They took our asparagus and raspberries and whatever else we had that they could sell and gave us credit for it. Of course, most of the time our grocery bill was bigger than whatever credit we got for the thing, so we were always a little behind I think until we got going again, but that was part of the way that we survived. And he was without a job then for two years? Almost two years. And then he went to work up in Edgerton for one summer at Fruhoff Trailer, and we made a deal with some doctor out of Milwaukee to repair his cottage on Lake Oshkoshkana. And for repairing the cottage, we lived there for the three months that my dad worked at Fruhoff. And then that fall he got a job at Barbara Coleman Company as a maintenance man for repairing the hobbying machines and other machines that they used to make machines. And then he stayed there until he retired. By that time my brother and I were up, and my brother worked at Barbara Coleman's for a while, and he was an engineer, and then he moved. And I worked at Ingersoll Milling Machine Company as an apprentice pattern maker. And then my brother went to Ingersoll's in the engineering department when I was in the pattern shop there. And I was there until the war broke out, then I went into service. And when I come back, I went back to Ingersoll's for a year, and then I had a chance to go to the job shop where I could make more money, so I worked in the job shops until I started my own business as a pattern maker. How about your brother now? He was three years older. Three years older. Did he go to college, or how did he? No. He went to a correspondence school in engineering. So he did real well with Ingersoll's until he retired here a couple years ago, too. But I actually retired before he did, because I had a chance to sell my business, and it just seemed like the thing to do at the time. So we both came out pretty good on that. Did you go to college, or through high school? No. Through high school, and then my apprenticeship. And then on to work immediately. And your mother, she never worked? Never worked, no. She stayed home and took care of the house and the garden and whatever had to be done. How about when you came here, the family joined the church then immediately after coming here? Yeah, then we went to the Swedish Covenant Church. So they were Covenant, or before, as you called it in Sweden. That's right. And one of my relatives had a farm out in the boondock somewhere, and I'd been to it, but I don't remember just where it was at. And he donated a part of his farmland to the Hunsjöka, whatever the conference was or anything. And they built a chapel on that land, and they still held services in that chapel. And I was in that chapel in 1981 when we visited Sweden. But my cousin took me to the place and introduced me to the people that live there now, and I really don't know just exactly what the connection is there. So they joined that church here in Rockford immediately upon arrival? Yeah, I would say immediately upon arrival. So you went to Sunday school there? Well, we first went to Sunday school in what they called the chapel, down on 18th Avenue, behind National Lock there. Because that's almost where we lived at the time, on 8th Street. Oh, they had like an extended... Yeah, they called it a cappellet, is what they called it. And it was for Sunday school services? That was only Sunday school. No preaching? No, no preaching. It was strictly a Sunday school set up at that time. Now it's a small church, I understand. So there were a lot of Swedes living around there? Oh, that was all Sweden. That was little Sweden, sure. To make it convenient for them to go to church. That's right. How about the old people? Did they go there too? Boy, they were just kids that I remember. Yeah, because I think the older people, they went to the main church on Kishwaukee Street and 3rd Avenue. Do you remember if you had any Swedish varananda of school, as they call it? Yes, we didn't have. You didn't have? No. In fact, my folks were... Oh, what should I say? Had the theory that in order to become Americanized, we had to do away with our Swedish traditions. What do you think they meant by that? Traditions. I don't know. And they weren't the only ones. I mean, that whole area felt that way about it. And I think probably, I don't know if it was a prejudice that he picked up at work, because I know there was a lot of people that didn't like the idea of having a bunch of Swedes coming in. There were too many of them coming in. Yeah, there was too many in one place, I guess. I don't know what it was. But anyway, we were schooled at home, and my brother and I, both, our attitude was to try to do away with our Swedish heritage and become Americanized. And so consequently, I didn't belong to any Swedish organizations of any kind until about five, six years, ten years ago? Fifteen years ago that you joined BASTA. Yeah, fifteen years ago. What about your parents? Did they join anything? Nothing. Only the church? Just the church. No one that came there, it wasn't easy to be a Swede or to get a job. I mean, if you were a Swede, you were... Very easy....on secure ground. In fact, my mother never learned how to speak English fluently, because the banker she knew was Swedish, the grocer was a Swede, everybody conversed with her in Swedish. And I think even, of course, her church, I mean, circles and that, they never even, they always were in Swedish. So she lived here from 1924 to, she died in 60, and it really was hard for her to conduct even a conversation in English. She could do it. She had to do it when Loveta was around, because Loveta couldn't understand Swedish. So she has to learn Swedish now before... Well, they did. We call it Swenglish. Yeah. Her English is with... But when I visited my mother alone, we always talked Swedish. Did they encourage you and your brother to speak Swedish at all, I mean, English all the time? No. It was never any definite thing there, but they just didn't want us to get involved with any Swedish groups of any kind. That was the part. Because they will hold you back, so to speak, or... Yeah, they just thought that we wouldn't become Americanized as fast that way. So how about citizenship now? Did they take out the papers? Well, my dad took out his citizenship papers when I was about 14 years old, because at that time they were talking about the law changing. And at that time, if your parents took out their citizenship papers before the children become of age, they automatically become citizens. So that was one of the reasons. And I think, too, he wanted to vote. I don't know just why, but I mean, he was... That was at the time when... Oh, come of age, was he 18 or 21? 21. 21. So then you automatically became a citizen. So I automatically became a citizen, yeah. So you picked up English very easily, I suppose, when you come to school. Oh, yeah, school. How about playing around a lot in the school lots and after school? Were they mostly Swedish youngsters, or were they... Yeah, we used both languages, and I don't think we knew the difference. When we were kids... There was a lot of Swedish kids. They were all Swedish. Yeah, they knew either language. Yeah, they were like me. No Italians or Irish? Not in that area, no. I got to know them afterwards, after I got into, like, becoming junior high school. But when we were in that 9th Street, southeast end area, it was strictly Swedish. How about not playing football games and basketball games against other schools, where there were Irish and Italians? Well, that was mostly English then, but I don't think... You never distinguished between Irish and Italians? No, never did. Never did. And as far as being bilingual at home, I just thought everybody was that way. I mean, I didn't know there was any difference, really. You can switch over in various... Yeah, no problem. I just figured that was the way of doing it. So your dad, now, he learned English fairly... Right away, yeah, right away. Because he had to... He had to in order to work and to get around and, you know, that. But of course, you could tell he was Swedish when he spoke, but he could speak English. But my mother, she always had a hard time speaking English. Now I have a hard time speaking Swedish. But you understand, though? Oh, I can understand anything in Swedish, sure. If they don't speak too fast. Over the years now, who kept up the correspondence and the contacts with Sweden? My mother. She was the one that wrote the letters? Yep. Your father never... No, no. I'm not sure if there ever was a family feud at home or not. But boy, my dad, he just didn't want to have nothing to do with anybody over there. Now, I can't understand it. My mother did. She kept up with everybody. So she had the right to your dad's family feud? Yeah, well, she didn't have anybody over there. Well, there was always a sister. Her sister, and then she came over here. And my mother's sister's daughter married in Sweden, of course, and he was a horticulturist, a florist. And my folks were instrumental in getting them to come over here, Karl and Elna. And Elna was my mother's... was my cousin. And Karl and Elna came over, and they lived with us first. And he worked for the Rockford Park District when he came over here for a while, until they got a few dollars together. And then they moved in to Chicago, and he bought a greenhouse. He bought into a greenhouse there where that old fellow had it, and when the old fellow retired or died or whatever, he just kind of took over the greenhouse. It was West End Greenhouses. And I spent a lot of... His name was Levinson then? Well, his name was Karl Olson or Nelson or something like that, but when he came over here, he changed it to Nordheden. Nordheden? Mm-hmm, Karl Nordheden. And Haden is supposed to be a prairie or something, meadow, isn't it? North Meadow or something, so that's the... I understand... I'm not sure, but that's what... Did he get that name when he went through the system or after he... I'm not sure. But he made that his legal name, Karl Nordheden. He probably took it off when he became a citizen then. That could be, I'm not sure, but anyway, his children are Nordheden. And they are... How were they related now to your mother then? All right, now my mother, Sister Hilda, was the mother of Elna, which was Karl's wife. And then after they got settled in Chicago, then they sent for Hilda. So Hilda came over here then, which of course was my mother's, was my aunt, and then she lived with Karl and Elna until she died. So they visited you often in Herodotus? Oh, we were close, very close. In fact, I worked for Karl in Chicago all through high school. I went in there every summer and worked for him in the greenhouse. And then I always went in there on Thanksgiving and Christmas and helped out, because that was a big rush time for Easter and Christmas, was a big time for the flower business, florist business. It was before the Second World War then? Oh yes, this was in the 30s. Late 30s? Yeah, late 30s. So the Depression didn't hit you too hard, because you were still a young guy? I knew about it. I think I still have the scars from it, but it never affected me as far as working in that is concerned. But I only had two pair of pants and one pair of shoes and a few things like that. So there was a hardship for people? Oh yeah, I knew the hardship. So you really had to look at the coin more than once before? That's for sure, you bet. We used up everything that we possibly could use up and redid it and turned the collars up and changed the cuffs and whatever had to be done. Match the pants, you know how it goes. But we survived it. I don't think it hurt us any probably. You brought home the language, English, to your parents, both your father and mother. But then your mother, she refused to talk to you in English. No, it was easier for her. She understood in Swedish. But you probably spoke English to her many times. Oh sure. So she understood it then? Oh yeah. In fact, when she babysat for our oldest daughter, and our oldest daughter probably at that time was five years old, I'd sit and listen to my oldest daughter speak English to my mother and my mother would speak Swedish to my oldest daughter and they'd be talking about the same thing and I don't think either one of them knew they weren't talking the same language. I mean, it was crazy, but that was the way it was, remember, Lovina? Another interesting thing, after Carl and Elna came to this country then, I had another cousin that came over here and he was about 19 or 20 years old. Oh, what was his name? Peterson. Huh? Peterson. Peterson. First name. Oh, gee. I'd take them dead now if he's over here and I just don't... Well anyway, when he came over here, he couldn't speak English at all, neither, and he was here for probably a month or two without really, he was real timid, you know. I was about nine years old at the time and after school, I'd take him to the different shops in town and try to get him a job and I'd be the interpreter at nine years old trying to get my cousin, I guess he's what he was, a job. And I did land him a job at Drockfort. So you had to explain then to the boss or the foreman? Well, the personnel man, yeah. You know, Gunnard, Gunnard Peterson. Was he from? Husqvarna. Husqvarna. And I was the one that kind of, they'd ask questions and then I'd ask Gunnard, you know, and he'd tell me and then I'd tell him, you know, and I got him that job and he stayed at that same place until he retired just a few years before he died. And I kind of lost track of him for a while when I was raising my family, but we got together again before he passed away and I kind of was with him most of the time before he died and it was real nice. So you were able to secure a job for him? Yeah, yeah. So that was quite a, and he always remembered that, you know, whenever we got together. And we did, we went on vacations and things together too when I was growing up with my parents, you know, and same with Carl and Elna. They were all fishermen, you know, and we'd all go up to Wisconsin and spend a couple of weeks up there fishing together. So during the depression there was a lot of unintended vacation of sorts. Oh yeah. Did they still go out fishing then, but there was no money though? No, we managed. I don't know how we managed. We had enough money for gas and a little groceries and they had a tent and we'd go and my dad had kind of, I guess you could use a pruta, you know, pruta. Bargain with people. Yeah, bargain with people for a boat, you know, instead of trying two dollars a day and try to get it for 50 cents a day if he'd get it for the whole week. And, you know, it was this kind of a deal all the way around. Just try to get by the best you could. And we ate a lot of fish. But that's the way we did it. So where in Wisconsin then? Just Ohio? Oh, Puck, no, Puckaway was the farthest we went and Koshkanaan and then around Madison, all the lakes around Madison. Wabisa, there was a big hill there that we used to put our tent up on. I remember Wabisa and we moved all those lakes. So it wasn't too far, you know, within a hundred miles of Brockford, most of them. And Delvin. We hit them all. But back in those days, you know, it wasn't too crowded up there. Was there any help from the church now during the Depression? Did they have any outings like that? Boy, not that I remember. It was only up to the family themselves then to go. As far as I know, if they did, I wasn't, I mean, I didn't get involved in it. I don't know. My mother must have had some kind of connection somewhere along the line, but how that worked, I'm not familiar with. So your mother belonged to a sheaf reading in the church, I suppose. With all the ladies. That's right. They met for sewing. Right. And I'm sure that she probably did work for people or something for things too. But it was never so I was aware of it. Or if I, I mean, there was nothing I remember. But thinking back now, there must have been some kind of a... Now when you came into high school, you said it was a Swedish area. But what happened now when you brought home your future wife for a date? She was not even Swedish. Well, I'll tell you what happened. When I brought her home and my mother knew that I was thinking about getting married, she was real worried about it. She talked to my brother Lenny. How old were you then? Twenty-one. Twenty-one? Yeah. And she told my brother, she says, you know, he's awful young, you know, to be married. Do you think he should be married? And Lenny says, don't you interfere with that. He says, you let that go through. She says, you've worried about him now for 21 years. It's time somebody else gets that job. So that's how we got married. So there was no discussion? No discussion about that, and when I decided to become a Methodist, there was no discussion about that neither. They were really, they accepted that as part of the way. I made up my own mind to do it that way. That was fine with them. They really, they didn't really try to convince me to do anything different. I don't know why, but it just never, never did. This is PSY II, the continuation with William Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. PSY II. So but the religious part of your going over to the Methodist, there was no big step then for your family to go from the Covenants to the... Yeah, but they didn't, you know, they stayed. They didn't... No, in fact my......raise any questions about it? Oh, no. No, in fact, I'm a Methodist, and they're still, until they, you know, they passed away, they've stayed still at their mission church, and my brother's a Baptist, so. Was this the Swedish Methodist church you joined, or English? No, no, English. English Methodist. My wife's English, you know. How did you meet your wife now? I mean, she was not in the high school. No, she was going to business college here in town, and my next door neighbor went to the Methodist church, and he'd go to some of the services with me, and I'd go to some of the young people's outings with him, and I met my wife there at one of the church, what they called the Epworth League, and we just kind of got together, and I got on one of their committees, and she was on a committee, and they had a play there that she was a director of, and I was in the play, and we just kind of got acquainted, and I think probably one of my best friends, he's still one of my best friends, even after all these years, and he was the best man at our wedding, was the, you might say, the young people's leader in that church, and he kind of saw to it that Lovetta and I were paired together on different things too, so that was, he was part of the setup, so that was the way we got together, and of course, both my folks, and Carl and Eleanor, and the whole, our whole, my whole family, they thought the world of Lovetta, so it was, it was a real good setup. How about your side now of the family, Mrs. Johnson? Well, my mother's parents were both born in Cornwall, England, and I do not know the years that they came to the United States. My grandfather was 16 years old, I do know that, when he first came to America, and worked here a number of years before he sent for his bride-to-be, and were married here. My mother was born in Parker, South Dakota, in the year 1900, but she's full-blooded English. Were they farmers out there in South Dakota? Yes, they were. Farmers. They had a big family, there were 11 children. My grandfather was one of 19 living children, there was 21 born in the family, but 19 of them left. Parker, South Dakota, is that close to Mitchell, or is it in the west? Sioux Falls. Sioux Falls. Southeast of. Southeast. Yeah, southeast of Mitchell. In the Vermilion County then? Yes. Turner County, Parker and Turner County. I remember that. They were always farmers, and then they came, my grandparents came to Illinois in 1933, and my parents moved to Illinois then in 1936, January 1936. And here ever since. My father was always a farmer. Did some, when he was in his younger days, was a barber, along with the farming. Did he buy a farm here in the closer up to him? He eventually bought a farm in Illinois in 1950, I think it was, 49 or 50. Outside of Harvard. But, a farm over at Harvard, Illinois. But up until that time, he'd always been a tenant farmer. My mother cleaned up somebody else's messes all the time, you know, in the tenant farmhouses. They had it rough. How were they cultured? Was there strict English? Oh, yeah. With the customs? Right. Right. Everything. They didn't Americanize first, or any of the other national customs? Well, yeah. You know, I guess you kind of take English and Americanization, you know, all in one lump. Actually, as far as English, the custom of the afternoon tea, of course, you know. Well, do you have that? We kept that up. Still do. My mother still has afternoon tea. And she's 86 years old. Still living. My father died in 1970. Other than that, there really weren't too many English customs. Some of the food items, things that we ate, you know, were very English. Yorkshire pudding and Cornish pasties. I guess that was about it. Actually, there isn't too much, you know, that's really English. Pudding? Other than your tea. Your puddings? Plum pudding. Plum puddings. Plum pudding. I still make my grandmother English plum pudding for holiday time. Were there other English people around there, I mean, born in England? Like in South Dakota and also here in Rockford? In Parker, there were a lot of English people. But here in Illinois, there weren't any. So they had their own church then in South Dakota? They were Methodists. They were all Methodists. Of course, England, that was where the Methodist church started. So they were all Methodists. Always have been. The whole family. So what happened all then? You went to college then in Rockford? I came to Rockford to go to business college. That was the extent of my college. I graduated from high school in 1938, right at the end of the Depression. And there just wasn't money to do anything else for other colleges. And so I went to business college. I came to Rockford and worked for a family for my room and board so that I could go to business college. Did you meet any Swedish people then at that time before you met in High School? That was the first Swedish I ever met. Did you realize that Rockford was Swedish though? Very much so. In what way? I was living with a family in Harvard to go to high school. Doing the same thing. Working for my room and board. Because my folks lived so far out in the country that there was no way for me to get into school. So I established a residency by working for my room and board. And when I graduated from high school and was coming to Rockford, the gentleman of the house said, well, Vader, you're going to go over to Rockford and marry one of those Swedes. And I said, nah, there's more Swedes over there. But I married a full-blooded one. But how did you know this 7th Street? Did you stroll up and down there before you met? No, I really didn't. I lived on the east side of Rockford, but I didn't... You didn't recognize any Swedishness? I worked eight, several meals at a restaurant on 7th Street that I knew was very Swedish. And that was before I had met him. I really didn't think so much about it. But you know, back in those days, I don't think we differentiated so much about it. I mean, it was just a way of life. I think it was more than all that. I think it was more than that. I think so. I think it was just a way of life. It was a stage of life. And we accepted that was the way it is and didn't even try to separate it. I think the first time I really was aware of being Swedish was when I started high school. We had one high school in Rockford at the time. And then when some of the west-siders got mixed up with us east-siders, I knew that the teachers, I think, kind of favored some of your, oh, I think probably richer families in town. Their kids were the ones that got to be in the plays and captained the football team and all that kind of stuff, you know. Came to home from weak. Yeah, that's right. So I think there was a little prejudice there, I think, but that never occurred to me at the time. And I know there was a couple of teachers in grade school that were really down on some of the Swedish people, but at the time it never occurred to me that that was the reason. I mean, I just figured it was because I was a little noisier, a little rowdier than some of the others, you know. I wasn't nearly as aware that there was a Swedish settlement as I was that there was an Italian settlement. Were they more noticeable? Which was in South Rockford, and that was just a place that, you know, you didn't go unless you were in a big group. But there was a real good spaghetti restaurant in South Rockford, and it's still there, and that was the place where we went. That was a good night out. Now, not with me. I never considered that, because a lot of my friends were the Italian. I had an Italian girlfriend in high school. Not that I dated any of them. I didn't have enough money to date her. But, you know, we went together in school and stuff, and it never made any difference to me. But your parents didn't know that you had a... No, I don't think it was that. We never got that involved. Maybe there'd been some... That could have been probably then. Yeah, it probably would have been then, but... Actually, my folks, they didn't tell me what to do too much. I mean, my dad and I never got along too much, because he was pretty domineering, but we fought a lot. But it's probably more noticeable for the girl. How about your parents, though? You brought home Bill Johnson here as a date. What happened there? How did you meet? Well, we met through the church. We met at church at a young people's meeting, which back in those days was called the Effort League, and still is there, has been, going all the time. And there was a church here in Rockford? In Rockford, right. Because I had dated several others, and taken them home, and I don't know... I guess they really never thought... They really didn't want me to get married. I think that was about what was... That's a nice way of putting it. I don't think her mother thought there was any of them good enough for her. It's probably universal thinking. They'd like them to wait till 50. And they never said anything about not marrying them, or what were we going to do, or anything about that. But he still just always got the cold shoulder. He was always very... Well, I think what topped it off was one Christmas, I hadn't said anything to her folks, and they hadn't said anything to me. In fact, I never even considered saying anything to her folks. But I bought her a cedar chest, because I figured she had a lot of nice things. She was going to get married, and she had to have a place to put them. So I gave her a cedar chest for Christmas, and her folks had bought her a cedar chest for Christmas, too. Well, that was a crowning glory. The cedar chest that my parents had given to me, or was going to give to me, went back to the furniture store, and they bought a kitchen table and chair, so I didn't start out housekeeping. I still have the cedar chest that Bill gave me. It was always a very, very cold atmosphere. What did your mother say, for instance, now, then? You had to explain who he was. How could you do that in the best way? You had to figure out something that was going to go over good. Well, I don't know that I did anything. No, we didn't. We didn't. We just told them we were going to get married, and that was it, because we were married here in Rockford, and they lived in Harvard, and they were just getting out of the Depression, too, you know, because they'd had bills and everything in South Dakota that they brought with them to Illinois. So they were really in worse financial shape than my folks, if that's possible. So actually, our wedding, Laveda did the whole thing. I mean, she paid for it and made her own dress and made a few mistakes, but then we got married. What year was that, 1938? 1942. 1942. 1942. Yeah. September 25th of 1942. So that was during the war then. Yeah, oh, yeah. But now I'd gotten a couple of deferments because I was a patternmaker in an industry that was supposed to be real crucial at the time. Oh, I see. So you got deferments. So I got a deferment until 1944, wasn't it? 1944. And then I went into service for 19 months. I was in the Navy for 19 months. So you had your minister, they were marrying you. Yeah. That's another story. But wasn't that a good thing, though, for your parents? I mean, you stayed with the same church. Yeah, they were very happy about that. That was good. They were happy that I was going to have a church wedding, which we did. But there was not too much talk then. No, there just wasn't any. There was no time to talk about it. The best part of it was is when we were courting, Laveda was living in the parsonage of the Methodist preacher. And he didn't like the idea of me bringing her home so late at night, so he and I didn't get along too well. Ha, ha, ha. Did he report it back to you? No, I don't think there was any connection there. But just about the time we were deciding to get married, he was transferred to Sterling, I guess it was. And then we got another preacher, and he and I hit it off real well. He was a younger fellow, and he was really a broad-minded fellow, because he set up a conversation or a group meetings with the Catholic priests and the rabbis. It was early for that time. Pardon? It was quite early. Oh, yeah. He was ahead of his time. He was way ahead of his time. Yeah. Reverend Lambert was his name. And he cornered me, and when we were getting married, he says, Yeah, I think that's good. I didn't belong to the church at the time. He says, I think it's about time you belong to the church too, because I need you on my church board. So we got married there, and I joined the church, and he put me on the church board, and I think I've been on it ever since. So you didn't have to do any kind of preparation of being a covenant or not coming into that church? No. You were accepted? Yeah. Oh, sure. Yeah, no problem at all. No lessons to be read? No, no, nothing. The baptism was accepted, and all he had to do then was to confirm his faith in the message. Sure. You mentioned the former pastor, the first one you met, complained about bringing her home too late. And in his opinion, was it too late? Oh, one o'clock, one o'clock, and then it probably took me, yeah. But it was late, or? Yeah, and then it probably took me another half an hour before I let her go upstairs. And then he was awake there, and he was tossing around there, wanting to know what was going on downstairs there. He was married. Right. But he's a real good guy. I still keep in touch with him. No, sure. His wife is in a retirement home now up in Janeville, Wisconsin. The other pastor and his wife live in a retirement home here in Rockford where Bill's been on the board for eight years, and I've been going on two. The chairman of the auxiliary out there now, so we see him real often. So how was the transfer now from your church into this Methodist? Was it more strict or less strict? Less strict. In what way? Oh, well, the Methodist less strict, yeah. Well, in Mission Church, you couldn't dance, you know. You couldn't go to shows. Really couldn't hardly do anything, really. That was fun. That was probably one reason I didn't get along too good over there. They probably didn't like people to join other organizations either. That could be. I don't know. Was it a conflict of interest, you think? I know one thing. I was active at the time in Boy Scouts as a leader over at the Methodist church, and I was thinking about the possibility of starting a troop over in the Covenant church, and I guess now they do have scout troops, but they discouraged scouting in the Covenant church then because they thought they'd take the young people away from Sunday schools on Sundays because they had their weekend camping trips and things like that, you know. So I think there was a little... They were just a little bit too strict in what they... because I never did like anybody tell me what to do anyway. You know, I've been kind of ornery all my life that way, and if somebody asks me to do something, I'm more apt to do it than if they tell me, because if they tell me, that automatically turns me off to start with. But there was kind of a risk, you know, for the Methodist past, you know, when they came, the one that you got along so well with, to have a dialogue with the Catholics. Did the congregation take that? There was some talk about it, but it didn't bother him any. He was just, oh, sure, in fact... And he... that's when Rockford College was downtown here, you know, and our church was only about four or five blocks from Rockford College. So he got involved with some stuff over there in Rockford College, too, and kind of perked things up in Rockford. He had a lot of good things going for him, but they were ahead of his time. And it... the people there were kind of wondering about it, but... It took at least 25 years for the rest of the church to catch up with him. That's about right. I think, too, that he was the first pastor that started the jail ministry. He really went all out for cleaning up the jails. Yeah, I know he got in hot water with the politicians here in town because he didn't like the way some of the stuff was going on. I don't remember just how much of it, because it didn't... I mean, it didn't set here. I mean, I didn't... I knew it happened, but I didn't really... You were not interested in it, too. No, I was more interested in trying to make a living and pay my bills. The politicians at that time, they were Swedes, though, weren't they? The police chief and the mayor. Yeah, some of them, yeah. That's right. Yeah, that's right, but of course he wasn't. Bargrain was his... Bargrain, yeah, yeah. Yeah, we had a policeman by the name of Showalter here in town, too. I don't know if you heard about Showalter or not. No, that name I never heard. Oh, he had a motorcycle and a sidecar. Us kids at the time, we called that the Rockford Juvenile Department because whenever we got into trouble or anything, old Showalter would come up to him and he'd give us a ride in his sidecar and give us a lecture before he'd take us home. So you took him... But it was kind of interesting, though. So maybe you got in trouble just to get the... No, not really. We got in trouble just because we got in trouble. It wasn't trying to get no direct... We didn't want that ride in that sidecar, but we got it once in a while. But, gee, I don't know what else I could tell you that would be... Probably interesting to know how I got involved with Carl Carlson. And I joined the VASA after I went to Sweden because I thought I should be connected with some... Way after 1980? No, this was before... 75. 75. Because in 75 we went to Europe and toured Europe with friends of ours, and I just spent three days up in Hiskwona trying to find out what was going on up there because I only had the address of one aunt. And she, in turn, found me acquainted with two of my cousins. And that was... Then we corresponded, and that was the reason I went back again in 81 for the three weeks in Sweden. But after that first trip, I joined VASA, and then I met one of the... Then I took some Swedish courses at Rock Valley College, and one of the ladies in that Swedish class's mother was a real active VASA member, and she wanted to know if I wanted to belong to the Swedish Historical Society, which is the one that Carl's in charge of now. And I says, yeah, I think that sounds like it'd be pretty good, but she gave me a membership card and it was to the Swedish Cultural Society, which I'm the chairman of now. And I thought I was joining the Swedish Historical Society when in truth I was joining the Swedish Cultural Society. And I didn't go to a meeting for probably six or eight months. And finally I thought, well, as long as I'm a member, I better go to one of the meetings. So I went to the meeting, and Carl was the chairman at the time. And he remembered me from Turner School. So he got over and talked to me, and we got to be pretty friendly. And then I started not going to every meeting, but I started going to some of the meetings. He convinced me to be on the board for the Cultural Society and help him get some programs and things going. Then when he started getting involved with you and some of these other things, he just had too many things to do, so he kind of convinced me to get involved with the Swedish Cultural Society. So I've been the chairman of that now for the last three years. So that's how I got involved with that. Do you belong to the Historical Society also? Yeah, yeah. Did you visit the Lander home earlier, though, or was it known? Oh, yeah, sure. I used to go there every Christmas for their Christmas programs, but I never did. Your parents, too? No, no, not that far back. No. This is later years. Later years, no. I don't think there was anything going down there at that time. If there was, we never did. And when my kids were younger and we were raising our kids and stuff, I just never had time to be. So it was since after my kids had married and left home that I'd take more time to it and got more interested in it, really. What happened when you had to exchange the plum pudding for the Riesgrußgröte and Ludfiske for something else? What did your parents say about that? Did they know anything about the Swedish dishes? No. Never did. Never heard of it. And you never mentioned them either? No, I didn't because probably your mother didn't fix Ludfiske, did she? A couple of times, but there was always the meatballs. Because her father, his father not being a butcher, I mean, you had the head cheese and the pig's feet and everything. Did your parents prepare the dishes the same way, that head cheese? They did that because being on the farm, they did it on wood-framing, and they used every part of the squeal. So it was very similar then? So that part was very similar. But the Ludfiske, the... But the Ludfiske, that was new. And I didn't make a mayonnaise drill. No, I didn't know how to. Well, I think the thing that would probably be of interest here is after we were married, the first year after we were married, Lovato had all of my relatives over for Thanksgiving dinner. That was Carl and Eleanor from Chicago and my folks. Lenny and Doris, too. It was in the 1940s, though. Yeah, this was 1942, right after we were married. Right after we were married. Of course, we had the turkey and all that stuff, and she and my mother, of course, brought the... Rice pudding. Rice pudding and the sausage. Your mother? Yeah, my mother brought that stuff. And Lovato made apple pies for the... Pumpkin. Pumpkin pie, was it? Pumpkin pies for the dessert, anyway. And we ate all that stuff, and after the meal was all over, Carl, now, that was my cousin from... Nordheden. Carl Nordheden, says, You know, he says, you may not be able to fix sulta or some of these Swedish things, he says, but I don't think there's anybody that can make pumpkin pie like Loretta can make it. She says, the Swedes don't know how to make pie. They'll make a pretty good pie. But then after that, then, not every year, but on occasion, my parents would join Bill's family, then, for Christmas Eve, Smorgasbord. Which was a tradition, you know, we just never had Christmas Eve, even yet, without the traditional Swedish Smorgasbord. So the English sure don't have that, no? The English, Christmas Eve is always oyster stew. And my folks still have done that. And I never did, because I don't like oyster stew. But that is another, you know, English custom and tradition that it has carried over. But to them, Christmas Eve is always very light. And Sunday was the big day, I mean, Christmas Day was the big day. A lot of food, then. A lot of food, and nearly always... Just one course, or is it the Smorgasbord? Well, it was... They didn't call it the Smorgasbord. We never called it a Smorgasbord, and it was always put on a table, family style, you know. But my folks couldn't afford to be fancy. You know, we just had good food and enough of it, and lots of variety. But it was nearly always... Our Christmas dinner was nearly always roast goose, which was English. And the plum pudding for dessert. Sometimes pie, in addition. You know, the plum pudding with the, you know, hard sauce or lemon sauce. But the traditional dessert for Christmas. It was, you know, the salads and all these cranberries, the so-so. How about the Christmas... It's held now with the Christmas tree. Did you... Did that differ from your family, for instance? You had the Christmas tree brought in just a few days before. A real Christmas tree. How about your family? Pretty much... Our Christmas tree always went up quite early. Quite early? Long before Christmas? Yes, long before Christmas. The Swedish now is usually just before Christmas Eve. And they dressed it the same way, with the same kind of ornaments? Or did you have something special, a little different from the Swedish way of doing it? Just traditional. As kids, we always threw cranberries and popcorn, you know, which was probably some... More to keep kids busy than anything else, you know. I think probably the biggest difference that I remember is, of course, we had the sugar. Well, we didn't light the candles, but we did have the clip-on candles. But you never lighted? No, never lighted. And then we had the sweet sugar candies wrapped in paper with the silver band around them and then the tinsel on both of them. We'd hang those on the Christmas trees, and my cousin would always make those. In Sweden, she'd always make those. Would they stay from year to year, or did you... We ate them. You ate them all? Yeah, we ate them. You cleaned off the... Sure. She had to make them over every year. No, we didn't. But we have in our family. No, I'm talking about Eleanor in our family now. Yeah. But Bill's in my family with the children, every day of the day. No. Did you have live candles in your Christmas tree? No. We just had lights. And, of course, we didn't even have lights until during the Depression. I was a youngster. We never had lights on the tree. We couldn't afford it. But you had a live tree light. Live tree. Was it a fir or a spruce, with long needles or short? I don't remember which. I was a little short. But there was the one the grocery man gave us. Yeah. In those days, there was... You had to buy it, though, from the grocery man. No. He gave it to you. He always gave it to me. Was there a stock in the back here for you? I don't remember that. I don't think so. But I know that there was some that did. Of course, if you bought... A lot of people had bought a lot of groceries at one time. It was like a gift then. Then they threw it in as part of the Christmas shopping or whatever. Because there was a little town, and there was only the one grocery store. And if you were going to eat, that's where you bought the groceries. And at Christmas time, we always got a Christmas tree from the grocer. And always a bag of candy for the kids. So then on Christmas Eve, did Santa Claus show up then on that evening? We always went to church. Christmas Eve, we always went to church. And by the time we got home, Santa Claus had been there. Why? So you never saw Santa Claus then? Never saw Santa Claus. And he left the gifts underneath the tree? He left the gifts under the tree. And then when we got home, Christmas morning was always the gifts from the parents and family. And Santa Claus always came Christmas Eve when we were at church. Church was always arranged. It was always from the neighbors. Those gifts were from the Santa Claus. Were they from a relation then? It was from Santa Claus, they said. But it was also from the parents. It was always the parents. But then it's a special gift from the parents in the morning. And you had the same thing? No, we had Santa Claus come. At Christmas Eve? Yeah, Christmas Eve, always Santa Claus. And who was that? My uncle or my brother or whoever. We always had, my aunt made the outfit and she had it for years. And whoever was available at the time.