 This is tape two, page one. We continue with the interview with Eldie Peterson, Rock Island, Illinois. Tape two, page one. So you got your son back then from the action over in Europe? Yes, he came back. And it was happiness just after that, everything. But you stayed in Galway then? Yes, I was still at Jacobson's. And Charles came here, came near here, and he got a job here. For the Corps of Engineers on the arsenal. So he didn't work for the arsenal, he worked for the Corps of Engineers. But they are under the Rock Island Arsenal, or is it separate? No, they're separate. We ran their locks and dams, and flood control. We're civilian, or civil. The arsenal is military. And you worked there all the time, all these years? Yes, all the years, plus five years in service. That's 37 years with the Corps. And then Mildred had gotten married through that time. I was in Galway, and Mildred and Charles were down here. And Mildred got through the nurse's training, and she's a registered nurse. And then Mildred said to me that Charles got sick with an awful cold. And he had bronchitis and was sick. And she said he was rooming and boarding down here. And she said, Mother, I think Charles needs a better home than he has. How nice it would be if you would come down in here and live where we live, so we could be closer together. So I said, All right, if that's all I can do, I wouldn't wish any better. And so Charles agreed on that, that I should come down too. But in the meantime, Mildred got married. And Charles paid for a beautiful church wedding for her. He didn't spend one cent on himself in the Army. He sent home the money to me. And she got married and lived in Moline to Robert Deal. Well, that's beside the point. So you've got a good son now. Yes, he's one in a million. How have you now transmitted the Swedish culture to your family, to your daughter and your son? Charles, yes, every Christmas. Every Christmas, yes. And you? It's just Mildred and me who like lutefisk. No one else, but we have lutefisk and we have rice and green beans porridge. So you have some Swedish traditions. Yes, my daughter is very fond of Swedish. She likes everything in Swedish. When you came to Illinois, to Cambridge, in 1911, did you have any Swedish Christmas holidays? Christmas tree, Christmas tree, Christmas Eve, Christmas Eve. Yes, all the time. And Christmas Eve. Yes, we went to Christmas Eve. My sister was at the farm. It was hard for them to come in with the kids and everything. But we went all the way. We went to Christmas Eve. We went to Christmas Eve at five in the morning in Galva, Galva Lutheran Church. Did you have Christmas Eve as a Swedish tradition? Yes, Christmas Eve first. And Christmas tree. Yes, and Christmas tree. We still do that. Same as Christmas Eve. So you don't have Christmas Eve morning? No, we have Christmas Eve. We go to Christmas Eve at eleven o'clock at night in our church, in First Lutheran Church. In Rock Island. In Rock Island. We had Charles' head usher in our church. I see he's interested in... Yes, Swedish....in the church. Yes, and we speak Swedish in our home until Charles started school. He didn't know any English at all, only Swedish. And when he started school, he hadn't gone to school for two weeks, I think, and he knew English. But he heard English from... But he played with the kids and knew English. Yes, yes. So it was English, but it was only with Swedish. We only spoke Swedish to him. And we spoke Swedish to my mother. She was with us a lot in our home. My mother. She was there a lot. So she died around the same time as your husband? Yes, she died in 1931 and my husband died in 1933. But my children have been so kind to me. Yes, that's... That's a nice trait, as they say. So you went back to Sweden in 1975. Yes. And Charles was with you. And you visited Halle, of course, who was in Stockholm. Yes, there were no relatives there. We didn't know what they were buried in. Axel's grandparents had died, his brother had died. He only had one brother. They had relatives far away in the country. And we only had that day to stay in Halle. We stayed overnight because we wanted to know what they had been buried in. So they had... We stayed in Stockholm all the time except for two days in Halle. So we went there especially to find out what they had been buried in. So we went to Roteman. And they had written everything down there. When they died and when they were buried and everything. So they came up with big, thick books. And they found their grave and they were buried there. In Halmstad? In Halmstad. So we went there and there were his father, mother and brother together. But no relatives left, cousins or...? Yes, there were, but we didn't have time. We don't know where they're at. They don't know us and we don't know them. So we didn't spend time to look for them. We only stayed four weeks and time went by so fast. We had so much to do with our relatives every day. So we had written down so many hours here and there. But I got to see where my mother was born. In Stockholm, yes. I mean, where she grew up and that house was still there that she lived in. So nothing had changed in Stockholm? No. Everything... We went to visit my church. And I was the only one who wasn't confirmed in the Katrine church in the south. A big, beautiful church. If anyone has come and we would have had pictures to show... The Katrine church, I know. We lived on Södmanna street, straight from the church, straight down south. Until we got to 18 Södmanna street. That house was still there. We went in and looked around and looked at everything where I lived. I was in two schools. First I was at Nytarget. And there I went around and looked at everything where I lived. And then I moved to the school on Tjärrasgatan. And it was still there. So we were in there looking. And they had repairmen there. To clean up and do everything in order for the fall again. This was in July. End of July now. In September the school starts again. And we asked if we could come in. Yes, they were so happy to let us in. They really took me when I went through my schools and looked. Where I had been as a child. And running and playing. And where we lived all the years. And so... I had started to be confirmed half a year. So I had to leave that. And we were in the church and looked. They had repairmen on one side. There was a stand on one side. They were restoring it I think. Doing a lot of restoring work. Oh, take him down to our place. Kiddie, kiddie. Take him in to Cindy. He might come out in the door. Anyway. So it was a successful trip. You met relatives in Stockholm? Yes, they lived in Spånga. When we came here in 1911 they lived in Stockholm with their parents. Do you know them now? Yes, we had sent cards and everything. And they were so happy that we came and visited. Two nieces and two cousins. Yes. So here... He's bewildered. He wants to... So in 1975 you visited. You flew over there. Yes, we went on. You went on a boat trip? So that was one of the last boat trips? We didn't fly over. Yes, we did. I wonder why. Of course we did. I don't know if you can take a boat anymore, can you? No, we flew over. I don't know if there's any direct line. We came to Denmark. We had to go straight over and change planes. We took a plane to Stockholm. We didn't have time to see each other in Denmark. No, we just went for one flight. Yes. When we arrived in Stockholm they were there to meet us. It was... We can fly direct into Arlanda now, can't we? We couldn't when we came. We had to change to a smaller plane in Copenhagen and go into Stockholm. Or into Arlanda. It wasn't open. The big runway wasn't open yet or something. Now they can bring in the big plane. They couldn't then, so we had to change planes. So it was a nice visit you made here. Yes, we had so much... Yes, Charles wanted me to go back. So you have contacts with Sweden then? Oh, yes. You write Christmas letters and... When we were home in 1975, my two cousins lived... Three cousins lived. And my two nieces. Knut had passed away. And then of course my sister had passed away and her husband had passed away. So it was just the oldest girl and the youngest girl. Your neighbors were great, huh? Yes, we stayed there with them. In Spånga. A town... Yes, I know. A town in the middle of Stockholm. How about the relation of Augusta and Nils going to Sata Kodai? Yes. Did they stay up there then? Yes, they stayed there all their life. Augusta's father lived until she was... I think she was 88 or 89. And you have a cousin there? I have a cousin. They only had one son, Vivien. He was married and lived on a farm with his son. And Augusta's father and uncle Nils had a farm of their own. And then he had two sons, Vivien. And so they took over the farm and the old folks are still living. Vivien and his wife are still living. You didn't have a Christmas card with them. All the contact you have with them is Christmas cards. We just write letters at Christmas. And they live in Mitchell, South Dakota? Yes, they live on a farm in Eton. It's a little small town outside Mitchell on a farm. Did you go up and visit them sometime? Yes. We went up there a couple of times or three times. My sister lived and they could go with. And then when Father Augusta passed away, Charles and I went up to her funeral. And they have been down, this thing. But otherwise we don't go back and forth much. It's too far. Well, it's probably it. And they're busy with theirs. But we do write at Christmas. We don't even write a birthday card. We can't tell how we are. The distance and time. You said contact. You have other things to do. The trouble is I have made myself so busy. So there's many other things I just neglect and I feel bad about. So when you came down to Moline then from Galva or Cambridge up to Norfolk Island, did you join the church here and you became active within the church? Yes. Charles and I, Mildred and Baba stand here already and live in Moline. And Charles was roaming and boarding. And then Mildred said, let's look in the paper if there is any room, any house that we can... We'll have some coffee while you're talking. You're just repeating yourself. Yeah. And then he said, so maybe we can find a house for you and sell your house in Galva. Yeah, we'll have to make a lease if we need to get it here. Yeah, I got... It was just an old house and I got only... We bought it for $1,400 in those days. And it was enough. It was a home, a home for me and my children, you know, for me to come and go. And then you joined the church then. You transferred from Messiah in Galva to First Lent. Yes, yes. I said that we come down here and Mildred had found a house. It sounded good for me. It would be like Galva around me here. And that was the house next door. And so we went and looked at that house and we bought it. Did you join any other Swedish organizations like Viking, Vasa, Svittjod? No. No, never did. No? Because we joined the church right away. There was no such organization in Cambridge or Galva at that time? No. Well, there still is. I suppose it was if we had inquired about it. Well, Vasa just started in Bishop Hills and we came down here. There wasn't all that. No, it wasn't anything much. No. And I said to Charles, you know, it would be fun to join Vasa sometime. We belonged to many other things. And so we bought that house and Charles moved home. And it was nice. And Mildred and Bob have a nice home. And we go back and forth together. And their children, one lives up in Michigan and one lives down in Springfield, Illinois. And whenever they can come, they try and come as if they're real home people. They're a close family and like to be together as much as they can. So they come and go always far between. And we try to meet sometimes halfway in Peoria just to get together. So you are involved there. You're not sitting back and taking a rest. You are with the people and meeting with them? No, I was among people all the time. All the time. Very active. That's how you keep your young, I guess. You're in the church. Yeah. And then. You're active there also. Yeah. I belong to 40 plus. It should be 60 plus. We call it 40 plus. 40 plus. And I belong to Naomi Circle. And LCW. So has the church changed anything over the years now since you started? Yes, it has changed. In what way? Well, for one thing, we don't sing the three Amen. I always like that. So that's a tradition that you. Well, that's the one thing I have against it. But I like everything else. But church is more critical. I still like the old Augustana church. We don't have that anymore. And I don't like it. To me, I think everything is just as beautiful as it could be when we started church. To me, it doesn't matter. But I love it. There are many old timers who complain about the new things. Yes, they do complain about. Coming in too fast. Yes. They do that. To me, it doesn't matter. So you don't care about that? No. I think it's just beautiful the way it is. To me. The church is becoming less and less Swedish, which it should be, I suppose. Because the old people are all dying out. And we have. There's nothing Swedish at all. But you still feel something of tradition, that you are bound by tradition from the Swedish background. You don't like to miss that. Very much so. I still like it. I don't like to stick to that old. But I think the new is just as pretty. Has the same meaning. I was born in midsummer day in Augustana. I belong to the American Scandinavian Society. So I mean, we have. I think I keep some ties with the Scandinavian culture. So do you like sugar or cream? Well, in a way, I mean. I'd love to put it in. What else was it I was going to say? So like your mother-in-law, she could enjoy the Swedish urban up to 1925, something like that? Yeah. Because they did away with the Swedish urban? Yeah, no, they gave away with that. What did she say then? There isn't anything. She died what year was it? 31. Yeah, in 31, sure. There was no Swedish urban then in the... No. Maybe it was, yes. Yes, it was. Occasionally. They didn't have it every Sunday like they used to. They had Swedish occasionally. I think once a month they had it. Yeah. Because she couldn't understand the English sermon. No, no. So, and... So it was hard on Mama in many ways that way, that was the language, but she was lucky that there were so many Swedish people around she could visit with. But she was happy though with being among her children and grandchildren. Yeah, she was always with us, always. So your son, though, he had the opportunity to grow up with Grandma. You know, a lot of immigrants that came here, they didn't have the parents with them. No. I mean, the parents with them. Right. She was... What did she tell you now, or taught you? Because grandmas usually have something good to say to children, you know. Oh, Charles was... I don't remember. I just remember being with her and, you know, she was with us, but I really don't... So you had to talk Swedish to her? I had to talk Swedish to her, yeah. So apparently I must have. Yeah, sure, you did. I must have. Yeah, she loved her grandchildren. But I can remember when I was real small, we had Swedish programs in church, it's a Christmas program, and I had to learn little Swedish sayings and songs and stuff. Yeah. That was sad. But until, I don't know, unless you get into these, like the Vasa and the Svitskyds and stuff, you don't have any... because the thing in Augustana is still culture there, but... I'm tempted to go to take a Swedish course next time they have it, just conversational Swedish, I think. Yes, you know, one of my cousins, she was married to Merta, she was married to David, and they had a daughter. And her family, she got married, and her family, she had two boys and a girl. And they all could go and get in universities and things, and so they learned American. And so everyone could talk American. And of course we went to visit with them, too, back and forth, and Charles, his heart just, he just talked himself hoarse almost to talk, because he could explain what he was doing, how this country was, and what was going on here, and ask questions, what was going on there, and answer. And which he couldn't do all the rest, he couldn't talk American. I don't connect my sentences right, you know. Oh, yeah, you're doing right. You probably thought, you know, like when you, I didn't connect my, I said a word ahead of another one or should have had it back, but I mean, I was understood. And the funniest thing is that we don't talk Swedish much between us. I don't talk much Swedish to my children, because grandchildren are Western, they don't understand, they probably understand a few words. Like her daughter, now she is younger, does she understand Swedish? Yeah, she is about the same as Charles. She probably understands as much as I do. Not maybe quite as much, but... They didn't marry any Swedish, so that is bad for them, you see. They were removed again from the Swedish, and their children are removed again, and there's... They're taken off then. I can't be together with my great-grandchildren like I was with my grandchildren, and that way, so they don't learn anything from me, you see, that way. So that's the gap in between there. They're what they call the melting pot. It disappears. But it's still Swedish... Yeah, we speak Swedish. The Swedishness is there. Yeah, right. So what do you think now, Charles, of being a Swedish? When did you notice that at first? I was happy. You didn't have any bro down when you came out in the military, for instance, because you were all American then. No, no, no. So they didn't call you a Swede or anything like that? No, no, no. But if you went to high school here, for instance, in Berlin, together with the Belgian youngsters, and then you had the frictions between two Italians... Yeah, see, we didn't have that gallop. Nothing at all? No, we didn't have that. We didn't have any... So there were a lot of Swedish background pupils in schools there. Oh yeah, the school was all Swedish at that time. I mean, the background. Yeah. Most people had a Swedish background. We didn't have any blacks. We had a couple of Mexicans because they worked on the railroad, but that's all. There was no... Like up here now, I don't know, it'd be... A lot of difference. A lot of difference, I suppose, yeah. But I think it's how you do it, how you make it yourself. If you can melt in with them, why, you're fine. If you can't, why, you're... I don't know what you can do. But I think I've always... I haven't thought much about it. I've always been... connected with Sweden, I suppose. But my... One of my nieces, Märta, she got married, and her last name is Andersson. And she had a daughter and a son. That's all, she had two of them. And they're doing so well for themselves, too, and the children. And they have moved. They lived in Stockholm first, the children. And then... They got married and moved up to Värmland, to Siljan, around there. And they had built themselves a new home there. In Dalarna? Yes, in Dalarna, near Dalarna. Siljan is in Dalarna. And Värmland around there. They're closest to that lake, Siljan. And so we haven't seen their home, and they said they'd come and have a go and see them. So you are ready for another trip over? Well, I don't know. Well, non-constandard, I suppose. It doesn't take that long, you know, staying on the train, or I mean on the plane. I would like to, in a way. It would be better than the first trip you made back to Sweden, 1919. Yeah, it might be a little... Well, Stockholm had to stop cold right in the middle of the ways there. Yes. But life is funny, isn't it? Oh, it's funny, yeah. So you don't regret then going over? You had no choice, of course, because you were 14, but it's a tremendous move though. No... Came to the same place for seven years. Yeah. For seven years you went on to... We want to be back here after a year. In Skåne? Yeah. They had a farm. Who was taking care of it? The city of Stockholm or your parents? That I don't even know or ever heard. So most of your classmates then went off to... It was through the school system. For seven summers? For how long then? Five weeks or... Yeah, that was just after my father died. I was seven years old. How long were you down in... Well, then school was out in June and July. And then school started up in late August, I think. So you stayed in the... Yeah. So you went back there again? No. In 1975, you told me. The house was still there, but it was... The house was there, but they had died. There was a sister and brother who lived on the farm and they had another brother working as a hired man for them. And then they had a guard boy and a pig. So it was a farm with animals? Yeah. Cows and... And I went on a hay load where they took a hay and... So I became acquainted with three other girls my age. So they had no children. It was a sister and brother thing. And they set up a floor for us on the farm when I came. So I would have it. And the cat had just had some kittens, so we had them to play with. And we played with the kids. We lived near Runneå. So Nanna's mother, one of the girls' mothers, she took us every morning to Runneå to swim. They came to my house just like I sat down and ate breakfast. So we left our house and went over to Åkrar and everything until we got to Runneå. We had a place there to swim. And you picked up the corn too? Yes, there was corn on the road and strawberries. They grew in the fence. So those were beautiful memories from your childhood. Yes, and when I came home they said I looked so good. We had been out in the sun. Were most of the children in Stockholm allowed to go on such trips? Yes, seven of us went on a summer holiday in Kvidinge. From your class? No, they were from other classes. They were not all the same age. I was one of the youngest. And the others were eight or nine years old. We were three and four. Then we came down to three and four. And then there was only a boy and me who came for seven years. I don't know what the others were doing. So you looked forward to the summer holidays in Stockholm? Yes. And they had to know ahead of time if we could come. If they wanted you. Yes, if they wanted us. So you probably did well since you could come back year after year. Yes, and when I was ten or eleven years old my grandmother bought a bicycle. They lived in the next garden with this one. She got a bicycle. It was before I came to Nannerl that I lived there all summer and winter. So when I came there, they bought a bicycle for me too. So we went to the bicycle. It was the last three years I was there. We went to Kvidinge and they had a fine bakery there. We went to the church in Kvidinge every Sunday. So every Sunday? Yes. So you had to learn to read for the food? Yes. The morning prayer, the evening prayer and the evening prayer. So it was a Christian home? Yes. And they had relatives who lived in Cherup. And they had a double bugger so we all went there to visit them. And they came to visit us. And we had a great time. He went to Cherup. So his home was there for the summer. The boy who came at the same time? Yes. But he had to go to Kvidinge and they had to come and pick him up there. And they came to pick me up at the station in Kvidinge and just a short distance away they had a farm. And the girls I was acquainted with, their parents had a farm around there. So we went to visit them and looked at everything there when we were home in 1975. And there was no one who lived in the house I had there and they had gone and died. How was the meals at such a place? Did you get to drink coffee for example? Yes. You got to drink coffee? Yes, they had coffee in the afternoons. Even for your children? Yes, we got coffee. A lot of milk of course. Every breakfast when I got up they had a big table where they baked everything. Did you get to help them do that? Yes, we just sat there and had fun. We didn't help anyone. We had fun on the outside and got to eat and go out again. That's quite unusual because everyone who was younger would work and get paid. No, we didn't work. I didn't work, I just had fun. And ate and went to visit their relatives. So you got coffee in the afternoons as well? Yes, coffee in the afternoons. And those who were... I think they came home from the field just for coffee in the afternoons. So you got to be with the children? Yes, and then they came home to milk the cows. They came home to milk before it got dark. So you got to see what milk came out of them? Yes. I didn't need to work or anything. I didn't have to dry the dishes or anything. They had a maid. She helped on the outside when she was free from the dishes. And cleaned the inside. And Aunt Matilda and Uncle Sven, who I was with. Aunt Matilda and I worked together in the house. She was never outside. And they washed. They did a big wash. Just two times while I was there. A big wash. And they were missing. They had a shortage on that place. A small house for themselves. Was it difficult to understand the local people? They speak Scottish down there. Yes. Was it difficult to understand? I speak Scottish, of course. I don't speak Scottish. You don't? No, I speak Scottish. So when I got home, I forgot Swedish. I speak Scottish. I speak Scottish, so my mother laughed and said something. And I speak Scottish. She thought it was funny to hear. It was hard for me to understand. Those people that we talked to in Skåne, it was hard for me to understand them. I don't know why. I'm not used to their dialect, I guess. It was just the church-birth time when we were there. 1975. Yes, and the church-birth time was already over. I had to take a few years off. And there was a church-birth time? Yes, we didn't have time to come in. We didn't have time to stay. It had to go so fast, all of us. We had to go back to Stockholm again. And that means we have to do another trip. This time I said we would travel around a bit. If I get there. I had a cousin there in Gävle. No, she was at Hofors. And where was that other place we stopped at your cousin had? It was in a home. I can't remember that either. I can't remember that name. She was in a home. Outside of Gävle there. One of my cousins. Otherwise she lived in Stockholm all the time. Politically, for instance, are you different than your son Charles here? Politically speaking. Are you a Democrat or a Republican? No, we are Republican. Both Republican? Yes. So you have no quarrels then? No. No quarrel? Mildred is Republican, but Bob, he is a Democrat. I see. And your husband had the same ideas then? Yeah, he was Republican. How did you or your husband get this idea of being Republican? Who told you? Well, we were Republican, I don't know. I guess in Gävle everyone was Republican. I believe that we knew. Everybody was Republican. We didn't... So nobody was there? Nobody ran against them. No. All the county officers were Republican. You had to be a Republican or you couldn't be anything. Here you have a little village called Bishop Hill. Yeah. They supposedly were all Democrats. Yes. Was that because they were different from the rest of the country? I don't know. I think so. I think so. See, they came from all over Sweden and Scandinavia. They came. And they had different upbringing. And I tell you that I haven't heard much of here, but we knew that, that so many young men left Sweden because they had to be taken out in service. And they wanted to escape that. They didn't want to go out to service. That was still as mandatory, isn't it? Yes. And a lot of them had already relatives over here, and a lot of young men wrote to them and asked that they could come over here and had things for it, they could come over here and stay away from service. They had to go to Sweden. Was that so bad in Sweden? Well, I don't know. I was a young girl. I didn't know. Some were afraid to come away from home. Like your husband and like your son, Charles, here. Yeah. Why did you take the choice now of making the choice of going out to enlist? Because they didn't ask you? I would have been drafted. You saw on the horizon? I saw the draft coming. Well, they were already drafting. They were already drafting, and I just got in one step ahead of them that I enlisted so I could get into the Air Force. I didn't want to be a foot soldier. Because they could put you anywhere you wanted. This way I was in the Air Force. That's why I went in, and I never regretted it at all. You got some education on top of that also then. It was like going to school. Well, a little bit, yeah. They didn't have that in those days. This was in 1939 and 40. How was the Air Force at that time? Was it in infancy? Infancy, yeah. It was. We didn't have much. We really didn't get started much before until we went into the war. They really started to grind out the airplanes and things. So you were one of the pioneers in the Second World War? More or less in the Second World War, yeah. Now it's so different from night and day than it was then. It's all high notch. High tech now. We had no jets. But I saw a lot of the world, what I would have never done if I hadn't. I've been down to Panama, and I've been to Trinidad, and I've been to North Africa, I've been to Italy. So you saw action in North Africa? Our unit said I was not, I personally was not in the fighting, I mean, but our planes were. At the end of the operation, they call it. I was ground crew. I didn't fly. I was ground crew. Our planes flew. I got a lot of medals and battle stars and stuff from our, from the... From the unit. From the unit. You were a staff sergeant? Well, yes. So that's... Crucial times. Well, you never knew what would happen. One day or another. No, you didn't know. Luckily that came through all right without any problem. So I've seen the war. I've seen the devastation and stuff that war can do. But then, you know, when the four weeks were gone in Sweden, it was hard to leave. It's really hard to leave. And then they said, can't you stay till August, we can craft Kalas in August. Oh, I wish I could. That's my favorite crafter. You better make another date. Yeah. Next time I won't go in July. Well, you'd go in June. June or something. But Charles couldn't stay longer. He had to go back to his work. He was working then. No, he was all the time away, all the time in the world. That just takes money to go there. And he leaves the cab home, you know, with no money, no phone. Yeah. After your visit now, Charles, you understood then more what your mother had told you earlier. And also your grandma, for instance, when she talked about Stockholm. Did she talk about Stockholm at any time that you remember? Well, they were too small. Too small then. And he didn't ask you any questions at that time. Probably not. Now you know to ask more questions about things than your mother can fit in. Yeah. Or necessary. And it makes... because now I'll have a... by asking her who knows, now when she's gone, I won't... nobody will be able to tell me what she knows. But you can fill in that to the next generation. I can fill in that to the next generation a little bit. I have a nephew living up in Chicago, John... John Anderson, my brother John's son. They just had one son. And he married a Swedish from one that lived in Sweden. And they go back and forth. They have a home in... Prospect Park. Prospect Park. Or Mount Prospect. No, Prospect. Mount Prospect. Mount Prospect. And... And they go to Sweden a couple times a year. Yeah, and they come over when it's birthdays and everything, they come over just for their birthdays and go back to Sweden. Lucky you have a place to stay. It isn't too expensive. They have relatives and sisters to stay when they come, you see. You've got some relatives. On her side. And so they have a boy and a girl. And the boy was over one year. They left him... they took him with and they went over. And he stayed with the farfar and farmor and they went back. The boy stayed the rest of the summer. And so they're full-fledged Swedish. They can talk Swedish as well as American. And so now this year... The mother and the girl... So when school was out, went over to Sweden. And Johnny and... Scott, they're still here. And... In July, they're going over. And the boy will probably go home with the mother, or else he'll come back with the father. He's going to stay over July. So they have a regular... Yeah, yes. Back and forth they go. So they have it so nice together. And they bought... now she's a Swedish citizen, so... Yeah. She can buy property over there. And so they bought a home over there, so eventually they'll probably move over there. Eventually. Yeah, I suppose maybe that's what it is. I don't know. I understand that you can... if you're a native Swedish, you can own property. I never knew if she was an American citizen yet or not. Well, she is now, but I mean, she apparently can buy property over there. Yeah, maybe so. Well, anyhow, they have fun just going back and forth to Sweden.