 April 8, 1986, I'm sitting together with Reverend Ellis Youngdahl, Moline, Illinois. He was born 1902, 24th of July in Fergus Falls, Minnesota. Your parents, they were of Swedish background, but they were both born here. Your parents now are of Swedish background. Yes, both of them. We start with your father now, Anton Servienus Youngdahl, he was born in New Bedford, Illinois. That's right. And was he also a pastor? Yes, he started out in the educational field. He was president of Northwestern College in Fergus Falls, and that's where I was born. They had a suite of rooms in the college dormitory. I was born in the building, college building. He stayed there, he came there in 1900, and he left there in 1909 and went out to Seattle and was head of the Scandinavian Languages and Literature Department at the University of Washington for two years. But always wanted to go into ministry, and so he organized a church at Green Lake, which is now a very large congregation, and then he left that job and went— Green Lake in Minnesota? What? In Minnesota? No, this was in Washington, the state of Washington. Green Lake, Washington. Yes. And he then went up to northern Michigan, way back in the wilds, to a little town called—not a town, even a town, it was just one grocery store and a shop there. Scany Michigan. Where? On the shores of Lake Superior, twenty-two miles from any civilization. That's in the Berga County, Berga, Leance, and around there. It's north of Leance and Berga, Michigan, just across from the Copper Country. The Key Wah Peninsula goes up the line, and then that little bay way back there. There he served as a lay pastor in a little church. He also was superintendent of the schools in that area. He also taught all of the grades in high school. And let's see what else did he do. Later on became the county superintendent of schools, but at the same time studied for the ministry for three years. Then the last half year, or the first part of 1914, he went down to Augustana Seminary for I think it was four months. And then he was ordained in Sycamore, Illinois in 1914. He took a congregation in Newberry, Michigan. It was his first charge. He was there until 1917, went to Knoxville, Illinois. He was there until 1922 when he came to St. Lutheran Church here in Moline. He had a very busy day on a Monday and had a board meeting, among other things. Felt ill, went home, and they checked in to see how he was doing after the meeting, and he was dead. Died of a heart attack. That's the story of my dad. And you went along to all those different places, Northwestern College. Yes, yes, yes. For six when you left, and then out to Green River, Skanie. So how did you see all these different moves? I mean, he didn't stay long in each place. There was always moving around. What question did you ask? Yeah, how did you take all these moving around? What did you do normally? From one school to another. That's right. He didn't interfere. He didn't interfere. You got new friends in every place. Well, while he was in Knoxville, I went to Augustana College. I graduated from Knoxville High School. Went to Augustana College in 1920. Graduated from there in 1924. Went to the seminary, graduated from the seminary in 1927. You went out to Massachusetts? No, no, no, no, no, no, no. 1927, I went to Rankin, Illinois, my first congregation. And in 1929, I went to Crystal Lake, Illinois. 1933, I went into the Army as a chaplain. I already had a commission in the reserve. And went to northern Michigan and spent six years in there, a little over five years on duty with the CCC. As a chaplain? As a chaplain, yes. Then I resigned from the Army, resigned from my position with the CCC, and took a church in Chicago, Grace Lutheran, in 1938. I think it would be the first of March. And then in 1930—that was 1938—in 1940, on Christmas Eve, I got a note from the government that I would be called back into duty. I went back into duty with the Army, Fort Sheridan, and for about a year and a half constantly on maneuvers. And then I was at Fort Sheridan going to go on a vacation. And although I thought war was imminent, I bought a new car. I know that because I wanted my wife to have a new car in case anything happened. And we had our first ride in it. Saturday, December the 6th. Sunday was December 7th. I had three services and went out for dinner with some friends also. Got word to return to the post. War was declared. Pearl Harbor had been attacked. The next day, war was declared. The next day, I left for overseas. And the new car was standing idle? No, my wife had it. And so forth. Then we went to New York. I did. And the fact is I loaded a board. I think it was the old Gripsong. I think it would be about the 14th or 15th of December, 43—I mean 41. And the next day we unloaded because they were afraid that New York was going to be attacked. And so we set up our—I was with the artillery as a chaplain. And we set up our guns on all the big buildings there and along the shore. And I conducted a search in February. And sometime in February, first part of February, left for some unknown destination, which was Iceland. I was in Iceland until 1943. Went down to Scotland, stationed there for a while, then down to England, which made chief of chaplains for the anti-aircraft artillery for the European theater. And three days later on, I had a hemorrhaging ulcer. And then I went to hospital, then back to the States. And then here I was at Miami Beach for a while as senior chaplain for the redistribution station. See, they had taken over all the hotels and these men coming back. And then also for the state of Florida. Then I was moved to—well, there was a number of little moves in between. First of all, after I left the hospital here, coming back, I was made assistant chaplain for the 18th Corps. And the 18th Corps was the airborne corps, airborne troops. And we had charge of all the tactical troops on the east coast and central part of the country. And see, I am trying to think of the name of the commanding general that I was on the staff of. Later on I was chief of staff for the United States Army. I will think of it after a while. But that was at Fort DuPont in Delaware. And then we made ready all the units, 100th Division, 101st Division, 101st Airborne, 11th Airborne, 13th Airborne, and oh, a number of other troops. So there was a big staff then. Were you in charge of all these— I was in charge of the chaplains. See I was made assistant, and then the chaplain, the corps chaplain was transferred to Second Army and I was made then acting corps chaplain. So we had all these—had to get these folks ready for the invasion, which was supposed to originally I think go through Norway, if I understand right. So you were doing as a chaplain, but there was a lot of stress with it. And then I retired as a lieutenant colonel. And my last assignment was at a hospital in North Carolina, a 5,000-bed hospital. I was a senior chaplain there. We lived right on the post. They had moved a house on the post. And then I retired. I had been having physical difficulties with that ulcer again. And I took a job. First of all I was sent to—I went to Massachusetts General Hospital for six months and took my work there and received my degree as a professional hospital chaplain. And I went to Lutheran Hospital then in 1947, July 1st, here in Moline as the first chaplain, full-time chaplain at Lutheran Hospital. And I was there for 21 years. And I retired in 1968. And at that time you were also on the welfare board for Rock Island County. And I served as chairman for that for a short time. And well, among the interesting things was I was the grand marshal when they celebrated the sesquicentennial here in Moline. They did all over the country, which was quite an experience. So you had a lot of activities. Since I retired from the hospital, I acted as—I'm the pastor of the Matterville Community Church. I still am. At present time. At present time. And let's see what else might be of interest there. Well, let us back up a little bit. You were married in 1928 in Rankin. Yes. And there was—your wife's name was Wimken. Yes, Wimken. Is it a German name? What? Sure. It's a German name. Maybe German, maybe Danish. She is from up there in Schleswig-Holstein. Her father. Oh, her father. She was born here in Illinois. No. She was born in Germany in a town called Wittman, Wittman way up there. You know, you got to remember that territory went from Denmark to Germany and Germany to Denmark back and forth. And then Germany took it again. Then it returned to where it belonged. But then it went back to Germany and finally—we visited there in 1958. When was she born, your wife? When was she born? When? What year? June 20, 1905. And she was born in where? She was born in Flanagan, Illinois. Flanagan. Flanagan. Passed away in four years—it will be four years this fall. And how many children do you have? No children. So she moved with you then to the different places now? Not during the time I was overseas, of course. No, but in the United States? Well, some of the children. Some of the children. And she was born in— She was born in Flanagan, Illinois. Flanagan, Illinois. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. Flanagan. No, during the time I was overseas, of course. No, but not in the United States? Well, certainly. But your work now as a chaplain—that must have been a stressful job. A lot of secretarial job or writing and journals to take care of. The last few years, of course, was all administrative, more or less. But I still loved people, and so I would go out and visit anyhow, like in the hospital. I made rounds every day besides taking care of the office work, which was quite tremendous. Overseas, for instance, when somebody was killed in action, did you have anything to do with that then? I never saw direct action. I was on a ship going back to Iceland in 1943. I was awarded a one-month leave from Iceland to England for meritorious service. And so I was down in England then and so forth. There were a number of bombings that took place at that time. But otherwise, I never was in there. However, I did have a number of services. Boats were sunk outside there and the bodies were flown up and was called in. And then of course our commanding general for the European Theater, the predecessor of Eisenhower, Andrews, crashed in Iceland. And I think there was about nine on the plane that died, all but one, all but the tail gunner. And General Andrews was buried then in Iceland and I had the funeral for his assistant brigadier general who was from Rock Island, of all things peculiar. I had his service. But that's been it. I've had a very active life. You are still going full guns at it now with the— Right. —passage down in Merrillville. So your family now, you are the young doll with a lot of brothers also in the ministry. Well that's another branch. Another branch. Your cousins then. They're cousins, that's right. Actually my father and Luther and Benjamin and Reuben and Oscar and Carl's father were brothers. From Scony, the province of Scony. Where did they come from? Christianstad's Lane. On both the mother's and the father's side? On both mother's and father's side. On Scony? Yes. Well they didn't know each other over there but they met each other over here through the—my father marrying the Augustan. The Augustan's original name was Oakerson, changed to Augustan. Well that's what it was. That's about it. So that's just scratching the surface. If we go back a little bit to Northwestern College in Fergus Falls. They peed it out in the 1930s, wasn't it? 1932 it folded up? What? Northwestern College in Fergus Falls. Yes. I don't remember what year but they united with some school up the line there, Fargo. Yes. Yes. So who were the students there now? Were they from the Swedish community in Minnesota? Yes, mostly Swedish. Yep. Because it was Augustana Venture, Minnesota Conference. So in other words they covered the northern half of Minnesota and Gustavus Adolphus took care of the— Well something like that. Gustavus Adolphus was earlier. See Northwestern opened in 1900. My father was the first president. So he was also the teacher of his education. Where did he get that from, Augustana? He got it in Augustana and University of Chicago. So he was elected the first president? What? He was elected the first president? Yes. And stayed for nine years? Nine years. So you went to school there too then in Fergus Falls? I went to school in Fergus Falls. Grade school. Grade school. And then off to Washington State and Green River. For two years. So how old were you then when you entered Augustana College? I went to Augustana College. I was 16. 16. Did you have to work for your tuition then or did you— Absolutely. You worked summers then? My father helped me the first year and he said from then on you got to earn it. And I did. It's a little different today with all the scholarships and so forth. And you were able then to get enough tuition during the summer to work? Absolutely. I worked during the—we did tables at banquets and things there. On Saturdays I worked at a clothing store and I did other odd jobs. Worked at the post office at Christmas time. And later on I was a part-time sports reporter for the Moline Dispatch. And I used to referee basketball games. And I used to drive cars from Chicago. New cars from there. Buick and then— To dealerships here in Carsonistan? What? To dealerships here in Carsonistan? That's right. And earned money that way. Sold instruments. Musical instruments. Did everything I could to get a little money. So you were a jack of all trades? Well, absolutely. So you were interested in sports, baseball, basketball? Well, yes. I never played any—I played a little basketball but not very much. But I was interested in it and I started as a referee. Refereed around here. That's immaterial. But there was a part of the— While I was in Crystal Lake, I coached a basketball team, a semi-pro team. That was during the Depression. See, I was in Crystal Lake for five years. 1929 to 1933. It was a Grace Lutheran. Bethany Lutheran. Bethany Lutheran, yeah. And during those days the boys didn't have anything to do so we—I had this ball team that I coached, and that later. And we opened up our upstairs part of the church there as a recreation center for young men and women. And a very worthwhile project. It was one of the first in the Wittgenstein Asylum then to open up for sports within the church? Well, this wasn't within the church. This ball team was sponsored by a drugstore there. And— But it was not sponsored by Bethany Church? No, no, no. It was sponsored by this and I coached the team. And I might say it was successful. And that was during the Depression? What? That was during the Depression? During the Depression. It was a hard time then? In other words, did they— Yes, it was very hard, very hard. You had to have another job? Well, we couldn't get another job. We did the best we could. A lot of interesting things happened in there, but that's neither here nor there. So there was hard time for many congregations to keep it past the Depression? You see, this was—at that time, this church was under the jurisdiction of the mission field. Then, of course, they couldn't—they didn't have any money to pay out, so I didn't get anything from them to speak of. And then the congregation, when the Depression struck, you see, Crystal Lake was a new city. And a lot of Swedes came over and settled there. They were all in the building trade. And then, of course, building ceased. Nearly all of them had built nice homes, took a heavy mortgage, and nearly every single member of the congregation lost their homes. Foreclosures? What? Foreclosures? Did they foreclose? Yes. I don't see. Were those people—did they come directly from Sweden earlier or from Chicago? Came from Sweden directly. Directly. But there were also some that moved from Chicago during the Depression. Yes, but there wasn't too many of them. No. See, these folks were all established there before. So how could you survive then? I mean, if you don't get that story. We had a member of the congregation who was in the dairy business. He kept us supplied with milk and cream and some butter, not very much. I might tell you a little incident later on what happened, show you how tough it was. And he said, I'll just take your IOU and you pay for it when you can. And I did. That was the reason I went into the CCC, was because we just had to live, that's all. And I'd go fishing once in a while. We had a lake there in Christian Lake, and that helped that part. Had another farmer who brought in some produce now and then. But back in 1932, my wife's folks, they were farmers, they came up to visit us and they brought along some chicken and I think it was a quart of cream, cream, it was sour when it got there, it was hot in the summer. And my wife said, we have to have butter, we haven't got any butter. So I went down to the church treasurer and asked him if he could have anything. He says, we haven't got a cent I can give you, I haven't a cent I can give you. So that's it. And we didn't have enough money to buy a quarter of a pound of butter. So my wife thought of the idea of going down into the basement and churning. She says, can you do that? Churn this into butter, which we did. So we had butter. That's how bad it was. So what happened now with the people that lost their houses? Did they move away from Christian Lake? Some of them did, yes. I don't know where—most of them stayed there and got along the best they could. There was quite a bit of welfare. So it was a trying—the membership of the congregation that Ed Wendell Don and also of course— No, no, no. We developed a very large Sunday school and from out of that Sunday school has grown a good-sized congregation eventually. It's a good-sized church now, but the Sunday school just doubled and redoubled and again and again. So from a very small nucleus we had a large Sunday school and a very active group of people. They were of course most of the members of the Vikings because the Vikings always played a tremendous role. They're our roles. How did they affect with your work then? I mean, you were not a Viking member. No. How did you see on it? I mean, if they could spend the money there, why didn't they spend it on the church? Well, I couldn't complain about the folks. We built a parsonage when I was there. We had a lot next to the church. There was danger of losing it. So Sears Roebuck at that time had a deal. They still owed $2,000 on the lot. They had a deal that they would advance 75 percent of the money and then you pay it off there. They furnished the material and so they also built it. But being that all our folks from the building trade, they all donated their labor. So we saved $2,000 that way, which we used to pay off the lot. And then the rest of the advanced. So then they paid on this. And that's where of course one of the things that had to come first because we didn't want to lose the house. And it's a nice little home, very nice. They moved it now away from there. I think I made a parking lot out of the room, out of the yard. You've been to Crystal Lake? Yes. Have you been back there for visiting somebody? Oh yes, yes. Three or four times. And some of them are still there? Some of them are still there. So there was hard times then. And then in 1933 you went into the CC. And what did you get your employment in, in other words, in Illinois or did you have to move out of state? Went to Marquette, Michigan. Marquette, Michigan. Well, see I was stationed out of Fort Brady in Sault Ste. Marie. My headquarters was most of the time right outside of Marquette. Later on Munising. We lived in Marquette. And during that time, but I covered nearly half of the Upper Peninsula. And what was your work then, to go from one camp to another? One camp to another. Conduct services, counsel. We had classes. A lot of the boys couldn't read and write, so we had classes there. So I had a very— Read and write, you mean there was— Cassette tube. We had one camp in which the men came from suburbs of Detroit. And many of those boys, you know, during those days didn't pay any attention to school, you know, or anything else. So we had a big job and did a good piece of work there in that. How old were they? Well, they were anything from 17 on up to 31. 31. They were still— I think that's the span, 17 to 31. And their job was to do road work? They did a lot of things. They improved the streams. They planted trees, big forests up there now from trees they planted. Stopped forest fires and did a lot of construction of buildings. And it was run like a military camp? Yes. The military ran the camp. They were not in the military, but the military ran the camp. The commanding officer and his assistant and then the men out in the field, they were what we called, well, woodsmen and so forth, but they were hired to be leaders there. So the organization was run by the Army and the work was taken care of by the civilian leaders. That's it. So they had roll call in the morning and— Well, yeah, they—see, these camps were usually about 200 men in each camp. And at one time I served as high as nine camps. And I traveled about, oh, 70,000 miles a year. 70,000? What? 70,000 miles? Yes. For five years. That's a long mile. Yes, it is. Long distances. What were the problems now in those camps? What were they holding? Were they homesick or desperate? Well, yes, homesickness, but not too much. Not too much. See, they were paid $30 a month. $25 went home and $5 they were allowed to keep. So we had a lot of recreational facilities. I remember one thing that I did that was interesting. I bought pool tables. You know, you could buy them for a song and a lot of people had them but needed the money. The government bought them. We put them in there. And we would have tournaments, chess, checkers, various card games and so forth that one camp would buy with another. And then we'd finally come down to the best of the whole lot and so forth. Things like that. We did that in the Army too, in Iceland, because that was a more difficult job when it comes to homesickness and a lot of them were married, you know. But most of those camp people, no, they were not married? No, no. Single men? Very few of them. Most of them young, young. Very young. Most of them between 17 and 21. So when you conducted classes now for reading and spelling and things like that, did you conduct those classes? Yeah, I did. You did? Yeah, I did. Of course, my big job was to have services and I would come into a camp and usually in the evening and immediately after dinner in the evening, they'd remain there and then they'd have service right there in the dining hall and sing songs and had a sermon for them. Then later on in the evening, they conducted classes every evening and when I came there, then I would have these classes for this group that I'd started and so forth. That's it. Just one of those things. So that was an interesting— Really interesting experience. I've had an interesting life. That's right. You've really been going through the windmill, I tell you. Yep. How about in your family now when you were growing up, did they observe the holidays like in the— Pretty much so. I was confirmed in Swedish out in Newbury, Michigan. Newbury, Michigan. Yeah. I spoke Swedish as well as English. When you went to Augustana, did you have to speak Swedish then for— I took Swedish. I didn't have to do what I did. I took a course under Morrison. My major was in languages more or less. I used to be able to speak German as well as English and Swedish. But you were not required to preach in Swedish when you went off to Augustana? Oh, I preached in Swedish. I see. Yep. So have you had much call for any Swedish services over your years? No, not for years and years and years. I think the last time I had a—I had a wedding in Swedish in Crystal Lake. I think that's the last time. Oh, I think I had a—I had no minister in Newbury at one time. I had a—I was called over there to take care of a funeral. Had that in Swedish. That was way back in 1937, 36. But then I had some weddings in German, a couple, four or five in Swedish. So you didn't converse in Swedish then in your home with your parents? Yes, we conversed often. My father, of course, being a linguist, he probably spoke pure Swedish and Norwegian. For instance, now at Christmas, how did you—did your dad take in the Christmas tree and your mother decorated it? Oh, yes. Oh, yes, certainly. We followed Swedish customs. And we've done so even though—see, my wife was a member of the Augustana Lutheran Church in Rankin. Yes. And she was teaching outside of there, elsewhere. That's not too far from Farmersville and Paxton. Well, not too far, no. That's right. And near Paxton. So she followed the Swedish customs through yours? Oh, yes, yes. She was— You told her and you— We—well, she'd all been with Swedes ever since we married. And so we— So they had lutefisk and herring and— No, not lutefisk, but herring and beans and rice and all the rest of them, of course. Yes, she was as good a Swede as she can come, even though she was a German. Her mother was very German, although born in this country. They both came from large families. So— Well, that's about it. There you are. You have gone back to Sweden and traced your— I've gone back. I've gone to Sweden. So you've seen your grandfather's home? No, no. No? No. We went to Kristianstadslän, the church there, but I didn't inquire anything about it. I did have an interesting experience. In 1958, my wife and I took a three-month trip through Europe, and among the things was a visit to Sweden, what is that area where they have those interesting north of Stockholm set-ups for meetings, you know? Uppland. What? Uppland. No, no. Right on the shore of a lake there, about 40 miles out of Sweden, Stockholm. Isn't that crazy? But they have a place there, they have one set-up for clergy, one set-up for government employees, and they have meetings out there, another set-up. You mean they have it today? Yes. Very fascinating. Well, they were having a meeting there, the matter of the chaplaincy, the hospitals, was even new there. The chaplains they had before gave communion, and that was about it. So I was invited to this meeting, and we were up in Uppsala, and my wife stayed there and I went down to this meeting. Well, the first day I came there, they were supposed to postpone it one day, so I went back and the next day I came back again. And so they gave me a program eventually. First they didn't pay attention to me, they found out who I was, that I was a chaplain, then everybody came around and talked. So they said, I want you to meet one of the members on the program who has the same name as you do, Ljung. Just another branch of the family. And he was a chaplain in Stockholm. And the interesting thing was when they came up to meet him, poor fellow, it was as if I looked in the mirror, he looked just exactly like me. And everybody wanted to take a picture of us two twins, and he was about the same age, 1958. And so we had quite a time there. They all promised to send me pictures, but I never got one. They didn't fill their promises. But it was an interesting experience. Then we went up to Lake Sand and Mora, and over through the Dalarna, up over to Oslo, the fjords. Then we've been back a couple times. We love to travel. When you look back now, when you came out of Augusta and the Theological Seminary, there was solid Swedish Lutheranism back then. And when you came out now in the congregations like Crystal Lake and Grace in Chicago and Rankin, yes, it was all English. But were you more or less on your own then to preach to the people and help them and confide to them what you had to say? Was it more individual pastorship you think back then than it is today? Yes. What is the difference? Well, we had a congregational system then, and the congregation was the unit. Today we're all under the bishop and the church. Not healthy in my estimation, but that's neither here nor there. But we don't even own the property anymore. We needed that over, our churches, over to the synod. The synod owns it. They tell us pretty much who you're going to have for minister. You can't choose your own like we used to in those days. Do you think there was a more familiar feeling when you were, for instance, in a small congregation in Rankin, Chicago and Crystal Lake, that the pastor, he was the shepherd of the flock? That's correct. Today, have they lost that feeling of unity? I think they have, but that's my feeling. I would be no authority except for how I feel and what I see. You have experienced over the years, you have been in several. Yes. Well, I'll tell you this, that today it's a different world. The ministry is entirely different. Pretty much social today in many cases. He's got to be there, but I don't think that, I think the word pastor no longer is really the terms to be used. Back in the old days, like I say, as far as I was concerned, you were the shepherd of your flock. Today, you're pretty much administrator. You're a servant for the synod. Yes. And so many committees, well, it was more a matter of Sunday services, morning and evening. So years ago then, before the merger in 1962 with the LCA, did you have a close companionship then with the whole United States? Absolutely. You cared about what happened out in California? Absolutely. Today, do you really care what happens out in California? Not very much. So there was not... That's me. Of course, I was against the merger. You can put that down. I think we lost so much. Now, in my estimation, bigness is not greatness. And this matter of this new merger, which is beginning to slip now, they find a lot of problems. Yeah, about the site in Milwaukee. Well, that part, that's minor. I thought that was a big one. Yeah, well, no, no, no. The matter of the congregational system and the matter of all certain bits of philosophy and so forth all come into consideration here. And there's a little bit, there's even a little doubt now that the merger will go through. Would they still? Very definitely. Solve it. Very definitely. It may not take place. And I don't see the value in just becoming a large, large church. You're going to lose so much by it. And the extra cost that's going to take place is unbelievable. Why do educated people figure things like this out or getting into trouble with it? Well, I don't know. I think myself, I feel that there are those in leadership who think that it would be a greater situation with being the large, see? It would be easier. Bigger fish, see? But they want to be big fish in a big pool. But there's a lot of small fish in that same big pool, see? The bigger the net, the more fish. Yep. But there's a lot of congregations slipping now, like in Iowa, a farming country, for instance. Certainly. And there's a lot of small fish. So why should they spend money on trying to locate a new, brand new office and everything? I don't know. That's what I can't figure out. But that's because I'm a conservative individual. Yeah, but there are many like you, though, that likes to... There are a lot of people feel the same way I do. How about your cousins up in Minnesota, the young dolls? Now, I taught in the seminary for about seven, eight years, nine years here, a course in clinical training. And I had both Governor Youngdahl's son, Bill, still correspond with him, and then, of course, Reuben's son, who is now the minister, the head minister at the large church there. Mount Olivet. Mount Olivet. And I had them both in class, both good boys. I don't think that Reverend Youngdahl at Mount Olivet pays too much attention to the Synod. They run their own business there, and they have a tremendous, tremendous outlay. Have you ever been out to their summer camp? No, I have been there. Up on Lake Superior? Tremendous. And then, of course, they have their own people's home. They have their own psychiatrist, their own psychologist. They have counselors, about five ministers, yes. They do tremendous work. But they're pretty much on themselves. I don't know how much Bishop Chilstrom has to do. Bishop Chilstrom was a very close friend of Reuben. Isn't he thought of being one of the leaders? He's the leader of the Minnesota Synod. But I mean in the big church now, the new church. Well, I don't think he'll be too much of a leader there. Is he too old for it? Well, yes, I think so. His bivouac was Minnesota. Now, of course, like Marshall, who was our president of our Synod at first, he became head of the church. So that's a little different thing there, but I don't think he'd be considered. He might be an outsider. Marty will probably be the man. The one at the University of Chicago? Yep, Marty. But he is of, is he a Missouri Lutheran? No, Marty was, you see, Marty was of this, yes, originally, he was of that stray group, you know, that broke away. That's the one. So if you go back a little bit in history now, you remember when the Swedes came here and they were called Scandinavians then, because the Norwegians were with them. They didn't go too well together, the Norwegians and the Swedes. They had to break up. That's right. Now they're coming in with ALC again. How do you think it's going to work? Well, that's it, see. It's like many, many of the old timers in the Augustan Lutheran Church still feel kind of estranged because of it. And you can understand that. The ULC took over, moved our wonderful book concern out to that dilapidated Philadelphia place. A good seminary building up here, nice place. Men had a very good bonanza here. Everyone had a job if you wanted it. Do you think that merger of 1962 should have been avoided too? I do. I voted against it. Because the covering church, you know, they are alone. And they are making it. So why shouldn't Augustana have? Yeah, they would have. It would have been much healthier in my estimation. But that's because they had 1,248 congregations at that time. You see, the Lutheran Church in America hasn't shown any real progress as far as membership is concerned in the last 20 years. So with the merger, then it looks like we're a better figure. It grows, but it hasn't stayed the same or gone down. What do you think about, you know, when you talk to Lutherans all over the country, there is an influx of Catholicism within the Lutheran Church. You have seen it creeping in, you know, make the cross and the sign and the new ministers. Of course, I don't. You don't practice that one? I don't go for that stuff. Why do they do that, though? Is that to get people riled up? Why do they do it? I don't know. I think it's to try to attract. There are certain people who like that. But no, all of us don't like that. You see, originally the idea of all this was because of the fact that the people were poor way back in the old Roman Catholic Church, and so you've got to realize that you had the fountain of the holy water, your fingers, see, then you had the communion touch. Then you had these fancy, fancy cathedrals. That was their joy. Now those things weren't necessary, but in those days they meant a great deal to these people. And then of course there was the litanies, and you heard these sounds, and then the eyes, the attraction. It was all necessary. Now today that isn't necessary, but I think it's to try to attract, and it does attract some people. Now I'm taking care of the church. It's a community church. We have no folderoy at all. We have an altar. We use the old Augustana liturgy, and it's a real, real joy. It's only 53 members, but boy, we have no problems. We do a lot of work. How come you're using Augustana hymnal? Are the former Augustana people in there? Just after they had formed, they had to have someone take care of the services. So they would have someone from the seminary come out there and preach. And someone— You mean from Chicago? No, no, on Rock Island. The church is 50 years old. And one of these men arranged for an order of service, and so we start out with the opening hymn and then we have the—afterwards the confession of faith. No, the creed. No, the confession. The confession itself, see? And then the absolution, and then we go into the response of reading, which is not according to ours. We don't have it. But then the epistle lesson, then a hymn, and then the gospel lesson, and then another hymn, and then the sermon, and then of course the benediction and the latter part of the service. So we're pretty much following that, see? In fact, the confession is the same confession that the Augustana Church had. Do you belong then to the LCA, or is it separate? No, I belong to LCA. That church out there doesn't belong to anybody. It doesn't belong to— No. All they do is they use their money, and we do more work philanthropically and so forth in proportion to any church in the city does. I mean, anybody in need out there, they do this, they give this. We help support a minister who had served for a short time, who's now a missionary, was a missionary in the Philippines at a hospital there, and then one in Formosa. And so each year we send money to them. And then locally, anything else in need, the family, the choir, they'll say, well, let's send them a couple hundred dollars to help them along. So you are your own boss then? I'm my own boss. You don't have to take the responsibility? No, I'm not responsible to anybody. How about now, there's been the last few years an uproar about giving communion, you know, to young kids. You don't do that in your church? Yeah, we have served pretty much the rule of 13 years old, and immediately have a confirmation, see, immediately after confirmation. What do you think is the idea now with LCA going into giving communion? I don't know, I don't know, I've tried to figure it out. Most of them at that age don't know what it means, have little realization. But it's, they got to come up with new ideas. And whenever you start that, you got to get something new out of your sleeve all the time. That has been the... Gimmicks. Gimmicks, yes. Because, you know, there's nothing to look forward for the kid when you're getting confirmed. It's a little hard to understand, and I'm pretty liberal in my thinking. I'm perfectly pliable, willing to understand, but I just say that it was healthier in my estimation 25 years ago than it is today, much healthier. So the average parishioner, he has a harder time to understand what's going on, in other words, he has... Yes, yes. I find it very interesting to have them tell me. But, you know, it used to be I'd go to church and I'd open it to the order of service and we'd go right through it and be just fine. Now we get this sheet of paper here and this sheet of paper here and we don't know what's going on next, we turn from one to other, and then we have this and then this. And time and time again, you hear these people say that. Even some of the youngsters, those in the 20s, say, well, I can't figure out why in the world we can't have an order of service in which we don't have to have a sheet of this and a sheet here. We go from this page over here. Why can't we go right through the thing, have it there? Which makes sense. So all those programs that you dish out every Sunday is actually necessary? I think so. I think so very much. Our old hymnal had all the gospel epistle texts in it, the three series of precepts, it was very healthy, but I'm not a renegade, but I still try to evaluate and I'm outspoken, no question about it, very much so. I tell them exactly how I feel. They don't like it. I'm not, I think there's many cases where I'm persona non grata because of my feelings, but that's neither here nor there. I think Reuben felt pretty much the same way, pretty much the same way. I had a lot of chats with him. And he had a discussion with Dr. Bergendorf. Oh yes, I do once in a while. Bergendorf doesn't come out and say too much. He does a lot of deep thinking. Well not even to you. Well we chat back and forth on many things we agree on. I don't think as much we disagree on, but we never argue about the points and so forth. I don't have that much chance. I do, I had a laugh. I took a trip to the Holy Land, my wife and I. And so when we went there, I said I'm not going with any church group. I want to go with a Jewish group. I finally found a travel agency that found a group which were all Jews. My wife and I were the only Gentiles. Well we traveled in class and nothing but the best. Same price as the others did. But we saw Israel, that's what I wanted to see. And so happy we were there during the holiday of the Seder. And so we had three days to ourselves. I rented a car and I went back and saw the holy places that we'd missed. We spent more time at the Garden of Gethsemane and more time at places of that nature, see? The wedding wall and that. But telling Bergenhoff about this, and Bergenhoff says I did the very same thing two years ago. He said I want to see Israel. He says I've studied the Holy Land and I knew we'd see this. And I so arranged it that after the trip was over, I had four or five days and I could hire a man to take me out to all the holy places I'd missed. We did go to Bethlehem, but that was just there and back, that's all. I was kind of surprised. Yep. That's it. One more thing. All right. You know, the last 10 or 15 years, maybe even more, a lot of women within the Catholic Church have taken out divorce. I mean, it was unthinkable years ago. Don't you think the Lutheran Church are playing on trying to cater to those people, the dropouts? Yes, they are. To make it look a little bit Catholic in the Lutheran Church. There's no question about it here and there. I know this. I've had about 1,100 weddings in my life. But I've turned down 400. You see, I've been in a position where I am known in the community. And so as they come to say, well, I want a minister to marry us, but we don't have any church. I've had 3,700 funerals in my lifetime. I don't think you've probably run across any other minister along the line. When I first came here to Lutheran Hospital, I visited every patient, at least every other patient, really.