 This is cassette three, side one, continuation with Burdett Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette three, side one. Cracker and a glass of milk and that was for free. Well, it had come out of profits. All that stuff, you know, just one thing after another, you know. But when you're big, you don't think of it, you know. Well, you were certainly dealing in volumes. Yeah. How was the city government now, like Herman Hallstrom, when they was in the 20s though? Well, yeah. They, you could get... They were real aggressive, you know. That's when my uncle was in there. That's when they developed Highland and Rolling Green and Rockview and all that stuff was in their time, you know. They brought all that stuff in, see. But were they favorable to you, the city council, to give you a break on taxes and good land? Yeah, we've always had good relations. There's always been good relations. Because you were important, you had a lot of leverage. And there was good relations between all of industry and Rockford. Yeah, Rockford's been a nice town. So they saw the... But there's a lot of reasons. When I sit and think back, and I don't want to talk about that now because I don't think this is a place to discuss that, but I have a lot of reasons why the company went downhill. Not because I left, that certainly wouldn't do it, but a lot of things were shaping up before I left, I could see. I think one thing is too much family in there. The Summers were a big family. And I think it hurt Keystone the same way. Keystone had trouble. And I remember the chairman of the board many years ago, they're all dead now, told me, he says, Burdette, we gotta do something. He says, you know, the banks don't like the idea that we got so many key positions with Summers. And you see, I was the only one that worked up to a good position who wasn't a relative, and nobody could figure that out. They said, who are you related to? Nobody. I don't believe that. I said, I'm not related to anybody. Yeah, but you've never been threatened to be fired. You always get promotions. You always got good jobs. And so I've just been a hard worker all my life. And I said, one thing is, I said, they said that they need somebody in here who's not a member of the family. And I said, many a times, I would be questioned. And I don't want to discuss that, but I've had many questions that were brought to me concerning by the board and wanted my viewpoint as a non-family, non-member associate. That's one thing I give them a lot of credit for. I had several long-distance calls, and many times, the chairman of the board would sit down and talk to me. And he says, Berdat, I want to get your honest viewpoint. What would you do under this condition in your position? Well, that's an honor. They didn't bring me any money, but it was an honor to me to have that privilege to tell them how I felt about that. You were not afraid to tell them it was a negative? Oh, I told them negative many times. Oh, if an average person had done that, they'd say, I'd be fired. I asked them, I said, this doesn't jeopardize my... No, we want your honest opinion. And that was the end of the interview with Berdat Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. Nice to meet you.