 This is cassette one. Now I'm talking to Bernice Johnson. And you were born 1905, October 1st, in Rockford. So can you tell me a little bit about your father now, Theodore Peterson? Yeah. He came from where in Sweden? He came from Öland. He was from Løtt, Søken or whatever they call it. And that's where he was brought up. And his mother died when he was six years old. And so he was brought up by his grandmother for a few years. And that was a difficult time because after his mother died, his grandmother had to take over the family. And she wasn't well. She had arthritis and used a cane. And it was pretty rugged for her for a long time. So she hit the kids often with a cane. Well, when she died, then Christina, my father's second oldest sister, she took over the family. And she sat down to talk to the boys. There were two boys, my father and my uncle Gus. And she says, I'm never going to use the cane on you children, but you have to mind me. And they had a long talk. My father just loved Christina. He said she was just wonderful. It was his older sister. Well, his oldest sister was Emma. Did you ever know Oscar Olsen that had the greenhouse? No, but I heard about him. Well, his mother, Emma, was the oldest, and then it was Christina. All of Emma's children, six children, all came to America. None of Christina's children came to America until just toward the end, and then one daughter came here just for a while, and then she moved back to Sweden. So in your father's family, how many children and sisters and brothers were there then? It was Emma and Christina and Gus. He had a farm out near Byron, and then my father, and then Sigrid, Sigrid Olsen. Arthur Olsen, Theodore Olsen was her husband. So he grew up then in Ljøt, went to school there and confirmed? Yes. And how old was he when he started to work then to help out? On the farm and everything, well, he didn't work. See, he was 14 when he came here. He was 14 when he came? His father, see, his father, Gus wanted so much to do something, and he ran away from home when he was 14. And my grandfather went on the ferry over to Kalmar and got him before he got on the train, and he beat him up after that terribly for leaving home and everything. But then a couple years later, he ran away again. That first time, he wanted to become a soldier in the Swedish Army, but the second time, then Grandpa said, I'm not going to beat you up this time. I want to know what you want to do, and he says, I want to go to America. And he says, well, then we'll go, you and I, and we'll take Theodore with us, that's my father. So they came here in 1890. 1890, and how old was he then when he was 14 when he came? 14, uh-huh. And when he was 18, he became a contractor, because when he was 16, he got to be an apprentice latherer, and he was real good at it and very much interested in it. And so he took a partner by the name of Cederstrom, Charlie Cederstrom, and they were Peterson and Cederstrom lathers, and so that's what he got started. He became the foremost lathing contractor in Rockford, mainly because he believed in organized labor, and he felt that everybody should have a decent wage. So he didn't get those ideas, though, because he was too young when he left Sweden. Yeah, he didn't get the idea in Sweden. He got it here. He was too young then at that time. He got it here, but he felt very strongly that everybody should have a right to have a decent job and get paid decently, and that's really what it should be. And so he organized his own men into a union. What year was that, do you think, before 1900? Yeah, that was before about 1896 or 7, I think, and then he organized them, and he was a member of the union. In 1923, he was kicked out. He told us that morning, he says, I know I'm going to be kicked out of the union today because they have decided. By that time, the lathers had what they called an international union. They had their own union, and they didn't belong to Bricklayer or something like that. It was a lathers' union. And so sure enough, he went to the meeting, and they told him that the contractor could not belong to the union, so he got kicked out. He says, all at once, they're making an enemy out of the boss, and he says, that is not right. I remember him telling us that. I was graduating from high school that year, so I was old enough to understand what he was talking about. And so the secretary was a wonderful young man who had come to him at age 16 and asked for a job, and my father took him on and liked him so much, but then my father got a letter from him afterwards that was really almost insulting. And my father says, I know George Bors never wrote that letter. That was sent from the union headquarters. In Chicago? I suppose so. But the union here in Rockport, it was a local, a Swedish local? Yeah. All Swedish or was it Irish? No, no, my father had many people working for him. Different nationalities. But so that's the way, and he says, this is not a good trend. I remember him saying that. This should not be. They should not hate the boss. The boss should be part of it, he said. And that's the way he felt, but most employers don't feel that way. So the union men, of course, they want to be against the management. Yeah, there should be animosity according to them, but there really shouldn't be. So he was an early organizer. Very early, very early. So when he came in the 1890s, was he confirmed then in Sweden? Yes. Barely confirmed, and then he left. Yeah. And his father paid for a ticket and he... And they came second class. They didn't come third class. They didn't have to go through Ellis Island. But my grandfather, you see, had property on Öland, and his oldest daughter got his Ö She was married, you see, and she got the property. And so he had sufficient income so he didn't have to worry about anything. He was here until 1900. He came in 1890. In 1900, at the end of the year, he went back to Sweden and stayed there the rest of his life. Did they come to anybody in Rockport? Why did they pick Rockport? Huh? Why did your father and other guys pick Rockport? To come to? Yeah. Well, there were an awful lot of Ölandings here. Awful lot of them. So they knew people then? Oh, yes. Uh-huh. And they rented a house on 4th Avenue and 8th Street, upstairs rooms, and they kept house. They bought furniture secondhand, and my grandfather did most of the cooking. And Gust was determined to be a farmer. He liked to be a farmer, although not on Öland. I don't know why. And so he got a job as a dreng, you know. And he met a girl who was a piga, a little tiny person. He was 6'4", and she was 4'10". So they were a contrast. And they got married, and then after a few years, they bought this farm near Byron. And he stayed on that one? Uh-huh. All his life? Yeah, and he was that kind of a person that just loved his relatives. Oh, he just loved them all. And so every summer, they used to invite the whole relation to the farm. And so we got started with a feeling that we were sort of like family reunions, you know. We got together, and so we kept that up all through these years. How did you get out there in the early years, though, when you were a little girl? My father had a horse, of course. Horse and buggy and wagon. From Rockford and to Byron? Uh-huh, two hours. Stay overnight then? Yeah, sometimes. It took two hours to ride there. Two hours with horse and buggy. But we used to go every time. And when we had the big family thing, they rented some farmer with two horses and a big wagon. They rode in that big wagon to the farm. They used to do that, but we didn't, of course. And my uncle next door to us, Olson, Alfred Olson, he was a plastering contractor. He was my father's uncle. And they had a buggy and two horses. They'd go out that way. So your father, he came right in the bad depression of 1893. Well, he came here in 1890. But then three years later, there was a bad depression here. Yeah, and so that— Can you mention anything about that? Sure, sure. He went to Chicago because there wasn't any work here. And so he went to—there was a fellow by the name of Pete Olson, lived in Melrose Park. And he went to see him, and Pete said, You could work for me. And so he rented an upstairs room there in a youngquist family. And my mother was a youngquist. She was 12 years old. And she liked my father right away. She used to run and meet him when he came from work and talk to him. And she was sconing. He just loved her little accent. And then he didn't see her anymore because it wasn't very long, that depression, in 1893. And he went back to Rockford. But then he went back to see her one time in 1900. And he went a couple more times, and then they got married in 1902. And then they settled here in Rockford. And by that time he had his own construction. Yeah, he lived 1127 Second Avenue. He had a big barn with room for three stalls, and then where they could park the wagons and things. So when he was doing business then, he used horses to haul out material? He had a horse, one horse. And whatever was needed and that and so on. And it was all ladling then at that time? Yeah, everything was woodlap. There was no wire? No, all of it was woodlap. I remember when corner beads came in, and my father said how wonderful it was to have corner beads. Because it made the edge of a wall. So before it was a little bit hard to get that? Yeah, the lather had to form it before that, but then they didn't have to. And laths come in two lengths, short and long, you know. So was he also able to do plastering work during the whole trade? Plastering? Yeah, like your... My uncle next door was a plasterer. But not your father then, he was in the construction of... No, just lath. My uncle was a Chalstrom and Olson. Do you know who Chalstrom was? No. Well, do you know who Lindley is in Rockford? Robert Lindley? No, I don't know. You don't know? Well, his wife was a Chalstrom. They had a lot... they had, in fact, they had two horses, Chalstrom and Olson. And every morning they filled up their wagons. They were there at six o'clock, the men all came over, and they loaded up, you know, what they needed, their plasterer and their... Those big things that they mixed the plasterer in, they threw them on the wagons. That's what woke me up every morning. So was this a new thing, the plastering at that time, or had it been earlier? They had been going on for a long time, plastering. So there was not a new thing coming in then that your father... No, no, that was nothing new. But he liked that business and wanted to learn it from you. Yeah. My father bought out his partner, Cedarstrom. And because Cedar... the reason why he took him on as a partner was because my father didn't have that much cash that he could go into business. But Cedarstrom did have $600. And so they bought the material they needed, and my father already had a horse. And so they managed to carry on the business, but then he bought out Mr. Cedarstrom later. Was that earlier, in the 1900s, or...? I think that was about, I don't know, 1915 or something like that. Did Cedarstrom, did he have the same idea about unions as...? Uh-huh. No? No, and he wasn't a good bookkeeper either, so my father had to do all the bookkeeping and all that stuff. No, he wasn't a socialist, but my father was. How did he get those ideas, though? Because it was unknown here in this country. I don't know where he got the ideas from. Because later on, 1914, 1915, then Herman Hallstrom came in. Yeah, and my father knew him so well, so well, that when my father was dying, Herman brought a whole lot of lilies from out by Sinsipi Park. They had that new floral place, and brought a big bouquet of lilies to my father. So Hallstrom, what year do you think he came from Sweden, before the First World War? Hallstrom? Yes. Oh, yes, he was there before the First World War. He came from Sweden? Oh, yeah. And he was in the Army. He was in the Army, and he wrote letters to... In this country? Yeah, he wrote letters to Labor News, I think it was, and he was very much interested in organized labor. Yeah, but wasn't he against the draft of Hallstrom? They had a meeting in 1917, you know, quite a few of you. Yeah, he was against that. He agitated the young people, don't be drafted, resist it, he said. Yeah, he didn't like it. He didn't like war, you know, he just hated that. But he wasn't in the military. He was drafted, so he had a goal, so he went to Texas. That's where he was. He wasn't fighting in the war. He was just there at the camp. At the camp. Because some of the young people had to go to Bridewell in Chicago. Well, yeah, and a good friend of ours had to. He just marched with them one time downtown. My father was in that group too, marching. But this fellow, Martin Engstrom, he got arrested, and he had to be three years in Bridewell. Three years? Uh-huh. If I remember rightly, it was three years. It was a long time, because both Robert and Martin Engstrom were good friends of my father's, and Martin was the one that was put into jail. A gentle, nice, peaceful person. It seemed impossible. Was he a family man? At that time, he wasn't married yet. He was single. Do you remember that march downtown in Rockport? Yeah. Was it a big gig? It wasn't a very big thing. But my father was down there too, and they all felt bad, because for some reason the cops picked on certain ones, and I think they wanted somebody who didn't have a family. But the cops were Swedish, though. Yeah, some of them. Some of them were, yeah. But I mean they had to arrest some of them for disturbing the peace. Isn't that what they called it? And so Martin was one of them that was arrested, and my father was awfully disgusted about that. He says he'd never heard a person. There were several of them that had to go to Bridewell. Yeah, they had to go to Bridewell. Was it three years? I think it was three years. I wouldn't currency it, but it was quite a long time, because he was— You don't remember if anybody was sent back to Sweden during that time? No, I don't remember. But my father was very, very much in favor of organized labor. He felt so strongly that you should pay people a decent living wage, and he couldn't see any reason why people shouldn't be organized. He was really far ahead of his time. Yeah, he was. In the management position, it was unheard of. Yeah. He was not like Swan Hillman. Well, here he actually organized his own labor union. He was a member, and they were there together, and he talked his men into it, and they all agreed that they should have it, so they had this early labor union, Lathers. My brother knows more about this than I do. My brother is Bertolt Peterson, and he took over my father's business after my father died, and he remembers a whole lot about it. When he was only eight years old, he saddled up the horse and drove over to the west side with material for houses. He had to leave the lathe, the nails, and the scaffold at the job. He was eight years old, and he did that every day after school for a long, long time. I really admired him. The funny thing is that he's nearly two years older than me, but I was much bigger than he was. I started to grow so fast that by the time I was 11 years old, I was pretty near six feet tall, and he was short. In order to fix the horse ready, put the harness on, he had to stand on something, but I didn't. I could put it on without any trouble. I grew when I had scolopever. I grew terribly fast in six weeks, so I don't know what happened to me, but I was five years old, and I got so big all at once, I outgrew all my clothes. I think you should let him ask you a lot of questions. Yeah, I do, too. This is very good, because this is history, just like you saw it. Yeah. And this is fascinating, you know, with your father, he must have been so far ahead of other people. He was. Because, you know, thinking about fair labor practices and so on. He told me once, it had a lot of effect on me that my grandmother hit us with a cane when they were little in Sweden. He said, Innan jordet, how do you say, before the job is done, order till urmonen ska halva gjerningen vå gjort. That's what she said. And if they didn't do it, whack. Så foten skulle vara i dörren innan det var färdigt. And she hit them with that, and hard. Det var skavligt, den taktik du tog, Agni. Yeah, but he said he always felt sorry for her. She was the mother of my Uncle Olsen that lived next to us on 2nd Avenue. That's actually who she was. And she had gotten arthritis and was sick and not well, and she had to come take care of all those kids. So that, he says he never really blamed her, but he says he sure hated when she hit him. So your father, he never practiced any kind of respect on you children then? No, never. Never? Oh no, I should say no. He was very, very wonderful to all of us. So he was the opposite then? He was really wonderful to all of us. He never spanked us. You know, my mother and father had a wonderful way about them when we were all together. If somebody started being mean or sassy or anything, my mother was kind of clever. She was funny. She would change the subject. She'd start talking about something else and we'd forget about it. We never got sent away from the table. Never. We were four kids. So you belonged to the Emmanuel Lutheran Church from the beginning. You were baptized there and confirmed? No, I was not baptized there. I was baptized on Christmas Day, 1905. In your home? Yeah, in the home, and it was on Christmas Day, and it was Pastor Huestrom from Zion Church. So he came to the house then? Yeah, he came to our house. But then you went to the church to the Emmanuel? Well, when I was three years old then. Did you go to church every Sunday? I've been very faithful. You were living close by, and you could walk very easily. Yeah, and then, too, we had a wonderful person there. We had very good people in the Emmanuel Church working, and one of them was Mrs. Engstrom, and she had a daughter who was a cripple. She had a broken back, and on Saturdays, this woman, although she couldn't stand to put up with a lot of kids as a rule, she had us meet at church, and then it was two societies. One was against liquor, and the other one was, I forget now. Day dogs? Well, no, it was about missionary work. Oh, I see. And she used to have us there for a couple hours, just a few. Well, it was 40 kids, but we weren't all there at one time. And, you know, I used to go on 7th Street on the way to come to church. If I went past Gaslander's Saloon, sometimes a drunk would come out, and I thought they looked awful and were awful and sounded awful, especially when they were swearing in Swedish. And I thought then, I'm never, never going to drink any of that stuff, and I never did either. But that was a good—she taught us a lot of things, and one of the things she said was that cigarettes are coffin nails, and I believe that. For many years, people made fun of that, but it's worked out that it really is true. When you were growing up, did they use a lot of cigarettes at that time? Was it mostly pipe and cigar stuff? Yeah, it was both pipes, cigars, and chewing tobacco, snuff and stuff like that. But like the regular workers, no, you didn't use any cigarettes? No, not as a rule. It was more snuff? Young people, young people. And the young people just loved these little white cigarettes. I see. When you were in high school, for instance? Yeah, and before. Did you smoke in high school in your days? Some of them did. They did? Oh yeah, not very many, but there were some who were. Cigarettes? Nobody was using snuff, though? Well, I tell you, the ones who would use snuff were workers, outside workers, and also out on the street and like that. They used a lot of snuff. And the reason for that was probably the furniture factory. You couldn't smoke in there. Yeah, and then they spit all over. They spit on the sidewalk. So you could see that when the Swedes were walking by, there were a lot of spit marks. Did they have spit tunes in the church? No. No? They couldn't use any? Not that I remember of. So they couldn't chew any snuff? It was usually not people who chewed snuff that went to church. Oh, I see. The snuffers, they didn't go to church? Yeah, no, they didn't, really, actually. You didn't see any ladies smoking at that time, though? No, no, but when I was in my teens, I did. Some of them? Yeah, like when I was 14, 15, I started seeing that there were quite a few women who were smoking. Because in Sweden, Edwin probably remembers, you know, the old women, they smoked pipe. Yeah, they did. Very often, but they didn't do it here, though. You never saw an old person. Not unless it was somebody who had come from Sweden. They would sometimes. Old ladies. Yeah. Never used a pipe. There were quite a few emphatic old ladies who were interested in one thing or another, and one of them was Mrs. Christensen. If you knew the Palms, do you know the Palm family? No, no. You don't know any of them. Well, anyway, she lived on 3rd Avenue and 10th Street, and she believed thoroughly in organized labor, and she was quite modern about many, many things. And we used to go over to their house because two of her sons worked for my father. They were Lathers, Nelson Augie. And so we were over there one time, and my father and her got quite a discussion about labor. And then she said it over and over, I believe that if you work and have a job, you should have a decent pay. And she says, I can never ignore that. I've got to believe it because if you're working, you should be paid for it. And my father says, oh, gum on that, exceptional, you know. I can't remember the word, but on the way home he'd always say, I admire her because she's thinking. She's using her head. But it was unusual that women got interested in stuff like that. Yeah, but there were some. And there was one woman that lived on 15th Avenue and 7th Street, and she had connection with wealthy families that wanted to have a maid, you know, or a piga. And so she kept track of those things, and people who would want somebody to come and work for them, they would go and see her. And she did that for several years. Her husband was either way. Huh? Mrs. Palm's husband. Was he married? This Palm? Well, her name was Christensen, yes. Yes, she was married. Yeah, but one of her granddaughters married into the Palm family. The Palm family was quite prominent in Rockford. At one time, you see, on 3rd Avenue, there were three contractors right in our block, and they were all from Irland. One of them was John Palm, and he was the oldest. He had come from Lut. But I think that they had come from the mainland before that because he had two brothers who were organists. One of them was organist for Lutjerk and the other one was for Järglarsa. And so they must have gotten their education on the mainland. But they moved to Irland, and John Palm came from Irland and lived on 2nd Avenue and built a three-story apartment flat, you know. And he did a lot. He was a general contractor and also cement and bricklaying. And then my Uncle Olsen came, and he was a plastering contractor, and then my father moved into that neighborhood, and he was a lathing contractor. So there were three of them, none of them college-educated or anything, but they were all businessmen, and they did well, very well. They did their work for many years. So now your father, he came when he was 14. Yeah. How did he learn the language very easily, of course? Yeah, but he never spoke real good English. He had quite an accent, you know. And once they persuaded him to try to run as alderman, but he didn't want to do it, but they put his name on. He didn't get voted in because nobody knew him, and he wouldn't go out and make speeches. So he was not interested in politics then? Not that kind. Oh, he was interested in politics. Yeah, he was. Yes, he was. Yeah, but he wasn't interested in trying to become an alderman. Because the first mayor of Rockford, Oscar O'Grin, was running against Bennett. Yeah, now I remember. He was a socialist. Yes. And he was defeated the first time. That was during the war, I believe, or shortly before. Yeah, before. Side two, continuation with Bernice Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. So Oscar O'Grin, now, he was a socialist? Yes. From Sweden? Yes. I don't know when he became a socialist, but I know he was a socialist. What kind of worker was he? Was he a bricklayer or a carpenter? I don't recall. I know that his brother ran a music store on 7th Street later. Those fellows were educated, I'm sure. Oh, I see. They must have had a little more education than the average. But your father acquainted with him, of course? Yes. Oh, he knew him real well. And I remember him, too. Do you remember when he ran against W. Bennett? I can't say that I was paying attention to it. Because you were too young then probably to. Yeah, I can't remember that, but I did know Mr. O'Grin. But your father was not that much interested. He was out talking for all those candidates running for office or anything like that. Well, he went to all the socialist meetings. So he belonged to that Arbetagruppen. Yeah. So he was an acquaintance there with Harry Anderson? Oh, sure. And with Colleen? Colleen. He came later on. He must have been the Reds for the... Oh, yeah. Of course, he knew him. He knew all of them, you know, and knew them well. So, like Halston, he was a bricklayer. Was he? Yeah, I guess so. I believe he was when he started off. And he was real active then, too, and he was elected a mayor. You remember that? Yeah. So... That's when we got these paved streets up in this area. So he is credited with that sidewalks and... And streets. Was he a good mayor, Halston? Hmm? Was he a good mayor, Halston? Yeah, I thought he was wonderful. But Barney Thompson, he was the editor of the Rockford Republic, and he was a good friend of my father's. He was not a socialist, but he used to like to discuss things with my father, and he used to like Herman Hallstrom. He thought he was wonderful. I remember that. But at that time, now, when Hallstrom was elected, could he be elected only by the Swedes, or did he need help from Italians and Irish votes also? I think he was well-known by everybody around. So he had contacts on the West Side also? I think so, yeah. Because otherwise I don't think he could have come in. Well, maybe he could have, because there were so many Swedes here. You know, nowadays when they run for an office, there's so much bala-bahu all over the place. Did they do it the same way years ago, or was it more... They just went to different meetings, Viking and Vasa, and they talked about... They just... I think they did most of it in meetings. In meetings? So they were not out having speeches and promising things? Well, they might have done that, but I don't recall that. Whether... I don't know. But he was elected three times. Yeah. So he must have been... And then Blum after him. And Blum was a socialist too. He was the one that was a pharmacist. Yeah, definitely was a socialist. Was he more educated than Halsund? Oh, yeah, sure. He went to college and became a pharmacist, you know. You have to have the education to do that business. Some people have told me that he was so honest that he went down to the garage every morning and counted the shovels. Is that true, you think? They don't do that today. I don't know. He was a kind of a guy. He was, yeah. He was a little man. What was against Blum was that his voice was so... What I understand was very... It was high, high-pitched and not strong. So he couldn't speak then? No, his voice wasn't good for speaking, although he made very good... He knew what he was talking about. You know, they used to make fun of him in Chicago. I was working in there during his time. And they used to make fun of him because he had such a woman's voice. Oh, I see. They used to kill him, kill him in the bottom. But now when he was elected mayor, Halstrom and Blum, was their full-time job, that was all they were doing then? I think so. They were sitting in City Hall and giving orders what to do. Yeah, by that time it was. So they had enough salary so they could live on it. Oh, yeah, I think so. And now one of the mayors that they had around 1900 or just before was Mrs. Green's father, Mr. Brown. He was mayor of Rockford. Well, we got electricity in Rockford for the first time. Mrs. Green was just a kid then, teenager, and she's the one that switched on the first light. And so her father was definitely... He was a Swede? No, Thompson. Not Green? Not Green, Brown. Oh, Mr. Brown. Mr. Brown. No, he was not Swedish. And they were wealthy. And his sister was married to one of our congressmen in Springfield. His sister was. Buckby. Mrs. Buckby. So they were English people then in the beginning of the war. Yeah. When you were born, did they have electric lights in most of the houses? No, we got electricity when I was a little girl. I remember my father was the first one to have electricity put into our little house where we lived. And my Uncle Olsen, who lived next door, was disgusted to think my father did it first before he did. I remember they talked about it. And my father says, That's pretty good. I beat Uncle Olsen one time. So you remember when they put on the street lights then in Rockford? Well, not the street lights. What I remember is having light in our home. We had, in our home we didn't have gas lights. But we had just kerosene lamps. And in my Uncle Olsen's house they had gas lights. And then they got electricity after that. So there was not too many cars then in Rockford at the time when you were born? Heavens no. There weren't many cars at all. But one person you probably also remember was Pelle for Union, P.A. Peterson. Sure. He was a short little stocky guy. Yeah, I didn't know him very well, but of course I always knew about P.A. Peterson. He was a real industrialist. He's the one that had so much to do with the factories here. He has a finger in everything. And then one of the men in our block on 2nd Avenue, his name was P.A. Peterson too. And he had a son, Herbert Peterson, who was working for the newspaper. And that Mr. Peterson was a real cabinet maker. And he made the altar and the rail at First Lutheran Church. He built that himself. So we had a lot of... Good craftsmen. Yeah, I should say. Right there. And he was a wealthy man very early, P.A. Peterson. Yeah. Because he bought a lot of factories during the first crash, like 1893. Yeah, did he? When everybody sold, he bought them. Oh, that was... He had a chance on it, but that's the way they... Yeah. They become big. Yeah. So then you went to school during the First World War. Do you remember any of that time? Oh, sure. A lot of people came from Sweden. Oh, yes. I should tell you about when I started first grade. We lived right next door to a school, because where Nicholson Hardware is on 8th Street and 2nd Avenue, there was a four-grade school, first, second, third, and fourth grades. And when I started first grade, there were 40 children who came to start school at Marsh School. And most of them had come over on a boat that very summer from Sweden. Some big families had five and six kids. They were all Swedes then? Uh-huh, all Swedes. And so the only Swede teacher right then, we had had Miss Deline. She had been our teacher, but she had moved over to another school. And so the only Swede teacher we had was Miss Johnson. And she had to talk to all these children and place them, because there wasn't anyone else could do it. I didn't help her, but she let me. But she didn't let my mother do that. So the teacher, she was your Swedish background then, so she was able to teach them? Sure, Miss Johnson, uh-huh. I don't remember her first name. There must have been a group to teach the fundamentals of English then. Oh, yes. So she had to put them in their right grades wherever they went, you know. And the name of that school, how do you spell it? Marsh, M-A-R-S-H. Marsh School. And that was Third Avenue, or Second Avenue and Eighth Street. Four grades. Now later on they got a Marsh School out here, out off of Spring Creek, you know, and Alpine. What was the stand for Marsh? That was a Marsh School, too, but that was eight grades. He's asking what they got the name of Marsh School from. I don't know. It's just a name they picked. They named it after some educator, I guess, but I don't know. I see they have Halstrom School and John Nelson School. Yeah, our children all went to Halstrom. So did you go to that class, too, then, with the 40 kids there? Yes, we had to wait and take it easy for two weeks while she placed all those children. And somebody had examined first what grade they were supposed to be in, so they just sent the ones that would be in Marsh School, but there were about 40 kids. But you were growing up knowing Swedish language in your home. Yes. Did your parents speak Swedish all the time? No. My mother, you see, had been—she was 11 years old when she came to America. She came from Skoda, from— Örnestad. Örnestad. Was that it? Örnestad. Örnestad. Well, anyway, when they came to Melrose Park, this Pete Olsen I told you that my father knew, he was the one that my grandfather found out he should see him, and that's why they settled in Melrose Park. So she learned English very fast then? Yeah, well, she went to school for three years until she was 14. Then she quit and took a job as a domestic, and she became first maid in River Forest, and then later on in Hyde Park she was a cook, and that's where she worked then at that time. So she learned—she could speak good English, my mother could. So in your home then you understood Swedish, or? Oh, yeah, my mother and father talked Swedish a good deal, and I listened and listened. But I didn't learn so much from my mother then as I did from the people who came and talked to my father. Oh, somebody, all of a sudden, they would just come and knock at our back door, and my mother would go to the door and they'd say, ìPitsen him, ma?î And my mother would say, ìJa, kom in.î And then they'd have a discussion. And I slept in the living room. It's a little tiny house. And I heard this discussion, so I've heard it all my whole life. Nearly always it was a young person who wanted some advice from my father. So many of them came to him and asked. And they were not too good in English, then, so they had to use Swedish. Yeah, they used only—see, these were newcomers, you know. Nearly always, not always, sometimes it was. But then they have to—what did they call that now in Swedish? Lattare. Lattare. Lattare kontraktare. I heard that so many times. Those were words, you know, there was not any Swedish word for. No, because— I've never heard of any Swedish. No. They didn't—see, when my father went back to Sweden in í25, he says, ìThey don't put on lath in the buildings. They use something else. Some kind of stuff made out of seaweed,î he said. And it was wires and— Like an ad, yes. And made a background for the plastering. But this lath thing, now, that was here when your father came. In other words, they've been in Jostein for many years. Yeah. And they continued up to what year? Maybe you know that. When did they start with lath instead of drywall? Well— ìThe ë40s?î Probably up in the ë40s. So they lasted many years, then. They had metal lath before that. They had— Yeah, metal lath. Even in the— Even in the ë30s, I was even helping making metal corner beads and stuff for— that stuff for her old man, see? I used to stand up and make it and cut strips for metal strips and that. So they had metal lath then, too. Yeah, they had started with that. Oh, yeah. But what tree was used? Because it's wonderful to look at. You know, you can spread it apart so much and it gets so wide. What kind of tree is used? Tree was a pine. Was it a special kind of tree? I don't know. I think it was just fir, wasn't it? Fir? I think so. I don't know. I don't either. I never did check on that, whether it was made of it. Even though I did lath, too. Oh, you did a work— Oh, I waited about six months for a contractor named Hoffman. And you had piecework? Did you have by foot or by room or on—? No, they just expected to put so much on every day. They expected you to do it? They expected you to put on so much. And they had the nails in your mouth. Oh, yeah, that was always good. They always had that. Oh, yeah, they had your whole mouth full of nails and just— But those nails are kind of big, though. No, no. No? They were about like that, yeah. Oh, were they bigger than tacks? Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. They're bigger than tacks, and they're about putting in an inch a lot. How did they affect the navel on the teeth? I don't know. Did you hear about any—? I never heard of any. I never heard any of them have trouble. Rips. Yes. About that much of it, see? Then you had the other one come over, so when this came this far, then the other one started right there in the middle of that, see, to bind them all the way. And you can see in buildings, older buildings, you can see the wood laugh right through the paint job and everything sometimes. Oh, they seem to stand the time. Yeah. But there's been great changes in the laughing business. But like your brother now, he took over the business. Yeah. Your father, when did he retire then from the—? My father died in 1938, but my brother had been running the business for a long time by that time because my father was sick. He had cancer. He was sick for a long, long time. My father got sick from aluminum cooking utensils. It took many years before I discovered it. But I know for sure that's what caused it because in 1910, my mother and father bought a whole set of aluminum, and it was about two or three years after that that he began complaining about having ulcers, terrible stomach ache all the time, and feeling sick. But not anybody else in the family? No. But, you know, it was kind of strange because he never felt he had to go to the bathroom. He never felt like he had to have a bowel movement after this aluminum affected him that way. And that is one of the symptoms of aluminum poisoning. So you get the constipation and then the—? Yeah, and you have to take something and force it like— Lexative. Or injection or whatever. And that bothered him all those years. But I've been studying homeopathy. Dr. Erblin was our doctor, and I've been studying it for years and years. I go to conventions and everything, and I know an awful lot about it. And I do know that that was true because we got a booklet from England that an English doctor who was not a homeopath wrote all about what caused aluminum poisoning. And he says, you'd be surprised there are millions who suffer from it. And did he know about it? The regular profession doesn't recognize it at all. So like the skillets and the cooking utensils, there was iron, of course. Yeah, it was iron. After what time? After the Depression? Well, there still is iron, you know. Yes, but I mean, when did aluminum come into use? Well, I was five years old, 1910, and an agent came to our house and showed us these nice, beautiful, shiny kettles and things. It's coffee pot, tea kettle, and all that. Made of aluminum? Uh-huh. And he was from wherever. Now, I've got one of those pans yet in my possession, and I can prove it. That's what we had, that kind of set that we had at that time. We had all the pieces, and also the pie tin, coffee tin, or cake tin and all that, you know. We had all that. So that was something that took long time. That's what took my father. That's what killed my father. Is it strange, though, that not anybody else in the family got the cholera? Well, not seriously, but later on I found out that, see, it depends on the symptoms that show up. Both our sons have been affected by aluminum, too, and I found that out, and I called a doctor in Chicago, in New York, who told me exactly that that was aluminum poisoning, and he told me how to take care of it and cure it, and I did it. I had the medicine. How did you have the medicine then? I had to have a medicine made from aluminum called alumina, and that was the medicine that cured them. The contract? Yeah. And I know that for a fact. Well, that's interesting. My father was always interested in Dr. Urbom and Dr. Olsen. Dr. Urbom? Was that Urbom in Swedish? Urbom, uh-huh. Wonderful man. And he was our doctor for many, many years. And then we got, after he died, we had Dr. Olsen, Alfred Olsen, and he was the brother to, what's his name? I don't know. Bruce Olsen's father. I don't know. Sunstrands? Yeah. You mean he was President Sunstrand? Yeah. I can't remember. See, they were related to, Dr. Urbom and Dr. Olsen were not related, but Dr. Olsen was, his brother was President of Sunstrands. And so we got to know him real well, too. Now, there's two contrasts for you, because Dr. Urbom was a poor man. He was very much interested in homeopathy, but he studied all he could, both in Swedish and German, although he never went to college, but he had a good mind about languages. And he became a homeopathic doctor, only possible because after his wife died, they had six children, then he married a woman who had some money, and she paid for his education because she was interested in this, and he got to be a doctor. Regular medical doctor? Uh-huh. A homeopathic doctor. A regular. He got three years of education instead of eight, like they call for. But, oh, he was good. He delivered my sisters. So he had a license then to practice. Oh, yes, absolutely. He was a wonderful doctor. And he made house calls? Oh, yeah. Lived near us. See, his office was on 3rd Avenue and 7th Street. So you were close friends then? Oh, yeah, and then Dr. Olson was on 4th Avenue and 7th Street, and he came from a rich family. His father was engaged in forestry and was selling tall, tall pine trees to England to brace up their underground coal mines and different mines. Props, yeah, in the coal mines. Uh-huh. And he had money. He had an education. They had real good education. They were brought up, Dr. Olson was brought up by a tutor. I mean, he was educated by a tutor. So that was entirely different. Isn't that strange? Were they working out of the Swedish American, both of them, or just one? Swedish American? Yeah, I mean, Olson, Dr. Olson and Urbom, did they also work at the hospital? They didn't work at the hospital. Why, did they have their own private office? They were not. They've never been encouraged to and never really permitted to belong to the AMA like regular ones. Because they say they're, what do they call them again? Anyway, that they were not legitimate. Nowadays, you know, they have the private practice and then they have a few hours at the hospital, many doctors. Yeah, but they were not permitted to be part of it. But the Swedes, they used them as their family doctor then? Oh, a lot of them. How about the dentist? Was there a Swede also that took care of the teeth? Oh yeah, there were Swedish dentists too on 7th Street, quite a few of them. I went to a German, I think he was, Werner his name was. So your age group, did they go to the dentist for checkups yearly? I did. I went, his office was right on 7th Street so it was easy to go there. So there was a custom then, very early? Uh-huh. For some. But not everybody? No. And then the depression of course, you know, they cut off every yearly visit for everyone. Oh yeah, the depression was terrible. But we lived through it here. We were seven living in this house. So what happened, your father, he got off the 1923 from the Union. Yeah. He was off then, he felt pretty bad about it because he felt like the friends were more betraying him. He told us that morning he knew he was going to be kicked out. So then he came home and he says, yeah, they kicked me out. And so after that there was not that friendly feeling, although it should have been. The men should have felt still the same way, but instead they were being encouraged to strike for higher wages, you know. My father paid his men more than the other contractor did in Rockford. There were only two. The other one was not organized. And my father paid his men more and they did better work. They had to be good. And so they did most of the offices, buildings, and schools and churches in Rockford. And of course a lot of homes too, but I mean they did all the big ones. My father did just about all of them at that time. Because this other contractor, he was good too, but they weren't organized and they didn't get as much as my father's men did. Did you go to Arbetarklubben, as they called them at that time? They had Sunday school for the children. You heard about the Sunday school? No, Edie Kinkbom went there and Helga Westerlin. Did you go at any time to those schools? Sure. And my father says, would you like to go to the Swedish Sunday school? But you were religious in your family. Their families were not religious. Yeah, well we were. I was. I started at three and believe me, I went and I just loved church. Oh, I just loved it. But then you also went to the socialist. Well, then my father says, wouldn't you like to go to the socialist club? It starts at ten. And I said, and it's for an hour. I says, I'll go, but I'll go to my own first and then I'll go over there after for the end of it. So you had two of them then? And you know, he smiled at me like he admired me for saying that I was not going to give up Sunday school. I remember the way he smiled at me and then put his arm around me and he says, that's a good decision. He wanted me to say that I wanted to stay with church, I think. Well, still he was not a church member. No, he wasn't. But he used to go to church. He took me every Christmas to Julata at First Lutheran. Every time. So you are one of the few that you had both schools. You are well educated. How did you see this now? Because the people I talked to that went to this socialist Sunday school, they are pretty bright people. You know, they got a pretty good schooling, in other words, of being honest and... Yeah, well, I remember it well. I remember one of the tests they made there at Sunday school. Herman Hallstrom was talking that day and he says, you know, cigarettes are not good for anybody. That's no good. I'm going to show you, he says. So he lit a cigarette because he could smoke, but he didn't. I mean, it wasn't a habit with him. So he took this clean, lovely handkerchief and blew into it and it made a brown stain. And he says, that goes into your lungs. Every time you puff a cigarette, that goes into your lungs. He says, it can't be any good. I remember that. They didn't do that in church, though, teacher things like that. No, but this cripple lady that I told you about, she told us that it's very bad for you. And she called them coffin nails. But I realized at the time that she was telling the truth, so I got her from both Sunday schools. So Herman Hallstrom, was he one of the teachers at the... Sometimes he would come and teach. And Francine was also one of them. Yeah, I think so. There were several men who enjoyed teaching. So they met on Sunday mornings? Yeah. They met on Third Avenue. No, they met on Seventh Street and it was right, Hanson's Jewelry Store was at the corner. And then you went up to the next door that would lead upstairs, so it was right above there, in that block. So you were a pretty good group. Yeah. Every Sunday. Oh, yeah. But your parents didn't participate. You were alone and... In the Sunday school? Yeah. But once in a while they would come for something, if it was a special program or something. How many years did it keep going? Swedish Sunday School? Hälga and Esther, they used to go. Yes. Do you know who they were? Yes. Uh-huh. You know, Hälga, where's Hälga? Hälga, London... Westerland. No. And you know that she married Erik Egerbom? No. Oh, you don't? No, that isn't the one. That is Esther's sister. Oh, yeah. The one that married Westerlund. Yeah, yeah. Westerlund. She was a schoolteacher. She was just married a little while and then he died. Yeah. I knew those girls from childhood. Real well. Yeah, I remember she told me her husband, didn't he invent...from Samuel's story, that he invented the razor blades sharpener. Oh! Do you remember that?