 April 6th 1986, and I'm sitting together with Adolf de Kael in Molina, Illinois. And he was born 1908, October 4th in Klerken, Belgium. East Flanders you mentioned. West Flanders. I can't even write my own writing. West Flanders. So you were five years old when you came together with your mother. Your father was already here. Can you explain a little bit the reason why he left now before? Well, I think it was money. He had enough money to come by himself and find a job. And then after he found a job he saved enough money to send back for us. And my uncle was here too. That was his brother. So he came to him then? My dad came first and then my uncle came over. And then they lived together and they rented a house. And then they both worked until they had enough money to send for my mother and my uncle's wife. That was my aunt. So my aunt and my mother both came all together. And you know it's a funny thing. I can remember going through Ellis Island. Which is real interesting right now because they're having that hundred year. But all I can remember is walking down steps in Ellis Island and then getting on a train. And it was water. The train ran along water and the lights on the other side reflected in the water. I can remember that like it was yesterday. And when we got to between Chicago and Moline my mother still had raisin bread in her suitcase. So we had some raisin bread to eat. Together with your father? No, no. On the train? On the train. I had a brother that was about a year older than I was. So you were two or three people that traveled together? No, there was four of us. My mother and my aunt and me and my brother. My aunt was married to my brother's, my uncle. My dad's brother. And when we got to Moline, when we got to Moline the depot was on Fourth Avenue and between 15th. It was on the corner of Fourth Avenue and 14th Street. When we got off of the train my dad and my uncle were there waiting for us. And the first thing we did was go across the street to a tavern to get some beer. And from then on we went on home and I can remember that too. So your father was happy then? Oh yeah, they had to go right to a tavern and get something to drink. They got thirsty. Well, you know, they were, Belgian people were drinkers more than the Swedes I think. I don't know. But they drink more beer though than the Swedes? Yeah, yeah. Swedes like harder to make. The Belgians never did that in that great amount as the Swedes. Well, anyway, I don't drink anymore. I used to. I got drunk one time and got sick so I quit drinking. From beer or whiskey? No, from home brew, not home brew, moonshine. Remember when there was prohibition here? I heard about it. Yeah, and everybody made moonshine. And this stuff that I drank wasn't too good. It ran through a pipe, you know, a copper tube and it was green inside and I drank too much and I got sick. I couldn't drink anymore. That was a cure for drinking, yeah. But I drink a beer once in a while, you know. But no whiskey. I have never drank whiskey since. So it was a blessing? I was sick, boy. Was it a long time? No. I was sick during the night. They tell me I was as black as your suitcase there. And I got home and I got to bed and the next morning I got up and I ran right into the wall. But then after that I got better. The same day, you know what I mean, I probably heaved and got rid of everything. They clear out your intestines. Yeah, oh boy. But I never drank whiskey since. Never. And that was when I was about 16 years old. How did they serve it though? Because the bars couldn't serve it? No. We bought it in East Moline. A jug of it. And we went to a camp. A jug? Well, it was a lot of it. Yeah, and it was no good. I'll tell you what we'd done. We rented a cabin on the river and we were going to have a party. And we poured it in glasses so if we got too drunk we wouldn't have to pour it anymore. So we could just get the glass and drink it. But how did you know if it was bad or not? In other words, nobody questions it until you get sick. Well, I knew it wasn't any good because I got too sick. It was just no good. But moonshine in those days you didn't know whether it was good or not. How could you test it? You couldn't. No way. You had to take it. Yeah, just buy it and drink it. My dad used to make a tube, but he cleaned his stuff out. You know that tube, that copper tube? He cleaned it out real good. And his was good. And he put coloring in his so you couldn't tell it from a bottle of whiskey. Ours was just a white stuff. It comes out white first. And then they take brown sugar and white sugar and melt it and that makes a brown color. And then they put so much in the whiskey. How many proofs would there be then? How much proof? They could make it... My dad had a thing that says 89, 90 proof. See, they could make it just like they wanted to. But I don't know what we bought because we didn't ask them. It could have been 120. I don't know. But my dad made it weaker so it was better to drink. Did you drink it straight then or did you chase it on with something? No, straight whiskey. Well, moonshine. There was no such thing as high balls back in those days then? No, no. When that happened, maybe there was. Maybe some people figured it was too strong and they'd pour something in it. But we didn't. No, they didn't even call them high balls then. They just thinned it out a little bit so it was easier to drink. But I can remember when my dad made whiskey. In fact, they made it in a copper boiler. I still have... Well, I give it to one of the kids. They clamped the lids down and the old man put a hole in it and soldered it up so that the coil would come down and cool off by the time he got it down there. We still have that boiler. So they were allowed to do that in their home for private use? No, not even for private use. But beer they could make though? We made beer, yeah. We made homemade beer. Some said that you had the right to do your own brewing of beer. You can still make your own beer if you want to. When it went up to 100 and 120 proof, you had to be careful. Oh yeah, I guess so. A lot of them blew up. It did? Oh yeah, that happened. You could smell the whole neighborhood. Sure, sure. And then what would they do with the corn and the grain that they made this out of? They'd feed it to the hogs, and the hogs would get drunk too eating that stuff. So the pork and the bacon was good in those times? Oh, I guess so. Yeah, it could have been. They were raised the right way. So you came here then and the reason why people left Westländer was because of economic conditions. There was no religious... No, no, no. This was money mostly. To survive and have a better living? My dad had done better than some of them in Belgium. He had bought property just as soon as he got married. He was pretty ambitious over there. In Sweden? In Belgium, yeah. We had property over there. But still he left though? Yeah, he still left. It was better here. Why do you think they get the idea? Did people return and tell them about good times? Right, yeah. And it all got excited? Well, yeah, like the California Gold Strike, you know. Everybody went to California in Alaska. Everybody went to Alaska. Well, a lot of them, you know what I mean. That was younger people. They would go up there. But that was the reason for coming here. They made more money and there was always a job. They could always get a job. Like now if you came over here you couldn't get a job. So you arrived and then had to wait a year or so and you went to school? Well, yeah, I don't know just when we started to school then. Whether we waited. It was in the summer when we came here but I don't know just what year we started school. I just don't remember that. Whether we waited a while or what. But we went to Sacred Heart School up here. And well, I went through all eight grades there at Sacred Heart. And your brother also? Yeah, yeah. He was a year ahead of me. I went to school in Belgium too as far as that goes. You did? Like a preschool then? Well, yeah, they go to school in Belgium sooner than they do here anyway. They still do. They're, well, I can remember not too much but I can remember getting vaccinated in Belgium. And I can remember going to the store to buy a slate. I can remember that. There's a lot of things I can remember from in Belgium. I can remember, I can remember, my brother and I put our barn on fire too. I can remember that. We went in the house and got a match and went up in the, it was like a, oh, the Volta where they kept hay and straw. Hay loft, you mean? Yeah, sort of a hay loft, yeah. And I can remember putting it on, well, my brother put it on fire. It wasn't me, it was him. He was a little older than I was. But we didn't, yeah, I can remember that. Both of us up there and you know, you can kind of remember those things. So what happened in Belgium? Well, they came and put it out. Somebody came and put it out. It didn't burn too much but the police were there. The Sandals came, you know, and had to check and see why it was burning and who put it on fire. But we were too young to put in jail. See, well, they had laws there too, you know. Arson laws, you know. Anyway... You got a good lesson there too. Oh, yeah. Learned the hard way. Yeah. And then there was another case there that I remember like it was yesterday because this was, a fellow got shot, a man got shot, and my mother took both of us, go see him. They covered him up, you know. What they had done, there was two guys, two fellas, and they went hunting at night. My dad always did that too. But he'd go alone, they'd shoot, well, big rabbits, wild rabbits, you know, and then they'd sell them, make some money. They didn't eat them, they sold them because they needed the money, see. Well, they needed the meat to eat but it was too expensive. They could make more by selling them. But anyway, these two guys went hunting. And they were both going with the same girl. So the one thought if he wasn't here, why I'd be number one man with the girl. So he shot him. And he blamed it on to the, well, they have caretakers, you know, groundkeepers and everything in biggest states. He blamed it on him. But it wasn't so. They figured out, well, you shot him, you know. You had a reason and the other caretaker said, no, it wasn't me. And my mother took us and went to see this man that was shot there. And I can remember that like it was yesterday. I don't remember the color of the blanket but he was covered up when we were there. And later on, when we went to Belgium the first time about 13 years ago, I asked my aunt, she's still living. My aunt was, she was 10 years old. She was about five years older than us. And she took care of us when my mother went out to the fields to work. And she's still living. And I went to Belgium, when we went to Belgium the first time, I said to Marta, I said, now who was that? I asked her, she remembered that too? She said, yeah. She remembered it and I told her just how it was and where it was. And she was just flabbergasted that I remembered that because I was only four years old. And it was just like a few other things I told her too that happened, like where the toilet was. But it isn't there anymore. But I said the house was here, the toilet was there. She said, yeah, that's right where it was. I could point it out right where it was. The garage was built over it now and the pigeon coop. But I told her right where it was. So my memory is pretty good for some things. You know what I mean? Certain points that you remember, like going to school and that, getting vaccinated. The only thing I remember about school was going by in that slate and then waiting in line to go to the toilet. There were so many kids waiting in line. I can remember that just like it was yesterday. Isn't that funny? You had to go there early on before you needed it. Sure, but this man now that got shot, I can't corner her and say, now that was related, one of them was related to us and she won't say. But it was related. He was related, one of them was, the one that done the shooting or the one that got shot. Next time I go to Belgium I'm going to ask her, now come on, you have to tell me who that was. That's a secret. Yeah, she wouldn't say. Maybe she really don't remember either, but she should. Because she's got a pretty sharp mind too. So she is up in the 90s then? Yeah, well, let's see, I'm 77. She must be like 82 or 83, something or another. You mentioned about the pigeon coop. Yeah. Most of the people had that? No. Was there a sport on the other side? Yeah, that was a sport there too. But my dad had pigeons here too when we lived here, when he was living. But do you remember any races over there? No, no, no. I don't even remember the pigeons over there. It was this time when we went over there, well the first time, 13 years ago, that they had built a garage and they had built a pigeon coop up over the garage. But no, I don't remember pigeons in Belgium when I was a kid. There was something that brought with them over here? Well, yeah, he had pigeons, well the Belgians had pigeons here. It was a sport in Belgium too, because the Belgians here, most of them, had pigeons. And they raised pigeons here. But it is more like a gentleman's sport though. Could the workers have it over in Belgium for instance? Oh yeah, now they did, yeah. Like my uncle, this Martha that took care of us when we were kids, she was my mother's sister, see. And her, Martha's daughter's son is here now. And he studied to be a Cairo over in Davenport. And he's staying with us right now. He's got my car and he's over there bumming in Davenport some place. But anyway, Martha's daughter's son. Martha's daughter is my cousin. And the son would be like a second cousin or whatever they figured that out. But now, Martha is my aunt, because she was my mother's sister. She would be my aunt. And then her daughter, Martha's daughter, is my cousin. And my grandpa and grandma, I don't remember them for some reason or other. From in Belgium, I don't remember them. I remember a lot of things from there, but I don't remember them. And they moved. My dad bought, the property was about 20, let's see, almost 20 acres that he bought with the house on it before he came to America. And my mother says to her sister, she says, you take care of the folks, my grandpa and grandma, you can take care of the folks while they're living in our house there. So they got some pretty cheap rent there, you know what I mean. But the house was shot down in the first World War. So my dad says, we'll sign the property over to grandpa and grandma, and he can have that rebuilt. As long as it belonged to him and he was in America, he couldn't get the government to rebuild that property, to rebuild the house, because it was shot down. So when the house was rebuilt and everything was fixed up, grandpa signed the property over to my folks again, see. So it belonged to my folks. And they lived in that house for, I think they paid the taxes on it for living there, which was real cheap, you know. And now my aunt Martha and her husband, my uncle, still live in that house. And in the meantime, in the meantime that one house was here and the son, they had a son too, my uncle, or not my uncle, my cousin. They built a house for him next to the original property, and then for the daughter they built another house on the same property. So that got to be quite a piece of property there. And in the meantime they sold some of the ground and back to a farmer. They didn't need all that 20 acres there, you know, for three houses. And Daniel was a cousin. He started a wood shop there, and he built a big shop on it, and they still have that there. But he died in the meantime. He's dead now. Daniel was 58, I think, when he died. Your grandparents know on your father's side, what kind of occasion did he have? What kind of work was he doing? I don't know. And you know there's nobody I can ask except Martha. I've got to ask her sometime. I think he was a farmer. I think he was a farmer. So he done pretty good then, in other words they had the parcel of land there. They had that parcel of land and then he built a house. You know, I think he done real good. I'm still connected here. I was going to show you a picture of grandpa and grandma. So your father, what did he start to work with when he was growing up? In farming, working in the sugar beets. And he went to France to work in the sugar beets. He made more money there, see, than in Belgium. And there was sugar beets to be worked. You know, the farmers in Belgium would work their own beets, sugar beets. But he went to France to work. That's why he had a little more money than anybody else, see. So he could buy that property. How far away from home was that, though, that he had to travel? France, when he worked in the beets. Well, you know, you can drive from one part of Belgium to the other part, to the other side in one day. Real easy. Oh, I don't know how far that would have been to go to France there. 150 miles, maybe about that far. And I don't know how he got there either. I mean, whether he took a bicycle and rode or whether they walked. He walked a lot over there, you know. But, no, I don't know that. And the rest of the people in the West Flanders, they were farming people. Oh, yeah, it's a farming country. It was no industrial... No, no. Like my uncle and aunt Martha, they built everything of brick in Belgium, see. But the windows and the doorways were wood. So my uncle was a Frenchman. Martha married a Frenchman and he moved to Belgium. And he was a woodworker. So he started making wood frames to put in houses. He was sort of a self-employed carpenter. And his son then, when he built the house, when he was old enough, he went into the same business. He learned it from his dad, see. But he built it big. I mean, he had machinery and everything and he hired people. And when we were in Belgium there the first time, we didn't get to visit with him very much because we bummed all over Europe the first time. The second time we went, we stayed in Belgium, see. And we got to know him better. He said to me, he says, Daniel said, he went to the doctor, he wasn't feeling good. He says, I've got to go swimming for the exercise. He said to me, you want to go along? I said, well, yeah, I'll go along swimming with you. He said, you know how to swim? I said, oh yeah, everybody learns how to swim in America here, you know. So I went swimming with him once. The only time I was there when he went swimming, I think he went once a week. And I just went with him once. And every time he'd go swimming later, they'd say, where's that American at that you brought along the first time? Just go swimming. Were you able to communicate with him then? Oh yeah, I speak Flemish fairly good. You kept it up then over the years, you never lost it? I never lost it, never spoke it after we got married 52 years ago. I never spoke it anymore. But you still have it? Oh yeah, it's still there. So even when you started school, you kept Flanders speaking? Well yeah, but you have to learn English right away when you go to school. You had no trouble in school? Yeah, with arithmetic I had trouble. Otherwise the language, no. It was no confusing. No, not that I can remember. But the arithmetic, you know, in the Flemish people and European people, when they get to 20 they say, they count up to 20 just like the English people. But when they get to 20 they say, in 20, three in 20, three in 20, four in 20, five in 20. And I think that confused me and I think that kind of stuck with me. I never liked arithmetic or algebra or anything. Never liked it. So that's the only thing that I can remember that I had trouble with was the arithmetic. So the English came easy then on the playground with the rest of the kids? Oh yeah. My brother and I had to stay together most of the time. When we first started school, the kids would pick on you. They'd say, there's a green horny, he just came from Belgium. Even the Belgian people? Oh the kids, yeah. Well yeah, we were newcomers and they were here for a while already. They'd pick on you, you know. Not when we were together, but when we were alone they would pick on you. I can remember one family in particular that I won't mention any names because there's still some around here, you know. But those two kids were like, they were about the same age as we were. And they had been here longer so they would pick on us. They felt safe then? Yeah, sure, but when we were together they wouldn't pick on us. But I can still remember them. And one of them is still living too. He lives in this area here someplace. Oh Mike, I won't mention his last name. When you came home then, you transferred over to Flemish immediately with your mother and father. Back at your home, I mean from school. Oh yeah, I suppose they spoke English as long as Flemish, when we were younger. Yeah, because your mother, she didn't... My dad learned English pretty quick, working in the shop, you know. He worked at Moline Ironworks. And that isn't here anymore either. They went out of business. There was a foundry up on... ...Fort, third Avenue. And 40 some street, 40, about 40th street. And there was one on third street and fourth Avenue. And he worked down, this one here was closer, you know. And he was a molder. In the summertime, he liked to go work in the beach. And we worked in the beach three years at different places. We worked in Michigan, we worked in the beach in Canada, up in Leamington. And we worked in the beach in Ohio. Did he close up in the summer? No, he just quit. Yeah, that's it. Went to the beach. He made more money that way. They kind of, so much per acre is what they got. How did he get that job? I think there was agents that came around to talk to people. I can remember an agent coming here and they make the arrangements. They say, okay, you get train fare, you buy it to there and you work for so and so farmer. And he's got a house for you, an old house to live in. So he took his old family and then... Yeah, we went and we helped him, helped in the beach. My mother helped too. We all worked in the beach. Were you alone? No, there was others that did that too. But not too many from here. My dad, he liked to work outside and he was real good. He could stoop over from morning until dark at night and never bothered. But I got a sore back out of it. You did it the right way. Yeah, and my mother would stand up with a long-handled hoe. She didn't have to stoop over. My kids would... You cut about... They'd plant them in a row and then you leave the beach set for about 12... For the sugarbeets? Yeah, for about 14 inches. Then you only left one set. And we would pick out, if there was two or three, my mother couldn't do that so good. We'd pick out so there was only one standing there. And my dad... Yeah, yeah. My dad, he could chop them out most of the time and just one would stand there. Because he had a hoe that was only that long and he stooped over. He could be right down there and do that. And that's why he was... Well, you get good at it. They were paid by acres then? Yeah, by the acres. He made more money that way then? Oh yeah, than working in the shop. And in the summertime pouring hot iron, that was no good either. He liked the outside. Well, he was born and worked outside all the time. And yeah, we went to three different summers working in the sugarbeets. He was never planning on being a farmer or renting land somewhere? No. Can you talk about that? When he came here, he worked in the shop. They made more money than the farmers did. And he was a molder, see? And that was piecework. The harder you worked, the more money you made. He got pretty good at that too. So there were no unions then? No, no. And when he'd come back, he was good enough to go back to the same place and get a job. They'd give him a job all the time. So that worked out real good for him. He made more money that way than anything else, you know. And after the Moline... Did they close up then? You mean the foundry? No, he'd worked in the wintertime there. Oh yeah, he worked in the wintertime. But they closed up after a few years. Yeah, they went broke. In the last few years, maybe ten years? Oh yeah, it's been ten. So he retired with them then? No, he retired from... yeah, yeah. But he was a watchman down there when he got so old that he couldn't do the molding anymore and run with that ladle of iron. He got a job as a watchman. And that's where he... Sightoo with the Moline Illinois. Sightoo. You went to high school then? I didn't finish high school. I quit before I had finished. I got a job. Shut that thing off a minute. I got a job then and I worked in several different places. That was the custom for Belgian people. When the kids got old enough that they could get a job, go to work. Don't go to school anymore, see? And I worked at the liquor factory in Moline here. I worked up at silver shops, the railroad shops. And I worked for three years at the Mono Aircraft. That was where we made airplanes down there. And that was kind of unusual too. Was that Viles? Viles, yeah. And Viles was... the auto business was going to pot and then they started making airplanes in one of the buildings down there. And I worked down there for three years. Three summers. They weren't too busy in the wintertime. And I got a job down there as a settling welder. And of course in the wintertime I'd go over to Deere's and get a job over there, see? And that was right next door there. Deere-Mancer was close by there. And then after we got married, why then I got a job over at the arsenal. And I worked over there for 30 years. The first jobs you got now, did your dad help you or anybody else? Or you went to your own? Just went, yeah. There happened to be a... the vice president down at the liquor factory was a Belgian fellow. Did they help? No, I really just went down there and got a job. That's all there was to it. But was it easy? You think they go to a Belgian... Well, it was easy to get a job, period. You know what I mean? They would go in and say you're hiring today and maybe they would be and just go to work. And we had a bicycle, rode back and forth in the morning and at night on a bicycle to go to work. And of the pay you received, did you have to leave some at home then or help out? That was a Belgium custom. Your whole paycheck or your money you got was you give it to your folks and then they would give you spending money. Which was alright in a way, but if you would like to spend your money, well you didn't have anything left by the end of the week. Did you have any discussion with your father then about the... Money? ...generaly a bit more? Well, no, it was my mother I always talked to about money. She was the... yeah, yeah, that's the way it worked there. So it was easy to talk to her? Oh yeah. I had a hard time talking to my dad. Do you have respect for him? Well, you see, I didn't know him really from when I was... He came over here two or three years before and I didn't really know him when we came here. And he was kind of hard in any way to get along with and that's another story. That's why you sided with your mother? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That was easier to talk to her. But otherwise... that was a bad system. The kids don't do that anymore. They pay room and board and then they keep the rest. But you know, you didn't make much money in those days. A liquor factory, 23 cents an hour. That's all you made. And then when I worked up at Silvers Yards up there, I made 45 cents an hour. And then when I worked down at the Monacoop for about a week and a half, two weeks, I made 40 cents an hour. And that wasn't good either, but I learned to weld right away down there. So I got a 20 cent an hour raise, which was a real good raise. 20 cents an hour in those days was a lot of money. And how old were you then? 20. So you got a chance then to learn something? Yeah, yeah. It was easy for me. It come easy for me. Up at Silvers I learned how to weld, cut with a torch. Cut a piece of iron with a torch. And that was about the same thing. You adjust your torch. There was a fellow down there at Monacoop, a fellow by the name of Ed Tate. The foreman was a seven day Adventist and he didn't work on Saturday. And we were busy so we worked on Saturday. And during the week I was making parts for Ed Tate. And Ed Tate was foreman on Saturday so I didn't have to make any parts for him. He said, well, learn how to weld. Well, you're here for a whole day, you might as well learn how to weld. And that's what I did. I had a Saturday there and then at noon I would practice a little bit. And then pretty soon they were looking for welders and couldn't get any welders that could weld stuff like this, you know, tubing. And Ed Tate says to the boss, he says, give him a chance. He says, have him weld something for you. So I welded about the hardest piece they had there to weld and right away I was hired as a welder. So this seven Adventist now, he got two free days a week? Yeah, he was foreman on the weekdays but he wouldn't work on Saturday. He would work on Sunday. Seven day Adventists don't work. But he didn't come back on Sunday then? No, they didn't work on Sunday. He did sometime, yeah, come in and work by himself. But that was a break, you know, for me. And I'd done a real good job right away. My pay started, instead of starting the first of the week, it started the first of the other week. So I was a welder then. And that paid, well, I was making 60 cents an hour, which was real good then. But when did you keep your whole paycheck? How many years you had to work that? Oh, no, that worked different. When we got married, we got married and nobody knew it. We went down to Galesburg and got married. And I was still handing my check over, but I was getting more money, spending money then. But after then, I don't know whether I want to say this on the tape or not. No. Shut it off. This is history now. We'd like to see what happened here with people. Well, yeah, no, not this. This is different. How old were you then when you met? Ruby? Twenty-five. Yeah. You were working at Silvis or in the airplane? No, he didn't work. No, no, no. He was working down at Deere, Deere Mancer? Yes. No, Ruby. Yeah, in the winter time. I met you in the winter time, so I had to be working at Deere Mancer. You met me before my birthday in April or right after. And then we went to Chicago that summer. That was in 1933. What did you mean? No, it was 1934. Yeah, the World's Fair was on in 1933 and they held it over until 1934. And that's when I met her in the winter before 1934. And we went up to Chicago. During the Depression? Yeah. You still had a job? Yeah. Deere Mancer, you said? No, maybe I didn't have a job during the Depression. No, in 19...let's see. I worked at Deere Mancer from 1928, 29 and 30. And from 1931 I probably worked at Deere Mancer part time. I didn't work too steady after that. There was nobody, you know, working. And in 1933 I went up to the World's Fair. I wasn't working then. And then you also went to Florida with Al in 1933. And you came back, and I don't remember what the date is. I'd have to go... Yeah, I'd have to look that up too. And it was through my brother-in-law. That I met. Well, my future brother-in-law. Yeah, her sister was going with Lax then, and that's how I got to meet her then. And in 1934 we went up to Chicago, to the World's Fair. We weren't married then yet. No. But that was strange too to me, you know, because I had... Anytime we went to my aunts and uncles in Minnesota, and the same way in Iowa... The way it was...it was your cousin that was married then, Clara. Oh, yeah. And then you slept downstairs in your aunt's room. Yeah. And I slept upstairs. We weren't married, you know, and she had to sleep someplace else. She couldn't sleep. Nowadays they do it different. Okay? They probably did it then too, but boy... We didn't not...no, we didn't... Sneak around them. Yeah, but anyway... It was probably more interesting that way, wasn't it? No, we didn't. No, that was different, yeah. I heard too much from my mother. But anyway, we went up to Chicago then, to the World's Fair. And you hadn't introduced her to your family? Oh, yes, yes. You had met Clara Lawson? Do you think so? Oh, yeah, yeah, you came over to the house there. Oh, yes, yes, they knew me, and they knew we went to Chicago. But we weren't gone that long. And then we were just dating, and I was working in a grocery store. And... How did we get to Chicago? Do you remember that? On a train. That's what I thought too. Oh, yes, we went on a train. I remember that, because I think that was a... Well, Roy took us down to the depot, come to think of it. My brother. He wasn't married. So when you were introduced into his family, what did your parents say then? I don't remember. I don't remember. You remember so well, you don't remember. Oh, yeah, but I don't know what they said. There are some things I don't remember. But I'll tell you something about when we got married, but I don't want that on the records. But we haven't come through the introduction yet. What did your parents say? About her? Yeah. They didn't say anything because she was sweet, I'm sure. No. No, I don't... But they asked though. Oh, yeah, but no... And he was already... Did they start to talk Flemish to her? No, she couldn't understand it anyway. My dad was real good for...his English was good. He could read the newspaper. He learned to read the newspapers. Yeah, he was pretty sharp. He had to be sharp. Yeah, in Belgium he was an older boy for one thing, and they wanted him to study to be a priest. So they were religious in your family? Yeah, oh yeah. They were in Belgium, but not here. When they got here, that was done. Going to church, that was done. My mother went to church all the time. My dad didn't. How about you now? We still go to church, yeah. At that time when you were growing up. Oh yeah, we went to Catholic school. He went to Catholic school and had to go to... Sunday school on... On Saturday? No, on Sunday. On Sunday. I think we had a Saturday off. Oh, did you? From religion, yeah. He always had a headache. Headache? Yeah, on Sunday. Always had a headache. He always had a headache. Why? Did he have to go to church? I don't know. Did he have a catechism? Yeah, go to church in the morning and then... Was it strained then, you think, on your back? I think so, I think so. I can always remember a headache on Sunday. Isn't that funny? Yeah. But then when you met Ruby Hall there, the headache eased a little bit. When another headache started. Yeah. Now let me see. His brother married to a parent and it was through... And Ruth was going with this Lex parent. With my brother's wife. They were married then. Yeah, so she was going with this Lex parent and then they just said, how about... You know, they introduced us and I remember that it was in April. And I don't remember what date right now it was. It must have been after your birthday because I didn't buy anything for your birthday. I think it was too. It seemed to me like it was the 30th, it was the end of April. And at the time, my cousin and husband was there and they were very religious. And now my folks, my mother, she was like his folks. She never went to church but we always had to go to Sunday school. It didn't make any difference what little town or any place we lived. We were always sent to Sunday school. What church was that, Lutheran? Well, when they came here, I don't know whether they joined the church right away. But Ruth and I were confirmed from Salem Lutheran. He had a motive. I don't remember us being baptized but we probably were in the church too before. There were just a lot of things. Now if Ruth was here, she'd remember something. But whether she'd say so was something else. She's a little different. She's more of a Holland. Yeah, that's right. She was daddy's girl and I was mother's girl. Mama's girl. But my mother always talked about religion. Oh yes. Just like she had a monotone. Pretty soon I was daydreaming. I didn't even hear her. Yes, mother, I could say that. But I wasn't listening to her. That's the kind of kid I was when I grew up. I daydreamed a lot. So I don't remember a lot. I remember some incidents that Ruth don't remember. When we came back from that trip, my parents were pretty upset because mom just wasn't that well. But she made a big deal of not being well. So my sister said, I always figured she was sick. And I think she was. But Ruth said, she just put on a lot. Well, you don't. Well, she had arthritis so bad. And the doctor didn't know what it was until after I had arthritis. Then he figured, oh, well she's got it. I inherited it. How did you introduce Adolf to your family? Well, it was through my sister. Was she already married? No, no, no. She was dating one of your... Well, Lax and Ruth were dating and then one time downtown we ran into them. And you were along. You ran into us. And I was with Ruth and her boyfriend. And ran into him and then he wouldn't know if he could come and take me out. And he had been in Florida for a few months. So just talking about Florida, boy, I just thought he was a great... Another fellow and I bumped down to Florida. And I drove down there. You impressed them on her. Oh, yeah, yeah. I was a wheeler and a dealer and an international figure and everything else. And so in the meantime my sister was talking about getting married. And anytime they would... You're not taking this? I wanted to see how it went. They were... They talk about something else. They never included me. But I knew that Ruth was planning on getting married. And so I wanted to get married the same day as she did. But I didn't want to tell my mother. And so, I don't know, when we became engaged, when you gave me the ring, within the fall. See, it was April and then we were married the 29th of November. And so it was my idea that we went off and got married because that's what my parents did. And I thought, well, what could they do? If they can do it, we can do it too. And so I talked him into that. And I wanted to be close enough to the day. But to this day I never remember whether it's the third or fourth of December that my sister got married. Well, she didn't know about your plans then? No, we just ran off and got married. We didn't tell anybody. I even had to borrow an automobile, my brother's car, to go down to Galesburg. He had gone down there before. This is your crime. And it was on Thanksgiving Day. And the minister and his wife were our witnesses. Who was the minister? Well, I'd have to go look in the book. How long did you find him on this day? I went before. I made a trip down there before. Was there a Catholic priest? No, just a minister. There was a church, there had to be a minister. See, I said if we got married by a Lutheran minister, then we'd get married by a Catholic priest later. Later, yeah. See, to me it didn't matter. Religion to me didn't matter like it did to my mother. It was just like you woke up and you ate and you went to bed. Religion that was. But I didn't have that. To this day, I could go to any church and you can talk about religion all you want to. I believe in God, I believe this and that. I've been a Catholic so long, I won't be anything else. Irregardless. And sometimes there's things that I don't really care. At first, I really like it. They say, what is it when they say you're not Catholic? A convert. I didn't like it. Yeah, she was a convert. From one religion over to the other. That's a name. That isn't a good expression anyway. They don't use it anymore. But sometimes I take that to heart and I'm being mad. But I never tell him. I always liked the idea of going to church. And so to this day, we always go. We always go to church, yeah. Now we have company from Belgium now, a young couple. And we went to church yesterday, but they didn't go. They don't go to church except on Easter, Christmas. Did they stop going over there? Yeah, they don't go to church anymore. They don't go to church in Belgium anymore like they used to. The old people do. You had the Lutheran wedding then. The church was free. You were married in the Catholic church. So what did you tell your parents when you got home? I didn't tell them. You didn't tell them? No, we didn't tell them. What kind of excuse were you going to have now? Well, I got kind of tough and I wanted more money. I wanted to keep my money that I was making. Then they wondered, what do you need the money for? No, they didn't say. They didn't bother. I was getting older and I wanted to have some more money. I was working and I wanted to pay room and board like everybody else. So you didn't move together when you got married? No, no, not right away. Is this the only thing? Yeah, that's all. You can talk about it. You've been doing this job yourself. Yeah, I know. This is the part that I don't want you to do. This is different. I mean, truth is history. What happened there when they found out that we were married? I couldn't keep it from my mother. I had to tell my dad when he found out. It was a cold day in February when he says, Okay, you're married, get out. He said that? Sure. Why? Oh, I was married. You're done here. We didn't tell him before. It was a break for you. I can keep my paycheck. I kind of kept it before that too, but that was tough. That wasn't nice to do. You don't kick your kids out of the house in the wintertime. No place to go. You mean it was literally all the way from A to Z? Yeah, just get out. But then you had her though. Yeah, and then I had her to contend with. That was an explanation. And off he went. It was alright with her folks. It was harder? It was alright. You just don't kick your kids out of the house. How many times have you visited her parents' house? Oh, all the time. Oh, yeah. In fact, you remember that you want a turkey? Oh, yeah, I want a turkey. Your mother cooked it. So I took it over to her mother's house. Oh, yeah, we got along alright over there. You didn't talk religion? No, no, no. Well, I still don't talk religion too much. I go to church all the time. But you see, when you're brought up from when you're real small in the church and you hear church history, you hear catechism and everything all the time, it gets so that it just flies by, you know, just forget it. No, but my parents, no, that was our... My mother wasn't very happy, but... I don't know. I was afraid to tell my dad and he would have been much, much easier to talk. Oh, yeah. I didn't know that until years later. He was an old softie. My mother was the one that... That was tough, yeah. She stayed there all her life then to be tough? Yes. She was the one that my mother said that's what went... So you found out about your father's softness too late and when it was all over. Yeah, well, he wasn't all that bad either, you know. He was alright. Yeah, he had his ideas, but if it was what mother said, well, that's what we did. But it just... Then it was through Florence Gustafsson, this friend, that we got an apartment. And her aunt... With a couple of Swedes. Man, if there ever was a Swede, he was where we lived over there. On the third street, on the top of the hill, and that house is still there. And we had the upstairs apartment and it cost us $20 a month. And at the time you weren't making $20. No, about $18 it seemed like I was making then. And we put $5 a week. You mean $18 a week? Yeah. And our rent was $20 a month. And by that time... It seemed like I made more than that, Ruby. No, you went to work at the arsenal. Oh, then is when I made more. Then you got $25 a week. He was skeptical about changing jobs, but it was so much better deal that... Yeah, that worked out real good. Going over there as a welder, and I had to do a little lying to get on my application, you know. I had to have three years of welding experience, electric welding experience. And I didn't have. But I could weld good enough that I got by over there, see. Well, in fact, welding came easy for me. For some reason or other, all I had to do was see somebody do it once, and I could do the same thing and maybe better, see. So I got a job over there. And Ole Larsen worked at the Monacoop. And I knew him real well. And he got a job over there at the arsenal. And of course when I walked in the shop there, there was Ole. And we got to be good friends. Well, at the shop at the Monacoop, we got to be good friends. And then over there, that was just fine. Was he a welder also? Oh yeah, yeah. He was settling... Was he finding out things? Well, Ole Larsen, Ole Larsen, yeah, I could show you his picture on the pictures I got there. Anyway, like when I worked up at, when I went up to Deere's up there at East Moline to get a job as a welder. You know, usually the foreman will say, well, I wonder if he is a welder, you know, we have to try him out. And I knew a couple of guys up there and I talked to him and the boss said, boy, he has to be a welder. He knows two welders here. So I never had to try out up there. I bet you that guy was kind of skeptical later on. But I got a job as a welder up there, no problem, no trouble. You stayed on for 30 years, how long you said? At the arsenal. At the arsenal. 30 years, yeah. I got 30 years in over there. He was laid off though after World War II. Yeah, for a while. They cut down over there. And the boss, he tried everything to keep me there, but he couldn't. It was regulations, you know, and he had to do what he had to do. Also the soldiers, the... The GIs got to stay there. They had the preference that... Oh yeah, yeah, sure. But I got back over there. He begged me to come over there to work. When he had an opening, he could hire me. So you had a deferment then to go out on the draft, I suppose, when you worked at the arsenal? Yes. Because you worked in the armament. Yeah, that was one reason, and we had four children then. Was it four children? Yeah, we had four of them then, yeah. And yeah, he kept me... I always asked Ransom if I'd have to go to the army. No, you're all right here. You're just fine here. That's... You can keep me out. But now his brother went, and although his brother is a year older, but married much younger, he was 36 when he was drafted. Well, he wasn't quite 36, Ruby. He was still... No, when they sent him over, he was 37. And 37, if you didn't want to go, you didn't have to. But he wanted to go overseas. And of course he was killed. Yeah, he got killed when he went over there. The Battle of the Bulge, is that it? No, no. It was at the time of the Battle of the Bulge, but they were already in Germany. The Battle of the Bulge was really in Belgium. So he was not too far from his home? Yeah, we rode back and forth, you know, and if he would get a leave later on, he was going to go to visit, you know. But... He never made it? No, never got a leave over there. It was in December. But he could have refused then because of his age, if he wanted to? He could have stayed here if he wanted to, but he wanted to go over, you know, he wanted to fight. He was kind of a... Well, he was having a little bit of family trouble too, and he didn't care whether... He liked to get away from here. And so... The... What was that? What was that? At the time, when he was drafted, he really thought it was great being in the army. Yeah, he was too old really. And the younger... The younger... ...like 17, 18, 19, you know, all in that spell called him grandpa. And you know, all the things that they have to do, you know... Dig foxholes and stuff like that, they'd help him. Because it was harder on him to dig through the rocks and everything. They'd help him a little bit, you know, so he got by. But he was a good-natured fellow, I guess. I never got to know him that well. Or my sister did, see, because that was her brother-in-law. His brother was her brother-in-law because... He married Selma. Selma was Lex's sister. And that's kind of a... Yeah, you've got to follow that. And he has one daughter. His brother had one daughter. And so that's also my sister's niece and our niece. And that doesn't usually happen unless you're marrying the family. But they did that in Belgium. I don't know why they did that in Sweden. Yeah, well in Sweden, I bet you they did that the same thing. They didn't go too far to get married, you know. Because you couldn't travel more than ten miles and walk back. If you walk five miles, you know. It was only your time, you know, when you returned from Florida. Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. The world family comes back. So did you quit working then after you married Adolf here? Was that a custom also in the Belgian families when the fellow married? If the girl worked, she stopped quit working. Yeah, when they have kids, you know. How about if they didn't have kids? Did she continue to work then? My mother, she didn't... Well, to go to the beach, yeah, she worked, you know. That was not a regular job. But in the sugar beach, yeah, she worked a little bit. But not here when she raised the family? No, when we were grown up. Yeah, she stayed home all the time.