 And my name. So your first name is Ethel. And then Eileen, Josefina. And Josefina, that's your grandmother's name, yes? Yes, and my mother's. And your mother's also? And she would apply to have that for a first name. My daddy insisted he wanted Ethel. So he got his way. 17th of June, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Ethel Pearson. Pardon? In Rockport, Illinois, and she was born 1899, 30 December, in Rockport. Your parents, now, John Pearson, he came from Sweden, from Skåne. Yes. Near Malmö, somewhere. Yes. And then your mother, Josefina Bedgildal. Can you tell me? No, Anna. Her name was Anna, Anna Josefina. I think there's another name. They both came from Sweden? There was an Alma sister that came the same time she did. Anna Bergendal. Alma. Alma. And how old were they when they came? Did they come together? They were, you know, in those days, they had to have sponsors. There was a friend that came from their area that was visiting in Sweden, and she offered to take them under her wing, and they got reservations on a boat. All that has gone from my memory. But they were young when they came, though, isn't it? They were not very. In their 20s? Oh, between 20 and 25. I mean 20 and 30. I see. But they were not married then when they came? No, neither one of them. They married when they came and settled down in, they came to Rockford? No, they came to Chicago. To Chicago. And they stayed there for a while then? Oh, yes. It was kind of unexpected and kind of an interesting story how they came to Rockford. Tell me about it, what happened. They had a very good friend in Chicago by the name of Liedberg, L-I-E-D-B-E-R-G, and she came from the next station to Merlunda. And her father had something to do with the railroad, I think. In Ruiningsnes? Are you familiar? Yes, yes. And they, Mother and Aunt Alma, knew that she was in Rockford, but they didn't have her address. But they did know of someone that came from that area that they had the address to. And that was a man that came from Ruiningsnes that they knew had this address to this friend that they wanted. So they decided to take a trip out here. You remember there used to be a little old station on Kishwaukee Street where the trains came in? Yeah. So they came there and there was a friend, my mother and this friend, had started a rooming and boarding house in Chicago. And all these immigrants came and they patronized them, of course. And so they decided they'd try to look up this friend. Well, my mother's friend had a brother that was going along, and somehow he had forgotten something. And he had to go back when they got the station in Chicago to start out, so they missed their train. So he decided he'd have to go home and pick it up, whatever it was, I don't know. And so they had to take a later train. So they came in to the station on Kishwaukee Street quite late at night, and not a very good time to look up numbers and discover things. So they sat on the church steps on East State Street. Do you know where that was, that church on 3rd and East State? There was a big department store later on across the street. Hess Brothers, have you ever heard of them? Yes, but that was torn down though years ago. Yeah, but this... And there was also a church there. On the opposite corner. What kind of church was it? It was not... It was not a Swedish church? No, no, but they went over there, that was two blocks, two or three, four blocks from where they got off the train. They sat on the steps until it became light. And then they thought, well, now they could go and look up this person that had the address that they... I'm sorry, but mornings are not good for me. It sounds all right. So what happened then? Did they find out? So they walked over to this address that they had, which was 309 South 5th Street. Do you know where the Freeman School is? Yes. Well, it was just kitty corner and down one house. So they got this address which they had, and they had a grape harbor out in the back. So they said, well, let's go sit there until people start waking up. And pretty soon this old man, well, he wasn't so old then. He was in his 50s. He came walking out, and he wanted to know if he could help them. And they said, well, they were looking for so-and-so because he had an address that they wanted. And he says, well, that's my brother-in-law. And he was a widower, and the brother-in-law was living with him. So he says, well, I'll have my housekeeper fix you some coffee and a little breakfast. And by that time the brother-in-law would be down. So that's the way it was arranged. And that was the first time my mother had seen my father. And he seemed to have been smitten right away. And he made several trips to Chicago, and finally he persuaded her to marry him, and she came to Rotherton. So, but she kept the boarding house, though, to get away? No. I mean, for a short time, though, after the... Very short time. But this partner of hers had a boyfriend, too, and she thought she could serve him his meals without payment. My mother didn't think that was quite right, that she should feed him. The preloading. Yeah, preloading. So, but that boarding house didn't last too long. Was that on the north side of Chicago? Yeah, over all the Swedes that came. And I don't know how many trips my dad made in there, but he finally persuaded her to marry him. And so she came out here, and they lived then at 309 South 5th Street, which was his home. And all her brothers and sisters that came to this country made that their home. And they got jobs, of course, and the girls especially took jobs with wealthy families. And your father, now, did he own the house there on the... Oh, yes. He was in the furniture manufacturing business, one of the early settlers. I'm sure you've heard of that. He had his own business, or... Well, not his own, but... Empire, or what was the name of it? You know, when I was growing up, I was so much younger that I didn't pay any attention to names. They didn't mean anything to me. It's just of late years. This was in the... They got married in... In 92, I think. 92? Yeah. So she came then in 89 or something, 91? No, no, it was a little earlier. In the late 1880s, probably 1880 or something like that. She stayed a few years in Chicago, then. Yeah. She had a cousin that lived there, and his name was Hessler. You've probably ran across that name in your... Oh, his name, Hess. Hessler. Hessler, yes. Well, my grandmother was a Hessler. I don't know where they came from. Somewhere in... You're catching me. From the same area in Sweden, you think they came? I've often wondered. They had some kind of a business. In Sweden? Yeah. You would probably know. And I've often wondered what the business was. I was going to try to find out about it. So your uncle now, Carl Bergendahl, was a... Yeah, he came. He came later. Yeah, he stayed at our house. And then she had a cousin by the name of Rignel, Carl Rignel. Oh, Rignel. And he stayed with us, too. It was a big house. So you remember this Carl Bergendahl, then, when you were growing up? Oh, of course. You were born 1899, so he was still staying in your home, then, when you... What? When you were a small girl. Yeah. Was he still at your house then, Carl Bergendahl? Oh, yeah. And he was a mechanic. Yes, a very, very good one. He had his own...? No, he worked for Barbara Coleman. Barbara Coleman. Yeah. Oh. And now I miss my track. Where am I at? How was it now when you were growing up in around 1904, 1905, when you start to remember Rockford? How was it then? Was a lot of horses around? Was it what? A lot of horses and buggies and... Yeah, naturally. Not too many cars? None that I know of. So when you went on to different places, you had a walk, then? A walk, mostly. I went to Freeman School through the eighth grade, and by that time, the furniture business had gone plunk. And that was in 1908? Oh, something like that. 1910? Yeah. There was bad times? Bad times, and my father tried so many different ventures and nothing worked, and he felt so badly. And he was one of the charter members of the First Lutheran Church, and he had pledged a certain amount of money. Your father? Yes. But then he must have come here in the 1850s then? No, I think it was probably the early 60s. But that church was organized in 1854? Was it? The First Lutheran Church. Then he was here, that's right. It was during his first marriage, and he had this one son, Fred. What? So he was married once before? My father, yes, he was a widower. And it didn't take long after he saw my mother out in the grape arbor, he decided he needed another wife. Another companion. And so everybody after that of our relatives came to Rockford. So did he get out of the furniture business then in 1910? Did he get out of it? Oh, sure. What was the reason for the bad times? The Panic of 93. Oh, that was still affecting the time? Oh, of course. And all of these Swedes you hear about now that were so active were his contemporaries, like P.A. Peterson. I always wondered about P.A. Peterson. He came out with the shining sun on his shoulder. How did he do it? I don't know. He had it up here, I guess. He was the only one that succeeded? Oh, no, not the only one. And the people that started the Swedish American Bank, have you heard of the Hardings? Yes. Hardings? Well, they lived around the corner from us, near the Emanuel Lutheran Church. So you played around with their kids then, the bank owners and the furniture factories? Yeah. Well, but see, I was too young. You didn't pay attention to it? No. And I wish I'd paid attention to name, but I wasn't interested. So your father-in-law, he was older than, because he was married before? He was 22 years older than my mother. 22 years older? Yeah. So he had the small children then? No, the son was 12 years older when they were married. But you grew up with him then? Very little, because things started to go, and he, the son enlisted in the Army. He was in the Spanish-American War and was in the, what is now the? The Philippines? Yeah. What was his name? Fred. Fred Pearson. And after he came back from the war, he married, and we were in touch then, but I was just a little shaver. I wasn't interested in, well, I was so shielded, I was not allowed to grow up. You were protected then? Oh, very much so. But you also had a brother, Henry. Henry, he was seven years older than I. I was an afterthought. And... So you didn't play too much with him then, because he was so much a different age? No, no, he couldn't be bothered with me. So you were a little bit spoiled then, because you came in late and... Not spoiled, protected. Protected. What is the difference? When you're protected, you can't grow up. You're not allowed to grow up. You weren't allowed to grow up? Oh, no, no, no, no. Why? Was your mother afraid that you were going to... Yeah, but there were a lot of Swedes around there, though, where you were living. Yeah. Swedish kids. Did you talk Swedish then, at the early age? I couldn't talk English until I went to school. So it was all Swedish? Yeah. How about the other kids in the neighborhood, did they talk Swedish? Not as much as I did. But see, I was so protected. It's a mistake. How about the... Yeah, but you've got to be protected, though. I mean, a child doesn't know the word to step all over the place. And I suppose the rocker was not big at that time, but it was probably big enough to be... Yeah. Well, my mother was fearful. She was. Was she a religious lady? Yes, very much so. Very much. And they belonged to the First Lutheran. But after they started hounding my father for that pledge, he said, I'm not going back to church. And he didn't. So when my mother and her sisters came, they went to the Zion Church. That's a walking distance. So you went to Sunday school there, then, or confirmed also? Yes. In Swedish? And then went to Swedish summer school where I probably learned Swedish more than the other kids. And I heard, as I was growing up, my cousin, Ruben, oh, now this goes on. When the Wal-Mart boys were, oh, in their early years, the family decided to go back to Sweden. And they settled in Oskarshamn, and the boys were quite close in age. And when they had finished grammar school in Sweden and graduated, they wanted to come back to the country where they were born, which they did. And they came, oh, by that time, my mother had another sister that had acquired a house on East State Street, 1908 East State. And they came to her, the two Wal-Mart boys. And what was the first time you saw a good one of Wal-Mart and his brother? No. When they came back from Sweden, because you were too young when they left. Well, no, they were just little kids then, and I didn't take to them probably so much. But when they came back then, then you... Oh, yes. And then they had a sister that was born over in Oskarshamn. And after she had finished school over there, she wanted to come to America, too. And the boys wanted the family to come, which they did. And then they put her in continuation school here, you know, where the high school was. She went to continuation school for two years. And then she was put in her regular high school class. And she finished high school in two years. So I was more, knew more about Ruby, the sister, than I did the boys, of course. So, oh, she wanted to go back to Sweden so badly and see her schoolmates in Oskarshamn. So this was during the Depression. And she got a job with Williamson Motor Company, and the wages were small. But she'd go to the bank before she took her paycheck home and deposited most of it. She was going back to Sweden to visit. She talked me into going with her. Yeah, but at that time I had graduated from high school and had a job and had a little more money than she had. So in 1930, she and I went to Sweden. And we visited with her aunts, which they were her father's sisters in Oskarshamn. Did you see your mormor then, or grandma? Let's see. No, she wasn't living there. But an aunt and an uncle had taken over. An uncle who had been a Swedish, no, a Finnish consul in Sunderland, England. He had given up that and had come back to Alfredsborg in Merlanda. And they were living there in the old family home. And so that was our headquarters. How long did you stay then, 1930? Oh, all summer. All summer. Did she stay or did she go back? Oh, she came back. Was she married? No, she met her husband on the boat going over. And this was a very quick affair. He was from Borby in Skåne and had his honors degree and was studying at MIT. But he had to go back to Sweden to service in the Army, which he did. And this romance was real quick, two-sided. And they corresponded. And three years later they were married. And he had applied for a position in what was then Siam. And he practically started electrical engineering school in Siam. And they still have their connections with that. They had two children, a boy and a girl. And as they were growing up, the doctor, they, let's see, all doctor friends of theirs, they were catching me at a real bad time, I'm afraid. But she never came back to Rockford to live here as a married woman? Yeah, three years later she was married. So she stayed in Rockford for three years? Very unwillingly. Charles was sending out feelers here and there for a job. And he landed this job in Schula Longhorn University. I'm sure you've heard of it. So they went on there to live then? Yeah, and that was their honeymoon going over there. So that was a good thing. She went to Sweden 1930? Yes, she was very happy. It was her romance. And then the doctor suggested that she take the children back to this country because the climate wasn't right for them. They had a boy and a girl. And they came by freighter over the Pacific. And then Gunner met them in California and they came back to Rockford by car, I think he was driving. So they settled here then? No, no. They had promised him after when Ruby and the children came that if he would come back after he picked up his family, he would be eligible for a pension after a year. So that's what they had decided on. So they stopped in a suburb of Stockholm. They got an apartment for a year and put the children in school. But Charles had to be back September 1st at the university. So he flew, but she thought one parent should be living. So she had made reservations on a Danish boat to go out to Bangkok. But in the meantime, my mother had died. And she said, why don't you come over to Sweden and stay with us? We're going to rent a house outside of Stockholm. So I thought about it. And my mother had died then just before around Christmas time. And so I was saving my pennies and I was working for the utility then. In Rockford? Yeah. My boss was in charge of general accounting, had a very responsible job. And he was always so kind and thoughtful to me. And so he gave me leave of absence. And I went over to Sweden and I stayed there. But after Charles had left, she said to me, why don't you come with me to Bangkok? I said, you're crazy. I haven't got the time or money. Oh, I don't know about that. Let's sit down and see what we can do. So we wrote letters here and there, wrote to the embassy in Stockholm. And I wrote to my boss and I said, I know I'm asking a great deal after having this long leave. I should ask for more. And he said, whatever you decide, I will never hold it against you. So he wrote back right away. And I said, I'm also concerned about money, whether I'll have money enough to carry me. So he considered all these angles and he went to the powers that be on the third floor and they told him about the situation. And they said, well, if you think you can do without her for a few more months, that's up to you. So he wrote me a very, very fine letter and said, I know how much travel means to you, so you go ahead and go and we'll try to make due. And as far as money, I know you have money in the credit union. I'll talk to the directors and see if we can send it to you. So he took the manager of the credit union with him down to the bank and bought traveler's checks and sent them to me. What year was this? In the 50s? No, 47. It was after the war then. Yeah, just after the war. And we wrote to the Danish company, oh, no, no reservations at this time. Everybody was going back out to the Far East after the war and they didn't have any vacancy. So we wrote back and they thought, well, she's an American, she's got dollars. And they reconsidered and I got a room in the same cabin as hers. And that trip took us two and a half months from Copenhagen out to Bangkok. And we made 13 different stops. And back in those days, they didn't have the container ships that they have now. Everything was done by hand, you know, and it was local people. And it was so interesting. But this is where my travel bug... So it was a good trip then. You saw a lot of different things. How did you like the climate down there? Was it humid or hot? No, I came in November and I stayed with them in Bangkok for about a month and a half. Then I didn't know how I was going to get back here. Charles, this great big tall fellow with long legs, he went to all the boat companies in Bangkok. He said, if he could get a reservation for me, come back via California. And finally he got, oh, and in those days you traveled with a trunk, believe it or not. So I had this great big old trunk and we got to a ship that was loading for Hong Kong. Charles went and asked the captain if they could take my trunk. He said, oh sure, they'd take the trunk. And I didn't expect to see that trunk again ever. But when I got to the office of the shipping company in Hong Kong, there was a trunk. And then about the middle of, well, I spent Thanksgiving in Bangkok and they were all invited to the American Embassy for a regular Thanksgiving dinner. And of course I got in on that. And oh, it was so interesting. And all we did was sightsee and whatnot. So from living a protected childhood, you really took advantage of your adulthood. My personality changed. It did? Absolutely. You were more curious then when you got older. Yes. And nobody to tell me what to do. I was on my own. You had a good relationship with the professor, Dr. Inglewood? Yes. Do you think the Swedish school was good for you? I didn't think so then, but I do now. You hated it? Yes, I hated it. All my pals were having a free summer, but I didn't. But you were not the only one, though. Oh, no. How many were you in the summer school? Swedish? Fifty? Oh, at least. Probably more than that. But didn't you feel good then? You had a lot of fifty youngsters around you. No, but all my pals that lived around me had a free summer. Did they poke fun at you going to the Swedish school? I don't remember that. But you didn't like it? No. After being tied down to school all year, I still had it. But it was just maybe six weeks, something like that. But did you learn anything during this time? Well, of course. But you knew Swedish at that time. You could speak it and understand it. Why did you need it then? Did you learn to write? Oh, I learned to write when I went to grammar school. But the Swedish, I mean. After fashion. In this summer school, not six weeks, did you have any writing lessons from a teacher? I don't think so. You only talked and conversed. Talked, talked, and Bible stories and things like that. In Swedish? Yeah. And you had to remember sounds and verses in the Bible? I remember for confirmation, you know, the minister calls on you for... That was Pestosido? No, it was... You remember him, though? No, it was...he had a son that was a lawyer. Now, maybe it will come to me, but anyway, he... You see, this is where my old age is creeping in. Forget names. Don't put that in there. I'm very much ashamed of it. How did all those people now that went to Sunday school, the Swedish school, did they all hate it more or less what you're talking about? No, it was just me. No, but I suppose the others were... Yeah, all the members of the church would send their kids to the Sunday school. Do you think they was good, though? I mean, would that have been better? I didn't realize then, but I do now, that I got a foundation. Anyway, and I...mother always talked Swedish, but she would read the English newspaper, if you can feature that. Your father, now, did he knew more English than your mother? Oh, of course. Because he was in the business. Yeah, he had traveled for them. He had the most beautiful handwriting you ever saw. I don't know too much about his early years. Did he go out of the furniture business then when it was starting to get bad times, or he started with something else? What? In 1908, 1910, there was bad years for furniture business. Well, he tried so many things, even invested in a grocery business, and that went kerplunk. He was so discouraged. And then he finally went as a laborer in one of the furniture factories because he had a good foundation in it. And he saw a man standing at his workbench and knew that they had crossed him off the list. No notice or anything. And he came home heartbroken. And mother says, Don't worry about it. We'll get along. So she carried on with her rumors and borders here. And they were mostly relatives that would come. And she was able to manage money very well, make it go a long way. I never heard her complain. Did you have to help out then with your mother in the boarding house? Oh, wipe dishes and things like that. But I finished high school. She told me when I graduated from grade school, Well, you can have two years in high school, but I won't promise you any more. And then after two years, she still carried on and I graduated from high school. I walked from my place down to the high school. So did most of your age group went to high school? Yeah, but they... I mean the full term? Pardon? Did they finish high school, most of the group? Oh yeah, not most of it. But this was a concession on my mother's... Because it was a hard, family's hard up. They couldn't afford to have the... They couldn't afford it. They did get scholarships like they do now. So I thought I was lucky. But you didn't have to pay any extra to go to high school, to finish high school? Well, you had your books to pay for it. I don't, no, I don't think there was tuition. I don't think so. So they went through the taxes? Mm-hmm. But anyway, then my cousin Ruby came back and I was with her so much. Now, of course, she spoke beautiful Swedish and I absorbed some of that, I'm sure. So after high school, what kind of work did you get then? Did you do dentistry? Oh, I had several small jobs. Office jobs? Yeah, and there was a man that did typewriter repair work and I told him, I was so... He was a friend and I met him in my daily walks and I said, I don't like this job I got. He said, well, go over to the gas company. I know that they are looking for a girl, which I did, and I got the job. And I stayed there until the gas company took over the electric company or vice versa. And then in a few years, they acquired the street railway company. So it was quite a job by that time. And each time my boss took on more work and passed more on to me. So I loved my job. So you worked as an accountant or a secretary? Secretary and accountant. I worked there for about 44 years. So when you came back from Bangkok, did you have your job? Oh, sure. What did your friends say when you came back after all this? I had a little old typewriter that I carried along with me and I'd write... On the trip? Yeah. Well, I was going to write letters in Sweden, but they followed me all the way around. And I'd write letters to my friends in the company and they'd saved them. And after I came... You know Paul and Margaret Johnson? They live on... Oh, he was a teacher at... Oh, yes, I was a science teacher. Yeah. Well, Margaret was my very best friend and she had a party after I came home and asked all these friends who had left to bring my old letters. Her mother came from Petersburg. Where? In Petersburg, in Murunda. Yeah. That's the one. Yeah, and they have a picture of the mother's old home. So your uncle now, Carl Burgendahl, he stayed with you for a long time, then with your mother? Yeah. And... Oh, off and on. Off and on, yeah. But this cousin... He never married, though? Yes. Well, he did. Yeah, late in life. But no children? No, no children. How about you now? Did you marry the... No. No, you didn't... No. Of all this travel, you didn't find one? Oh, that's all I could... I got the travel bug. I wasn't interested in anything else. You look for the sky rather than the boyfriend. Yeah. Yeah. So did you belong to any organizations here in the Rathford... Yes, there was one... A group that belonged to the YWCA, and they had started what they called the Cosmo Pountain Club, which included all nationalities. And you belonged to that one? Yeah. But you didn't belong to a specific Swedish organization? Uh-uh. Oh. Oh. Well, then, after the war, I visited them and took this long trip. That was the beginning of my downfall, I guess. That was all I was interested in. The travel? Yeah. Did you travel... All over the States, all over Europe. Alone? Sometimes someone would go with me. But Ruby had one ticket from Bangkok to Hong Kong. While I was in Wong, that was for her. I could have used that ticket very well, but she... So after you saw your trunk in Hong Kong, you had confidence in the fellow man? Mm-hmm. You always hear so much stories about the Orient, you know, it's dangerous to travel alone, especially for girls and so on. Oh, and that, when my trip from Bangkok to Hong Kong was by plane, it took off on the water, and, you know, they went way, way up, much higher than an ordinary plane. And I was the only girl on that trip from Hong Kong to Bangkok. And it was a full load. And you were not afraid? No. And when we landed in Hong Kong, I thought, where am I going to stay now? You had no reservation? No reservation. You've heard of the Peninsula Hotel? It's world famous, have you? No, I haven't. The Peninsula? It's the famous hotel in Hong Kong. It's on the island. And I went up to the desk and I said I needed a bed, but I didn't have much money because this was the end of my trip. They said, well, maybe you could be happy in a dormitory. So I said, well, show it to me. So they took me up to this room that was a great big area, and they had taken off a section of it and made a bathroom of it. And otherwise it was just cots. So I got a cot and a suitcase went underneath it, and the bathroom was around the corner. And I was there until my American boat arrived. This sounds dangerous, though. I mean, here you go without any reservations. It wasn't dangerous then. But you didn't know that at all? No, nobody questioned it. What was your mother's protection in your head at that time? She didn't worry about that. Well, I think it was ingrained by that time. So you had no worries then, in other words, go without reservation, or you had no idea where you were going to sleep the next night. No, no. But then the boat came, and that was the American boat, and that was quite an experience. That only took three weeks. And we made one stop after I got on the boat. Now, that I should remember, but I don't. I don't remember the name. If you hadn't asked me, I could have told you. When somebody asks me, then it's gone. How about the food and water and intake, I mean, the diarrhea and the stomach? Oh, I think on the Danish boat, there was an epidemic of flu or whatever it was, and most everybody got seasick. I did, too, but that goes on. But it didn't worry you anything about seasickness? There was an American on that boat that was taken on over there. He had, what is it? Everybody gets out either. On the sea, you mean? Huh? On the sea? Yeah. Scurvy? No. Oh, maybe it will come to me. You're staying for so many days and weeks on the sea, you know, they affect your... Yeah, but that boat, I was on that boat from September through the beginning of November. It was eight weeks, I think. Oh, it was marvelous. How were you able not to cope with the food, for instance? I mean, you had to be careful not what you were eating. Yeah. You thought about that? Uh-uh. You ate every meal? Somebody would take care of you. Did you use liquor at any time? Hmm? Use liquor at any time? Liquor? Oh, yes. On that Danish boat, it was... You had Eckewit? Huh? You had Eckewit? The captain was newly married to an American girl that had been a passenger on his trip before, and she had gotten the last boat from here to Denmark before the war broke out. And they lived on this boat in Denmark all during the war, and they had two sailors that took care of them, because she had lived in... Oh, I hate this. You had a United States? No. It's now United States, but it was Hawaii. Oh, Hawaii. Yeah. And that was quite an experience for her. And she would see that Ruby and I would be invited up to the captain's quarters, and we went through the Mediterranean, of course, the Red Sea, and on and on. Every evening about sunset, we'd be invited up there, and we had a little drink. You've seen the seven seas. Yeah. It was wonderful. How could you settle down after so many weeks on the sea, I mean, coming back to Rockport? No sea life here at any time, no traffic or anything. How could you? Well, I told you, my personality changed. You didn't try to get a job then, for instance, down in Thailand or Hong Kong? I loved my job here. It was nice to come back again. And I got interested in people of different nationalities through this club. So your cousin Rubina, is she still living in Sweden? Oh, yes. Her husband died just recently, so she's living there. They had, oh, I went back several times. So the last time you were in Sweden, what was that? They lived in Vesterås. Vesterås. And when were you back? A couple of years ago? Oh, no. I've lost track of all the times I've been there. Been there many times. Yeah. So Gunnar Wallmark, he, how did his life develop then when he came here? He started to work for his uncle, Carl Bergendahl. Yeah, he got, and then he went to work for Sunstrance. Yes. And he did very well as a coach. He's a brain. He's an inventor. He's still inventing. Yes, I understand. Isn't that something? Yes. I think he's about five or six years younger than I am. Yeah, about five or six. He has a brother, Harold, who lives out in Arizona. So your family kept, your mother died there, and your father died there. Oh, in 23 he died. 23? Mm-hmm. 23. So his last work there, or job, what was that? Was he able to start his own business again after the furnish a favor? No, no. He had set up shop down in the basement at 309 South 50th. His own house? Yeah, and did hand work on the furniture line. He had made a chest of drawers for my brother. It was about this high. And my mother said to him, don't you think you should make something for Ethel? Yes. So he made this bookcase for me. So that's a memory of yours. So that's a memory. And all of these things are from my old home. That was his shaving mirror. Well, there it was. And I thought, well, Margaret said to me, why don't you put it up there near the door, and you can have a look just before you go out, see if your hair's on straight. So that's his shaving mirror. And that table, I love that table. He made it also? No, no. And this, before my brother was about to be born, my dad went out and bought this chair for my mother so she'd have a comfortable chair to sit in. Did she continue to speak Swedish even up in the high? Oh, very much so. How old was she when she died? She was 83. 83. She still spoke Swedish? Yes. Did she prefer that than the Swedish? Yes. But she read in the English newspaper. Isn't that strange? But it was more comfortable to her. And all these Swedish friends, she had a chance to. And she, oh, well, my brother spoke Swedish, too. How about now when you were out on dates? Did your mother tell you whom to date, for instance? What would happen if you came home with an Italian boy? Or an Irish? Well, that happened. It would happen? Yeah, and she almost lost her mind. Why? She didn't want her little daughter to leave her. Can you imagine that? Yeah, but you were grown up then. She didn't think so. No? She wouldn't release you for the outside world. And when I was going to Sweden with Ruby, you know what she said to me? I won't be living when you come home. For heaven's sake. She needed a protection. Well, my dad was so much older, she wanted companionship, I suppose. But she had other friends, though. I mean, she could talk to them. Yeah, yeah. She had a lot of work. But she didn't want to let go of her daughter. So you never brought home a guy then and a boy? Yeah, but they weren't too welcome. Well, she could see right away they were not too good for you. Yeah. What did you say then? I didn't say. I had learned that I could say. There was no objection? Oh, yes. I could say it. It didn't need to be said. But didn't she want you to be married and settled down in your own home? Because that would mean I'd leave her. But you could still live with her. She wouldn't want a stranger to come in. Well, she didn't feel comfortable then, too. She wanted just to have you. Well, maybe I'm unfair. I don't know. No, but that's usually what happens, though. I mean, it's very hard, like the Swedes come into a new situation. You know, Italians and Irish and different religions and so on. But she never sat down and had a serious talk with me. Never? Never. But I knew what her feelings were. Your dad, though, he didn't pay attention to stuff like that? Oh, yes. She influenced him. Him, too. So your mother was the boss then in the home? Mm-hmm. Yep. Maybe I'm not fair. But then when you started to travel on your own, you were your own boss. Yeah. That's when my personality changed. Do you think you took more chances than necessary? Because, you know, well, everything worked out kind of, but, you know, going with our reservations to Hong Kong in the middle of the night, and you come in and ask for a sleeping quarters there, I mean, what would you expect? I don't know what I expected. But you had no worries? Well, I didn't worry, no. Were you different than your mother? Was she worrying more than...? She was gone then. She was gone then, but, I mean, in her life now, was she the worrying kind of mother you think? Yeah. You never had that worry, I mean, for the next day? Mm-hmm. You just travel and you're a suitcase. I had my job waiting for me, you know. You were lucky then to have her. Yeah. This was during the Depression, though. Yes. When you went to Sweden. Yeah, it was after the Depression, really, was in 46. 46, you took me to have some job. But you had a job during the Depression? Mm-hmm. You were never without a job? No. By that time, I was indispensable, I think. You had put your mark. Uh-huh. You had put your mark with the employees, the employer. Well, I liked my job very, very much. So, there was no town that was not for them? Yeah. And, you know where the Chesna Street Bridge is? Yes. They were then in that building across the street on the west side. On the west side, yeah. And then they got this gas-electric building on North Main Street. Your parents, now, did they belong to any Swedish organizations like the Swedish, or the SMOS, and... No. Only to the church? Mm-hmm. Yeah. The people that came over from Sweden and stayed with you, or boarded with you in your mother's house, were they close together then with your family? Yeah. Did you meet often? Oh, yes. For dinners and... Then one sister married and lived in Chicago. So, you could easily go in and... Well, we would go in Chicago. Did you go to Chicago often? Yes. One, every summer vacation. It was in Chicago? Mm-hmm. So, what did you do then? And she had other relatives, Hessler relatives, that lived in Chicago. In Chicago? Yeah. Well, there was always someone going. Her brother-in-law, Carl Bergendahl, did he go back to Sweden at any time? Oh, yes. I was 11 years old. My mother took me to Sweden to see my grandmother. But you were 11, so you met your grandmother then? Mm-hmm. She lived in Mörlund. Mörlund, yeah. What did she say? Do you remember anything that she didn't say much? No. But you could talk Swedish, though, you are, I mean. Yeah, but nobody wanted me around. I was excess baggage, I think, on that trip. So, they never asked the children too much? No. They were not supposed to be heard? But Gunnar, he spent summers in Mörlund. With Murmur? Yeah, yeah, with Murmur and Mosterloten. So, he remembers quite a bit. I remember him. He was younger than I. I remember Gunnar, he said that his Murmur, she always talked about her wonderful son, Carl, in Rockford. Yeah. He was a… He was a wonderful guy. Mechanic. And I think Gunnar absorbed some of this. So, he learned from him, then, the basics of it. Yeah. And they lived with my aunt, Hildur Johnson, then. She lived on East State Street. Did Carl Bergendahl live long enough to see Gunnar Wallmark's inventions? I think so, I think so. So, he knew that he became a good… Yeah, he probably gave him advice. And his son, he had a son, you said? Who? Carl Bergendahl. No. He had no children? No children. But he married? He married a widow. Oh, I guess she was divorced, come to think of it, because her husband went back to Sweden. Where did he live here in Rockford, on the north side? Carl? No. You know where the old Rockford College is? After you go over that bridge going north, there was a… Is that East Walkie? No, it was a small street that went along the railroad tracks. Seminary? From seminary. There was a house, a two-story house. And where did he live? Carl bought that and lived with his wife, and they rented out the upstairs. Were you close, you and Gunnar, when he was here in Rockford? Pardon? You and Gunnar, were you close when he was here in Rockford? Yeah. You visit each other often? Yeah, yeah. You know what he says, my mother wouldn't let me do anything. That's what he says now. That's what he says. Now, don't put these family secrets in your… But it's interesting, though, to see how one generation can go on to the next one. And influence another. But do you think the next generation shouldn't have been too much influenced by the previous? By what? Do you think the next generation should be influenced by the previous generation? Well, to a certain extent. You can't go overboard? No, no. So if you will do it over again now, what would you tell your mother? Oh, don't put me on the spot. Let me take this Irish guy out. Oh, in fact, I came home with a diamond ring one night. She about lost her mind. What kind of guy was that? Was he a Swede? No. Not a Swede? No, that counted against him, of course. What kind of nationality was he? Irish, I think. Irish. Yeah. Do you think you get the counteracts? In other words, if your mother told you, you can't go out with him, you can't go out with him. Do you think you get the more liking for that person because she says you know him? No, I don't think so. I liked him, but I didn't know him. You had a diamond ring? Yeah. You were engaged then? Yeah. I think he couldn't get through to me, and he thought that was the only way to do it. Because I had been so sheltered, it didn't mean anything. Your mother didn't appreciate the look at your diamond then? No. What did you actually say when you came inside the house? You had him with you? No. He wasn't welcome. He couldn't come to the house? No. You only brought the diamond ring? Yeah. So what did you do then? You gave the ring back? Yes. And by that time, I got in the travel book, and I wasn't interested in anyone else except people that I met on the trip. You didn't want to be tied on then? No. You were restless then, more or less? Although I like my work so much, I look forward to vacation and seeing something different. I think that's, I don't know how many times I went to Europe and Sweden. Middle East, I had a sure-tail relative that lived in Turkey, and I was there.