 I'm sitting together with Mr. Oliver Hultman, who was born 5th of October, 1950, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. And we have 26th of October, 1987. Your parents now, Fritz Laurentius Hultman, that was your father? Right. He came from Västergötland. Right. How old was he when he came over here? Nineteen. Nineteen. And he came from a farming place? Yeah, it was a farming community. The name of the, what do they call them, those little places that are attached to the farms, you know, the torp. Torp. I can't think of the name of the one he came from. But he worked, then he worked on one of those torps for several years before he came to this country, you know. Real, they came from a real small, they had a small house, his family that he came, was in. And so all the kids had to go out and go to work naturally when they got here. How many kids were there? I think there was, golly. There was three girls. Three girls and four boys, I believe is the way it was. Was he one of the older ones or? He was the youngest boy. The youngest one. Yeah. So what kind of work was he doing then after the confirmation? Did he? Well, he just did farm work. He worked on the farm, but evidently he learned some woodworking. His dad and brothers were woodworkers, carpenters. And then he got into carpentering when he came to this country. So Egbe, that's not too far from where he started or? Oh, about 25, 30 miles. English miles, yeah. Yeah. Did he work anything in the cities there or? No, no. So what made him go now to the United States? Did he have any relation here? Oh, yeah, he had a brother here that came the year before. And they had a cousin here that I think that's, the cousin is the reason they went to let's see, the town in South Dakota. Virginia? No, it was way north. Aberdeen? Aberdeen was where one brother lived later, but there was another one up there, farther up that they went to. And he worked on a farm for about one season and then went to work for the railroad on the bridge gang and then got into regular construction. So he came to the United States. Yeah, regular construction. And he came what year? 1909. 1909. Yeah. Do you remember him talking about the big strike in Sweden two years earlier? No. Or? Don't remember him mentioned. By tradesmen, you mean? Yes, there was a big general strike in Sweden. If he mentioned it, I don't remember. But he never mentioned it. Maybe that had something to do with him coming eventually. So two brothers came then? Yeah, the oldest brother, his older brother came the year before. They all went to him. My dad and this brother Emil and a cousin went to Gothenburg, Uteborg I guess they call it, to catch the boat to the United States, and they didn't have enough money. So my dad gave him his money, and they came on over. And then he went back, my dad went back home and worked, I suppose, at this Torp again until the following year. And then he came in May of 1909, and he went to where his brother Emil was for a start. So did he go into the military service in Sweden? No. I think that's one of the reasons he probably left, Laila and them. But he never talked about it? I don't remember him mentioning that they were after him to go into the military or not, but he knew that when he got to be 21 he'd probably have to go in. So he came then to South Dakota? Yeah. And how long did he stay up there? Oh, I think about a year, or maybe that summer anyway. He was soon in Iowa and up working up around Hayward and in Sioux City and up in there. In farming? In working for the railroad on the bridge gang. Yeah. And then he got into regular construction of buildings after that, after he left the railroad. Did his brother go with him? No, his brother stayed in South Dakota most of the time. Most of the time he lived over here. And he was also a carpenter. It seemed like all the men in that family were woodworkers. And then eventually he came to Minneapolis? Eventually he came to Sioux City where he met my mother. Then they moved to Minneapolis. Oh, he was married then when he came over? Yeah, my mother was living and working in Sioux City at the time when they met. And they met there. How did they meet, in the church or? Well, that I can't tell you. If they told me, I don't remember. I think, as I remember it, my dad was working on construction on this store. I think my mother worked as a maid for the people that owned this store, Davidson's, I think it was, in a big department store in Sioux City. And he was working for Davidson's on construction. That might have been something the way they met, but I'm not sure of that. And your mother, she was born not too far away from Egbe? Yeah, about, I'd say, 25, 30 miles from there. But she was only two then when she came over? She was ten. She was born in, my dad was born in 1900 and my mother was born in 1901. And when my mother and her folks came before my dad ever came, they didn't know each other in Sweden. And mom was ten, and they had an interesting thing to tell about, too. They were shipwrecked when they came over. They came over on the Lusitania first, which was before the Lusitania that was sunk during World War I. And they were shipwrecked in the Gulf of the St. Lawrence and had to be rescued. And they lost everything but what they had on their backs, you know. And they came to this town where they had relatives. For instance, one of the daughters of, well, one of my mother's older sisters was living in here and was married. And they came to this town and my grandfather, he was also, he was a cabinetmaker, and he went to work for the railroad down here. And his name was Nordin? Nordin. They changed it from Nordstrom to Nordin when they came over. For some reason, Americanized it, I guess, was the idea. So your mother remembered the shipwreck? Oh, yeah, she did. So what happened? Did the ship? Well, they hit a rock. It was foggy, real heavy fog, and it hung up on this rock. And they fired a cannon in the bow to attract attention, you know. They didn't have enough lifeboats, I guess. And fishermen from the coast, I believe it was Newfoundland or Nova Scotia or whatever it is right in that area, they came out and got them off of there. But all the luggage was lost then? Oh, I think they lost everything that I remembered. I had an uncle, a brother of mom's, who was a little older than she was, and he remembered it real well. And he wrote an article many years ago that was carried in the Swedish-American paper out of Chicago, you know. So that's going to be going on today? Something like that. And it was published, and some of our folks got copies of that, too. Sometime I want to get that and get a copy of that for myself. So they went ashore in Canada rather than the United States? Well, that's where they were at at the time. But when they got off the boat, they put them on a train then, and they came to, I believe they entered the United States in Buffalo, New York. And then they came through, I believe they have a port of entry at Chicago, don't they? Or did at that time, as I remembered. And they came through there and then here to Missouri Valley. And the reason they came, the whole family left? Well, they were very poor in the old country, the way I understand it. Now, my dad's folks weren't rich by a long shot, but they were better off than my mom's folks. Because my granddad had a bad stomach or something, was sickly, you know, and couldn't work all the time, I guess, over there. And, you know, times were tough in Sweden at that time. I used to hear that plenty of times, you know, how things were. That's the reason a lot of them came over here. How big of a family was it? Well, there was, now let's see, there was two daughters came earlier when they were in their teens, and they were living over here already, grown women. In Missouri Valley? One in Omaha and one in Missouri Valley. They had kids of their own by the time the rest of them came over. And there was my grandparents and my mother and her twin brother and three, Uncle Hugo and Uncle Emil and Uncle Carl. So that makes six. A large family. Yeah. And the reason they settled here was because one daughter was here in Missouri Valley. Mm-hmm. And what was the prospects now for them to make a living here? Well, see, the railroad had a big shop here at that time. This was, I don't know if it was the end of the division, but they had big shops here. They had 500, 600 men here working for many, many years. Well, didn't your grandfather have some relatives here, Agnes Gunderson? Yeah, come to think about it, one of the first ones of our relatives that ever came here, as I remember it, was William Nordeen. He came over from Sweden years before that. Now, I don't know what part of the country he came from, but he was a cousin of my grandfather's. He settled here? Yeah. Was there a railroad business that drew them over here? Well, I'm not sure of that, but evidently that was it because evidently there was lots of work for people. They evidently went right to work for them. And my granddad, as I said, was a woodworker, and he went to work in the car shop, which did woodwork. And he also, come to think about it, was an inventor, I've been told. He invented one of the railroad couplings, and his name was on it. My sister was looking into this here a while back. And we've got cousins, some of my uncle's kids living in Chicago and around that area, and they know about, they talked to some people that know about this. One neighbor, a lady of theirs is a patent attorney, and she knew about this. And their own dad had told them about our grandfather inventing this when he worked down here in the shops. And there was your mother's father. So he invented this thing here in Missouri Valley? Yeah, it's called the Nordean coupling, they tell me. I've been wanting to look it up in the patent office. If I get a chance to find out the procedure to go through, I'd like to see a picture of it or some papers or, you know, like sketches of the prints or something like that. He was a patent maker, I'm told, make it up. He didn't work with the metal, did he? No, he didn't work with the metal himself. Now, I don't know whether he invented this while in their shop or... He must have done it on his own because my uncle, my mom's brother, who went to Chicago to work later when he grew older, he said that when my grandfather invented this, he didn't have enough money to get the patent. So he loaned my granddad, my uncle loaned my granddad $20 or $25. They could get a patent for that price then. And he got the patent, so he must have got it on his own, must have invented it on his own. But of course, you know, when a guy patents anything, you don't always get the benefits out of it. But anyway, they say it's used on the railroad cars. And it was during the First World War, then? No, it was even before that. That was in 1905, I think it was, when this coupling was patented. Yeah, I'd like to look that up, really, and get the particulars on it. So what year did he come over then? 1901. 1901. And you know, a green Swede over here that soon couldn't talk the language very good. He wouldn't have much chance of doing much with it. He had to trust a lot of people, and it wasn't easy, I suppose. Yeah, right. And as my uncle said, the reason he invented it, he could see what he worked in this car shop repairing cars and that, and he could see what damage the old couplings was doing to the cars, you know. They'd ram in the ends of the cars and that because of some fault to the old coupling, you know. Is it still in use? That's what they say. No, it's probably been improved on and modified since, but at least this patent attorney who was a neighbor of my cousins in Chicago, when they were meeting when they first moved there, she found out their name was Nordean. She said, are you, is the fellow that invented the Nordean coupling any relation to you? And then she said that they remembered that their father had told about this. I suppose there was not a big deal then when he made it. They didn't even pass it down to us kids. We didn't know it. At least in our family, we didn't. I suppose they'd forgot that because he didn't get anything out of it. Do you know if there were, how many Swedes were living here then in... I don't know how many there. Most of the old timers are dead, you know, and if there's any Swedes living around. Can you think of any? One of my friends died last winter, Ernest Johnson, he came from the old country. He has some cousins that's living around here. Who are you thinking of? Melvin Anderson. Oh. Is that his name, Melvin Anderson? Yeah, there's a few Andersons, but we don't see much of them there. We never were real close to them. Farmers, I think. Dorothy Johnson's brother Howard, their family came from the old country. Oh, that's right. But there's not a community like of Swedes that kind of get together like in some places. It was never called a Swedish... No, never kind of like a Swedish settlement. It was pretty much Duke's mixture, you know. I think there was probably more Danes around here than Swedes, and then there's quite a few Germans and Hungarians and so forth. So they land off of farming. They was already taken then when they came. Oh, yeah. This was... Already settled. Yeah. I don't think any of the... You don't know any Swedish farmers, do you? No, and we know some real good Swedish farmers. The sons of this fellow that I mentioned, they farmed hundreds of acres, but they didn't get in on it at the time when this land was being bought real cheap in the middle of the last century, you know. In fact, most of the Swedish settlers way back then in the middle 1800s, I think, went to Minnesota and South Dakota and places like that, and then Kansas, I believe I read. So when they came here, the land was already... Yeah, it was taken up by a lot of the early landowners here. It seemed to me the old families that we know, English and Irish and some of them, and German. A lot of Germans got in here early, too. So this railroad company, what was the name of it? Chicago Northwestern. Chicago Northwestern. Yeah. And your grandfather, he worked until his retirement there? Oh, I'm not sure whether he lived to retire. I mean, he retired a while before he died or not. He lived to be 71 years old, but I don't know whether he worked up to the end or not. You don't remember him? No, I don't. I was too small when he died. And we were living in Minneapolis at the time up until I was... They were still living here, though? Yeah, they were living here at that time. They never moved away from here? No. So they are buried here, then? Yeah, right over here in the cemetery over here. They're buried down there. Yeah. So then your mother and your parents moved to Minneapolis. Yeah. What was the reason for that? Well, I can't tell you. I don't know. I guess for construction work, there was lots of work going on up there, and my dad, he was real sharp on construction, and he was a foreman when he was in his middle 20s. They were building schools and everything like that, you know, I mean big schools. I don't know what all. And then finally, I don't know what brought it about, I guess my mother wanted to be closer to home because my dad was going on construction work so much, like up in Duluth and places, St. Cloud and places like that, and so they moved back here, down here in 1920. You were five then? Well, I came, we actually, we came back, my mother and us three boys, who were the ones that were with them then, and the first of us, came back here in 1919. I was almost four. My dad came down the next spring after they got done with the job he was on. So she wanted to come back to the old... Yeah, her folks, we had a bunch of relatives down here, see, and I suppose up there she was... She wasn't well either. No, she wasn't well, and Pop was gone for weeks and months at a time on jobs, you know. That's the way I understand it. How was he able to secure a job down here then? Well, he was an exceptionally good builder, and he wasn't long, he never was out of work, even during the Depression when a lot of guys were out of work. Did he run his own business or...? Yeah, yeah, he didn't get into it in big contracting, but he was well known. A lot of the buildings you see, the church you saw down there at the foot of this hill he built, for instance, and a lot of the better... On our own church. Yeah, on our own church, and... He built this house next door towards his later years, and my brother built that house over on the hill over across the way shortly before he died. So he is also buried up here, your parents? Yeah. In the same cemetery. Did they go back to visit? At no time. No time? No, times were so tough, and by the time us kids were getting some size to us, we were in the middle of the Depression, and we had a lot of sickness in our family. My mother was sick, and I had a brother that was sick for years until he finally died at the age of just not quite 16. So they had a tough time, I tell you. So you remember the Depression then? Oh, real well. How did it affect this community then, in comparison with Minneapolis and Omaha and the big cities? Well, it was really rough on this one because this was a railroad town. It was shut down. And, yeah, the biggest share of the families were railroaders, the breadwinners who was working for the railroad. As I say, five or six hundred men worked down here in the shops besides all the section gangs and things like that, you know, and they started shutting it down and laying people off. They were laid off for years, some of those men, and so a few of them got moved away to places like Chicago and Clinton and Norfolk and Cheyenne, you name it, Boone. And then finally, little by little, the shops were torn out of here completely. You don't see any buildings down there at all anymore. So they left them during the Depression there? Well, the railroad, of course, still operated, but they moved their repair work to either Council Bluffs or Omaha or Clinton and like that. So they are no remnants of the old railroad shop? No. Boy, this town just stood still. What happened to the people? I mean, they had their houses there, I suppose. Well, you could buy a good house for $1,000 then. There was panic then. Oh, there really was. It was people, a lot of the railroaders, they went to doing other things, just scratching at anything they could get, you know, and a lot of people went to work for WPA and things, you know. Yeah. But your daddy was able to manage? Yeah. He never was out of work. He had to lower his wages, of course. I don't think he ever went below 75 cents an hour, but a lot of guys were working for 25 cents and were tradesmen. But he was well known and they knew what he could do, and he's the one that ran crews and they kept him busy right on through it. And there was no union at that time? No. There never was a union here in this town. Pardon? There never was a union here in this town except the railroad union. Railroad union. Yeah. But they didn't do any good either when it was... No....going out of business? No. No. How were they taking the new deal off, Franklin Roosevelt, when he came in to... Well, of course, there was always a lot of people that didn't like that, but I think he did a lot of good himself. Were they mostly Republicans then in this valley? Oh, about split, about 50-50. Our folks mostly seemed to be Democrats. I see. Yeah. So your father was a Democrat? Sure. Yeah. But he was his own boss, though, you would think. Well, yeah, but he, I don't know, he just thought that it was better, and I do too is where that goes. But there is no president that has been loved and hated at the same time. No, but when you get into politics, that's where you make enemies, I'll tell you, whether you've ever had any before. But the Republicans, like Omar, for instance, is very heavily Republican. Oh, yeah, all of Nebraska, most of Nebraska. Yes. They are more Democratic in Iowa on this side of the river, then? Well, I wouldn't say that, no. We've lived in Nebraska too. We've lived most of the time here in Iowa, but for almost 20 years we lived in Lincoln, Nebraska, Mary Jane and I and our kids. And we've seen both sides of the river, and there's a lot of Democrats over there, but it's mainly Republican, and I think it's mainly Republican over here. So the landowners and the farmers are... Oh, they're usually Republican, yeah, except when they have the bottom-drop side of things, like it's been here lately. You ought to hear some of them now. But were there any turncoats during that hard time, because there was really miserable? Sure there was, naturally, yeah. I don't think they were seeing the light of being opposed to the Republicanism, but they still... Well, the way the economy is running, it changes a lot of people real quick, you know, and they get to feeling flush, they turn into Republicans. Gosh, Mary Jane, even when she was a kid, teenager, she had a little money in the bank down here. You know, when they went broke, she lost every dime of it. And I guess that can't happen now. But how was the feeling, though, when you... Even if you had a little saving account, a few dollars, you would think they would be scared to go back to the bank again. Well, the bank was not there. Well, I'll say a lot of people were scared of the banks. They put the money in a tin can or something rather than go to the bank. I think Mary Jane is kind of skeptical of banks yet because of it. They put the mark on her memory. Yeah, really did. What bank was it down here? Well, we had two or three banks. We had First National, State Savings, and... People's State. I thought it was called Valley. Well, there was savings alone, or what? No, no. There were all banks. I believe there were three banks. Three banks. And all folded up, or... Two of them folded, didn't they? And then the First National never closed, I don't believe. I mean, at least not permanently. It didn't either. Well, which one was it that was... State Savings broke. Mr. Barrett committed suicide shortly after this came about. Was that what it was? Up on the corner of Fifth Street. Yeah, but they had no insurance to cover them or anything, you know, at that time. But now they got... they are counter-insured, of course, and everything. Were there... there was a lot of foreclosures, then, I suppose. Oh, you bet. And the insurance companies were foreclosing like crazy. And then after they got all that land, they wished they hadn't taken it back. They were stuck. Because those three banks, they had all the mortgages, you know. Something like that, yeah. There was too much to carry forward. So you were 15 then at the time when it... Oh, yeah, yeah, right, sure enough. No, I was... let's say Black Wednesday would have been 29. I was 14. You were out of... We moved out in the country on the farm, on an acreage, in about 28. My dad wanted to get us kids off the street out here south of town, near Loveland. And we were living out there at the time when this happened. And it was just... everything was wide open and going great guns in 27, 28, 29. Oh, you remember that. It was a good time. Oh, I certainly do. And then when it came about in 29, boy, things really started happening. I'm telling you, people were in rough straits, really. So it didn't take too long, then, before it... No, and each year it got worse, up through the middle and late. Especially up through the middle 30s. But along with the economic situation, we got the drought. And that... gosh, I remember there was people... We were, by that time, living on a farm, and us kids did the farming, and my dad still did construction work. So you had a few cattle, then. Yeah, we had cattle, a few, and milked cows and pigs and raised corn and that. We managed to raise about 25, 30 bushels of corn to the acre. A lot of people didn't get five bushels, so they didn't even pick it. It was that low. I remember one year in 34, we sold hogs, top-grade hogs. At that time, they sold for... the best size was about 300 pounds. We sold them, we got 3 cents a pound. You can imagine that. $9 for a 300-pound hog, about 40 of them we sold. And that's the kind of conditions it was. Gee, it was terrible. And the shelter houses, they... That's all they paid? Oh, yeah. They shipped to Omaha or something? Well, we brought ours into the... We had a stockyard, then a small stockyard here in Missouri Valley. But a lot of people shipped to Omaha. But I remember when we finally left the farm after my mother died in 36, we sold our cows, and I think we got something like $35 for a cow, full-sized, good milk cow. So it was still better? Yeah, you bet, right up until, in fact, heck of a note to say, but things didn't start getting better until World War II. Of course, that fired things up, you know. So you stayed on the farm, then? Oh, until 37. 37. Mm-hmm. How about the rest of the boys? Well, my brother was married by that time, and then... And my other brother had passed away in 33, and... And then when my mom died in 36, then finally we moved into town and... Sold the farm, then? We didn't even own it yet. We lost that, in fact. My dad was paying on it and lost that, and that was, I think, part of my mother's problems, grieving about things like that, maybe. She died of... Continuous, next site. Next site. Site 2, continuation with Oliver Huffman, Missouri Valley, Iowa. But this side of the river, though, is a tremendous depth of topsoil, isn't it? Yes, but this dust blew clear up from Texas and Oklahoma. The first time I remember seeing it, it seemed to me like it was in 34 when we started getting hot winds. And the first time we noticed it, we woke up one morning, and it hadn't been raining much, it just seemed like clouds had come up and it couldn't rain. It had sprinkled during the night, and it looked like drops of rust or blood or something on things, like out on the brooder house where this white stuff was on the windows, like lets the light through. This had dropped through this red dust from Oklahoma and down that way in Texas and left these rusty marks all over everything. But before that dust bowl was over, that lasted several years. I'll kid you not, there was times you couldn't see the sun for several days at a time. I mean not even a glimmer of it, because that dust was so thick, and it wasn't in the sky, it wasn't clouds. And the women would go around, you know, the houses weren't built as tight as they are now, but even if they were, I believe that dust would have sifted in, and you'd have to wipe the windowsills and stuff. And even out here on the bottoms, that is gumbo out there, black, hard stuff. It got so bad that that, and dry, there'd be big cracks in the ground and that, and it drifted and the fence rose just about like snow, only it was black. And just like you probably saw pictures of down in Oklahoma and up in South Dakota. Yeah, it was bad here for years. So that topsoil from down south was carried by the wind, so... You bet, you bet it was....the A-streams all the way up here. Yeah. So there was actually no rain then during that... Well, I won't say no rain, but it was very little. It didn't come at the times we needed it. I remember the corn coming up, and it was, it would burn out before it would tassel out sometimes, and that would be, heck, I've seen it start burning up in June. You remember that, it'd curl up and start burning, and... And a funny part of it was we didn't have, some of the winters weren't so severe. We had some bad ones, too, but once in a while, we had a mild for a while, and it rained like the dickens in the middle of the winter, about like it does in California, I guess. But we wouldn't get the rain in the spring and the summer like when we needed it. And, boy, they did, farmers were selling their cattle and everything, and they didn't have anything to feed them. There was no grazing then? No, the pastures were burned up, and this went on for several years. I don't remember how long the drought lasted, but it was for a number of years, and right in the middle was the rest of the economic situation, you know. It was bad. The young people now, you had your work day cut off. In other words, you were on the farm and had to help out. How about other people now, like sons and daughters of the railroad workers? What kind of work were they doing? Well, a big share of them moved away, but if they could, they'd get to work like clerks in the stores or work as farmhands. At that time, they didn't have all these tractors and stuff. They could maybe get on as farmhands sometimes. And very few of them went to college, but a few of them managed to. But there wasn't the money, I suppose, though. No, there just wasn't the money, unless their family was a little better off. The ones that was kept on on the railroad and some of those businesses like that, the ones that were kept on, they were well off in comparison to the rest of the people, and maybe their kids they could help go to college, or maybe if they were a banker or something. The one with a good income, he could live cheap. Oh, you bet. And you could buy houses for, oh gosh, you could buy a darn good house for $1,000 here in town then. Were there any investors coming into Missouri Valley at that time? If there was, I don't know. At this time, town just didn't seem to attract industry much, even yet. And there was no speculators on the private money? No, no, no. The value of real estate didn't start going up until after World War II. It started in the late 40s. It started just going up a little bit, and then it gradually kept getting more and more. So did they go into Omaha to work? Oh, a lot of them did, yeah. But it was too far to commute, or you had to live there in Omaha? Yeah, I don't remember. Well, of course, come to think about it now, a cousin of mine by marriage worked, was a boiler maker, and he transferred to the shop in Council Bluffs when they closed this one. And he commuted back and forth, him and a number of guys in a carpool, for 35 years he drove back and forth until he retired. So there was some of them went back and forth, but not near the number of them that do now. This is more kind of a bedroom down now. Most of them work in Omaha, or the Bluffs, or farther away. Heck, I myself drove back and forth to Offutt, where I worked for years. Did you own a car then during the Depression? No, not me. Never owned a car until I had it. Not your daddy, then? Oh, yeah, yeah. But I never got a car until I was ‑‑ we were married when I was about 26 years old or 7. I think it was in 41, wasn't it? I believe 41. So the church now, they belong to your grandparents and your parents. Was there a Danish background church? There was no Swedish ‑‑ No Swedish American church, a Swedish church in this town that I know of. You never heard a Swedish sermon about it? No, no, never did. You had a Swedish minister one time here, Reverend Lund. Well, yeah, he came from Sweden, Reverend Lund, and was our minister for a couple of years. My mother, though, was confirmed in the Augustana Church in Sioux City. She went there to work when she was about 14 or 15, and I guess one of her sisters were living up there by that time, and she went to work for this family, and she was confirmed in the Swedish Augustana Church. Did she join as a member at the same time? Yeah, I imagine she was, yeah. But your father didn't belong to any church down there? No, not that I remember of, not formally, until we started this one down here in 21. Of course, he was confirmed in the old country to start with. In fact, we were in the church when I was over there, both the churches of my parents when they lived there. And they didn't belong to a church in Minneapolis when you were there? If they did, I don't remember it being mentioned. You don't know whether you were baptized or not? Down here, down here, when I was about six, seven years old. So you probably didn't, I don't know. So the church here, then, they were all kind of different nationalities? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, just like the town. Yeah, it was in Sweden. Yeah, right. Hungarian. Hungarian, too. And there was a railroad they brought in this mixture. Yeah, this town was principally for the railroad. Heldingpop. Right. You don't remember any Swedish spoken down on the street? Only what when my dad or some of his friends would speak it. My folks both spoke Swedish, but they never talked it to us kids enough for us kids to learn it, believe it or not. They only talked it when they wanted to keep a secret from us. Did you have a Swedish-American newspaper? Do you remember that? At one time we got it, I believe, but years ago, yeah. But you were not able to read that? No. When I went to Sweden this time, I had to depend on my cousins speaking English, some of them, you know, and I could talk with them that way. Did your parents talk about Sweden often? Oh, yeah. What did they say about it? Well, mostly what they could remember about it is how tough it was living over there. Because my mother's folks, you know, the big landowners, they owned most of the land and most everybody else worked for them. So they felt suppressed then? Well, yeah, that was the main reason they came over here, I guess. Did they mention some happy signs? Oh, sure, naturally. And, of course, Christmas time was, you know, was the main thing, and they must have remembered some nice things about it. It's a beautiful country, I'll say. It sure is. But they live much better now, people do, there than they did when my folks were over there, the way I understand it. You understood that? Yeah, they're prosperous over there now, aren't they? Talking about customs now on Christmas, in your family, do you remember when Dad got the Christmas tree? Yeah. How far ahead of Christmas? Were you able to get a spruce down here, or did you have to buy it somewhere? Well, we never got... No evergreens around this area? No, we didn't. No, yes, we got the native evergreens here, but they're just... You maybe see them in the hills, but they're not like spruce and that, but they are evergreens, and that's the kind we used. Like, we had them right on the farm, in fact. So you used them as a Christmas tree? Yeah, sure. They were brought in and put a stand on it and dressed. Yeah, and we had some traditional things that stemmed from their families, you know. Do you know about dupegrute? Yes. And, of course, lutevisk, which Mary Jane don't care for. What are some of the things? The custom... I don't know all this, where they go and sing and take coffee. Oh, yeah. Santa Lucia. Lucia. Was they observed, your family? Yeah. You got coffee on the... Yeah, on the 13th. The 13th? Yeah, in the middle of the night or early in the morning or something. So your mother then, because there were only one girl, was she the Lucia then when she got older? Yeah. And went around with coffee and... Well, the younger girls of the family, of my mother's sister's daughters did that, but my mom did that with us in our family time, but not out through the neighborhood or anything. Did she bake those Lucia buns also? As I remember, she did, yes. Come to think about it. Yeah. Now you're bringing back things to me. So she had a lot of relation here, then, in other words. They were knit together. Yeah, sure. And often came together for parties. Oh, yeah. Did they have coffee together every day? Well, no. We didn't live that close together. Too far apart. Yeah. In other words, you were on the farm and they were living... Yeah, and we'd get together. We'd have a picnic several times a year and maybe get together once in a while other than that. Once in a while. Yeah, like that. How about Santa Claus now? You remember him coming? Oh, yeah. When I was about seven years old or so, and like that, I remember something about it that's kind of vague now. Who was the, you know, who... Well, my dad never played the part, but my mom and dad would put stuff out during the middle of the night, you know, but I remember one of my uncles, he fit the bill as far as physique was concerned, too, but he'd get in the... Uncle Gus, you know, he'd get in the... He was from Sweden, too, come to think about it. He'd play Santa Claus. Was he dressed up, then? Yeah. And carried a bag over his shoulder, you know. What kind of gifts were given on them? Oh, a lot of them were homemade, I remember. One I remember especially getting was a wooden ship that Bert Johnson made for me. Made out of layers of wood, you know, and made a ship. You made it? Yeah. Did your dad make small toys, too? Hmm, hmm, hmm, hmm. I don't remember anything in particular. He might have. I think he did some things, but I remember making toys for myself when I got about 7, 8, 10 years old. He'd let us work in his shop. He had a wooden-working shop, you know. Heck, I made my own stuff there for a while. Did you go with your dad often on different jobs? Very few. I did a few times, but my older brother did more than I did. So you were not interested in the particular area? Well, not at that time. Huh? Your father taught you the trade? Well, yeah. I later, when I got older, later on, I got into it. I'm a carpenter by trade now. But I'm retired, of course, but I work at it, yeah, a little bit. So he taught you, then, how to square up? Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Yeah. Did he know all this laying out floors with the square and everything? My dad? Yes. Oh, gosh, yeah. He was a regular genius at it. Some of the guys that he built for tell me he was a genius. He really knew construction. Well, tell him that he helped build those big bomber plants in Omaha. Well, yeah, he did stuff like that. During the war? Yeah, on defense work, you know, and things. Yeah. But he was, he just, that was his whole life, building. Was he too old then to be drafted? Oh, sure. He was – Way too old. Yeah. He was in his 50s or maybe 60s. But what happened to you now? You were right in the – Oh, I went to the, in the Army. I was over in Europe during the war, yeah, in the infantry. Yeah. You served there for about two or three years? Well, in the Army, two years, but I was overseas a year, up through, started in Scotland and, you know, where we landed, England and France and Belgium and Germany and Luxembourg and some of those places. How about your other brothers? Were they drafted? Well, my brother, older brother, was in the service, too, but he never had to go overseas. Yeah. And you came back without – Oh, I never got a scratch, luckily. Yeah. Yeah, I was lucky. So had you already apprenticed then as a carpenter before you left the Army? Oh, yeah. I had been working at it, and we were married. We had a little girl when I had to go into service. Yeah, I had been working on defense work for a while, too. So how did you meet your wife now? She was right there in the – Well, I met her when she was in third grade, I think. We were, when we moved to the country, why, they had a two-room school down at Loveland, you know, a regular country school, and she was in, she was in third grade, and I was in about seventh, I think. That's the first time I saw her. I didn't pay any attention to her, but I knew her and her brother and me were buddies, you know, an older brother. So you were confirmed in the same church town here, then? No, she was – no, I was confirmed when I was about 14 or 15, but she never joined our church till after we were married, you know. So you married and you settled here in Missouri Valley, then? Yeah, we lived here. Believe it or not, we were in Chicago first for a year, and then we were in Council Bluffs for two, three years, and then I went into service, and then we moved, Mary Jane moved to Missouri Valley while I was in the service, and that's where I came to when I got out. So you married before 1940? Yeah, we married in 1940. And how many children do you have? Two daughters. Two daughters. Mm-hmm. How did they marry, though? Did they marry Scandinavians or Jews? Neither one of them. No, neither one of them. Boy, I can't tell you what nationality either one of them are. Probably just mixed up, really. One of the girls in her family lives in Lincoln and the other one lives in Colorado. Were they brought up here in Missouri Valley? For a few years, but most of the time as they grew up in Lincoln after we moved there. So you had a big job there, and always wanted to go there. Well, I moved there to go to college for a while, believe it or not, and learned to work up to being an architect, but I learned how to draw plans and that, but I never had enough mathematical background to go through with the system to get a degree. So I just built houses and stuff like that, and I can draw plans. In fact, I drew the plans for this one and that one and that one over there and a number of them around. And a bunch of them in Lincoln. So that was mostly family dwellings that you constructed, or were there any other? No, nothing big like that. You worked on both sides of the river then? Yeah, yeah, I did. During the defense work before I went in the service, worked all around Nebraska, mainly in Nebraska. But you worked several years for the Air Force. Well, yeah, I finally went to work for the Air Force at the Lincoln Air Base and worked as an estimator and a planner and stuff like that, and that's what I worked at until I retired. So I get a pension, and I had benefits from that, you know. But you had to join the Corporate Union, though. Oh, yeah, I did for a number of years, but never had a union up in here. To tell you the truth about it, I used to be all for the unions, but I'm not too happy with them anymore, as greedy as they got. How much benefits did you get now after you retired from the Corporate Union? Did they pay you a pension? No, no, never. I didn't belong to them long enough just to pay for you. Well, how much was it then if you paid in dues? Well, you couldn't work on the defense work unless you did belong to the union. Well, there was the requirements. Yeah, right. So you had to pay monthly dues then. Yeah, but that wasn't very good. But what kind of benefits did you get, though? You got the right to strike, but the ñ Well, I didn't care about striking. I never was for striking, but we got better wages on those defense jobs. I'll have you to know I got all of a dollar and 12 cents when I went to work. As a union guy? Yeah, as a union guy, that first job. Were you active on the board with the unions? No, no. I was just one of the flunkies. Did you go to most of the meetings they had? I don't think I did because, see, where did we live at the time? We lived in the bluffs, but I went to a few meetings but not many. I wasn't really active. That's really interesting. You know, you talk to union people. Most of them never attended the meetings. Why is that? Well, that's part of their problem. They let somebody else do it. If 50 or 75 guys come there, I mean, they can change the whole thing if they want to. Yeah, really. They never happen. No. I guess I shouldn't complain about them, but I do. I think they're just too damn greedy. I mean, with some of the benefits they insist on until they kill the goose that laid the golden egg is what I think. So no pension come all the way through? If there ever was intended to be one, I never heard of it. I never got one. I didn't belong to them long enough to maybe three, four years I belonged to you. No, I carried, come to think about it, we carried a union card for years after that, right through the service and after I come home, even though we didn't have to belong to it to work up in here. I think you dropped your union card when you went to work for the government. I believe you're right. I must have carried it longer than I thought. Yeah, I did. I carried it up until 53. No lasting benefits? None that I know of. Maybe I ought to investigate. But you're being your own carpenter now, a contractor. You don't have to belong to the union. No. But the guys you hired, though? There never was that requirement up around this area. And I don't think they're too strict in council bluffs either. It's not a strong union set up in this part of the country. How about the Nebraska side? Well, around Omaha it's more so, but the rest of Nebraska I don't think so much. Wide open spaces you can get away with. That's right. So now in your retirement age you look back to Sweden, to the Swedish roots. How did that come about? When I went over there, you mean? Yeah, in other words, was that your... Well, I'd always wanted to go as far as that goes. I was always interested in it. Did they tell you enough about the area where they came from, your father and mother? Yeah, they did. They told us a lot about it. And they had the names, where they were. Yeah, and I corresponded with a cousin of mine for years, 20 years or more, that lived over there, still lives over there, in Vådstena, you know where that's at? How did he come about it? Did he or she come over here? Well, no, never did. He used to come to this country on business occasions. He was running a pump company, a centrifugal pump company. And he came over to this country numerous times, but never right into this area where he could look us up. He was on business trips. So... He called you on the phone. Yeah, Ed, my older brother, was the one that started corresponding with him first, back years ago. So they knew over in Sweden that there were people in Iowa? Oh, sure, sure. In fact, my last aunt, my dad's, one of my dad's sisters, the last one, just died about a year ago. And there was three of them living up until several years ago. And the main sister that my dad corresponded with through the years. And what really prompted us to go, my sister, who lives in California, her son lives and works in Gothenburg. He's been there about three years or so. And he invited us to come over, and he'd show us around. And he did. We couldn't have done it otherwise. He had the company car, and they paid for the gas, and that was one of his benefits. And he drove us all over Sweden, you know, visiting some of our other relatives. And we had a real nice time. We looked up, we went to my dad's old home place, and went to the church where he went and was confirmed in that. And then we went to Bjursater, where my mother was from. The house that they were in is gone now, but we went to church. And the school, yeah. And, gee, that's a beautiful country, really. Did you meet anybody of your parents' friends that were still living? No. That was too late. Yeah. There was nobody that remembered them. No. I mean, your father, especially. No. The only ones, in fact, we met cousins over there, and none of them remembered my dad except through correspondence, you know. And we went to one of the places where now my cousin that had the pump company, he's retired now, last year or two, but the other cousin, he's still working. No, he retired, too, didn't he? Semi. Ola is his name, Holtman. They've got a wood plant there where they laminate material with stuff like for mica and that, like for countertops and that commercially. Is there a tea brew? Excuse me? Is a tea brew the place where they do this work? You mean the name of the town? Yeah. No, they're near Egbe, this little town. Oh, I see. But they're out in the country on this acreage, and they've got this factory right there. They carload some material, plywood or whatever it is, and they've got big forklifts. They lift this up, and they've got great big presses, big enough to take big sheets, and they laminate all this for companies that ask for big amounts of it, you know. I was surprised. This pump company, was that Flick Pump? Do you remember them? That don't sound right. He took us through the plant, too. They got a new plant they built just a couple of years, three years before he retired, and I can't— In Östergötland, Vådstena? It's in Vådstena. A real nice plant, I'll tell you, really modern. I can't think of the name of it right offhand. That's quite a town, too, I'll tell you. Real from the Middle Ages, it was established in 1400s, I believe. It goes way back. Yeah. What was it that you were most impressed of in Sweden? The people you met, were they like the Swedes you had met over here, or were they— Well, how friendly they were for one thing, and how prosperous they are. So you were able to talk, speak English with your cousins? Oh, yeah. And if we were—some of my cousins couldn't talk it, or if we were talking to somebody else, there was always somebody there to interpret. But it seemed like in the business places, they always talked English, good English. Yeah. And you went through some of the plants? Oh, yeah, we went through the Volvo plant in Göteborg, a real modern place. And we went through the glass works down around, what is it, Orfors? Several of them. In fact, I brought some stuff back, that candle thing and a few other things. And it seemed like a big share of the country, we were just like we were driving in a national park or something. It was that nice. And then up in the north end, we didn't get clear up to the north end, but up to— what's the name of that town up there near that lake where they make the wooden horses? Liksand, Mora. In that area, but that's not the name of the town. Lusnes. That's still not the name of the town I'm thinking of. But anyway, in that area, it reminded me, the architecture reminded me so much of pictures I've seen in Norway. So many log buildings, houses, churches, and really neat. And the style of the roofs on the churches and the houses, you know. You said all of Sweden was so well kept. Well, it is, really neat. Did your wife go with you? No, she didn't go. Just my sister and me. It was only you and your sister? Uh-huh. So you went over to old— But I didn't see any places that looked junky or run down like you see some places over here. And another thing that impressed me, the biggest share of the roofs are tile. So they really last for generations, no doubt. And the age of those churches, my lord, they were—a lot of them built in the 1100s and 1200s. And still in good shape. I suppose they'd been worked on at different times, naturally. Your parents, now, they never got the chance to go back? No. Your mother died in the 30s, now you said, from the Depression? Yeah. And your father, how old was he when he died? He was 77 when he died. In the 40s? No, he died in 67. 67. Uh-huh. Oh, so he— Uh-huh. And he was active all the way up to— Oh, yeah. In fact, he was—well, if he hadn't have quit working and retired, he would have— I don't know if he would have lived longer, but he would have been happier because he was sure happy working with tools. I don't think he should have ever quit. But during the last years of his life, though, he didn't work on constructions. No, no, no. Did he live alone then here in— No. Eventually we got him to come over to Lincoln where we lived, and he lived in an old people's home over there, one run by our church. In fact, Mary Jane worked there for a number of years. Real nice place. And that's where he died. Yeah. Uh-huh.