 Carl Albert Anderson, Staten Island, New York, was born 1908, 9th of February, on Staten Island. His father was Anders Johan Andersson, born in Holmshocken, Mellerud, Sweden. And his mother was Karolina Johansson, born in Aserham, Blekinge. And we have the day, July 5, 1986. Your father now, Anders Johan Andersson, he came from Holmshocken, Mellerud in Dalsland. And do you know what year he came? To this country? Yeah. 1902. And he was unmarried at that time, right? He was unmarried, yes. And then he met your mother. That's right. Who came from Aserham. Yeah. She came over about the same time, or? No, she came out, I don't think she came here much before that. I think she came around before 1900, anyway. I'm not sure of the year, exactly. And they came to New York, then? No. No, they came to New Jersey. And mother worked in Hoboken, I know, when she first came here for a wealthy family. And then she married, not my father, but she married a man by the name of Johnson. Probably it was Johansson, I don't know. And they went to Wyoming, where he had a silver mine. And my sister was born there. And then they came back to New Jersey because he didn't have sufficient capital to continue with the mine. And he was going to try to raise enough money here in New Jersey to go back and continue his work. While he was here, he must have gotten a stroke, and he died. How old was he then? I am not sure of how old he was, but I know he was a great deal older than my mother. I would say as much as 17 years. And he died in August, 1904, which left my mother. She had another child in the first marriage, Arthur, my brother. And they were left alone. They had no means of support. So in December, she married my father, which was really something to talk about during that time, you know. You just didn't get married until at least a year after the person had died, the husband. But as I said, she had no means. But she had to. Yes, she had to. There was an insurance for the continued living. And from what I understand, it was a very, very happy marriage, more so than the first one. Then they moved to Staten Island, and I was born in 1908. And in 1910, my mother came down with appendicitis and was operated on. The operation was successful. But then a few days later, an abscess set in, and she had to go through another operation, which was also successful. But on top of that, she contracted pneumonia. And in a couple of days, she passed away. So you don't remember your mother? I don't remember my mother at all, no. No. The only thing that I can remember, and that is the day of the funeral. I remember that. I don't know how that became imprinted on my mind. But at that time, you know, there was horse-drawn carriages. And I remember riding in this horse-drawn carriage, and we had to go on a ferry boat over to New Jersey, where Mother was buried. Where in New Jersey then? In Greenville. And what church did they belong to then, your family? That I don't know. Oh, at that time, then they belonged to what was the Warsaw Lutheran Church. Oh, Warsaw Lutheran. Yeah. But when they lived in Jersey, I had no idea where they belonged. And your mother's first husband, what was his name? I know it was either Johnson or Ewanson, but offhand, I can't think of what it was. So what happened then to you then, to the children? Well, Dad tried to keep the house together, but you know, during them times, it wasn't like today where they have certain hours that they work. I think they had to work at least ten hours. What kind of work was he doing? He was a dock builder. And many times, or most of the time, I would say, it was off the island, so naturally he had to travel. And it got so that he just couldn't keep the house together. Of course, when he left to go to work in the morning, he left me in charge of a woman that lived on the first floor, and she herself had something like eight children. So you can imagine what attention I got. Well, the home was finally broken up. My sister went to live with her godmother in Harlem. How much older was she than you then? Seven years. And my brother was four years older. And he went to Sweden with an aunt. And that part of the story I don't know very much about, except that I heard later that she was very mean to him, and he had to work very hard. But then at sixteen years of age, he returned to the United States and went out to live with an uncle in Gladstone, Michigan. This uncle was what you would call rather wealthy. He had been digging for gold in Alaska and had become very rich. In fact, so rich that during the crash of 1929, he had lost more than a million dollars. Of course, this hadn't broken him anyway, because he had one of these Western-type saloons, as I understand, and he also distributed whiskey for some New York firm, I believe. But he never married, and Arthur lived with him. He put him through some kind of a business school, and he worked there for a while. But then he didn't like it there in Michigan, so he came back to New York. He lived with my sister and her husband and myself. He then got a job with the Swedish Consulate in New York, where he seemed to be very happy. But then he became ill with pneumonia one winter, and the doctor told him that he had had pneumonia twice before. If it should ever happen again, he says, I could never guarantee that you'd pull through. So he told him that he should seek another climate. But personally, I could never understand why he said it was all right to go back to Michigan again, where it's so cold and all, especially up in the northern peninsula. But he went back, and then after a few years, my uncle took sick, had a stroke, was taken to the hospital, from where he never returned until he died. He was there for eight years. He had so many strokes that they lost track of how many he had, which is very unusual. In fact, it was so unusual that the doctor that was treating him asked if he might write it up in the doctor's journal, but my uncle refused. So he was never permitted to write it. But after the eight years, he passed away, and rather, according to the will that he had left, I didn't see it until after my brother had died. He had left everything to my brother. I was not opposed to that at all, but I found out later that the reason why he had left all of it to my brother was he wanted the estate to remain in the family. He was a very generous man to a certain extent, although I never found that he had any generosity towards me. But another brother that he had, who also lived in Michigan, had, I think, eight or nine children. He put all of them through college, paid the expense of all of them. I met one of them at my brother's funeral. He passed away in 1957, I believe it was. He had gotten quite ill and was operated in a Chicago hospital. And at the time, the doctor told his wife that he had about six months to live, but she never told him. And they decided that they were going to move to Arizona, which they did, purchased a house there. And rather than live just the six months, he lived 18 months. And of course, there was nothing left of him by that time. I mean, he was just skin and bones. Was that the bar business, you think, that made him so rich? Oh, no, no, no, no. No, he had money before. And he was a great investor in the stock market. But he lost quite a bit. That didn't hinder him, and he went right back to it again. So you can imagine, after being in the hospital for eight years, which was quite an expense, he still left an estate of over $400,000. And that's back in the 50s? That's right. And what year did he die? 57. His brother died in 57, but he died, oh, I imagine about four or five years before that. So did you have any close relation with your brother? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Did you visit him? Oh, yes. We visited him in Gladstone. And he came and visited us in New York also. So he was well to do then after his... But he didn't get to get much pleasure out of it. What kind of business was he in? He didn't have a business, but he worked... I don't know just what office work he did, that I'm not sure of. But as I say, the last job that he had in New York was with the Swedish consulate. What he did there, I don't know. I never inquired into it. So you went to a school on Staten Island? Oh, yes. You stayed then on... I've been here there all my life. So who raised you then? Well, for the first few years, I was then about two and a half when mother died. And I was pushed from pillar to post, two weeks with one family, maybe a month with another family. And this went on until I was about, I guess, four years old. Then I came to a family, a Norwegian family. And there we were both able to live, my dad and I. But it was only for about a year's time. It seems that the husband and wife didn't seem to get along too well, and they were going to separate. So that meant that we had to get another home. But a friend of theirs who helped her, she had a child also, this woman, and she used to babysit for her every once in a while. And she said, well, maybe my mother will take you. Which became the fact that it happened that way. And I remember that the first day we came to this family, Boston Norwegians, I was five years old. I just had a birthday at that time. And I was with that family until I was 21 years of age. So they were a nice home then? That's right. Then it was really home. And your dad then, did he... He stayed with us until I think I was about 14. And they had some sort of a falling out with the people that I had been living with, you know. And he wanted me to go with him. And I said no. This was my home. I did not want to go. You felt secure there. Right. So he said, well, how are you going to get along? He says, who's going to pay for you? So I said, well, I expect that you would. Well he didn't give me any particular answer. But when I told the people that I was living with, they said, don't you worry. If he decides that he doesn't want to pay for your board, we'll take you anyway. But he did. I mean, he was an attack person anyway. But he got upset because I wouldn't go with him. And he was not a lover of the Swedish people. No. No. I don't know why. But he liked the Irish and people of that sort. Never associated that I know of with any Swedes at all. Whether someone had done him a dirty turn or what, I don't know. He never joined any organization that liked us? No. And when he found out that I was going to join Boss Order, oh, he says, don't do it. He says, you're very foolish. He says, I know some people that belong there. He says, and they're absolutely no good. Joe, what made you not join the Boss Order? My sister had belonged. And I guess she was about, she was very young when she joined. It was in 1917. The Lodge had not even existed a year when she joined. Because we had a cousin living on Staten Island. And after she had lived in Harlem, she moved back with the cousin on Staten Island. This cousin, incidentally, wanted to adopt me when mother died. I didn't know it until she told me just before she died in Sweden. And she said, your dad would not give you up. So... And he never remarried, I believe. He never remarried, which was very foolish. I remember him coming to me, which you should never have done. Naturally, I didn't look forward to a stepmother. So I always discouraged him. I probably shouldn't have done it, but he was old enough to know that a child doesn't know what is best. But he listened to you, then? He listened to me, yes. But you didn't listen to him not joining Boss Order? No. So what happened, then? You became one of the most ardent workers for the Boss Order in Sweden. I have worked hard, there's no doubt about it. So you joined then as a junior member, or... No, I was 17. 17? I was 17 when I joined. So I have belonged now for 61 years. And that was all Swedish, then? All in Swedish. And I didn't understand a word. So you had no chance to learn Swedish, then, when you were growing up? None whatsoever, no. Because my dad, he never spoke Swedish. Never. I could... I remember some of the songs he used to sing, and oh, I only wish that I could remember them now, but I can't. If I'd only tried to listen, but I didn't know what he was singing or anything, you know, but the words sort of stuck in my subconscious. So some of them I can remember a little bit of, you know, but I can't remember enough to complete the song. He played violin very good, too. Of his own teaching. Never had a lesson or anything. But I understand he was in great demand when he was in Sweden. Whenever they had parties or something, he had to be there, you know, to play for them. And I enjoyed his music, too. He played very well. Picked up most any tune that he wanted to, too. So you joined Svea, then, at 17 years of age? Right. And you started to get involved with the officers' work? Or how long did you...? I... Yeah, let's see. After the... Not the first year, but the second year. Then I was elected as assistant master of ceremonies. I said at the time, it's foolish to elect me because I don't know the Swedish at all. Oh, you'll learn, you'll learn. Was you one of the younger members then of the Dutch? Oh, yeah. Were there quite a few members in your age group joining? No, no, no, no, no. Very few. Much older than you? Yeah. Well, not much older, but in their twenties anyway. And I accepted the office as assistant master of ceremonies. And as I say, when I was to take the oath of membership, then I remember the past chairman coming out to me and he says, I know you don't understand Swedish. So he says, I'm going to tell you exactly what it is in English. I don't want you to feel that you're swearing to something that you would not like. So he explained it to me and thought that was very nice. Did you have to, when you later on became an officer, go read the rituals in Swedish? Yeah, see, that's what I'm coming to now. I never planned on the master of ceremonies not coming to a certain meeting. He didn't show up and we were to have initiation. Well, by that time, even though it was only about two years or less, I listened very closely and I asked different people what this meant and that meant, you know. So I sort of got an idea of it and I looked at the ritual and I tried to follow them in the parts that they had something to say, you know. So I'll never forget the night that we had the initiation and I had to get up there and be master of ceremonies. Well, I could see my cousin, she was a chaplain and she was sort of smiling, you know, at the way I was pronouncing it. But afterwards, she said, well, you did pretty good, she said. And if you keep on, she said, you'll do better. So I did take an interest. And then we, Karl Teft, when he came into the Lodge, he formed a sort of a dramatic club and they put on Swedish sketches, which I was permitted to take part in. And through that, I learned a considerable amount. And it's unfortunate that I don't get a chance to use the language because, I mean, when you learn the language the way I have learned it, without any book knowledge, then you're liable to forget it rather quickly. Although I don't think I would ever really forget it, it would probably take me a little time to revive some of the words that I have forgotten or have not been able to use. The Lodge now was about, both sexes, men and women? Yes, yes. At that time. And I think that was the best kind of a Lodge there was because I have noticed since that where there have been only men, that type of Lodge does not work. Because they need it otherwise. That's right. When the women come in there, you can see the change right away. Are they bigger pushes of things, you think, than the men? Oh, yes, definitely. Yeah. Oh, I should say. At least I have found that to be true because they can get something done where a man, well, they put it aside until maybe some other time, you know. Procrastinators. That's right. So the women in our Lodge have been marvelous. In fact, when I joined, it was a woman chairman. It was kind of unusual, wasn't it? Yes, it was unusual. Unusual. But she was one of the original starters of the Lodge. And of course, she took a tremendous interest in it, too. When they started the Lodge, I think she was probably chaplain or something. Then afterwards, of course, she became chairman. And then she was secretary for many, many years. And her name was? Emily Peterson. Emily Peterson. Yeah. She was a hard worker for the Lodge. We've had some very dedicated members. God rest their soul. They've gone from us, you know. They were wonderful. And you stayed with, as an active worker, for the coming years ahead of you? Oh, yes. You went through all the offices. Yes. I was chairman 11 different times. And all the offices, except I was never recording secretary. I have taken the office when someone hasn't been there, but I was never installed as a secretary. Neither that nor financial. I was assistant financial, and I had all the other offices. In fact, I was outer guard when I became district master. People thought that I was rather unusual and probably not proper, but I couldn't see anything wrong with it. What year was that? 78, I believe it was. But then you certainly had a lot of experience. Oh, yes, I had. Before that time. Tremendous, tremendous amount. And I had never any intention of going ahead in the district, but some of our members just insisted, you know, go ahead, go ahead. We'll be behind you, of course. I've heard that story so many times, you know, and they don't always live up to what they say. But in this case, I must say, they did stand behind me. And we have a splendid lodge. It's so small. Now, I don't think we have many over 100 members. And we do get new members every once in a while, but like all the other lodges, it seems that the younger people, they don't have the same interest. I don't know what to say in a case like this. We have been discussing it so many times, what can we do? If the young people will only tell us what they would like to have, maybe we could fulfill their wishes. But they don't seem to know what they want either, as far as that is concerned. Well, you came in now as a new member, 70 years of age. The Swedish, of course, was something that, a barrier for you. You were probably more scared than anything else. Was the rituals a little bit too rigid for you to follow, I think, once you got the understanding? Oh, no. I enjoyed it then. I thought it was wonderful. And I learned, memorized all the initiation work, everything. In fact, we would be invited to other lodges to perform the initiation in Swedish. And we did this many times. I acted as chairman before I ever was chairman. So nowadays, the young people are talking about, well, even some of the older ones say, we've got to change and get away with the formalities. Do you think that's a good idea, or is there should be some formal things in there? I think we should stick to something that we have been having throughout the years. It should not be changed completely, because then it will not be an organization the way it was meant to be. Our ritual at that time was entirely different from what it is today. Because you had difficulty with the language. But now they have no difficulty with the language whatsoever, and still they say it's too much. Is it a different kind of people now? Oh, of course it is. People don't know what they want. More daisy, you think? They don't know what they want anymore. They have so many opportunities. They have so much that has been just thrown upon them, you might say, without having to do too much to acquire it. What kind of work were you doing then when you joined the Law School? I was a secretary in the New York firm. You went into office? You went to college? No, no, I went to business school. So I'm sure that you were tired when you came home at night after sitting on your desk. Oh, yes, yes. The good part, what I thought at that time, was that we had our meetings on Saturday nights. We still have it, and have had all these years, which is a little ridiculous today, I suppose, because most functions that are being held, that is of any size, are usually held on a Saturday night, and weddings, all kinds of things like that. So sometimes we don't have too many people that come out to our meetings. There's always something else that's going on somewhere, and it becomes a little discouraging. But thank God we still have very active members who are dedicated. I mean really dedicated. I don't know how many 50-year members we have, but quite a few. So you now, being 17 and joining CERIA, like I mentioned, you said you were working in New York and you come home and tired and so forth, and then you had this Swedishness. You would think, to heck with it, why should I sit there and talk? What were you looking forward to for the last work? I don't know exactly. Your benefits? To learn Swedish. That I wanted to do. My dad had never taught me, and I made up my mind, someday I was going to learn it. And I succeeded. So that was your goal then, for the last work? That's right. And at the same time you gave the Lords quite a bit of your time and effort. Yes, I know they appreciate every bit of it. And being a district master, now this is one of the harder districts in New York, because you have a Jamestown Fort. Yes, and Buffalo. That's right. So it was a little difficult for me, but I attended so very many meetings. Sometimes I was out every night, every day in the week actually. So how about your wife now? I never married. Oh, you never married? Never married. So you had the time then to... I had the time. It would never have gone otherwise. You don't think so? No. I doubt if you'd find many women that would put up with anything like that. Unless they could be connected with the same thing, that would probably be the only way. Either way, it would be complex. Yeah, yeah. But then when the depression came along, and then I lost my position, and I had several different jobs, you might say, throughout the next two or three years or so, and nothing steady was just enough to probably make ends meet, that's about all. In the meantime, my father died, and that was an expense that just about took everything that I owned. I had nothing left, because he had been sick quite a long time, and they couldn't understand what was wrong with him, because he had all the pain in his feet, he couldn't hardly walk. And he was in and out of the hospital, and they could not understand what it was until finally one day I came to visit him in the hospital, and he says to me, I want you to take my ring and my watch here that I have. And I looked at him, I said, what do you mean? Well, he says, they're sending me to Bellevue Hospital tomorrow, because they say that there's nothing they can do for me here, and the only thing would be Bellevue, where they... So I took it. He didn't seem to recuperate any at all, you know. In fact, when I come up there maybe a week or two later, I found out that they had actually found out that he had a tumor on the brain. And I could never understand this at the time until I spoke to the doctor and he said, well, you know, it does happen that way sometimes, that the brain reacts to certain nerves in the body, and it affected his feet. He had no headaches of any kind, and he had become so emaciated from just laying there, you know, and not having ambition, I guess, to even live. They said it'd be no sense in us operating on him, because he'd only die on the table. So he did die about a week after that. I was very fortunate that I had my sister, because her husband had a very good position. And even when I didn't have work quite, it was never a question of, well, you have to work over so much or anything like that. Of course, I paid them back every cent that I felt was due them. At the time, it was a blessing that I had her. And they were still in the depression. I was during the depression. You still belonged to the lodge, though. You didn't drop it. No, no, no, I still belonged to the lodge. The Noggin members dropped the lodge, don't you think? Yes, they did. It was a hardship for me. Right. And there were many lodges that folded up, too. Well, you can imagine what a membership they had in New York State at one time. They had approximately 10,000 members. But that went down gradually, you know, and there's no one coming from Sweden, or very few, and others moving away to acquire positions somewhere else. So some of the lodges just couldn't exist anymore. They had to give up. But it was a good insurance, though, to belong to a lodge in case they got sick. Yes, it was. I mean, after all, now, to go into the lodge, as far as any sick benefit that you receive, of course, that's sort of ludicrous. And have respect. Outdated. Yes. But at that time, it was a tremendous help. Because nobody had insurance at the time. No, no. But in your work now, you worked in New York at the office. Were you insured by the company you worked for? No. No insurance? Not at that time. Nothing. So then I didn't know what to do. And the Svea Hall had just been in existence about, oh, I guess three or four years. And the managing custodian, he said that he was going back to Sweden, where he intended to stay. So he says, maybe you could take over. Well, I thought to myself, this would be a blessing, because at least I would get a free apartment and wages so that at least I could live. So I accepted the position when they offered it to me. I had it for one year, but I just couldn't take it any longer. And I gave it up. But then I went back to New York and worked there. But even then, things were not too plentiful. So it was just a temporary job, and I finally was out of work again. So then I got a job as a salesman, and I made out fairly well in the beginning with commissions and whatnot. But even that started to peter out. So about a year afterwards, then I found out that the man that took over for me in the Svea Hall, he was leaving. He was going to work in the hospital. So he says, well, I'll get the job back again. But he had a family living with him, the Tafts, Carl Taft. And he said, I don't like to chase them out. But he says, what can I do if I give up my job? He says, I have no other alternative. But he said, what you could do, you could make arrangements with them to have a bedroom. They could keep the rest of the apartment, and they could supply you with your board. You wouldn't have to worry about that. I said, well, you'll find out. So I did. And being that it was my lodge that owned the building, naturally I'd worked that much harder for it. And I just never got away from there. I stayed there for 42 years. Of course, in the meantime, the lodge couldn't keep the big building going any longer. Not that they didn't have money, but it was so difficult to get a board of directors. Some of them had been on the board for more than 25 years. And it isn't just being on the board. When you were on the board there, there was work to be done. It was carpenter work or whatever. They expected you to help. So some of them were tired of it. And they decided that, no, we're going to sell the building. So they got a very ready buyer in one of the Masonic lodges. After all, they got a bargain. $65,000 is all they paid for the building. And we received, that is the lodge received the $65,000 because instead of selling the building, they sold the corporation. And in that respect, they didn't have to pay any tax. I stayed on. I didn't want to because we had a bar there also. And we had been doing catering and there was dances and whatnot going on. So we had a very busy place going there. So when the Masons asked me to stay on, I said, no, I am so tired of the bar, I don't even want to look at another bar. So they said, well, we have no intention of keeping it. We're just going to use it for fraternal groups, Eastern Star and various other groups. So I said, well, in that case, I'll stay on for a while. If I decide that I don't want to continue any longer, I'll just let you know. But I did. I stayed on until I retired. And personally, I think they could have treated me a little better than what they did because even though I had the apartment there and all, they never gave me credit for that as far as my Social Security was concerned. So that made quite a difference, you know, when you figured all the years that I had been there, even if the apartment was only valued at $200 or $300 a month, that was still money. So when the time came for my Social Security, I protested. But it wasn't much use because they just gave me credit for one year. So it was like a rotten leaf. Yeah, it was. But you can't fight anything like that. It's out of the question. As luck would have it, I mean, I was sensible enough to invest in good stocks and whatnot. You made out good loans. So I had no problem. And that was the only kind of living you had then, was you had no outside activity. That was plenty to be done because we did a lot of caring, you know, weddings and whatnot. And it was a tremendous amount of work. When I think of it, all the cooking and everything, you know, and of course we had lots of help, but still and all, I was responsible. So I had to accept them, the different reservations, and I had to see that they were properly taken care of. And, you know, sometimes you couldn't always get the help that you wanted. You had to pitch in. It was not unusual for me to sometimes work for 24 hours straight because we'd have Saturday and Sunday going at the same time and someone had to do the work. It wasn't easy. You didn't belong to any other Swedish organization in the Greater New York area? Not Swedish. I belonged to a Scandinavian, well, it was really a Norwegian organization, the Dover Mountain Society. And outside of that, that was the only Scandinavian organization I belonged to. Of course, I belonged to other organizations since then, I mean the masons and all the different bodies within the organization. So I'm a 32nd Degree Mason. Belonged to the town of Cedars and the Richmond Masonic Association. Did you visit Sweden at any time? Oh, I've been there ten times. Ten times? With your father at any time? Never, never. And that was one thing I always looked forward to because he had promised me that when you graduate from school, then I'm taking you to see your grandmother. But I never received that promise fulfilled and I never got to see my grandmother because he knew me at the time she died. But you knew the place where he was born? Oh, yes. So you've been there? Yes, so it was a little difficult the first time, I mean to make up your mind to go there, not knowing how it was going to work out. Of course, I knew Swedish to a certain extent, but I always felt this way, it's going to be a different thing to get to a country where that's the only language they speak, actually. This was in 1953. And then I stayed for three months. Oh, that was beautiful. And we traveled all over Sweden. So you met cousins then? Cousins, yes. Right. I had cousins in Melerode and cousins in Stockholm, cousins in Karlshamn, and some cousins that I met one time and I didn't want to meet them again. It was unfortunate. When I came to Oslo, and then an uncle had lived there, I mean his wife was still alive. So I figured, well, I must go and visit her anyway. Never had any contact with, except one of her daughters I had written to. And I came there and I rang the doorbell and this lady came to the door. I mean it was rather foolish of me to not realize that my aunt would be rather old, you know. But she evidently was busy with housework and she had some kind of a cloth around her head, you know. So I asked her if she was Mrs. Johansson. Well, she must have gotten insulted. So she says, no, she says, I'm not Mrs. Johansson. So I says, well, is she home? Well, she's home, she says, but she's sleeping and cannot be disturbed. But my aunt was not sleeping. She heard what was going on, so she called to her and she said, Linnea, she said, who's there? So she had to tell her. Oh my goodness, she says, let him come in. So I came in and I wasn't very welcomed by the cousin, you know, but the aunt was very nice. She had a little problem walking, so she couldn't walk very much. I don't know whether it was rheumatism or what. But she said, called to Linnea and she said, Linnea, she says, put on the coffee pot so that we can have a cup of coffee. Oh no, says Linnea, I'm not cooking any coffee. So I could understand then that she was offended. And I knew there was no possible way I could even try to apologize. So I said to my aunt, I says, well, I says, don't pay any attention to it. I says, just get the feeling now that I haven't even been here, but I'm going to come back some other time and then I'll let you know when I'm coming. So I figured that was an easy way to get out of it. Of course, it wasn't a very nice way to think, though. Because when I went to visit another cousin of hers, that is, daughter of hers in Stockholm, she says, Albert, she says, you have to go back again. She says, mother would be so disappointed if you didn't come. Because I told her what happened. She says, I know, but that just can't be helped. So I says, all right, Helma, I says, I'll go back. So I did write to them and tell them that I was coming. And I got a very nice greeting from my aunt, but I don't think Lenia ever got over it, because she just seemed to ignore me. So you must have been taken by surprise. Yes. Yes. In a bad situation. Yes. Yes. But then I met one of the male cousins and he was very nice. The only thing is, he seemed to have an idea that I was going to sort of sponsor him back to the States, and I just felt that I was not in a position to do that. So another one of the cousins came to visit the next day, and we were out in the garden and talking and all, you know, and she says, well, she said, it's very easy for people to travel from the United States to Sweden, she says, when they get their tickets paid for them. So I says, what do you mean? Well, she says, Uncle August left you a lot of money, didn't he? I says, he never left me one penny. How does he leave me? Oh, she says, you can tell that to somebody who will believe it. Well, that was another cousin that just turned me off. And you know what annoyed me? The fact was that they knew differently, because when they found out that Uncle August had died, they had gone to the Swedish consulate in Stockholm and gotten a copy of the will. So they knew more than I knew. I never even saw the will at that time. So I never, yes, I went back to see another cousin, Anna. She was very nice. She lived in Stillerede. So I went back there a couple of times and visited with her and her husband. And I liked her. She was very nice. I don't know whether she's still alive or not, because we somehow broke off the correspondence. Do you still have the contact with the... With the other cousins in Mellerud in Stockholm? Have they been over here recently? No, they have never been here. Never been here. But you've been there ten times. Ten times. And it probably would have been twelve or more times, only I have not been well for the last four years. After the last convention, you know, we went to Hawaii and I became very ill there. And then when I came back again and I went to the doctor, my doctor was not satisfied, so he said, I can't understand what's wrong with you. The best thing for you to do is to go and have a blood test taken. I did. And when I went back to him, he said, well, I'm no expert on blood, he said, so I'm going to send you to a hematologist. So I went there, and this doctor, he was so impossible, abrupt, you know, that he really scared me. He examined me maybe two or three minutes. So he says, you have leukemia. All I had to hear was leukemia, and I figured, oh, this is the end. So I said, well, how are you going to treat it? Oh, he says, there's no way of treating it. He says, because there's no cure. Well, I left there, and when I got home, I called my regular doctor, and I told him. He was furious. He says, Mr. Anderson, you call the Sloan Kettering Hospital in New York and make an appointment with them and find out just exactly what's wrong. So I went up there, and the doctor that I had, he asked me my medical history and all, and he looked at me, and he says, don't you worry about one thing. I said, what do you mean, don't worry? He says, when a person gets leukemia at your age, he says, it's not serious. He says, you probably feel very tired at times and all. I said, but don't worry. He says, you can live for many, many years. Well, of course, this was like a tonic to me. I felt like a different person after hearing that. I come back, and aside from the following December, then I started to lose my voice. So I went back to my regular doctor, and that treated me for my throat. And he said, we'll have to operate on you. But he says, this time, it's not just polyps. He said, the cancer has invaded one of your vocal cords. So he says, we'll probably have to remove the whole voice box, and then you'll just have to learn how to talk. So I says, oh, my God. So he says, how long ago was it since you had cancer the last time? I said, 13 years. Oh, he says, well, in that case, you just take out the one vocal cord and see what happens. So it was a strenuous operation and all, you know. And it took a few weeks before I could even talk or anything to speak of. But then gradually, when it cleared up, then I was able to talk. So, I mean, it may sound very funny to some people, but I'm very happy that I'm able to speak at all. There hasn't been any thought back on it or anything? Not yet, no. It was very unprofessionally done by the first doctor. Oh, I tell you. It's awful, really. And, I mean, 75 hours for maybe two or three minutes, that's all the examination was, you know. I wouldn't have cared about the money, but, I mean, to be so rude about it. And my regular doctor, as I say, he was very angry. He said, no doctor should ever talk that way. He was an Indian, this doctor. And I get disgusted with some of them. But, of course, since then I've been in and out of the hospital, off and on. Bronchitis. Now, this year I was in for seven weeks, from the first part of January until after the middle of February. My doctor went on vacation when I was just starting to get better. Two weeks I was up walking. I was thinking of going home. And they sent me down for an x-ray. And down there, it was so cold in the hall, I had to wait for two hours. When I came back to my room, I couldn't understand what had happened. That night I came down with a 107 fever. When the doctor told me afterwards about it, after he came back from Florida, I says, 107, I says, that can't be possible. Oh, yes, he says, it is possible, but it can't go much higher. It can't go as any higher, he says, than its curtains. Well, they told me afterwards that they never thought that I would possibly lose. But, I don't know, it must be a greater power than the doctors that can bring me back to life again. So, now I feel very good. The only thing is I'm not so steady on my feet. So I've had to use the cane at times, you know. And this time I thought, well, maybe I can do without it. So I did forget it, otherwise I would have taken it with me. But this morning I felt that I didn't think I'd get through the day without it. So I went to the desk, and they were good enough to get a cane for me. But still, you are a contributor to the Vasa Order. Oh, yes. So this 90th convention, or the Grand Lodge, well, convention week here in 1986, you contribute with some beautiful poems that are read by a narrator. How did you... did they start long ago, this writing? Yes, I would say some time ago. Just when I feel like it, I might write something, you know. And Betsy came to me and she asked me if I could do something about writing something for the different flags. Beautiful. There are all the nations included in the Vasa Order. So I says, well, Betsy, I says, you know, I haven't been well. And I don't always feel much in the mood for writing anymore. I'm sorry, because I think if I had a little more education, I might have been able to make a profession of it. Have you contributed somewhere else with the newspapers? Well, short stories or something, you know. Nothing that amounted to anything. You didn't have newspapers? Years ago. Years ago. And after that I never had time to even consider it. No, but going through this train of it, you're not being too well, and put your thoughts together, it takes some doing. It does. I mean, and the peculiar part of it was, when she called me, she said, well, you don't have to hurry. You've got at least a week or ten days to do it. So I was just finishing lunch that particular day, and I thought, well, if I'm going to do something, I'll have to sit down now and try to get my thoughts together. And I guess inside of an hour and a half, I had written three of them anyway. And I didn't think that she wanted all of them. But then she told me afterwards, oh, she had to have one for Iceland. And then she told me she had to have one for New York. So I thought, oh, Betsy, I don't know whether I can do it or not. But I just made up my mind, and I managed to do it. It was probably one of the most touching moments, darling. It probably was. In this ceremony. Yeah. You were, I'm sure, appreciated. Yeah. You have brought a lot of years of service to the last order. Oh, yes, I have. What do you think about the future for it? Oh, at the time, I mean, everything looked so bright and glorious. And it was, because at one time we had over 300 members in my lodge. And we were in these different sketches, both Swedish and English. We were asked to go and perform, you know, in different other lodges. And they were very happy to have us. We enjoyed it. It was a great enjoyment for us, because sometimes you get more of a kick out of learning these different things than what you do when the performance takes place. Because you never know how it's going to turn out. But we also had a glee club in Lodz, so I imagine there must have been about 30 members anyway at the time. And there too we were invited to go out and sing in different places. You mentioned about the 21 sketches, the theatrical plays. Did they disappear during the Second World War or before, in the Depression? No, no, after. Oh, not during the Depression. There were good times then. Oh, that was... To bring people together. That was our beautiful time. We never enjoyed anything so much in all our life, because we had really nothing. You had friendship then. But what we had was friendship, right. And we really enjoyed that. When we look back now, we could never relive anything like that today. The people are too satisfied now. They're too satisfied, absolutely. They had everything. They barely surfed for it. Right, right. And it's hard to be a messiah. That's true. No, we really enjoyed those years. As I say, we had very little, but we managed very nicely.