 This is cassette three, the side one, a continuation with Robert Brodine, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette three, side one. The ornamental. But anyway, during the Depression, I think my dad turned his stock over to Lindell. So the Archer Land and Lumber Company was owned by Lindell. And somehow they were able to retain it. I suppose they were, I don't know how they did it, but they did. So they succeeded then. But it was probably because, you know, your father went on there for a year and a half and kept it going. Yeah. Did he sell out then to Lindell? No, I think, we got an orders, they'd have to put in money and one day I'll do a Lindell one time, my dad another time. So Lindell was like my dad, was a good partner and I imagine, so my dad probably owed Lindell some money. So to even things out, my dad, they made a deal. My dad, well you take my Archer Lumber Company stock. And what it was worth at that item, so Lindell agreed to, so it was done amicably. And so Lindell became the sole owner. Was he tired of it then, your dad, you think, about that deal down there? Why did he get rid of it? He didn't see any future in it? Probably not, because he was down there and like he said, they had so many problems. The White River would overflow, they would steal their logs. And they also had cotton, you said. They had cotton. Did they rent out the land then, some of the farm, the river land? What did you say? Did they rent out the land then to farmers in the area to grow cotton on? Well, they probably did some of that, but I think they tried to raise cotton and sell cotton themselves. Who were the workers then, Floyd? Are they local people or were they Swedes from Rockford? No, Mr. Swenson went down there, but then when he died, they had a local man, a Hellen Arkansas man, what was his name? Mr. Landry, I think, L-A-N-D-R-Y, seemed to be a nice fellow. And he and my dad seemed to get along good. But oh, another thing, to keep it going, they borrowed money from the Mississippi Valley and Trust and maybe other banks, and they didn't show enough profit to pay back, see. So I suppose my dad, like you say, just got tired of it. And I think maybe what the Lundells did, they were smart, they kind of just retrenched and didn't try to make it succeed and just let it rest, and maybe it worked out for them some way or other. So there was an outside investment your dad did, but the rest of the investment was done locally in Rockford. But this was because of the lumber business could bring in more profit, but it was only your dad and Lundell left. That's right. Like Scandia or Landstroms, whatever their names were, Empire, for instance. Empire. They dropped out. I think Mr. Hoagland was in it for a while. Of course, Mr. Hoagland, a block on you, was originally in the furniture business. He was in it. What furniture company was he in? Mr. Hoagland was at the old Rockford Cooperative on Railroad Avenue, and then he later went over to the Empire Furniture. Mr. Lundberg took that over, and then the Wyman Company finally bought out Empire Furniture. Wyman did real good. They were Jewish fellows from Chicago, and they did wonderful. Why did they do so good? Were they going to do better salesman anything than the Swedes? Better connections? I don't know. They were smart. One thing, they did a lot of advertising, but to me it's a miracle that they were able to do as well, and I think they finally sold out and became millionaires. But they did wonderful over there. I remember, as I say, after I got out of school, I went with my dad to the old ornamental, which is hardware for furniture, and the fellows from Wyman had come over. They were awful sharp buyers. One of them especially I didn't like very good because he was too sharp. He tried to chill with you all the time. But you've got to give them credit. They succeeded. How did they conduct their business? Were they abrasive or hard-selling or shrewd in a way that you understood or could see on them? What did they differ from the Swedes, for instance? Like when your dad now made a deal or closed a deal, how did they do it different than Wyman, for instance? Could you notice that? Well, I remember there's Mr. Wager, Mr. Kulp, who the general manager was his name. Anyway, they'd come over and they were active while they were here. I suppose they decided they didn't want to maybe permanently live in Rye. They stayed at the old Faust Hotel, lived there. And I don't say they lived high, but they must have drawn good salaries to do that. And they had a strike there, but they worked out of that. So they had their difficulties, but just how they did it, Leonard, I couldn't tell you. I don't know. I really don't know. Well, your dad bought—no, they sold this airing machine to fishers and other people in the village. I got an idea that was about the year 1926 or 1927. My dad got $680,000. Then he had overpaid taxes, and Mr. Flynn said—and he got a check, I think it was for $250,000. So he was a millionaire right there. That's right. You were old enough then to understand what was going on in the business. Did he talk to you boys, for instance? No. I got almost a millionaire. Can you suggest what I should do with it? Or did he all work by himself? There's a lot of money. He could retire right there. I tell you, he sent us all through school, and I'll admit, I suppose it seems a little strange, but we really didn't pay too much attention to his business affairs. But when I got out of school, Natch Lydon wanted a job. First he didn't want me to go over to the ornamental brass. He says it's not set up right the way it should. I suppose he figured—but I did. Did you start on the factory floor then, or in the office? Oh, you say? Did you start in the office? Oh, no. I guess the superintendent, Mr. Carlson, oh, it would be a good idea. So I worked in a dye and two-room a week, foundry a week or two. Then Mr. Carlson—you see, at that time, my dad—I remember when I first went there, my dad would be walking through the shop with a bunch of papers in his hand. And what he was doing is going around—you see, there was a foundry, there was a machine shop, assembly department, a plating room, a polishing department, and so on, different departments. So maybe my dad got an inquiry. What's the price on some special item? And my dad, he'd go around each foreman, get the list of operations, how many per hour, and so on, and finally arrive at a price. So Mr. Carlson noticed that, and he said, well, you ought to have Bob take it. So I did that, and I learned a lot from it. And I'll admit, I worked hard there, and I think if old John Anderson hadn't foreclosed on the mortgage, we would have made it. But so my dad—my dad made his mistakes, too, over there, because like in the previous superintendent, he wasn't very strict on discipline, I guess, and they would, you know, waste time and so on and so on. And I noticed that. And then—so I think I made good suggestions to my dad about ornamental, but his other affairs I don't—I didn't have any particular. And I don't think my brother Willard or Ed did either. So they just let him on his—in other words, my dad got into too many things, and he thought that, of course, if the Depression hadn't come on, I bet he would have pulled it through. So he believed in the hard work should finally pay off. Hard work, and you know, I don't think my dad—he didn't have any special desire for money, but his main idea, like Mr. Swenson said, he wants to see the wheels a-turning, you know. I suppose it gave him a lot of pleasure to see a factory grow. Oh, another thing—what was I going to say now? Oh, my dad, he had a lot of energy, but he thought it was a sin not to work. He'd always—now when my dad lost everything, maybe he was 70 years old. He still wanted to work. I remember he had a garden way out here. He'd get up—we'd take him out, he'd work till noon. And then he'd even went over to—and then he had this friend, Mary Erlander, at the Erlander home. He'd walk all the way and give her vegetables. She was broke at that time. And— That was the daughter? Yeah, that was the daughter, yeah. And she was never married? No, no. And so— Broke, you said, were they also wealthy? I think they—I don't think they were—I think they were well off. I don't think they were wealthy, no. But they were stockholders or had something to do with the Union Furniture? Yep, that's right. They were started right there. That's right. But I don't think Mr. Erlander—you know, looking back, I don't think— Oh, you don't remember him, though? No, I don't remember him, no. But Mary, you remember? Just a little bit. Mother and Mary Erlander were good friends, but I didn't see her often. But what I was going to say—oh, yeah. When my dad, maybe 70 years old, he still went to work. No, he must have been a little younger than that, yeah. But anyway, maybe 65. Frank Hoagland, he gave my dad a job just doing clerical work, I think in the statistical department, just to give him a job. It wasn't necessary. And I met a lot of fellows. They said, well, we don't like Mr. Hoagland very well, but he sure did a good deed when he gave your dad a job. So my dad worked there, oh, I think for a year or two. And then Mr. Hoagland died a little bit suddenly, and Mr. Strank, who took him over—I can't say I fault him on it—so my dad lost his job. And it was about the time, if my dad had been able to work there six more weeks, or was it six months, he'd got some Social Security. But he didn't get Social Security, see? So he was absolutely penniless. Complete penniless. But everyone complimented on—they thought Hoagland did a good turn there, and he did. Because he knew my dad's psychology. He said, well, Will Brolin, he'd feel like a new man if he got a job. It was a menial job, you might say. It was just a clerical job. But I remember so well, because I had to take him to work every morning and pick him up. And he saw no way to start a new venture, I mean, to invest in—I mean, there was no way for him to raise money again? No, I think I heard him make the statement—what was it he said? He thought about it, but I think he probably analyzed it carefully and just said like this, it will be impossible for me to make a comeback. I suppose, and he probably was right. You know, things have changed. Because from 30 and up to 40, 45, it was impossible to raise money. Yeah, that's right. And then his age was again—he was getting old, see? How did he instruct your boys now to handle business affairs and investments? Did he get you into the idea of investing, buying stocks? No, he—like my brother Ed, he had several friends who were in the bond and investment business. So I think probably they heard—this was before the Depression, when my dad was well off. So I suppose they just said, can't we talk to your dad? So I remember a couple of them came over one evening, and my dad—they now happened to be around, and my dad told them. He says, I don't know anything about investments. I have, and the only thing, investments I have made are locally. And of course he knew—and then, oh, but Walter Strong, he—my dad got—he was a big insurance man in Rockford—in Chicago, I mean. So he told my dad, oh, you ought to get some Chase National Bank stock. And my dad got a pretty good block of stock of that, Chase National Bank. But outside of that, he didn't play the stock market, or I don't think he was interested. He figured any money I got, I want to invest right here. Nothing was written on your money, for instance? Not only that. And I—when—naturally, when my dad went into bankruptcy, or they forced him in, they got the house down on where the Sunbird Funeral Home is, big house, 20 rooms. How many rooms, you said, 20? Twenty rooms, well-built house, and what was it? There's something in the law that my dad—or my mother was entitled to a certain interest in the home. And of course, I guess it was—well, they have what they have, dollar rights, but this was something in addition to that. So my mother, I just said, no, I wish to turn that in, too, you know, to apply on the indebtedness. So— To pay off. To pay off, yeah, that's right. And I don't—see, my mother, she was—she must have been pretty strong to be able to—because she, you know, raised in a large family, and she was a more conservative—my dad, some people would—now, I don't know if the word plunger means it is derogatory or not, I don't think it necessarily—in other words, a gamble, plunging and gambling, the same thing. My dad was willing to gamble, and he was able to make quick decisions, and he wouldn't—if he decided on something, he'd go at it all full force, you know. That's right. So he had an eye for business. Yeah. But at the time— Of course, I won't say—you know, I remember—I remember Barney Flynn said one time—or was it—maybe it was my—no, Barney Flynn, he was Siebensieben, he's dead now. He took care of the P.A. Peterson estate, I think, and probably did a good job. They were talking about Mr.—oh, Barney Flynn, oh, Mr. Foss, not a good businessman. I think Flynn would say the same thing about my dad, because they weren't careful enough. You know, they were good business in the sense that they were enterprising, but as far as being—now, Mr. Atwood, of Atwood, he was one of these fellows that he would have everything calculated, and so he didn't make mistakes. My dad and Foss probably made a lot of bad investments and didn't work out, see. So from that standpoint, you might say they were not good businessmen. And that was the first depression they experienced, in other words. Well, they probably had the 1890s, though, but that wasn't the time. That was different, and I don't think that was naturally— The best— Well, you see, the depression of 1930s, that was very severe. Oh, very severe. They wiped out everything. That's right. Rockford had—was it seven banks and four of them? Closed. And my dad had stocks, and the receiver—I suppose you can't blame the—the government gave a man a job as a receiver of a bank, a federal bank, and it was his job to collect money in. So if they—my dad had 2,000 shares of Sunstrand stock, they sold it out at a low price, I suppose, because everything was depressed. Did somebody make money on that, you think? Well, my dad, he said, I wonder who got that stock. Well, whoever got that stock might have bought it at, we'll say, 50 cents on the dollar, and now it's worth—and they've had a lot of stock splits, he'd be a millionaire. That was the end of interview with Bob Rollin, Rockford, Illinois.