 So you said the Indians had to show you an ID? Yeah. About their age? About their age, yes. I thought it was... No, at that time......subjected to complete? No. No serving? No. You could serve them? They could have five order at that time. How much? Was there a limit? No. No. There was no limit. The only thing you had to watch out for was that, you know, some of these kids, they borrowed each other's card, you know, so they could come in and have a beer. And I learned so many... And then you were responsible? If anything happened to them, yes. But as long as they had a card, we were all right. Is this true or not? They say that Indians are more violent than the white people. Is this true or not? Or is it just a myth? Some Indians were very nice. Even with liquor in their body? Yeah. But we didn't give them that much. We had... Yeah, but did they like that if you restricted them from... Yeah, yes. You had to? You had to, yeah. You would say, hey, you go on home now. And they were very nice. Some of those were very nice Indians. But for instance, if you had five Swedes sitting at a bar, and you had five Indians sitting at a bar drinking about the same thing, the same amount of liquor, would there be any difference in the behavior? Yes. In the behavior? Yes. In what way? The kids, you know, the young ones. They got wild. They got a little on the... Raw side. Yeah. Then they thought that they owned the whole world, you know. Yeah, but the Swedes do the same thing when they get drunk. They got fistfights and everything. Oh, yes. So maybe there's no difference. I don't think so. I don't think it really is any different. But we always saw that when they pulled out from our parking lot, we saw that they had something to eat before, you know, see? You served them. We bought this big cartwheel of Wisconsin cheese and dished it out, you know, every night. And some crackers and put it on the bar, and everybody helped themselves. Nobody does that anymore, really. And there was no extra charge? No. But there was a precaution then? Right. But that was fun. It was lots of fun. I was going to say, I learned more four-letter words at that place than I ever knew existed. I tell you. But then we saw that. Were the girls able to... I mean, they could sit down at the bar too at the time? The girls? Oh, yes. Yeah. And we had, not only Indians, we had a lot of nice young boys that came in and had their beer and a little drink or something. They were all very nice. So how many years did you keep going on that one? Oh, we had that for two years. Two years? That's all. You got tired of it then? Yeah, sure. Too much work? Yeah, there was too much work. We sold a lot of food. And I think of it today, we had fish fry on Fridays, and we served everything in a little basket. For instance, two or three fish fillets, some French fries, coleslaw, a roll with butter, and coffee, $1.29. I wish I could go eat like that today. Could you make any money on that though? Because there's too much profit. Well, you make a little more on your liquor, but that was a draw card, you know. And shrimps, half a dozen shrimps and French fries, $1.59. Well, I could sit there for a whole week and tell you all these things. So you saw it from the bottom up? Yes, I did. Why didn't you continue more than two years? You could have rented out or hire somebody? You made enough money, didn't you? Well, I didn't want to be up there any longer. And we had a chance to sell, so that was all right. And then you moved back to Chicago again? Yeah, Evanston. And then your husband started to work? He was a troubleshooter for a couple of real estate. And also he was connected with the police department. In Evanston? Yeah. Oh, I see. And then 19... And you stayed home then as a housewife? Yeah, I'll say that. All of us have worked. Everything. I had a catering service. From your home? No, not from my home, but from another lady and myself. We took parties, anything from a four ladies bridge party to 300 people. And we took care of all the parties in St. Luke's Church in Evanston. The men's club, there were a couple of hundred when they had their dinner, and we worked like horses. They had five, six turkeys in the oven all at the same time. In them days, you couldn't buy like you do today. You bought the carrots, you scraped them, you cut them, you bought the peas, and you shelled those and did that. Now you buy a bag of stuff already done. But you know, it wasn't that way in them days. It was all from scratch? It was all from scratch. You talk about St. Luke's Church, what church did you join when you came here? Well, we have not been church people. We've been too busy working. So you didn't join any church then? No. My daughter, when she was a little child, three, four years old, she went to Ebenezer Hill in Sunday school. She was confirmed there too? Was she confirmed in Ebenezer too? No. She went to Sunday school. Did you join Vasa, Viking or Svettjo? I would never have belonged or ever been to any Swedish club or doing. Never. Never been to any? Never. We have a lady that lives right below me here on the first floor, I think she is. And she said she's going to so-and-so now tonight. You know what that is. I said, don't ask me. I said, I have no idea about any Swedish clubs. I have never been anywhere. But not during your first seven years here, the homesickness really took on. You didn't feel the need to meet other Swedes in the organization? No, we didn't want any Swedes. You didn't want any Swedes? He wanted to be an American. We had more Italian friends than real American friends. He strived for that? Yeah. He didn't like the Swedes. Why didn't he like the Swedes? I don't know, because he said, oh, it was just a stupid Swede. He said, I don't want to go there. Oh, Lord. Well, so it goes. How about your political affiliation? Were you Democrat or Republican? Yeah, we were Democrats. Democrats. Yeah. We voted for everyone way back. We took our citizen papers as soon as we could get them, and we came here. After five years, 1930s? Yeah. And my hubby got his before that, I think. But we always strived to be American people. He didn't believe in the Swedish stuff. How did you like the Italians? I mean, they are completely different. Wouldn't you be a little restricted, I mean, to reveal yourself about certain things? Could you really trust them like a Swede? You had enough of your sister-in-law? Yeah. Yeah, that was enough. So that did you in? That was enough. Anything but her? No, I would say we had a half a dozen very nice Swedish friends. And some of them I still correspond with and call occasionally. And there was nothing wrong with them, but I don't know, we leaned towards the American people. And in any business that we have been connected with, we always had, you know, would never been for a Swedish thing. It was always, I think even our doctors was Italians, pure or stello. And our bar man was something in that, I forgot now. But anyhow, so we haven't really patronized any Swedish club. We belonged to a Swedish club on LaSalle Street for a short while. They said I was the cream of the crop. And of course that's gone. And of course when we moved to Florida in 71, well... You disconnected yourself. Yeah. Did you have any connection with Sweden? Like you corresponded with your mother and father, I suppose, until they died. How about your husband? Did he have any... No, he was not very good at writing. So he left Sweden and completely forgot about it? Yeah. And of course his fox was gone. I still correspond with his relatives in Sweden. There's one sister-in-law in Sweden in Tibro, near Ju, I think it is. And that's the only one that's left from his side of the family. Dahl Kunlan was down on Belmont and alone Clark, close to Belmont. Did your husband or you go down there to buy any Swedish newspapers or... We always... No. You don't read any Swedish papers? No. I've had a Swedish-American paper since I came to this country. We used to buy it for a quarter on Clark Street here to start with. You didn't have $3 to send in on them days. But I have subscribed on that paper all these years. So that was your only link with Sweden then? Yeah. And when did you start to write then for the Swedish-American Tribune? 1960? In the paper you mean? Yes. I think the first one I have in my book is 1965. 1965. And it's the same pen name, Ragnhild. You always use that? That's all I have. And nobody knows who you are? Yeah, everybody knows me. I had a letter yesterday from Arkansas. Where did I get your address then? It took me a heck of a time to get your living orders there. And I'm good at it. Well, I tell you this. Did Ingrid tell you about this Ragnar Jering? Ragnar Jering, yes. He came here to see me and I went to his party. I told you that already. Yes. Well, yesterday, no not yesterday, the day before yesterday, I had a letter from Arkansas. And when I saw it, I returned the address and thought, oh my God, there's a new pen pal. So I have decided that the world is so small. It is fabulous, absolutely. So when I got up there, I read it. And there was a letter from Gerda and Knut Andersson. And that was brought to this Ragnar Jering. And he wrote and said many things for, because I have, I wrote in the Swedish paper about the party, you know, and all that. And he wrote and said thank you for writing so nice about his brother. So he said that that was very nice. Then he told the story about himself. So now you can write about that. Yeah, I've written already. And he said that he, he said that you probably wonder why my name is Andersson. And my brother's name was Jering. But he said when we came to this country in 1926, he said, my brother thought there was enough Andersson in Chicago. So he wanted to change his name. And he kind of insisted that I do the same. But he said, then I, my mother wrote from Sweden and said, how come that Andersson is not good enough for you in Chicago? So he said that he, as a good son, he said, he kept his name Andersson. So please, his mother. Yeah. Then he said that I have a friend that lived nearby you. He said, I think they live in the same building. He gave me the name. And they live right next to me here. I tell you, it's a small world. And this Ranga Jering now, he was only home a couple of weeks and he got a heart attack. Three weeks he was in Sweden. In Schenningen in Östergötland. Yeah. And he died. Yeah. And Anton Syström or Sjöström. Yeah. He was also home and died. Yeah. And people tell me, why don't you go home to Sweden? You're almost afraid to go home now. I said, I wouldn't want to go over there and die. I said, I'd like to die right here. So how is your feeling now about Sweden? You don't have the homesickness anymore. No. Why? I don't know. It disappeared. Completely gone. Yeah. But you went to Florida in 1950, 1961 you said. 71. 71. And you retired on there then. Yeah. And then your husband died. You were there in... He died in 82. 82. And then you moved back to Chicago. 84 years old. Why didn't you stay down there in Florida? Was it to... Well, my daughter and son-in-law kind of hinted that they wanted me there. It was so far for them to fly down and expensive. And telephone, you know, was expensive from here to Florida. And they wanted me to be up here near them, which I'm very grateful for. So you had a house down there then. Yes, I had a very nice house. Where in Florida? So... Where? In D-Land. D-Land. Near Daytona Beach, Central Florida. And your daughter Maynard, did she marry the guy of Swedish background or... No. You didn't make her marry a Swede. You gave her whole Sweden. Why? No, I tell you what she said. Yeah, but she was born in Sweden, though. I know. I told her that she was a youngster. I said that she had boyfriends like kids have. And I said, boy, he's not a nice boy. He was a Swedish boy. And they were such a good-looking couple together when they went out. How did they meet? In... So I said, I said, I wonder, are you going to marry him? Marry a Swede, she said. Nothing do. And she said, I'll see what kind of a husband you have. He was a Swede. I don't want one like it. What did your husband say then about it? Well, he was... My daughter and my husband didn't have much in common. No? No, she was gone most of the time. And then we left, you know. And he was, he was very nice and I loved him dearly. But some things that she remembers that she really don't care for. Do you think the difference in time being together the first year when he left, you could have set on some emotions? Well, it could be. I don't know. But she is a lovely daughter. She's the most Swedish kindest thing that I could ever wish. Has she taken after Swedish traditions now, like for Christmas? No, not very much. Lutfisk, doppelgryta? No, peel. No. They wouldn't talk lutfisk to me. Köttbullar? Well, yeah, that's all right. Inlangsill? That I like. Inlangsill? That I like. Inlangsill? That I like. Inlangsill? That I like. Inlangsill? No. How about your husband? No, he didn't like it either. You know, the first two or three years we were in this country, I tried to have a Swedish Christmas. And we had lutfisk Christmas Eve. In the next year, in the next year. So finally, I didn't like it, but I thought they liked it. I said, well, I have to go out and buy lutfisk. I said, oh, do we have to eat that stuff this year too? No, I said, you don't have to. I fixed it because I thought you liked it. Oh, no, please, let's stop it right now. So we did. So that was the end of it. Did you have a Christmas tree though? Oh, yeah. We had the most beautiful Christmas tree every year. And Christmas gifts? I mean, your pappa. Yeah. Did you go to Julotta? We went to Julotta 1919 in Stockholm. In Sweden? Yeah. It was the last one? It was the last one. But now when people read your articles here, you know, your input in Swedish American, they might think, you know, you are a wonderful lady. She must be a very religious and deep Christian. How can you fool them? I don't talk about that. You avoid that? No. But don't they get the sense to hear it's a real Swedish? No, I had a lady that came to visit me from Geneva, late Geneva, Illinois. She came here and she read my stories and she knew somebody in here. And she connected me with all this. But then also, she, we had coffee. She had a daughter with me, had coffee and, and when she got back to Lake Geneva, she wrote a little note saying, thank you, nice to meet me and all that stuff. But she said, you were nothing like I expected. She said. You mean she was disappointed? She was disappointed. No. Yeah, I guess so. She said, you were so deaf and she said, so sophisticated. She meant the writing is more, the writing is more simple. Yeah. Say, well, say, I'll write the old, old Swedish. Because the new Swedish, I can't even read. But the readers now are Svenska Mekana and they are more familiar with the old style. My daughter, she works in the bank, had done all these years. And she has bank customers that comes in. And during the last few years, well, somehow it leaked out that I write in the paper. So not long ago, there was a couple of her customers that came into the bank and the lady said, say, is your mother sick? No. I just talked to her. My daughter said, she's all right. Yeah, but she didn't have anything in the paper this week. So they miss me if I don't have anything in. So what has your subject now? What has it been over the years? My subject is exactly the way I lived, what I have done, what I have been. You reminisce back in time then? I don't write from a book that a lot of them do. No. My own experience. You search your memory. Yes. And from my parents and my early years in school and everything that I remember, I have kind of a photographic mind. I can remember a lot of things. And I bought our experience in Clintonville and our building up north. And you didn't have a daybook? You made entries in Clintonville and up there in the rain? I had. A daybook? Did you write in a daybook? No. You didn't write it on? You can still go back in time and visualize everything that happened? Sure. Did you read when we came up with the load here, I read this, I did this about two, three months ago. We had a big load with material and everything we could buy down here went up to the place. And we had an old truck with lousy tires. And after the truck we had a trailer with the boat on top and all, we looked like, what do you call those, tatari? Isn't that a word? Yeah, well. No? Well anyhow, it had rained for a couple of days. And we came up on that little road. It wasn't a road in there. It was a little horse and buggy thing. And we came up there and got stuck in the mud with that load. There's no way. The wheels just went around, you know. The motor wasn't strong enough to get us out of that, what do they call it, you know, ruts. That's the one. And anyhow, and we sat there. And then I knew of a farmer, but that was quite a ways off. Like I said, we weren't exactly dressed for going through Okroneng, you know. But I did. And it was very early morning, four o'clock in the morning, just daylight coming up. And I went over to the farmer and got him up. And before he got his pants on and all, and I got the seal, seal, dunan på hästarna, you know what you call it. Sealer. Sealer, all right. And down to the road where we were standing, and then he pulled us on. And of course, the pressure and the radiator, you know, all of a sudden said, boom, you know. And the top of the radiator flew in the woods, and I'm sure it's still there someplace. But anyhow, he pulled us out of that rut there and into our place, which was just wilderness, like I said. But we had this man there, Joe Longquist, and he had built us a garage. That was the first thing. And so we had some place to set in all our pipes and all that, all the stuff we bought. We bought wash stands in Chicago, you know, everything that we could get a hold of. So anyhow, he pulled us in there and helped us unload, and we looked at this old truck, you know, and I said, I don't think I said that that's going to take us back. So we left it in the woods. And the trailer. And then we took the train home. And of course, that was relaxing, because, you know, when you sit driving at night with one of those loads and that poor car and the poor tires, all of a sudden you saw a piece of rubber fly by the windshield, you know, from the tire. But how have you been able now to reminisce back in Swedish, if you didn't write it on? Do you think in Swedish then all the time when you're thinking back? Well, if I... Because you have written this in Swedish now. Yes. And it's not easy to find the names, you know, for radiators and the cabs and the pistons and the rods. So far, I don't put it down good. So you think back in Swedish, actually? Yeah. You don't think in English? No. Because this is 70, this is 60 years ago now. Yes, sure. Sure. Do you correspond now with Hendrix out in California? With the editor? I have written to them, yes, once. No, but you have met them though when he was in Chicago. No, I never met them. You never met them? No. But he takes in anything you write? Yeah. He doesn't pay you at all? No, no. This is just a hobby I have. But there is a lady that lives here, just a few blocks from here. Her name is Irene. Oh, yeah, the secretary. I know her. Yeah, and she's been here for coffee a couple of times. But isn't that... She's a German lady. Yes. I mean, the world can do this work. She can't even read anything. How? Well, it seems to work. You leave it with her then? No. No, I send it right to... California. Yeah. And I have one to... That's what it's all about even. So you send in then every other week or something. So you write it in longhand then? Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah, sure. You want to read some of it? Sure. So this will be one article then. Yeah, that's the next one to go in. Hälsningar till alla som läser mina småalster. Randhild. Så det kommer in nu i november någon gång då. Ja. And that is about when the police picked up my husband for nothing on Clark Street. One night in 1924. For nothing? Yeah. What did he do then? He didn't do anything. We never did find out. They picked him up. I guess they had to bring in somebody. They took him downtown and put him in jail. Overnight? Yes. And booked him? They booked him. En och korset var samma. Kassett två, sida två, fortsättning med Agnes Andersson, Chicago, Illinois. Kassett två, sida två. So he was booked. Well, he had been down to visit our daughter. I told you that we had her boarded out. And he was on his way home to Evanston. About 10 o'clock in the evening. He had an all open touring car, you know. Probably could do 25 miles an hour. Paid $25 for it. And all of a sudden comes this big police bill that they had. A big bell on the outside. You weren't, you were not old enough to know these things. No. But anyhow, a big klocka på utsidan that they banged in, you know. And they meant you had to stop them? Ja, that's it. And he didn't do that? And my hubby said he was almost all alone on Clark Street, you know. This is on a Friday night, 1924. And so he pulled to the side and he thought it was funny because there wasn't anybody else on the street, he said, at that time. So they got off with the drawn revolvers and told him to get out of the car. He was pinched. And of course his English wasn't too good. He had just got there. And they took him with in their car downtown Chicago to the big station. Was at that time. I don't know. I never been there. And he, they asked him if he had any money. And he said no, he didn't have any money. And he said, you know anybody that has money, they can bail you out. And he said, explain what I have done in his poor English, you know. So, they couldn't exactly tell him what he had done because he hadn't done anything. So he said, you can call somebody to come and bail you out. And scared, he said, I was so scared I was shaking all over. And it was his first, first thing with the police or jail or anything like that. So, he couldn't think of anybody and he couldn't even think of a telephone number to anyone, you know. So, they put him in jail. And then he sat there and he figured what to do. And you know, I was worried about him that they didn't come home. Did you have telephone at home at that time? Well, what I worked had telephone. But not in your home though, where you lived? No, no. So, he thought of a man that he knew a little bit. They lived on Edgewater Avenue up here. In fact, I called him the other day. He's dying. So I said, for God's sake, hang on a little longer. So he called this Rudy and said that he was in jail. Did he have any money? And he said, no, because I have a check. Well, of course, they wouldn't take a check at the police station. So, my hubby said, well, give my address where I worked. And by this time, it's in the middle of the night. So, he came up out in the yard and he took a handful of stone and threw it on my window. And I thought, well, my gosh, maybe he forgot his key. So I looked out, there was a strange man standing outside. So I opened up the window and I said, yes. So he said, have you got any money? I never been approached that way exactly. It should be the other way around, really. So, I said, so he said, because your husband is in jail. And I said, my God, I said, what has he done? Well, he has to tell you tomorrow, figures out. Have you got any money? And I looked through everything I had and I had $7. So I throw that down to him. And he said, well, see if I can scrape up $3. There was $10 fine for whatever he had done. So he drew, he scraped up $3 and then he drove down to downtown and got them out. Because they told them if they don't bail you out before 12 tonight, you have to sit for Saturday and Sunday. There's no judge there on Saturday and Sunday. This is, you know, there is no night court in them days, you know. And no explanation for what? No explanation and until today we have talked about it dozens of times. And he said, absolutely. I drove my 20 miles an hour up Clyde Street and it was right below Devon. And he showed me the spot. What did your husband say then? I mean, was he happy about the United States at that time? No, he wasn't too happy about the police force, I can tell you that. So, but anyhow, so he finally, he got out of there. So when he came home to his room, he called me and he said, well, Rudy had scraped together, he said $3. So he, he bailed them off for $10. That was the end of the interview with Raynell Anderson, Chicago, Illinois. End of interview.