 We have October 14, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Roland Berglund, born 15th of May 1926 in Chicago, Illinois, and his wife Helen Bernice Born Olson, 15th of November 1927, also in Chicago. And now we are in Omaha. We start now with you, Roland, your parents, Arvid Petrus Berglund and his wife, Anna Teresa Westin, as we call it in Swedish. They came to the United States in... 1923. July 4th, they came to Chicago. They arrived in Chicago in 1923. Do you know the reason why they left Sweden? Did they tell you that at any time? I never did, but I believe because of the... Well, the farm that dad was on, it had deteriorated to some extent, I think. And mother, she came because there were two... the farm couldn't feed the family. There was nine, and the farms aren't that large there. Did he work in his home in Sopperholm, the Kronfors, down there on there? Yes, he could have. I know he was... well, he was in the Swedish cavalry. That I know. Oh, I see. My sister has a picture of him on a horse. In Stockholm or... I don't know. It's when he had to serve his time, wherever it might have been. And I don't know. So he never talked about it? No, no. Well, dad passed away when he was 49 years old. And how old were you then at the time? I was in my early 20s. In 1947, this was, that dad passed away. And of course, dad being 49, he was a young man at the time. Our mother, my sister and I, were... Well, mom said, let's go to Sweden. Your father's mother is still living. She's 80 years old, and we have to visit her. And so in 1948, we went to Sweden. We drove an eight-year-old car, a 1940 Plymouth that dad had bought in 1940, new, for $900. Was eight years old. Put new tires on it. And we drove to New York, put it on a boat, and shipped it across to Sweden, 1948. And your mother was with them? My mother was with. And your sister? And my sister. She's younger than you then? Yes, she's younger than I. And that was the first visit back for your mother? For my mother, it was the first visit back. How about your father? Had he had any chance to... He didn't have a chance to go back. Why he died suddenly then, or why... He had a heart attack. They called it coronary thrombosis. What kind of work was he doing then at the time? He worked in Chicago for the power company. Was it Commonwealth Edison, I believe, in Chicago, downtown, in the boiler rooms as such. Was it heavy work? It could have been. I'm not sure. Dad was a strong, big man, so I don't think it hurt him any, whatever work it was. But, well, it was hard work. He'd come home tired. Yes. You lived on the south side? No, on the north side. North side. In the Lakeview? No. Well, I was born and, well, brought up, started to, brought up on Clifton Avenue. It was just off of Belmont Avenue. It's close to the Bell Park. Well, no, that's further, the Wrigley Field we talked about. Well, that's where mother and dad, that's where they, when they arrived in Chicago in 1923, that's where they were, right there at Wrigley Field. But Clifton Avenue is there, or a short street? Yes, it's a short street up in that area, but, yeah, well, yeah, okay, it would be close to Wrigley Field. But Addison is right there by Grubbs Park, you know, Wrigley Field. So there was a real Swedish area then? Sure was. You had school and seminary and... Yes. Yes. And Café Idrot. Yes. And the Viking Temple. Yes. Salvation Army and the... I remember going to the Vikings, I believe. There was get-togethers, but there were the friends of the family, well, from, that come from the old country. They were, they'd shuttle back and forth on the streetcar. No one had cars, so it was an hour, hour and a half trip to go to visit one another. And there was always one who was in dire need of help. And so every Saturday there would be a party to help one or the other. So you were about five, six years old then, when the Depression hit. Well, you were four years old then, when the Depression hit. I imagine, you know, well, I don't... I remember some of it in the... Some of it, yes, it, yeah, oh, yes. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. So they have to collect money then for something? Yeah, they'd have a party and there would be Lawrence Hoogleen, he was a janitor. He played an accordion and he was always there and he played the accordion. And they danced their hombos and waltzes and shottishes and they had a good time. Brought food and then they'd pass the hat and play cards and eat and drink. And the kids were along then? The kids were along. And when you got tired, you'd go behind the sofa and lay down and go to sleep. You'd get out of the way. You're tired. And they'd get you up and off to the streetcar you'd go and back home. So you didn't live close enough so you could walk then? You took the streetcar? Took the streetcar many, well, most places we had to go. Or the bus. During the later years, it was so hot during the summer months we would get on a bus on Addison, go down to the lake. Belmont Harbor. Belmont Harbor there and spend the days down the Saturday. And we might, if it was hot enough, sleep down there if it was a nice evening, warm enough. And the different friends of the family would show up for picnic and there would be another get-together just a day out. So at that time, the houses didn't have any air conditioners at all. There was only open windows and screens. That's right. And I never thought of it until now, you know, when you realize how good we have it now. Were you living on the third floor, on the top, fourth floor perhaps? We lived on the second floor in one apartment. There was one coal flat we lived on over a store. There it was a pot-bellied coal-fired stove with that glass, what do you call those? I forget now what those glasses were. They were about four inches square or so, and they would glow. And Mother would warm the blankets around that, and she'd heat the water on the stove and fill a makeshift tub close to the stove so we could take a bath. It was too cold in the winter to go in the bathroom or in the tub. There was no hot water. Coal flat, cold water. It had to be heated. It had to be heated, yeah. So, but your dad, he was able to work most of the time? Not during the Depression. Mother worked. Dad had to stay home and clean house, which he didn't care to have anybody know about. So he would pull the shades so nobody would see him as he went around the house cleaning. Tough times. It was tough times. But it was easier for a woman then to get a job, cooking and... Well, Mom worked at a bakery. She packed cookies. But it was, again, a Peterson Bakery Company is what it was, and that was another friend of the family that everyone knew. And he took a lot of Swedes, and they were good workers. Those that worked well, he hired. Well, he did well. But, well, he's the boss. Surely he should make more money than the rest. But there was no way out to... At that time, no. No. So you remember Daddy fixing the food for you then? Oh, yeah, sure. And he, I remember breaking my arm, coming home and making lunch, and he said, go wash your hands. And I washed my hands and rubbed my hands on my arm and it hurt. So I had to tell Daddy, I said, I hurt my arm, and I guess I'd broken it. What did you do then? Fell off a wagon. And it was broken? Well, yeah, somebody was pushing me, and when you stand up in a wagon and you turn, you fall out. So there was the hospital then, or the doctor. Yeah, yeah, that was the doctor. And no insurance? No insurance in those days. So what happened then? I don't know how, they traded somehow. You didn't go to the hospital for that? The doctor took care of it, put it in a cast? Yes, yeah, I believe so. It was at the doctor's office. He set it and it went into a cast and wore a sling, you know, a sling, until it was healed. Yeah. How old were you then? Eight, ten? Probably eight or ten, yeah. So that was on the north side of Chicago? That was Cicero and Addison Street. Oh, so you moved west then? Well, yeah, we moved west when I was younger, when we lived on Clifton. Then we moved west, out there close to Addison and Cicero. Was that closer to your dad's work then? No, I don't know what the situation was there, because it was, maybe it was cheaper, the coal flat above the stove, above the stores, that it was there. It was right across the street from, well, where the Midwest Bible Church is now, in fact. Then we moved to an apartment on Addison, just west of Cicero. We lived on the second floor, but there it was heated. Radiators, hot water, yeah. What church did you belong to at that time when they came? They didn't belong to any church other than, I can't remember, there was something down on, down, where was it, down Addison or toward the lake, there was a Lutheran church down in there somewhere. Messiah Lutheran Trinity, a school and seminary? I don't recall where it was at. I know my sister was baptized there, or christened, that's what it was. Mom didn't christen her until she was a little older. And so she was, I remember she was a little embarrassed about the fact that she didn't have, Doris, my sister, christened, you know, which was important for them. You didn't go to Sunday school there at all? No, not down there, no. It wasn't until some years later, after we moved again right close in the same area, and the neighbor, Orton Grin was his name, had a daughter Marge, there from Sweden also. She went to this Midwest Bible church, and that's where I was confirmed and went to church. Mother and father didn't go to church. Oh, they were, they were pretty, well, from Sweden they were. Mother's family was very strict. And I believe dad's family was too, yeah, because of things that were told through the years. Mother and her younger sister would, excuse me, they would fix their hair with rags to curl it, Friday or Saturday, and then they'd put a babushka or a bandana around their head so mother and dad couldn't see the curls that they were making. Because Saturday night they were going out, but mother and dad didn't want them to go out. Mother knew, but they hid it from dad because he didn't. I guess he frowned on it. Did they get away with it? Yes, they did. They got away with it. There was, in fact, when dad was courting mother, the, I don't know why, but the front door, I guess, in the house, in the house in Sweden, if I had a picture of it here I could show you, it has a little roof that extends over it. And then above that covering, or it's a protective porch cover, is a window. And they talked of dad climbing up there or out of there during their courting. It was an escape route. An escape route, I guess. So they were engaged and married in Sweden then? I don't know whether they were married in Sweden or married here. I believe they were married in Sweden. But they came from the same area? Yes. So they knew each other then? Yes. Yeah, sure did. So when they, your dad, after the, no, what happened then after the depression and the war? Was he too old to be drafted? Well, he was, during the war he was, say, 19, he passed away in 1947. He was young enough to be? He was 49 when he passed, died. So he was maybe a little bit too old to be drafted? He was probably just too old. I was old enough, see. I was drafted. Oh, I see. See, I was, say, 1944. No, you were 36. I was right out of high school in 1944 and went into service and spent my, over two years, 28 months, I think, I was over in South Pacific. Oh, you were sent out into the battle? In World War II, yeah. I was in the South Pacific in. Navy or? Army. Army. And how did it work for your dad then? Was he working during that time? Dad worked, yes, he did. There was plenty of work then. Well, in 1940, you see, he had accumulated, well, he had a $1,000 endowment policy. That came due in 40, or 39. So when he got the money, he went and bought a new car. That was this car we talked of earlier. Did they come from Sweden? The endowment money? I don't know. Was it some kind of life insurance? It was some kind of insurance, that 20-year life or 20-year endowment or something that he got. But it was $1,000 and he bought a new car. In fact, there was an argument about it. I wanted to buy a bicycle, he said to me, he says, you don't need a bicycle now. You're going to be able to drive a car. Well, I said to myself, no, I won't be able to have that car whenever I want. I want a bicycle. So I bought myself a... And it was 1940? Yeah. So he must have bought it in Sweden then? Me? No, no. Because he came in 23? 1923 they came. But it was a 20-year insurance that must have been bought in Sweden. See, 23 to 43 had the problem. Oh, it was in 43, was it? No, no. I'm just counting 1923 and 20. 1923 and 20 is 1943. No, it was a 1940 automobile. So it could very well have been. Yeah. I never thought of that. That's right. Well, there was some endowment that was $1,000. But he bought a 1940 Plymouth four-door for $900 and he didn't know how to drive. So he didn't test drive it? No, he just wanted a car. Did you know how to drive at that time? No, I just read the book and I sat in the living room playing like I was shifting and operating the clutch with my left foot in the air and pressing on the gas. It was stick shift? Yeah, under the steering wheel. Three on the three. Three on the three. Yeah. So you had a pretty good time then. You read the instruction there and... Yeah. I taught myself how to drive. So you were the one, the principal driver? Well, no, no. Dad, he went and learned how to drive. Lessons? Well, see, I was just graduating from grammar school in 1940. You were 14 or you were more in grammar school? No, I was just 1940 I graduated from grammar school. Eighth year. You were 14? I don't remember. 14 years old. I don't remember. Well, you can figure that out. You were about 26 or 40. But anyway, on graduation day, Dad drove the car to the graduation and on the way home we had an accident. With the car? With the car. Dad didn't yield to oncoming traffic and he ran into the side of a car. It was a brand new car. It was Dad's fault. He didn't step on the brake, he stepped on the gas and that made a little bigger dent in the other car, of course. I remember that. He did. Was there insurance then on the... Yeah, there was insurance then for the car. Took care of it? I'm pretty sure there was. But after the car was fixed, it stayed in the garage for two months. It never was driven for a long time because Dad said, no, I'm not going to drive that car no more. He had it then. Yeah, he thought he'd bought it. He drove later then. Yeah. And they headed through the war. And then, well, Dad then passed away in 1947. We still had that same car in 1948, so we took it to Sweden. So you had a garage during that time too then? Had a garage, yes. In the wintertime. They bought a house. Mom and Dad bought a house up on... Where was it? 3720 Giddings. That's further north and west, just off of Lawrence Avenue there. Well, Giddings is just south, the first block south of Lawrence Avenue. So his earnings was pretty good? Well, Mother was working. She was a seamstress, and she made more money than Dad. She worked piecework, you know. Yeah, you've heard that song about, what is it, the women and their... the union, the label of the union or whatever it is. But she was a union gal and seamstress. And she, well, she learned it in Sweden. That's how the family did, as I understand it there in Sweden. I mean, some went to learn to be bakers, some learned to be seamstresses, some to be tailors, to, well, whatever. And so it paid off when they came here in many instances. So they bought a house then after? Bought a house. Dad didn't want to buy a house because he felt he couldn't afford it. But Mom says no. And they paid it off very shortly. Well, times got better for them. And so it was, it worked out well. And then you set off for Sweden in 1948. Yes. What kind of work, you had started work then? I had finished, well, been in service, and then I had, because I had been in the Army, I had what they call from the government, Public Law 16, where I could, the government would pay for schooling. The GI Bill. GI Bill. That's correct. And so I went to electronics school. And when I finished, well, when Dad passed away, it was just a short period of time I finished school, and Mom said, let's go to Sweden. So I was finished with school, and so we went to Sweden. I think they cost, I think it cost $600 for the freight of the car on board ship one way, and it cost $300 both ways per person on the boat. Well, anyway, the car cost as much, if not more, than a person's ticket. But it was the same car that was bought in 1940. That's right. The Plymouth. Yeah, and so we had a car there. I was able to stay for three months. They only allowed me to stay three months because I was of military age, so you can only stay 90 days. At that time? At that time. 1948. 1948. Yeah, but the war was over. The war was over. That didn't make any difference. I could only stay there three months, but Mother and Sister, my sister, could stay longer, and they did. I went back after three months, and Mother and Sister stayed for another three months. Did you take the car with you back? No, no, we sold it in Harnesson to a Jewish tailor for $2,000. So that was a good investment, then. The car paid for itself. He paid $900 for it. I sold it for $2,000. But, Mom, you know, you can't take the money out of the country. Yeah, but there was some way you could fix it up, though. Yeah, Mom figured that out with her brother. She just put the money in the bank account with him, and friends of the family here would send—Mom would send a letter over with them, and Uncle Milker would—he'd get the money out for them. Yeah, so Mother got her money back. So it was easy to sell the car then, 1948? Yeah, no problem. Oh, they were—they wanted cars over there. So you came over there and drove on the left-hand side? I drove on the left-hand side. You had to learn again. Yeah. You knew how to shift by that time, though. Yeah, but— And clutch and everything. Well, yeah, that was no problem, of course. So you had no problems driving? No. Different places? No. We went to Norstig, and we drove all the way up from Malmö. You must have come in— Well, we come over—we come in on a Polish—the USS Batory, I believe it was, that went—it was a Polish liner that landed in Denmark, and then Copenhagen, and the car was taken off there, all our luggage, and we put it on a train, and then went over to Malmö, and then we were able to drive on up. We stayed in Stockholm, Grand Mastan there, and then drove up to mother's and dad's home. But this was an eight-year-old car, no? You had no problems with the— Didn't have any problems with the car. You didn't need any tune-up, or— Well, we had tuned it up before, I guess. Well, it worked, yeah. Had put a new set of tires on it, new Sears Roebuck tires we put on it before we left Chicago, so that had good tires on it. So the Jewish guy in Hermezan, he was— He got stuck. He was flipped right away. Yeah. Did it break down in Sweden? No, I don't remember us having any problems in Sweden with it at all. But then when the car was gone, I didn't have any transportation. Yeah. I had to walk or bicycle it, but Uncle Milker had a little Jelte Mehem, a little motor scooter. Isn't that what they called them, Jelte Mehem? So did you have any cousins in Sweden? Oh, yes, yes. Same age group? Yeah, I was the same age group as I. We went out dancing and hiking, and— Well, it was midsummer, so it was a time to behold up there with the sun going down in the sky and coming right back up. You didn't know what time it was or when to go to bed or sleep or whatever it was. How about your mother now? Did she like it? Oh, yeah. Did she enjoy it? Oh, yeah. In fact, she went back numerous times afterward. She did? Oh, yes. And then she would fly, of course. In fact, she took our second daughter, Joyce, over here. It was 10 years ago. Is your mother still living? No, no. She passed away here in—what was it, 1980? 1980, she passed away. Oh, that daughter right there, she took to Sweden with her, the one with the blue, the two in the blue there. Oh, the red sweater. Yeah. Yeah, she took her with her to Sweden. But Joyce, she couldn't speak the language, but Mom was getting along in age, and she needed somebody to have somebody along. She was worried because she was older, and of course Joyce was willing to go, and Mom talked to her pretty lengthy, didn't she? Are you sure you want to go? Are you sure? It's going to be hard. You won't understand nobody. That's the way it was. I mean, she had one heck of a time with that. So your parents never spoke Swedish then among themselves when she was born after that? Or why didn't she get affected with the Swedish? Because we moved here to Omaha in 1949. After your father died, you came back from— I did. I came back from Sweden. I moved out here in 1949, yeah, because of work. I had an opportunity to get into electronics here. It was just opening up in 1949 here in Omaha. You were not married then at that time? Oh, I wasn't married. Helen came—well, I went and got her, or she came with me. We were engaged. Yeah, we were. And your mother, now, did she move— No, she stayed in Chicago with my sister, her daughter Doris. So what happened now when your sister went with your mother to Sweden? Well, they had themselves a good time there, I'm sure. I don't remember what happened, but they came back after a while. But then it was—well, I'd been away from them for three months, and I had been working and decided, well, somebody give me the opportunity out here. It wasn't but a short time after—well, let's see, Mom was back in— they were back in 1948. So when did I come out here? August of 49 is when I came out here. So it wasn't but a short time, and I left mother and sister in the house all alone. I mean, they had—well, then my sister—well, then I got married. Mom was busy working and making Helen's wedding dress. Of course, like I said, she was a seamstress. She was busy, I mean, always working. And she belonged then to the Swedish-American organization, Chicago Vikings. Yeah, Vikings and— Vasa. Svitsed. Svitsed. The interview continues, next side. Next side. Side two. Do you remember if they had any friends from the same area in Ungermannan? Yes. In Chicago that lived in that part? Yes, certainly was. Many of them? Yes. There was a baker that was John Soderstrom that lived across—would you say Viken? No, Viken, no. It's a lake or a pond? No. And there were the Hultines that—well, in fact, I talked to the last of the Hultines that came with my mother and father just the other day. She lives down in Florida now. Anna Soderquist is her name. Hultine was her maiden name. And I just called because I wasn't sure when mother and dad came here, and it was 1923 is what I was— you know, you think about it because you were going to have an interview, and I thought, well, gee, I should know when my parents came, and I didn't remember. But she was one of the Hultines. And then there was Eriksons and so many. And they left about the same time then? All about the same time. All about the same time. There must have been some tough times up there in Odalen, Ungermannan. Ungermannan, I guess. But I think it was they just wanted to go out on their own. They were—well— They never talked about anything of labor problems or sawmills? No, they didn't talk about that if there was anything like that. I guess that's the sawmills up in that area. Well, most of—well, all of Sweden is up in that area. And the farm is, well, negligible but small. Was this still in the family when you visited Sweden in 1948? Yes. Oh, yeah, it's still there. On my mother's side. I don't—on my father's side, that one, it depleted, I guess. In fact, Mom, when she went to Sebrat Kjörekum, which I believe is in that area, to— Well, the Bergland stone, it hasn't been taken care of in the cemetery. So there's nobody left there? There's not that many left there at all, other than—oh, Bergland, who is there? Yes, my father's sister married a—his name was Bakke, and they had two sons. This is a nice story. So these two boys are my cousins, who I was able to visit in— I don't know where it was exactly. They lived down in Sundsvall area, I think. But now, both those boys are ministers in Sweden. One in the Church of Sweden, and one is in the other church of—the Covenant Church, is it? Yes, the Covenant Church. And one of them came to this country. I got a letter from him that he was coming, he wanted to visit. He was with the singing ministers of Sweden, right? And they sang the group out in Lincoln, Nebraska. We, Helen and I, went down there and listened, and brought him back to our home, and he slept there that night, and we were together. So that's on my father's side. We haven't had any contact. How long ago was that? Early 70s. I still have the record here he left, and it's a beautiful, beautiful piece of music. Love it. But then through the years, Mom has—she went back and forth to Sweden. She'd bring us things from Sweden, the copper. We have a—I've got a rain gauge out here that's from up in Angermanland area, and it was made by a burglar in his fabrique, but it's no relation as I understand it, and I don't understand that, how that could be. Well, there's other burglars. Oh, then—when did Mom come out here when we got the Chevy? Well, I learned something from my mother. She told me on a drive back from Chicago here to Omaha in a—well, Mom remarried Orton Grimm. He was a widower, and they— Was he from up there, too? He was from Stockholm area, but he was an old neighbor, and his wife had passed away, and so Mom—Dad had passed away, and they got together and remarried. But they didn't know each other in Sweden, though. No, not in Sweden they didn't. They met in Chicago area. They met in Chicago. In fact—and then—well, when George passed away, they had this car, and Mom didn't want it. My sister didn't want the car, so I flew to Chicago, and Mother and I drove the car back here to Omaha. And on the way back from Chicago, I should have had a tape with me because she told me stories that I had heard before, and also she told me the story that her father was here in this country in the 1800s, all the way out to the state of Washington as a lumberjack out there. He was here to make money for maybe five years, and he didn't stay here. He went back to Sweden because he didn't like the women here in this country. He said they were lazy, so he went back to Sweden. It was Westin. Westin, yeah. And Mother remembers him coming in from outdoors during the winter months, wearing—he had two coats that he brought back from America. One was a bearskin coat, and the other one was a wolfskin fur. And she remembers the big coats. He would wrap the coats around her and her sister and roll around on the kitchen floor with them, which was kind of—the buttons on them were made of wood, I remember her saying. So this was in the early 1900s then when Mother was growing up, up the Angerman land. She tells of when they moved from one farm area, the farm to another, I guess. They sold one and had built the new house down there. I Kragum, I guess, is the name of the place. And her and her sister had new white rabbit fur hat and a rabbit—the white rabbit fur muff. And they went in a sleigh when they moved. Everybody moved at the same time. But there was a sleigh ride to the new house when they moved. But when that was, well, that's something else. But I didn't know that my grandfather then was in this country. But I should inquire about it more just to find out about it. It would be very interesting to know. So she started to talk to him when she was in the car going west? Yes. Oh, yeah. Well, she'd been out here several times before that. Visiting you, but not together in the car, together with you. Yeah, well, when you're—yeah. In fact, I've got some tapes of her. We used to go back to Chicago every Christmas. And we would either take a train or we flew or we'd drive back. As the girls got older, we had a car, so we were able to drive. But at Christmastime, it was a Christmastime, Swedish Christmas. And in the mornings, she would always be frying pancakes. And I've got a tape of her frying her pancakes, and I'm teasing her. And she doesn't know I've got the tape on, of course. And it's a good, good broken English. It's a joy to hear. So in the customs of Christmas, that was typically Swedish? Yeah. Mom would get—she'd go get a fresh ham, and she would boil it and bake it, and it would be that pink color to it. Schöntor. Schöntor, ja. Lutfisk. Lutfisk, ja. Kallisulta. Kallisulta, she'd make kallisulta. What else was there? Kaffebröd, or cookies. Well, we had to go down to Carlson's bakery to get the limpa. Selma Carlson's? Carlson's, ja. So do you remember the Christmas tree now? What kind was it? Was it a fir, short needles, spruce? Short needle. Always short needle? It seemed to be short needles, ja, ja. For some reason it was short needles. Well, I don't remember. I don't know for sure. It wasn't real long needles, but Bowman's, I remember Roy and Hannah and John Bowman, they always got the real short needle, and then we never got those short of needles. Ours were a little longer. It wasn't that thick a tree, the one we had, okay. And the one with the real short needles was pretty thick, as I remember, in my younger days. So your mother wanted a bit more space between the branches? It seemed to be, yes. And we did, through our Christmases, we have the same thing. So you follow the same custom, then, when you met the... Yeah. Same idea. Same idea, but I didn't like the lutefish, but she likes the lutefish. Oi. Why was that? Why didn't you like it? Well, I don't like serious trimming. I shouldn't even say. But you are... Look, there's some... Your mother ate it, though. And your father? Lutefish? No, serious trimming. The story about serious trimming was, this was friends of the family. Someone had gotten the can of serious... Well, you know, they're always having their Sunday parties and dinners, and everybody shows up while everybody's invited, and they bring things, and it's a get-together of old friends. Yeah, and so many from all over the country. Well, yeah. And the serious trimming showed up, I guess, somehow or another. It was hard to get in this country, though, because I guess it blew up on a New York dock, and they won't allow it in this country anymore. And... My sister was of the courting age at the time, and so her husband-to-be, he's an Italian fella. Good man. Anyway, he used to take the streetcar over on a Sunday to visit my sister. And on this day, this Sunday, we were having friends over for serious trimming. Now, the table was set for about 14, maybe 16 people, and there was the can of serious trimming on a beautiful platter in the middle of the table. There was a bottle of whiskey at either end of the table. Every place was set with a shot glass in front of it, so we could have soup and soup, you know, and have a little bit of soup, be glad, and toast one another and sing, which they would. Someone would, Carl Borgman was one who would, they'd ask him to sing, and he would sing some pretty pieces, and he could say some pretty toasts to everyone. But when I guess, I never seen them drink so much before they opened the can. And then after they opened it up, well, for a few years you figure out why, because of the serious trimming. But there was a few drinks, and finally the can got opened, and it is an odor and a scent that is quite permeating. I mean, it fills the room quickly and starts to eddy out the door down the street. And of course, like I said, my future brother-in-law was coming on a streetcar, and he was a block away. He got off the streetcar and started down the street, and he, this is the truth, he said he started to smell something. And as he got closer to the house, that scent was stronger. And when he finally turned up the walk and got up into the first step up to the house, he knew that was the place. And he had no idea what it was? He had no idea what it was. To this day, he, well, he knows. Were you still in the room at that time? I was still in the house, of course, but this is what he tells on that day about serious trimming. No, we tasted it with potatoes, and, well, I don't know whether I really tasted it or not. Maybe that's why I don't eat lute fish so much anymore. How about your mother? Did she? I'm sure they all did. The women folk were there, and the men folk were there. I don't know if it was just the men folk that were sitting around, but everything was so busy going around there. But when did the smell disappear then? After it was finished, the can went out, I suppose. I don't know how they got rid of the can or where it went. Wherever it went, the went would throw it away because it's... A friend of mine that I know here recently, he brought some back from Sweden, and not knowing what he was getting into, he opened it up, and, well, they just barely took a smell of it. I don't know what he did with it, but he said he threw the can in the Missouri River, and the river threw it right back up on the shore. You've got to be from Ångermanland. Yeah. Do you remember if they had knäckebröd? Knäckebröd. With that, always. You always have knäckebröd. I still eat it. I had it for supper tonight. Did your mother bake it at any time? Do you remember that? No. I remember the bakehouse, though, on the farm in Sweden where... Ellensbro. Ellensbro. They had a bakehouse, and they had a laundry house. They were separate from the main house. And the water come out of the hill, down the hill from a spring that was there. But the bakehouse, well, they would make tundra or whatever you call it with a hole in the middle. Yeah, tundra. And it's hardtack or whatever it's called. But I remember us buying it here in this country, the big ones, with the hole in the middle. And in the bakehouse there, I saw them, it was lined up there. I mean, that's what that hole was for. You put a... the pole goes through there. So you saw the 1948 when you... Yeah. Well, and then there was also, they would make... Well, from pig's blood also, what do they call it? Pitebald. Could have been pitebald. Blood sausage. Blood, blood. Well, blood, just like the hardtack. Yeah, like a big round cake. Round cake with a hole in the middle. And it was dry or baked or however processed on the farm. And that way they could store it up high. And they kept it. And it kept there, yes. Do you still eat the tundra? Oh, my. I don't eat white bread. It's got to be black, black, as dark a bread as I can get. So your mother, she baked white bread at home, though? Sometimes, yes. Oh, yeah. Lempa. You never had white bread for... Oh, yes, we had white bread, but I never cared for it. I never cared for it. It doesn't have any flavor to it. It's so bland. Himing rye. Roggeringen. Roggeringen. Lingon. Lingon. Yeah, well, that's lingonberries. Yeah, that we've got, too. It's expensive, though. Four dollars less than a jar. How about jortbrun? Did you pick that one? You were there in the summer, I suppose. Yeah. No, I wasn't able to pick anything. So your mother, now, was she homesick? Do you understand if she was... Oh, sure, to some extent. Her sister went back to Sweden. She was here in this country. And her husband also was here in Chicago, her younger sister. What was her name? M? Not Emma. Well, mother had several sisters. But they owned a little grocery store right outside of Harnessand. And they lived upstairs in the apartment or whatever that was upstairs. And they had it very nice. I mean, it was like a delicatessen or a grocery store. I don't know exactly how you would say they had, but they lived well. And they were glad that they... well, they liked America. But it was the bad times when they went back to Sweden. So they went back to stay there in Sweden. Yeah, yeah. They couldn't ride it out. Did many of those people, not for long, but you mentioned, came together for parties and gatherings. Did some of them go back for good? To visit, no. Only for visit. Karl Borgman, he went back after Ingeborg passed away. But he was of retiring age then, not to work anymore. No, there weren't any that I remember that went back. They all worked and did well here and retired down to Florida. Worked in, where is it? St. Petersburg. St. Petersburg area there. But they had some tough years there in the 30s. Oh, sure they did. Did they talk about it in Sweden, that if they also had it hard? Yeah, I remember a little bit. They did have it hard there in Sweden. In fact, how was it? They sent things. Coffee was sent over to Shkodra. During the war? It could be. Your mother sent to you? Coffee and cans of whatever it was that there was shortage of or that they could pack and or send back to Sweden for those, whatever it was, with ease. I know when we went to Sweden in 1948, I think we had an extra trunk because there was foodstuffs in the trunks that mom felt that they might want there. Coffee was one, I think. In 1948 even, there was rationing in Sweden. There was gasoline rationing, meat. How were you able to get gas now? If you had the American money, you could get the gas. They wanted the American money at that time. So you didn't have any rationing? I didn't have, yes, I got rationing coupons. I just went to wherever it was, the office, to get the coupons and they would give them to me. If I ran out, I'd go back and get more because I was American spending American dollars, I think, is the reasoning for that. But you could only, well, if you spent $200 in Sweden of your own money, you could only take out $200. If you made $400, you could only take two of it out at that time. Well, it's that way now. Did they check you when you went out? Oh, yes, they checked. They did? Well, I don't remember whether it was just, you just didn't want to take a chance. You just didn't do it. Like cigarettes, as I understand it, there was something about cigarettes when you brought them into that country that you could only take in so many. Well, I took in ten cartons. And what I did, I had a carton on my suitcase with one pack out of it, out of the carton, right on top. So when I closed the suitcase, there was one package of cigarettes that was out of the carton, and that pack went into my pocket. The other nine cartons were in the sleeves of a sweater, where the ends of the sweater were tied in a knot, that was inside of my raincoat over my arm. So I carried the cigarettes by the customs over my arm. Now, he opened up the suitcase. This is 1948. He opened up the top and he says, picked up the cigarettes and says, you got any more of these? I says, yes, here's a pack. He closed the lid and gone. He said, that was all. It was well thought of. It worked. It makes it more interesting. Yeah, well, it wasn't right. But we had, my Uncle Melker, he liked them cigarettes. Was the Camel or? Chesterfield, I think it was. Did you meet any that were interested in America at that time to come here? Did they ask any questions about how it was? Yes, those of my age, they, in Sweden at that time, they didn't talk about wanting to come over here. Oh, I'm sure they'd like to visit. But to stay, I mean, that's something that they would have to decide, I'm sure. I didn't, I didn't, it wasn't on my mind to think and ask such things. I remember one fellow talked of wanting a book on small inventions because he was wanting to, well, build gadgetries or something to start a business in Sweden, which he didn't have, well, he couldn't get it. It wasn't available or whatever. But I never did follow through on that. I can't remember. It just come to mind. That was back then. But we did a lot of drinking and dancing. We, his sister and I, we liked the jitterbugs. We were pretty good dancers in Chicago in those days. Well, Helen, too. And, you know, at that time in Sweden when you danced, you didn't separate. No. If you did, the police were there. They'd come out and take you off the floor. They did. They took my sister and I off the floor. Is that right? Yep, in Stockholm. They were on the wounded at that time. They didn't, well, you know, they know you're American from the clothes you wear. And we were out having a, just, we went to dance in Stockholm. Well, it was just my sister and I and my mother. I don't know where she was at. She might have been sitting on the side. But there was a place where they were dancing, and they had the music that we danced to, so we danced our dance, but they didn't like it. You couldn't do that. We don't do that here in Sweden. They said that? Oh, yeah. What kind of clothes did you, you didn't have jeans at that time. No, we didn't have jeans. But loafers, I think, maybe it was the... White socks? Could be that we had white socks. That might be. Yeah, probably. No, the guys didn't wear white socks. No? The girls did. Bobby socks. Oh, Bobby socks. Uh-huh, the girls did, but the boys didn't. Uh-huh. Well, anyway, even when we got up to Harnesson, they must have known that we were, you know, that we danced different in the United States, because they danced, well, they would dance together. Well, we did, too. Yeah, foxtrot and... Foxtrot and waltz and tango and all, but, you know, when you jitterbug, you spin out, and, you know, you're twirling and holding onto one another with one hand, but you might separate, but they didn't care for that there. Even up in Harnesson, they, you got to have the, I had to, well, both, my sister and I, we had to keep our eyes peeled for them. If they started to make a move for us, well, then we would start to dance right for them. Together. Yeah, we danced together then. So it was a good visit. We enjoyed it. How long did your sister stay at that time? Six months she stayed. Six months. Yeah, but then she must have picked up Swedish talk. Oh, yes. She talks better than I. You've got to go visit her. She's in Des Plaines, Illinois. You'd have a good session from her. Oh, yeah. So she picked up Swedish then. Oh, yeah. Well, we talked Swedish from when we were younger. I couldn't talk English when I started school. It was all Swedish at home and with all the friends. And, well, some of the friends, you know, you got to the point where you could tell where the Swede came from, even though he didn't talk Swedish, but from his American broken English, well, accent that he had, his Swedish accent and English, you could tell what part of Sweden he was from. I can't do it anymore, but I think I used to pick out whether they were from Småland or Blekinge area or Angermanland up in Norland. There's a difference in there as we have it here in the United States. A New York person speaking or, I guess, a person from Texas or from Midwest or from Chicago, there is an accent from a Chicagoan, definitely. I was from Chicago. When I came out here, I could be talking to someone, and they say, you know, you're not from here. You're from Chicago. They could detect it. They could detect it, yes. So if you get the ear for it, you can detect where a person generally comes from. Yeah. You're running out.