 Here's your father. No. There's my father right here. This man and my father came from Sweden together. In what year? 1893. And then a year later, your mother and your brother John came. My sister Signe came. 1894. July 8, 1986, and I sent them together with John August Wimblad and his brother Rudolf Wimblad in Port Byron, Illinois. And John Wimblad was born 1888, 25th of February in Ryttensocken, Sweden, in Västmanland. He came to the United States 1894. Can you tell me now, John, you were born in, what was the name of the parish? The Kordobacken. No, no, no. I forgot the name of the place, but I can't remember. I almost had the other day. I'm trying to remember that. It was a big place. Big place. But, see, that was a soldier in the standing army. That ain't no more. So, I said, I wasn't born, but right now I was baptized, John August Wimblad. But that was the name of the place that we were. That's where we resided. Took the family name again. I raced around. Now, between East Moline, now East Moline, and 48th Street Moline. There's where I raced. Do you remember anything from Sweden or from Rytten? Well, I remember when we was over there. Then we stayed at a place called Ness. That was outside of Halstahammar. It was over there. Halstahammar. About a mile from there. A place called Ness. So, you went back in 1901 with your parents? Yeah. You were old enough to remember that. Oh, yeah. I was 13 years old. We had stayed because the same mother was dead. We couldn't go back again until after she had the baby. My brother was born over there. So, I would stay the whole summer. What was the reason your parents went back? You think they tried to stay in Sweden? Well, they intended to stay in Sweden, but they didn't like it anymore. So, they liked better over there. Was there something specifically they didn't like in Sweden? Well, I don't know. I don't know. When Dad got here, he was back here. There's something about it. I see. And, of course, he had his sister there. His brother and I got a lot of things. And, had two sisters. One in the West Coast and one in Halstahammar. So, you remember the – I remember driving an oxen. I worked all summer. All the kids worked over there that day. Oh, he had to run away with an oxen. Oh, they ran away with the oxen. How did you learn to drive the oxen? I mean, you were not used to that. I don't know. They drove with a line of horses over here. Just one line there? Yeah. I don't know. Two lines. Two lines. And, to put a line on the air. So, you had to work then out in the fields? I had to work. All kids had to work. You didn't go to school though in Sweden? No, I never went to school. But, you understood Swedish at that time? I could talk at that, yes. Oh, yes. I could talk good Swedish. But, now you're coming home to Sweden and you're talking English to the other boys? Well, when we come back, I come back, back to America again. I wasn't over there long enough to hurt me. How long did you stay in Sweden? We got over there the first part of June and the first part of November we come back. Or, last day of October, I forget what. You remember the boat trip back over? Oh, yeah. We were both away. We had, when we left over here, we had nice fog. So, it was a day late. So, we come to England one day late. Then, the place we're going to guns work, we had to take a boat from the coast to Copenhagen. Then, the place I take the boat to Copenhagen, we took the ferry across the mountain there. Then, we took the train to guns work to meet, to meet the troops. It was nice going over. Oh, there's no sea. Sea was this way. I see. Because they made my gunboat work. You got seasick then? Yeah, I was a good street kid. Copenhagen went this way, where that boat was going. And, when we come back again, we had quite a storm. Do you remember the name of the ship? No, I don't remember. There was no Swedish. You went from England, from Liverpool. Yeah. We come in to the, well, we were known to get the Gennard Line. And, we went back on the American Line. I forget what the other name was. Oh, that thing, that boat stood on the rift. The propeller got out of water. It was that bad? It was a bit. And then, when you entered the New York Harbor, you remember the Statue of Liberty? Yeah, I remember seeing it. We come in there early in the morning. I was up on deck. You saw Statue of Liberty? Yeah, I see Statue of Liberty. So, your parents, they were happy to be back? They sure did. They sure was happy. Was there something particular they complained about this week? I don't know. Things were so much different than it was before that you just couldn't bear it. What was the reason why your dad went over in the first place? Well, I don't know. Edmund's father, Fred Trumbull, got talking about a place in Alabama. And, they couldn't bear it. Was it in Silver Hill, Alabama? No. I don't know what town. I never heard him talk about it. Then, they said no, they go to Moline. He had two brothers, three brothers in fact, in Moline. Well, before him? They were already here. What was their name? This is Gus Tarblum, this is Eric Tarblum, and this is Victor Tarblum. They were all here. And, they were brothers to your… To that man, Tarblum? Yeah. I see. They were a whole group here then. Did they come from the same area as you? No, they were from the same area. But, see, I went there and dad was in the Army. I see. This fellow and dad was in the Army together. Well, that's how they met them. And, they told him that the United States was a good place to come? Well, this man and dad was riding to someplace in Alabama. The land was cheap. And, so he said, why not go to Moline and see our brothers what they know about Alabama. When they come here, they stay. So, you now, Rudy, you were with John and your parents back to Sweden in 1901. So, why don't you tell me about your experiences? Well, when we went over on the boat, I was four years old and my birthday was on the ocean. And, I seen barely a sea, but a stork died. And, John started up the mast and they took him down. I remember in Sweden, there, different things. John went to the store to buy some stuff and I wanted candy. And, nobody knew what candy was in there because that's called a mellet. And, they finally got some. And, another thing, I went out crock fishing one evening. And, I was four years old. And, then, of course, I wasn't quite, you had to be quite fish and crock fish. So, you remember that? Oh, yes. And, on the way back, we were in London. And, some English boy said something to John and he answered him in American. And, there was a two-wheel cart, two men on it, and a Clyde's horse, four white feet and a white face. The two men sat there hollering coal. And, on the boat come back, a very severe storm. My father and me was the only passengers that came down to eat. And, they served tea. And, tea tastes just as bad today as it did then. And, I didn't like Sweden because I wanted lemon pie and I wanted pumpkin pie, which couldn't be had. That was a bad experience for you. Yes, it was. But, John, your brother, he was an only boy. He went up to the nest. Yeah, he started up to the crow's nest. And, they took him down. Somebody died, you said, on the ship. Yes, the stewards. The stewards. And, they buried him at Siden? Uh-huh. So, you remember seeing that? Yes. How did they do it? Did they? Well, they put it out on the platform and they tipped it and he went down. And, he was wrapped in cloth or something? Well. There was no casket? No. I can't remember that for sure whether it was casket or what it was. So, he was buried at sea? Yeah. You remember that too, John? Oh, yeah. You remember crawling up there in the crow's nest? Oh, yeah. I remember that, yeah. And, then they came, the English came. We was all over. You were two rawdy boys then? I was a heavy boy then. And, then we come back. There was a family named Erickson. And, the old lady, when she would come, why, we always get a little hand out of some kind. I was three years old when we was up there. And, she had a basket of peaches. And, she took one peach and gave my sister, Signe, and me each one. So, you were three children then, Signe, John, and you, Rudy? And, Annie. She came later? No. She came in 1904. She stayed over with our grandparents. I see. She was born in Sweden then? I was the only one born in this country. How long did you stay in Sweden then? From in June to, well, the later part of October or the first part of November. 1901? 1901. But, how could your sister be born in Sweden in 1904? Did she go back? Oh, no. She was born when John, mother, and Signe came over in 1894. Oh, 1894? Yes. I'm sorry. I thought it was 1904. It was 1894. No, 1894. So, your parents then came over here in two turns. Your father came first in 1893. Yeah. To look for a job. And, he came to the Tumblums. Yes. Well, yes. Tumblum brothers. Yeah. What were they doing here in Moline? Well, the two of them were working at John Deere, power works. And, he met one of them in the military service in Sweden. Yeah. Carl Thornblum. He was, he came in 1907. And, Who came in 1907? Carl Thornblum. Oh, Carl Thornblum. Yeah. It was the one that your father met in the service. Yeah. And, you mentioned here now that they were looking for land in Alabama. Yes. So, they were ready then to be farmers, actually. Yes. They intended to farm. Why did they peter out? Well, they liked it here, so they just stayed. They never went down there to look at it? No. So, they came over here in Moline. He said his brothers, they maybe know something about it. They just liked it and stayed here. So, you never, you don't remember anything mentioning about Torsby, Alabama? No. You never heard of Silver Hill? No, no, no. They never said. Only Alabama? Yeah. And, So, what kind of work did your dad get now in 19? Well, when he, he came in, he worked for the government on the river. Right away? Yeah. How did he get that job? I can't tell you that. And, I'll tell you a little thing. When the government always had a boat where they give the employees dinner, and they had tomatoes. And, Dad had never seen a tomato. And, he took one and he said he bit into it. Oh, that awful taste. So, he quickly put it in his pocket and he threw it later out in the river. He didn't like the taste? You know, he didn't like the taste of tomato. So, that was the first time he Yeah, the first time he'd ever seen one. He took it to be an apple. So, then the following year, 1894, your mother and John and Annie No, Signe. Signe. Yeah. Came over. Yeah. And, Where were they living then in, you said out In some place in Moline. Yeah. Or, what was Walker Station, John? When you come from Sweden, where did you live? Walker Station? 51st Street now. Yeah. On the corner of 51st Street and 5th Avenue. 4th Avenue. I see. Down in East Moline then. Moline. It was still in Moline. Out in the country. Out in the country. There was no East Moline. There was like a farm down there. The farm then. Yeah, it was old. The farm on 34th Street, there was a big farm there. This way, going out east, there wasn't anything but farmland. Then you got to Carver Cliff. All farm. Or Watertown. That's East Moline now. Up for Ed. That's all farmland. And East Moline got, land company started. So, there were no factories, John? No factories out there then? No, not in East Moline, no. Not in Moline, no. There was nothing out there. So, he rented a house there, and your father, or how did he, where did he live in the house or an apartment? It was a house. It was a house. It was the only house up there on 54th Street at the time. And later that got a lot, we built a small house and lived in it for a few years, then we went to apartment. So, he continued to work then for the government? No, just that year. Then he started with the Moline Plot Company. And he could have bought Springbrook Court in Moline, that 20 acres, for $2,000. And look at the value of it today. But he didn't have the money though? No, they thought it was pretty high. And they had a bad outlet. They had to go to 23rd Avenue to get out. And that was inconvenient. So, where is it located today? It's up on, it's between 12th Avenue and 23rd Avenue? It's around 12th Avenue and 41st Street. 41st Street? For $2,000? Yeah. So, he was looking into it? Well, he thought it was a little high. And it was good farmland then? Yes. And there has been so many changes there in the time, that it's hard to remember everything. I started school in the Grinnell School on 55th Street, between 4th and 5th Avenue in Moline in 1903. Do you remember a school? There was one school? It was a schoolhouse where Hardee's are today. And they had a divided school room and two teachers. Two teachers? Uh-huh. And Ege was the man there. Do you remember what the lady teacher was, John? I don't know how much she was. So, he was already out of school then, John, when you started? How was that? He was out of school then? No, no. Yeah, he was out of school. He was out, yeah. Yeah. So, what did he start to work with now, John, when he came out? He worked in Union Melville in East Moline. That was before there was an East Moline. What kind of work was that? He was carrying cores. And John was up to the barbecue when they sold the first lots to East Moline. He was about seven or eight years old. So, then the town started to expand. To expand, yeah. And there were a lot of Swedes around then. In Moline? Yeah, a lot of Swedes. You could talk to Swedes in Moline, any place, any store. You could go to the tabloids and talk German, any store. If you were a rock band, you better talk American. How about 7th Street now, with all the Belgians? Well, they came a bit later. They came later? That's where the thousand first came in. And then later they... So, there was not too many Belgians then around when you were growing up then, in the 90s? There was. There was not too many Belgians around then when you were growing up? No, no. No? No, there wasn't any. I see. There was no kids in school or... There were all Swedes around then. And Walker Station, there was only one family, there wasn't a Swede. Before that, there used to be 48th Street, Moline. That was known as Walker Station. They had a depot there. The Berlin Line, the flight depot, so you could fly all the time, your train. Oh, I see. You could get out of one. Walker Station. Yes. 48th Street. 48th Street. Yeah. And then in 1904, Dad went to work for a farmer, named Henry Schell. And in 1905, he started farming on the John Miller farm. And that was located where? In the back of Port Byron here. About a mile and a half east of Port Byron. Was it the slack in the business in Moline Plot at that time, or why did he... Well, Dad thought it would be better to get out of the town. He didn't like the factory work then? No, he didn't. But the farming was so poor, in the winters, he went down and worked in the shop. In 1906, we moved to Charlie Pierce's place. And he was there four years. And he grubbed stumps and cleaned up. He was planting corn between the stumps. And then in 1910, the year of the Haylage Comet, we moved down here below Rabbit City, where Interstate 80 Bridge is now. We was there four years. On the farm? On the farm. He rented land then? He rented it from Jim Simonson, the banker here in Port Byron. So, you mentioned he was grubbing stumps and everything. That was just white land, and there was no farm before? No, there was only three acres of farmland. And he broke new land then, himself? He broke new land himself. He bought a stump puller and grubbed stumps. Did John help out with that? Yeah, he helped some. Yeah, that was a hard job though. Well, hard work. It was mega hard. Yeah, but I mean, you know, starting from scratch there. I mean, no farm, plow, or anything? Well, in 1907, some plowers grubbed out some trees. And Dad had John plow that had gone down on New Year's Day. It was very mild. And then the next day, it was froze up solid. So, and we was there four years. We had done a lot of climbing, and Brother Walter and me, he was nine and I was 13. And we picked up $60 worth of clams playing on the river. And you could sell them then for? $16 a ton. $16 a ton? To whom did you sell the clams? They went to Muscatine Highway for the button factory. $16 a ton? Yeah. How much could you collect then in one season? Well, we had one plow there that Doug, he got up at four o'clock in the morning, and Doug, he'd dig about a ton a day. A ton a day? Yes. You mean $16 a day? Yeah. And you could get them on the shallow? Shallow water. See, that was all rock in there. And there was deep places and shallow places, and Doug and I were in the shallow places. They had a fork about 12, 14 inches wide, short handle, and they'd dig them up. So a ton a day? Uh-huh. But he was the biggest digger of them all. Some of them would dig 300, 400 pounds a day. And then you'd cook them out. You had to do that? Oh, yeah, you had to cook the meat out of them. And sometimes you found slugs, and once in a while, you're lucky, you'd find a pearl. There were actually pearls in them? Yeah. Did you find any? No, John found one there, a small one. He sold it for $5, and that traveled all over the world, and come back to the owner, nobody wanted to buy it. Why? No reason why. They just didn't like it. Pearl is valued just whatever you can get out of them. But John, he got one? Yeah, he found one. And after about six months, he told me, he said, I'll sell it back to you for $5. So how, you had to cook this out, you did it outside in the big... We had a vat about 30 inches wide and about 4 foot long. And we had a rock foundation, and that sat on there, and then had the fire underneath. And then they had covers on them to hold the steam in, and then they'd open up there, and you'd pick the meat out. And you didn't use the meat for anything? No. But then after you cooked them out and cleaned them out, they were considerably lighter. Yes. You needed a lot of cookouts then to get a ton? Well, yes. You had quite a few of them. And you see, there were so many different kinds of shells. Niggerhead clam was among the good clams. And the yellow sand shell, they were sent mostly to Germany for that pearl work on knives and that fancy work. He paid $80 a ton for them. But Muscatine, they picked up everything? They took everything. We had muckets and pocketbooks, Blue Ridge, Deerfoot, and Pimplebacks. What is the name of the... The clam. The clam. Mm-hmm. And they were right down here on the fire and on the stuff? Mm-hmm. Between Port Barn and Rabb City, they used to have a crookwood. And have two crookwoods on each string. And on a piece of pipe, they'd drop it down and drag it along the bottom. And when the things that touched the clam, they'd pinch down on it and hold it. And they'd pick them up that way. And you had the right then to finish wherever you wanted to? Anywhere. Anywhere? Yeah. Oh. And so, yeah, we got a lot of bass down there and walleye pie. There we had all the fish we wanted. So you spent a lot of time at the river then? Oh, yes. And I learned to swim down there where in there stayed 80 bridges. That was in 1910. The river was very low. And in September, they had a big forest fire in Minnesota. And the smoke come down, and the sun sat out there just like a yellow ball. You could see it down here? Yes. That was a strong smell from the fires in Minnesota. They had a lot of fires in Montana and Idaho too at the same time. And they blew down this way? Uh-huh. So how big of a farm did your father run? A hundred acres. A hundred acres. Uh-huh. And the reason, 1914, the folks went to Minnesota to the Red Tomblum. And there was an owner to the estate. He come down there and took 20 acres off of that 100. So Dad didn't like the land that was left for him. So him and Carl Thornblum went to Minnesota in 1913. So in the fall, John and Dad went up and they rented 320 acres. And the SOC Center in Minnesota. And then we stayed at Fred Thornblum's there until John brought a carload of furniture and things up. Did you have any cattle or anything of bring up? Yeah, he had horses. Horses. No cattle? No. So then the whole family moved away from Wadeen? Yeah, we was up there. The SOC Center? The SOC Center, 1914 and 15. In October 1915, we had a sale. And John and Dad went out to Montana and looked to see about a homestead. So we stayed at the Starr family. That's these here. In Montana? No, they was at Belgrade, Minnesota. And they went up there and they didn't like Montana, so they came back. And we left Belgrade, Minnesota the 11th of November in 1915. So we came down here. We stayed at Dad rented a house on 6th Street and 17th Avenue in East Smolene. There was a lot of operations. So you sell everything and move the horses up to Minnesota, up to Montana, and back again. I got to ask you now why you didn't like Montana for? Why didn't you like Montana for a reason? The high blue sky. Well, it might be high blue sky. It was a lot of... I don't know. I don't know. I can't tell you why. It was kind of... It was in Nepal. It was kind of rough out there. It was? And Dad couldn't take the high altitude. Well, Dad affected him. We were out in the basin. We slept over there. And then through the basin, we slept over there and started up from there. We started climbing the hillside. It was a mountain, my God. So we got so high, pretty soon Dad's nose got bleeding. And we got more blood. So we started down low and quit. So he got disgusted. I see. How did you like it though? I didn't care too much about it. I kind of liked the west a little bit. So... So there was a homestead? Yeah, only it was in the wild. It was in the wild. Where was it in Montana? Do you remember the place? Lewiston? Oh, it was not too far from... Billings? It was quite away from Billings. What the hell was the name of the town? It was north of Duden basin. North of Harlington. I don't put that word up, but I can't tell you. I can't tell you. But the altitude was too high? I think it was too high. And you and your dad, you were not with the... No, I didn't come with him. We stayed in Ellegrade, Minnesota. And John, he was with Charlie Ziegler, a homesteader. Charlie Ziegler, a homesteader, in Lam Rose, South Dakota in 1909. I liked that part of Gunty. You did? That was on the Rosebud Reservation. I had a little trouble explaining. My voice was... I was 21 years old then. I'd seen Indians. I'd seen 1,500 Indians. And that's on the... They're up there. 1,500 full-blooded Indians one time. A big celebration out there. That was... When I came out there, I didn't see a train. I was 23. 23 miles per railroad. So the Indians, they didn't bother you or you didn't bother them? No, no. They didn't bother nobody. Not then. So you were helping out then on the homestead out there, on the Rosebud Reservation? No, I had a... They were... I had a homesteader. That was a lot. So he had the cattle and the... He had some horses. So that's all they had. He just owned it and he sold it. But it was hard to make a living out there, or if it was dry season... Well, dry season, when the good years... They had good years and bad years out there. Them days, before it started, everybody went to cattle country. I know a fellow that, he had a mountaineer on the head. He was patting my head on the head the year. And then... I was... There was nobody living out there. Them days, if you come to a place, they give you a meal, they don't give you that now. No. But at that time, you could pick up the land very, very reasonably. But it was hard to get the money though. Well, yes, no money wasn't too bad. But then, no worse than any place else. But... Do you remember how much this homestead you were looking at in Montana was going to cost you? With the filing costs and everything? It wouldn't cost very much. No? I don't know what the filing charges were. There were no houses there though? No, no. Nothing at all? Nothing. Just built your own houses. It was a... It was a rough beginning though, to start with nothing. Yeah, yeah. A rough beginning. So you went back then to Belgrade, Minnesota? I went back. Then they went back to Moline. So they didn't try to farm up in Minnesota then? No, they... They had the sale there and then we left Minnesota. And... Who got working? I got working. I got... We started at the Deer Harvester in November. It's down on the chair over there. Well, you... You started with the John Deere? We started at the John Deere Harvester. You and John? Yes. I was heating the rivets and John was assembling for the binder mainframe. And our day rating was 17 cents an hour. And we made a little over $17 a week. Ten hours a day, five days a week, nine hours on Saturday. What year was this now? In 1915. And no unions? No union. And on February the 25th, I had an eye injury. I lost the side of my right eye and... At work? At work. Then the folks moved from 7th Street East Moulton to a farm known as Harry Miller Farm on Parkburn Hillsdale Road. They started up farming again after they came from Minnesota. So... I was in the hospital three weeks with the eye. How did you get any compensation from John? Well, I get $879.10. In one lump sum? In one lump sum. And they pay the hospitalization? They pay for the hospital. And then... You lost the side of the eye? Yes. Completely? Completely. I didn't know. I couldn't see. It happened at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. I went back to work till 5. So I didn't know I couldn't see. A brother-in-law came down and he said, You better see the doctor. And so I went down to the doctor and he put the light hand over my good eye. He said, Can you see the light? I said, No. So then they sent me down to Dr. Henry Arp. And he sent me to the eye specialist. So then he put me in the hospital. But you still continued to work then after you came out? Well, I worked there back about a month. Then I went out and helped Dad on the farm. How about John? Did he continue with the... He was still working there. And then later, John started working at the molding and plod company. Why did he change over to molding and plod? Did they pay for it? Well, he liked it better. I lived in Moline. I worked in East Moline. And I made it. So you had to take the streetcar up. It was closer then, so... Oh, yes. It was right close to his work. And then in 1918, the folks moved to Barstow. And my birthday is the 4th. I registered for the service. And I left August the 1st, 1918. So I was in World War I. And your brother John, though, he... He was rejected because he had a hot scale working in the blacksmith shop. He had his eye damaged to the side of his left eye. I see. And so I come back in 1919 on farm. And then John was working at the Wheely Motor Company. Were you overseas during the service? No. I was stationed at Columbus, Ohio. They were building warehouses in there for storage of all kinds of stuff. But here you had this eye injury. You had one inside your eye. Well, you couldn't tell the difference. They didn't believe me that I couldn't see on the eye. Well, you didn't tell them that. I told them, but they wouldn't believe me. You couldn't tell the difference in the eyes. See, the eyeball was never hurt. So you were never rejected then for the... No. But you still can't see anything? No. So you were drafted? Yeah. But John, he... They took him... How about his eye injury down at Moline Place? That was in November in 1916. Was he compensated for his injury? No. He didn't get anything. Nothing at all? None at all. So then the folks farmed in Barstow. And then they farmed there in Barstow three years. Then they moved back to Port Byron here. So they made a lot of moves to your parents? Yes, they did. How long did they stay in Sauk Centre, Minnesota? Two years. Two years? Uh-huh. What did they... Was something they didn't like up there? Well, they... It was so cold. Winters. The winter, we was up there, we had 42 below zero. And living out on the prairie, the cold was $8 a ton. And that was a lot of money. Down here, you could buy a cold for $4 to $5 a ton. And milder winters? Uh-huh. Milder winters. And... So they made a decision to move back then? Yeah. But then they were looking for Montana, even colder climate. Yes, that was still a bit of cold. Below. Yeah. And then... They moved to Oregon, and they was there three years. You see, Dad was great to fix the places up, clean up. And when they got it fixed up, then they wanted more rent. And Dad wouldn't pay them more rent, then he'd move someplace else. But then he lost all the input he had on fixing up the buildings, don't you think? Yeah, he lost that. He didn't gain anything? No, he didn't gain anything. But why, he said, when I fix it up, why should they have more money? So he worked against himself, actually? Well, in a way. But he wouldn't pay more money. So he moved? Then he moved. How many times do you think he moved now, if you really figure it out? About every four years. Say, about every four years. Every four years. Yeah. He usually stayed on the place four years. How about your mother now? Didn't she complain about the... No, never complained. Uprooted all the time? When we was young, Mother knitted all our stockings and our mittens. And for many years, she sewed all our shirts. She made all her own clothes. She set the sewing machine, sewing, even at night, she'd have a lamp setting up there and sewing. So she never had the rest then to speak of? No. And when she was in Sweden, she could shear a sheep, card the wool, spin it, and weave it. She knew exactly how to take care of things. She could take care of everything. So that way they didn't have to buy too much. They could get everything from the farm. They took it from the farm. So they hay sheep and... In Sweden, where she worked. No, we didn't have any here. But she could do all that. How about your sister, Narcina, did she help out? Oh yes, she was a good seamster. She learned to be a seamster. How long did she stay in the home? Well, she started working out when she was about 14, 15 years old. She went out to houses here to help? Went to housework first, and then she started working for a seamster. But she didn't live at home then? No, she didn't. And so, in 1912, she married a fellow named Charlie Nordholm. He was a Moss. In Moline? They lived in Moline. And then later they went down to Luca in Illinois. And she got blood poisoning, and she passed away down there. And you all tried to pitch in and help your parents? Oh yes, we always helped. There was no question about that, you had to help out. So when you came back then from the service, you went to the farm again to help? Yeah, at the barstow. He started to get old though at that time. Well, yeah, he still worked. He was still farming? Yeah, and, well, he farmed, done the farm, we helped until about 1929. It was good farmland there in Barstow? Yeah, it was sandy land down there. But you still got good crops? Yeah, and we had milk. And then after, in 1929, had the sale, and I started working on the road. Well, I didn't in 1923. I worked on the Township Roads in the summer. And then we come back from the Orient. I started there. I worked 30, 31, 32. In 33, we started farming at 258-acre farm between Barstow and Silvis. And then we moved to... You rented that farm? We rented that. Then we rented another farm, 200 acres, where the airport is at Barstow. And then we moved there. They wanted more rent, so we moved to a farm back at Port Farn. And we were doing very good on that. We had good cattle and doing good with hogs, and they sold the farm. So we had moved, and then we moved down close to Barstow again on a 260-acre farm. Were you and John together then? Yeah, John and me together. Dad passed away August the 23rd in 1942. And your mother died? In March or February the 5th in 1954. So you had your mother with you then? Oh, yes. We took care of her. In 1948, we bought a 120-acre farm in Henry County on the Billy Wolf Road. You bought the farm then? Then we bought the farm. And we had it for 20 years, and we were getting just a little too old to farm. I was getting about 70, and John was in the 80s. So we sold the farm and moved here to Port Farn. So you had an interesting life. You didn't let grow any moss on your feet. You were moving all the time. So did you quit working then for Moulin Pla after you had the eye accident? No, he worked. I went back to work again. Yeah. You went to work. So he stayed in Moulin then. Yeah. How about during the Depression though? We lived back at Port Farn here. So did he work, John? No, nobody worked. There was none of the factories worked. So we had a cow and some chickens, John and Dad took care of that. We had a little 27-acre piece we lived on then. So you could survive the Depression. Yeah. But you moved away from Moulin then at that time. Yeah. It was a rough time for a lot of people. Oh, you better was. A lot of them was to cut wood or anything just to keep the house warm. And we've traveled quite a bit since we retired. We've been to Montana, Idaho, Colorado, and Wyoming, Minnesota, Montana, highway. By car? Yeah. And we've been to Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida. So you see in Alabama that your father was dreaming about in 1890s. Yeah. But we don't know what part of Alabama that was the funny part about it. Oh, I see. So now when you saw Montana then, you saw it together with John. Oh, yes. What were you thinking then about the high blue sky there? Well, a farmer named Clarence Adams had a farm there. And he had it with his brother-in-law there. So he was talking to Dad in 1914 to go out there and rent. So Dad came down and seen it. And Jim Henniger, he decided he would go out there and farm it himself so we didn't get the renter. So I often wondered how it would have been if we had got to Montana. That would have been a roundup of Montana. Well, it has been a cold climate out there. Oh, yes, it would have been. Forty to fifty, sixty below. Very tough. You've seen those places then? Oh, yes. And in some places I'd like to live. I tell you, the one place I'd like to live in the summer is Custer, South Dakota in the Black Hills, and Buffalo, Wyoming. They're two beautiful towns in the summer, but not in the winter. Oh, but John, oh, I mean, he's... He likes it. What kind of aspirations does he have? Is it about the same or... Well, when he was young, he traveled. He was out to harvest fields. With Dakotas? Yes, with Dakotas, Minnesota. With the threshing crew then? Yes, threshing and cutting, when they cut the grain with the binder and shocked it. And in 1907, yeah, it was 1907, you was in Gary, wasn't it? 1908. But no work. There was no work to be had. Seven days a week. Yeah. 1908, in Gary, Indiana, you couldn't buy a job. Oh, so there was also a bad time then? Oh, yes, and Moline here, they issued scripts in the stores so you could exchange from one store to another. You mean they issued scripts? In the store, so they was good from one store to the other. In the place of having money, if you had a script, you could go to another store and... A piece of paper then? Yeah. Who issued those? Well, the stores did. They did? Just like to help people. Yeah, to help people out. So your family, now, when your father came in 1893, there was a bad recession here then at that time? No. There wasn't? What year was it that Cleveland come in? I don't know. About 94, I think. 94, 95 along in there when the Cleveland time, then it was a bad depression. Then it was bad? Then it was bad. Dad made $13 that one winter. He was a butcher by trade in Sweden. Your father? My father. And he'd go from place to place and help them butcher. He'd give them some meat. They had a cow and a pig, and they had a little fat for potatoes. And mother skimmed the cream off the milk, made butter, so she'd trade it for flour and sugar. So John, he remembers that? Oh, yeah. I remember that well. In Fort Easton, at Fort East Moline, they had quite a brickyard. It was known as the Sweet Brickyard. So they worked there in the summertime. The brick, that yard, was out, I don't know. It's a western structure. The brick, they were made at Fort East Moline. And the brick, they used it as an asylum up there. They were made up there. So they had quite a brick, known as the Sweet Brickyard. It was fresh brick. Oh, Sweet Brickyard. That's what they called it. Was it owned by a Swede, you think? Well... A lot of Swedes working there. That's all there was. There was only one that wasn't a Swede. That was John Heaven. He wasn't a Swede. The rest were all Swede there. So that's how they worked there. A couple of years was good. A couple of years wasn't so good. So that's what caused them to live in there. Dad worked in there in the summer. So you remember in 1894 and the Depression. And then 1907, and then you had 1930. You've been through a lot of depressions. Yep, 1980. I was looking for work. I tried to go someplace, but I couldn't go. I landed up in Chicago. They turned up the cable. They were standing on the street. The boss come looking at you. You. How are you? Grab a shovel or a pick. If it don't work, don't ask what I'm going to do. You didn't ask how much they paid. About $2 a day. $2 a day? I call it that. But you never asked for that when you were looking for a job? No. You never asked how much they paid? Oh, no. Then the time people come along, get your name. If you ask them what they're going to do, they fire you before you got a job. All the construction work, the guy thought they were going to light a table, so they had to grab him. That was rough. Rough times. But you were young and strong. You must be a sturdy guy though when you were in the 20s. Yeah. He was a well-built boy. I got back to, I got the military in Chicago. I got the Eldridge on it. They did a free ride, of course. I was broke. They never sent for the Eldridge that night. So what they thought was limited. They're going to the Eldridge. And the worst part was they didn't have a sign. I probably got on it. I rode with Moline, got on another train, poured wine and got off, free ride. I rode the tank, the tender, all the way to Melvin. That's the last free ride they had. Otherwise, get a freight train ride. My armor was always greener on the other side. I always move. So you were always on the move. Always on the move. I worked for a guy called Wiley Dilley. I run Barnett down there. The automobile manufacturer, the Dilley. Automobile. Yeah, automobile. I worked for a year in Milwaukee. They were making cars for Nash up there. I didn't want to, because I had to. My arm was going mad. I was destroyed, but I didn't like it. I worked for the Packard up there. You've been around? Been around all over. Some people like John Deere, they came here in 1895 and they stayed on all their life. For 50, 60 years. They never moved. What is the difference? Do you think they were consented to stay with it, even if it was hard? Turbines. This fella here and this fella here, they stayed around the vicinity of... All their lives. They never moved. Well, they moved from Port Barn to Hillsdale and to Moline. They was in this vicinity and never left it. Remember, they both took a trip back to Sweden. That's all. Not arrested. I couldn't stay one place long. I had to go someplace else. It was always greener somewhere else. Always greener. How about the unions? When they came in, were you affiliated with the unions? There was no union. At any time? You never worked on the unions? No, I never worked on the unions. Do you think it was a necessity for the union to come in, though? Well, in a way, yes. The manufacture was too hard. Now, I think the union is a little too strong here that way. I think... I tell you, they leave the mess. Sometimes they have a mess. It was a goddamn... You can't fire them now. That's why you... I know... I was up in Milwaukee, up there. I know where they had Pecu. There was one guy... He actually wasn't a dad. The boss didn't fire him. He just sent him one building to another. Doing the same kind of work. We do that today. So it was harder than if you... So, in a way, the manufacture was too strong. Now the union is too strong. So... The union is going to have to come down on wages to compete with other parts of the world. And our dollar is too high. Another thing I'm worried about is the stock market. Too high. You can easy... You can hit the bottom. It goes faster down than up. My brain's going too high. So... I would like to travel. You'd like to travel? Yeah. You have it in your body? I couldn't help myself. I have to. I don't know how many times I go up to... toward Minneapolis up that way. But you don't drive anymore now? No, I don't drive no more. Rudy's taking care of the driving. Yeah, he takes care of the driving. In 1959, you went and seen this cousin of ours in Philadelphia. It was, yeah. This is your father's? Niece-Jean. Niece-Jean, yeah. That's the only little relation we got over here. It's the only relation? That's the only relation we got over here. Do you have any context of what the relation is? No. My last one passed away here, oh, 8, 10 years ago. He lived in Stockholm. That's the last one. We asked him to get in contact with someone. He's over in the nation, but he never did. He had his two aunts. They had quite a bit of children. The one that lived in Vestalåk, the one that lived in Alsthom, they'd be my aunt's children. And we tried to get him to find some of them, but he never did. Before the war broke out... I had some cousins in Stockholm, a German. He was a bus control. She was on the other side. But we don't know. We never got his address. And we never were able to get something that we know.