 Cassette 2, side 1, continuation with Bob Borden, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette 2, side 1. So Lundstrom then apparently had eggs in different baskets, and he was prepared in case of being not solid enough to keep it going. Well I think that most big businessmen do, you know, yeah. I don't think very many of them have all their money tied up in their company. So no one of the big manufacturers lost their house and their belongings when they went up? I don't think so. Well some of them if they didn't have them paid for might eventually have had to lost them in that way, you know. Were they smart enough? I mean those were immigrants, like Lundstrom, he came from Sweden. Yeah. Who gave them the idea to be a smart businessmen, for instance? Did they learn from experience? Well that's a good question. I don't know. Like P.A. Peterson, for instance, they probably studied him more or less when they had the gatherings to be businessmen. Yeah. I think another fellow that was kind of an example to them, although he never became quite as great a man as P.A. Peterson, that was Jonas Peters. I don't know if you've come across that name. He was an associate of P.A. Peterson. Yes, in the Union Furniture. He became treasurer. Now Jonas Peters became an orphan. He was a Swedish boy, he came over with his parents, and then both of his parents were wiped out by the cholera epidemic. Cholera was a terrible disease in those days and it could, you know, a person could feel well in the morning and be dead by evening, you know, it hit them fast. In about 1854 or so, something like that, a cholera epidemic hit Rockford and especially on the Swedish part of town and wiped out an awful lot of Swedes. And this Jonas Peters was, left an orphan. And apparently there were no other Swedes that could take care of him. And so he was put into the Burpee family. Now the Burpees ran a furniture store down on West State Street where the United Bank of Illinois is now, down there at the west end of the State Street Bridge. And it was also though a combination, it was a combination furniture store and Undertaker. That was a fairly common combination in those days. And I think it still is in some small towns. You'll find the local furniture dealer is also the local Undertaker. And so the Burpees ran both and we still have a Burpee wood funeral home now that's a descendant from that family. Well they ran this furniture store and so they took in Jonas. But they made him work for them and he would spend the daytime putting furniture together. Now this was back before Rockford had a furniture industry. And so their furniture all had to be shipped in from out of town. We did have the railroad here by that time so I suppose it came in by railroad but it was all, it was of course, it came apart you know, it was separated, it was all taken apart and came in crates. And so he was taught to put these items of furniture together. The tables and things you know that came all broken down in parts, he had to put them together, assemble them. And of course in doing this he learned a lot about furniture. And then he had to spend his evenings I guess working in their house waiting on the table and this sort of thing you know so the poor kid never had much time to himself but he learned a lot about furniture. And so when he got older he began working in small what they called wood turning shops where they just, we didn't have any real furniture industry in Rockford then but we did have small places that would make, oh maybe if a fellows wheelbarrow lost a handle they could make a new handle for him. And they had a place called, it was a sash and door factory, they just made windows and doors you know, window frames and doors. And so he worked in places like that. He went in the army during the Civil War and he came out and he started working some more. And then he went to Chicago and worked in furniture factories there until the Chicago Fire came in 1871. And that wiped out pretty much the furniture business in Chicago so he came back to Rockford. But he knew all that and the furniture. But then apparently he also took some business courses too, he had a business college in Rockford. And so when that union furniture started, P.A. Peterson of course, both Jonas Peters and P.A. Peterson had been working as cabinet makers in some other factory. And so when union furniture started, they were in on the ground floor of it, you know, they were among the first. And so then they started as, like P.A. Peterson was secretary and Jonas Peters was treasurer. But they also worked in the shop too, so they learned both ends of it. And I think that both of them were an inspiration. You know, Jonas Peters never became as great, for one thing he had a family to support. And he was a little older man too, so he didn't, when he finally got started in business he was a little, you know, up a little further along in years. So he never became as great as P.A. Peterson, but he, I think he was also an inspiration to them too. And so those two, I think the Swedes, a lot of them learned a lot from them. But you know, like economics now, they always talk about two-handed economists. On one hand we have this, you know, on the other hand you got to look forward to that thing and so on. In 1893 for instance, most of the people they scrammed and ran and left it. And then we had a guy like P.A. Peterson, one of the few, he stayed right in the battlefield. You would think he would get scared. I'm going to check it out, when it's on one hand or on the other hand, the theoretical economists that... And the practical ones. They teach in the colleges and they teach out of the books and so on. And you need them too, but of course... But they don't teach you how to perform in 1893 and 1930 though. No, well, you see... They seem to be completely new theorists, waiting for the people. Well, the ones that are teaching in the colleges and the ones that are considered economists, they probably have, most of them have never actually been in industry themselves, you know. At least not in the real practical part of it. And sometimes they might get appointed to a board of directors or something like that, but most of them have never actually been out in the field and really had to make ends meet, you know. So they don't know what to do in the crisis. Not as much, I don't think. Now, O.E. Landstrom, Oscar Landstrom, I think learned a lot from both P.A. Peterson and Jonas Peters. He started out in the shop. In fact, for a while he worked for my grandfather, who of course was his brother-in-law. And then he would ask to be transferred to other departments in the shop. And this was kind of unusual. Most of the fellows, if they got to be pretty good at one job, they figured, well, I'll stay at this, maybe I'll become foreman someday, you see. Well, he wasn't satisfied to hope that someday he might become a foreman. He preferred to work in many different parts of the company and learn all the different operations. And then, of course, he was a pretty good talker, too. And that helped. So then he wanted to go on the road as a salesman. And he traveled all through the South. I know the family used to talk about this. He traveled all through the South for several years and made good money. And I guess he had also taken some courses at business college, too, bookkeeping and so on. And so then he finally got appointed secretary of some company, I think. And I had done some work in some of the old city directories. Now, here in 1900, Oscar Landstrom was a finisher at Scandia Furniture in 1900. Well, as a finisher, he was working for my grandfather because he was a finishing foreman. In 1902, he was a clerk at a furniture store. And so he was learning the retail end of it. You see, he went from one thing. And then in 1908, he was a correspondent for Forest City Furniture Company. And he was a sales correspondent, you know, wrote letters and so on. So he was learning that aspect of it. By 1909, he became secretary treasurer of Central Furniture Company. And he continued in that job for quite a number of years. But it was gradually going from one thing to another. So in other words, he prepared himself then for a big position. That's the way it seemed. That's right. So when he hired people, he knew exactly what he was looking for. If it didn't perform, he... And, of course, when the factory finally, when he, well, like I say, he started up again on 23rd Avenue. And it was a new Landstrom Furniture Company. And that was back, it was in sometime in the middle 40s. And he brought his son in there. He started to get old himself though, up in the 60s. That's right. He started to get old. Well, he didn't live to the 60s. He brought his son in, Edward. His son had had some college. Now, whether he graduated from college, I don't know, but he had some college. But he started him, I guess, almost at the top. Now, he might have had some jobs out in the shop first. I don't know. But even if he did, he knew that being a Landstrom, he eventually would be up at the top. But, you know, the funny thing, when Oscar died in 1952, I think it was, the company was doing fine. I have a cousin who was working there at that time. And he said he couldn't believe it. The company was doing fine. Edward, his son then, became the top boss. And he said you just couldn't believe how fast that company went downhill after Oscar died. Now, Oscar was in his 70s by that time, getting close to 80. I think he was about 75, maybe something like that, when he died. But he was still working. Still there every day. But when he died and his son took over, he said everything started getting goofed up. It just started going downhill. And it was not the fault of the time that it had appeared? No, this was in the 50s. It wasn't bad, you know. It wasn't real booming, but it wasn't bad during the Eisenhower days. No, other factories could have done. Of course, it was a bad time for furniture factories in a way, in Rockford, because one problem with furniture factories in Rockford was that Rockford went into the metal producing, machine tools and so on. And there seemed to be more demand for them, and so they paid better. The unions were stronger and they paid better. And so many of the men who had been working in the furniture factories would then go and get jobs in the metal producing factories. And so then the furniture factories had to try to raise their wages, but their margin of profit wasn't as great. And then another thing that hurt furniture factories in Rockford too was that we lost the source of wood supply from around here. Now when the furniture factories first started in Rockford, we had plenty of native wood here. How close was that to the plant? Well, at least within the county anyway. Oak and walnut particularly, and those of course were the two good ones. Most of the Rockford furniture industry was furniture such as dining room furniture, bedroom furniture, desks, office furniture, this type of thing. Rockford didn't produce much in the line of upholstered furniture like for living rooms. It was mostly wood furniture, all wood. And of course walnut and oak were very good woods for doing that. But they were using veneer at that time? I don't know when veneer was introduced. The first factories in Rockford didn't bother with veneer. It was just solid wood, solid oak or solid walnut. I suppose they started using veneer more when the solid wood began to give out and they began to run out of it. But eventually they had to start shipping in the veneer too, I suppose. And so that added to the cost because then you had shipping costs from someplace else. You had to bring all this wood into Rockford. Whereas when we started we had it right here. And then the labor supply in the South, the South never got real unionized. Even today you find companies from the North still going South at times. And so they could pay less. And so the factories in Rockford that didn't feel that they could compete here anymore, they'd start moving South. And I guess eventually the ones who didn't move South just went out of business. Like this Edward Lundstrom. Do you think there were some departments he didn't understand if they lagged behind in the production? There must be. I don't really know. He was not able to comprehend the whole thing. If you come across some other older furniture men in Rockford, some that are older than I, and of course I was no furniture man anyway. I got this all the second hand through my parents. But if you can find any that maybe might be in their upper 60s or in their 70s and were in furniture, you might ask them what they knew about Edward Lundstrom. And especially if you can find somebody that worked at Lundstrom at that time, see what others thought. Being that I was related to them, my perspective might not be as good as somebody else's anyway. And of course I wasn't in the business anyway. I was doing something else. My father was dead by that time. He wasn't in the business either. Because the old man, he went from scratch, in other words, from the beginning. Every department in the furniture business. But his son, he started, like you said, at the desk. Well, he may have started lower for a while. But he was not as good to comprehend though as his father. It seems to me, Edward told me one time, that his father started him out in the lumberyard. But he maybe only worked there for a month or two. He gave him a little dab of this and worked in the lumberyard for a little while, maybe in the finishing department for a little while, maybe in the cabin and making department for a little while, but not long enough to really know it. Whereas his father would stay in the same job maybe for two years or more and really know the job before he'd go on to something else. And so I don't really know all the reasons that things started to goof up. I know my cousin, and I can't talk to him now because he's living out in California, but he was working there in the shipping department at the time. And he said that you just couldn't believe how things started going bad after Oscar died. And nobody should have taken out a wife? I guess not. They finally brought in a fellow who had been superintendent, I think, at the Wyman Furniture Company, a fellow by the name of Frank Frick. And they brought him in to try to run it. And I guess it improved slightly for a while. He said it looked kind of funny because Edward had always been kind of a big shot there, especially after his dad died. And then after this Frank Frick came in, he said Edward was kind of following him along almost like a puppy dog. But he said that things just didn't seem to get much better under this Frick either. And finally he left, and it just went from bad to worse, and they finally just went out of business. So they just completely demolished the whole corporation? For a while, what was left of it was merged with another small furniture company called the Atlas Furniture that was down on Madison Street. And they continued for a while. I think they bought some of the Landstrom designs and some of the machinery, and they called it the Atlas Company, but then in the directory it would also be listed as Landstrom Furniture, and they sold the furniture as Landstrom Furniture. Landstrom was good furniture. In fact, I remember one time going to a furniture store when we were first married and looking for furniture, and we mentioned Landstrom, and the fellow told us, well, he said, that's the Cadillac of furniture. It was expensive. Yeah, it was expensive, and he said, that's the Cadillac. He said, if you want to really pay for furniture, then you buy Landstrom. He said, that's the Cadillac of the industry. So they had that reputation, and so the Atlas Company continued to sell some of its furniture under the Landstrom label for a while. But I don't think even Atlas exists anymore, so I don't know, it's just all gone, I guess. But there might be the difference, though, like the old Oscar Landstrom, he had to have an apprenticeship of maybe 25 years before he came in to settle as his own boss. But his son, on the other hand, they only took a few years, and he was right at the top. Of course, his son... The experience was not there. No, his son, of course, another thing, the motivation wasn't there, because his son knew all along that after all he was the son, his father was the boss, and so he wasn't quite the same as a guy that is an immigrant from Sweden and knows he's going to have to make his own way, you know, it's a little different. So his son apparently never really applied himself to really learning everything. He might have gone through the motions, you know, working in the lumberyard, working here, working there, but never with the idea that, well, I've got to master this because I'm going to work my way up and start my own company. He didn't have to start his own company. So his attention span was short, though. Probably, yeah. But, you know, just from a distance, that's my perception of it, but, you know, there's no way of knowing for sure. So in the 50s, that was the end of the furniture in Rockford? I guess pretty much. I think the Wyman Company on 11th Street continued a little beyond the 50s, maybe into the early 60s, and they finally moved. They're still in existence, but they're out in Carolina somewhere. So the source material, the raw material, it disappeared, and then the labor cost. But they blamed it on unions in many cases. They usually say that. I mean, it's easy to say, you know, there was a union, they broke the company. Yeah, actually, I don't think that the furniture unions broke it. You might say if you're going to blame any unions, it would be the machine shop unions that got their wages so high that then the furniture workers followed along, and they got dissatisfied, and many of them even switched over to the machine shop. And so then in order to keep their workers, the furniture factories had to pay more and so on. So I don't know that the furniture unions could be blamed. If the machine shops had never come into Rockford, I think the furniture maybe could have hung on. Of course, they still would have had the material problem. They still would have had that problem. But maybe they could have dealt with that, and their unions I don't think would have been able to. After all, a lot of these jobs in the furniture factory weren't too complicated. I think they could teach a fellow to become a cabinetmaker even in not too long a time. It didn't take them as long to become a cabinetmaker as it did to become a skilled machinist or something like that, I guess. But like Sjöstrand, if you call the cabinet among the unions, they have been deleted because they have government contracts. Sometimes it seems to me they are blessing in disguise because they draw a lot of other industry with them to the top. The government, of course, they can afford to pay high wages because they got to have it for... Well, you can look upon it as a blessing or a curse, whichever way you look at it. I suppose the people who own and operate smaller businesses, they probably wish Sjöstrand weren't around. Because they are suffering. Yeah, right. They are not able to compete, not in the same field, but in the wages squabble. Of course, some of them might be suppliers of Sjöstrand. Some of the small job shops at Sjöstrand will job out some of its work, I think, so some of them, of course, are happy Sjöstrand is here. But if they don't get any work from Sjöstrand, probably many of them wish Sjöstrand weren't around. Because I suppose the rest of the workers, they look up to Sjöstrand for their pension plans and hospitalization. But there are quite a few non-unionized shops in Rockford. Oh, yes. Rockford has never really been a strong union company. There's only Sjöstrand. There's the big one. Barbara Coleman tried a union for a while, and the workers finally voted it out. Now, that's very unusual. That's the people who voted it out. They finally voted it out. And Ingersoll's never had it. Woodward Governor's never had it. Amarok's never had it. J.L. Clark's never had it. Rockford Products, Elko, Anderson Brothers, none of them have ever had unions. But they are very close to the substance contracts. I think so, because most of them would rather not have unions, and in order to prevent the unions from coming in, they keep their workers happy. And to keep them happy, of course, they've got to pay them somewhere near what the prevailing wage would be at Sjöstrand. So I think that the Sjöstrand unions and their contracts have been beneficial to the workers in these other companies. I would imagine that's true. But like Sjöstrand, they have more white-collar workers than the other unionites, though. No, Sjöstrand is very heavy on engineering. So the engineering department, they are getting the benefits from the smaller part of workers. Yes, they are. So they are, in one sense, more or less like scabs. Well... They are not doing the picketing. Yeah, that's true. They benefit. Well, it's always been that way. I think that there are some unions that are trying to organize white-collar people, too. But they are not the Sjöstrand's, though. No, they haven't had any success there. Now, our white-collar people in our courthouse were unionized back two or three years ago. You know, office workers and so on that work for the county. But they are paid well enough at Sjöstrand. So I don't think the engineers and other clerical workers have ever even considered joining a union out there. Because they go out and the workers get a new contract, they automatically... I know. Yeah, when I was at Sjöstrand in the 50s, I was, of course, in the office. I was very glad when, I think it was a new health contract, new medical contract came out while I was there. And it was, of course, brought about by the union. But then we got it, too. Oh, you worked on the management side? Well, I don't know if you really call it management. I was in the office. I was a technical writer. I wrote booklets. So you didn't have to belong to the union? No. But you workers now don't belong to the union. Did you have any input to the union what to ask for, like more vacation, more holidays, more sick pay? No. The working part then decided the goal? Pretty much. Then we got it, too. So you were riding on the top there, untouchable. And more strikes, more pay, because then you worked overtime. Now, I understand. I don't think there was ever any strike while I was there. Well, there was a short wildcat strike one day when I was there. It lasted about two days. But there wasn't any regular strike for benefits while I was there. I was only there about two and a half years. I think that when the union is out on strike, that the office workers have to go in and they take over some of the union jobs. On the floor? Actually, out on the floor. I had a friend who is dead now, but he was the supervisor of the blueprint department. He hated when there was a strike because then he still had to do his blueprinting work, but then he'd have to go out in the shop and do various things out there. So he'd be putting in maybe 12 hours a day, something like that. And they weren't salaried, so they didn't have any... Probably didn't get any extra pay. Well, he might have gotten straight pay. I think they got straight pay, but not time and a half. And so it was nice getting a little more money, but still he was making enough anyway, and he wasn't interested in getting that much more money, and he didn't like that at all. He had to go out there. The union workers on the picket line would kind of give him trouble when they went in, too. They'd make taunting remarks at him and sometimes spit on their cars and so on. And so it was kind of unpleasant. He wasn't too happy about it, but they had to do it. Do you remember the strike of 1938? There was a big one in Rockford. No. I was only 12 years old, and I... What company was that at? I don't know which one it was, but I remember some people talking about it was a bad... No, I don't remember that at all. In fact, I haven't even heard of it. There was probably one. I can't remember now, but there was one they mentioned. It was one of the worst ones I remembered. Well, I suppose there are struggles and tribulations to get better, but it seems that the emigrant that came, he was satisfied to get a foothold for his family and to survive. He was looking for a better future for his children. I think most of them felt that way. I think most of them were pretty much resigned to the fact that they were going to be just ordinary factory workers all their lives. And like this area where we live in here, especially the next block over and block two and up in the hills, you find a lot of small homes up there that were lived in by these Swedish workers that worked on Iskandia. So this was a Swedish area? Yeah. No Irish or Italians? No, I think it was almost entirely Swedish. Now, of course, there were very few houses on this street. Now, that house right across the street there, that big kind of a greenish house... There were big houses there on this area. Well, that house was one of the... He was vice president. His name was Swenson. For Iskandia? Yeah. He was vice president and superintendent. And... So he lived right here in the neighborhood. Walking distance to the factory. But most of them that were here in this neighborhood were just workmen. Now, my grandfather lived down the corner. He, of course, was a foreman. The house just on the other side of my parents' home there was my grandfather's brother-in-law, my grandmother's brother. He was an older brother of Oskar Landström, but he was just a cabinetmaker, but he was a real shrewd investor. And so his house is... Actually, there's a lawyer living in his house now. Even though it's an old house, he built a nice big house. And, like I say, he was always just a cabinet member. But I think he... Being that he was Oskar Landström's brother, that helped him, because Oskar had already begun his rise. And so he actually, even though he was a cabinet member, I guess he served on the board of directors of the company, which is kind of unusual. But they would have some workmen on their board of directors because their workmen would buy stock. In fact, like I said, in most of those early furniture companies, it was a requirement to get a job. You had to buy stock. You were encouraged to know, so you couldn't get any job. That's right. It was called the cooperative system. In fact, we had one factory that was called the cooperative, Rockford Cooperative Furniture Company. But that wasn't the only... Cassette 2, side 2. Didn't they scare people, like your grandfather? Didn't he hesitate to buy stocks in any other company when he saw some papers became worthless? Well, this became... This was a thing that happened mostly in the 1930s when the Big Depression came. Before that time, they were pretty good then. Before that time, they were doing pretty well. Now, they did have that big panic of 1893, and there were a lot of the workmen who sold out at that time. In fact, I think it's safe to say that this cooperative system pretty much went down the tube at that time. The workers didn't want to own any part of the company anymore. And, of course, P.A. Peterson and some other wealthy men too bought up a lot of the workmen's stock. So they played on that fear and got rid of the others at least? Yeah, they were able to buy it at low rates because the workers were so glad to get rid of their stock and get something for it. And so, in fact, many of the workers probably needed the money too. They were completely unemployed, and of course there was no unemployment compensation then. Or maybe their hours were cut or their wages were cut. In fact, some of the nicest homes of that period were built by Swedish workmen who were out of work. And needed the work. For example, the house on the west side, which is right next door to the old Burpee Art Gallery. It's the, I think it's the Burpee Natural History Museum. Have you ever been in there? No, I've never been there, but I know where it is. A lot of stuffed animals and so on in there. You ought to go in there sometime. Beautiful wood carving. The front hall and the staircase and everything. Beautiful. And they say that it was done by Swedish wood carvers who were unemployed at that time and were willing to work cheap. And it was built by W.F. Barnes, who was, I don't know if you ever heard of the company W.F. and John Barnes. It's been sold to another company now, but I think that's still called by that division, that name. W.F. Barnes had that home built. That was during the early 1900s. No, it was in the 90s. In the 90s. 1890s. That was when this big panic, they called it. They blamed President Cleveland, I think. But anyway, the president always gets the blame, no matter who he is. But anyway, it started in 1893, so generally it's referred to as the Panic of 1893, but it lasted for a couple of years anyway. And so this was about 1894 he was building that house. And they claimed that he got all that beautiful wood carving done by unemployed Swedish wood carvers from the shops that didn't have any work right then and were happy to take the jobs, whatever they could get. And so these Swedish workmen were happy to sell their stock, I think. And so people like P.A. Peterson and I suppose Jonas Peters bought up some, and probably some other wealthy men bought up some too. P.A. Peterson, I guess, bought the most, and so he then became a big stockholder in a lot of different companies at that time. What happened, there was another big guy here living fast. Oh, yeah. There was a white elephant there. He was not prepared at all. He apparently had all his eggs in one basket. Well, that would be in what, Mechanics? 1928, Fast Hotel. Yeah, but I mean, I was just wondering what company, Mechanics Universal Joint maybe. Yes, but I mean, he seems to have lost the whole thing. He didn't have a thing then in 1932 or 1933. That may be. I don't know that much about him. Now, Fast, of course, he was a bachelor. Yes. So he never needed a big house. He lived in a house on 2nd Avenue that's near, if you know where Nicholson Hardware is, almost across the street, one of those brick houses there. It's a nice home, but not real pretentious. After all, he was a bachelor. He didn't need any big mansion to live in. I don't know how much he lost. I think all these fellows lost something in the Depression, you know, because the companies that they had, many of them went down the tube. Others, of course, the price dropped a lot, so all of them lost something. But whether he lost more than some others, I don't know. I don't know that much about him. Jane, do we have to do that now? But they said that he was almost… That may be. Like I say, I'm not that familiar with him. I don't know. That may be. I don't know. I suppose this hotel now was really an undertaking. It was a little bit too big. Yeah, and I don't think he was the only one in that. I suppose he must have been the biggest stockholder in it. I suppose that's why they named it Foss Hotel. But I really couldn't say. I've never made enough of a study of Levine Foss to really know. I think if he did lose a lot, he probably made somewhat of a recovery later on in the 30s. But like I say, they all lost something. And P.A. Peterson, he was already gone then, so… He was already gone. But his wife was still living. In fact, she lived until the 60s, I think. And I'm sure she lost too. She wasn't worth near as much when she died as what she would have been if it had been the Depression. Everybody lost. But the ones that survived were those who had put enough aside in various places and didn't have it all in one basket, you know, and so they were able to start up again. And anybody investing in land at that time, I suppose, they became pretty wealthy later on in Rockford. If they could buy some lots here and there. In fact, investing in almost anything. If a person, when the stocks were so low there in the 1930s, if you had had enough money to invest then, that would be the time to do it. I understand that's what John F. Kennedy's father did. He had dumped his stock back in about 1928 or early 29 before the stock market crashed. He had just got an inkling, I guess. In fact, the story is that I think his shoeshine boy was starting to tell him how much stock he was dabbling in. And he thought, well, if a shoeshine boy is getting into the stock market that much, he said, this is the time to get out. That's what the story is anyway. So he, I guess, got rid of all his stock at the peak prices when the stock market dropped. And then in the early 30s when it was real low, I guess he bought an awful lot of it back again. So those that had money in the 30s and could buy stock, of course, by the 50s and 60s, they were doing fine. So that was an unusual thing to happen with head mining. In other words, he could get rid of them before the crash came. So he used a little bit of foresight. Usually they want to buy more and more and more. But it was not unusual even in the 20s then for a Swedish immigrant to buy stocks, not only from the companies but also from the oil stocks. I couldn't tell you. I don't suppose it was. Everybody was buying stock in the 20s, especially around 1927 and 1928 and early 1929. Everybody, your taxi drivers and everybody else were buying stock and buying it on margin. You know, 10% down and the rest of it was carried by the broker. And, of course, that's why so many got caught when the stocks dropped. Then they had to pay up what they'd borrowed on it. And the stock itself had dropped so much in value but they still had to pay it. And so then they had to sell their homes and a lot of other things. People who had their stock all paid for it and were able to hang on to it. I don't think they had much trouble. People that had not bought on margin but had bought their stocks outright, so they had them paid for, if they just sat tight, most of those companies came back eventually. Most of the big companies that the stock went down, General Motors and all those, the stock went down so much, but most of them came back. And if those people hung on to it, eventually they had more money than they ever did. But the trouble with most of them was they'd bought so much on margin that they had to pay off their brokers and pay off their loans. And then, of course, they had to a lot of times even sell their house and everything they had just to do that, you know. What happened with the houses along here? Did they have to walk away from some of the families? There were some. I remember down on North 2nd Street there, there was one fellow, I think his name was Fitzgerald, who was one of the executives at Landstrom. So my dad knew him. We were driving home from church one day along North 2nd in our Model T Ford. And this fellow was backing out of his driveway. And I remember my dad saying, he had heard this around the factory, I guess, I remember him saying, that fellow's going to lose his house. Of course, I was only about four or five or six years old, and I remember wondering how my father was so smart that he knew this fellow wasn't going to be able to find his way back to his house. I thought that's what he meant, you know, he's not going to be able to find his way back home again. He's going to lose his house. Of course, he meant he wasn't going to be able to pay off his mortgage and was going to lose it. And I guess it was fairly common. Certainly it was common in the middle and upper middle classes. The very rich, I don't think, lost their houses, most of them. I think the very rich had enough, probably their houses were all paid for, and if they weren't, they had enough other assets. So I don't think the very rich lost their houses. It was the newly rich and the upper middle class and the middle classes, they're the ones that lost their houses. And the ones that bought the houses right before without their little men and money invested in them. Now my parents were able to hang on to theirs, but partly it was that they hadn't had to take as big a mortgage as many people because they got so much done free. My father, for example, wired the house. He had become an electrician, as I mentioned before. He wired it. My grandfather, Rosenquist, laid most of the brick, or at least a lot of the brick, especially the fancy work, fireplace and pillars and stuff like that, fireplace, chimney, you know. My grandfather, Borden, was a finisher. He did all the finishing of the woodwork in the house. He got a lot of nice oak woodwork in there, and he did that. And of course my mother had been teaching school and had saved money, and my father, they married a little late. They were in their 30s. And so between all the labor that they did on it, my two grandfathers and my father, and the money they had, they didn't have to have as big a mortgage as most people. And so they were able to hang on to it. But even if they had a house for about 10, 15 years, and they only had a few payments left, and they were told by the bank, we need payment to pay up, and they lost one mortgage, and that was a lot of money that they all took. I suppose, fortunately, my father did have a job. His pay was cut, but he still did have a job during the whole Depression. So at least there was always a paycheck coming in. It wasn't very big, but it... And my parents were able to live very frugally, too. And some people have a hard time doing that. For example, my father never bought a new car, and I've been the same. I've never bought a new car. Because I'm concerned new cars are way overpriced, and I can buy a used car for so much less, even though I do, maybe my repair bills are a little higher, but when you look at what you pay for a new car, to me it's ridiculous. And so I've never bought a new car, I never will. And my father was that way. When he died, he died in 1949, he had a 1937 car, and a lot of the time, well, most of the time, he had a car that was probably at least 8 or 10 years old, sometimes 12. And we didn't go on vacations very much. The furthest I'd ever been away from home until I went in the Navy was down in Springfield. And the only reason I'd gone there was that my father, since he worked for the state, had to every once in a while go to a meeting down there, and so once in a while we'd ride along with him. But otherwise, before that, I think the furthest I'd ever been away was probably Chicago, maybe. So there was no unnecessary trips taken? No. How about vacation, though? Did you take any in the 30s that you remember of? Frankly, I don't remember my father, back in the 30s, ever getting any complete vacation, like a whole week. We did go up to Montello, Wisconsin, one time in 1937. I think he took about 2 or 3 days off, and then the weekend was included in there, too, so it made about maybe 5 days. My mother had a friend up in Montello who had been a schoolteacher in Rockford, but she'd married a man from Montello, and so she'd moved up there. And so we went up and stayed a few days with them. That's about the only real vacation trip that I can remember all the time I was a child, all the time I was growing up. Other than that, we just went some places on Sunday, maybe go out to... My father had 2 sisters living on farms. We'd go out to see them, or maybe sometimes we'd drive up to Madison to see the Capitol Building or the zoo or something, or into Chicago. Had a couple of great-aunts living in Chicago. We went to the World's Fair about, oh, 3 times, I guess, 1933 and 1934. But never on any... We never had a week-long vacation or any great distances at all. How about politics now? Your grandpa, was he a Republican or...? My grandparents were all Republicans, yeah. What were most of the people at the Scandia at that time Republican? I couldn't tell you, but we were talking about my grandfather Rosenquist, who was a bricklayer and belonged to Bricklayers Union. There's the one on your mother's house. My mother's father. And of course, the Bricklayers Union president was Herman Hallstrom. But they weren't Democrats, though. Well, Herman Hallstrom was not a Democrat. He was a progressive. He might have at times called himself a socialist, but he was never actually a Democrat. And how Herman Hallstrom felt on the national level, I don't know. But my grandfather, as a bricklayer, he stuck with the Republicans. He did? Yeah. Now, I didn't know him very well. He died when I was only about four years old. But my mother used to say that he used to... Is there an expression? Usla or Usta? Usel, Usel. Is it kind of a bad expression? I thought she said Usla, but anyway, Usla Democrater or something like that. Usla Democrater. Well, he remembered Grover Cleveland. Like I said before, Grover Cleveland got the blame for that big recession. And I suppose my grandfather probably was laid off for a while during that recession. He was a little more fortunate than some because he was a bricklayer, a good one, a very good bricklayer. And mason, he could lay limestone, too. But he also had learned cabinetry in Sweden. When he came from Sweden, he was a cabinetmaker. But he found out when he came here that he could make more money as a bricklayer, and so he learned bricklaying when he came here. But in the wintertime, when there wasn't any bricklaying to do, he'd go into a shop and work there. And I suppose if he got laid off sometimes in bricklaying, he'd find something as a cabinetmaker. He'd find something, some kind of work. So he usually had some money coming in anyway. Do you think there was some philosophy about the Democrats now? They were usually regarded as Irish and Catholics. Didn't they go hand-in-hand, Democrats and Catholics? Well, I think that was mainly because somehow the Democratic Party seemed to get control in most of the big cities. Now in Chicago, Chicago was Republican for a long time. They're Democratic now, of course. But a lot of the other big cities had been New York and Boston, and they'd been Democratic almost from the beginning, I guess. Now how it started, I don't really know. But when these immigrants came in, and most of the immigrants from Ireland seemed to settle in the cities. And of course they were Catholics, and the Polish and Lithuanians and so on, which were also Catholics, they seemed to settle mostly in the cities too. I think it was because by the time they came, most of the good farmland was taken. I think that was probably the main reason. And so right away, the political machines, which were Democratic in these big cities, would help them out, buy them some coal and help them find a place to live and so on. And of course that was the way they kept the machines together, by doing favors for all these people, the immigrants particularly. I think that's probably the reason, more than anything else. Now in the South, the South was Democratic, and they were mostly Protestant. Yes, Baptist, Methodist, Presbyterian and so on. And then also, maybe the Swedish immigrants wanted to be something like the management, to vote for the same party, to be sure you got the job there. Did they discuss much politics, you think, back in the 20s? Well, of course, I don't know. I was just a kid then, wasn't born until 1926. I have a feeling that most of the Swedish immigrants, even if they resigned themselves to just being machine operators themselves, had the feeling that they wanted their children to go up higher. And like you say, they probably wanted to stay on the good side of management. They certainly didn't want the capitalistic system to go down the tube. They believed in the capitalistic system. And so even if they might have been inclined a little bit to be Democratic, still, and Union and so on, they still had in mind that they wanted their kids to benefit from the American system. And I think that kept a lot of them probably in the Republican Party. Because when they came from Sweden in the 20s, if we, this generation is still here now, we can talk to, because they couldn't read the newspapers, they didn't get an idea what the editorial page said or anything like that. They had to listen to somebody to tell them. Well, by the time they came in the 1920s, they had been off a lot of Swedes here for an awful long time. And most of them had learned English. And they were conservative. Oh, yes. Most of them were. And they, of course, still spoke Swedish. And so they could speak to these new immigrants that came. And these new immigrants, they joined the same churches that the old immigrants were in, for the most part. And those churches were largely dominated by fairly successful Swedes by that time. I can remember in our church, for example, a fellow by the name of D.R. Peterson. I'm not sure now just what company he was with, but he was, whatever he was with, he was pretty successful. And a couple of Johnson brothers, Lenas Johnson and Armour Johnson. They belonged to the First Lutheran. Their father was one of the founders of First Lutheran, S.A. Johnson. I don't know if you've come across that name or not. And their sister, Maud Johnson, there's a school named after her, Maud Johnson School. She became the elementary supervisor in Rockford for many years. And she held the job of elementary supervisor of the elementary schools for longer than anybody else in the city's history. And they asked about Knightsville. But maybe we should get back to her. We were talking about her father and her brothers and so on. Maud Johnson's brothers, Lenas and Armour, were big shots in various industries. And I can remember as a boy in our church, these men, D.R. Peterson, Armour Johnson, Lenas Johnson, coming into the church, and various other wealthy men, you know. And everybody kind of deferred to them, you know. The people, the largest number of members, of course, weren't as wealthy, but they respected these men. And I think they all hoped, they all had the desire or the expectation or hope at least that if not they, at least their children would eventually have nice jobs too. And so I think this kept them more within the conservative framework, you might say, and the whole free enterprise system of capitalism, so that they were more inclined to stay with the Republican Party. But the cooperative idea, you know, in the 1989, this was a really cooperative thing. You know, the Swedes were, has been regarded as a very independent person. He's not afraid to stand alone, you know, to go out in the woods and stay there. Did they have any cooperative efforts? In other words, did this, they had a store or a restaurant on 7th Street. It was a cooperative ideal, it was called. Do you know anything about that? In the 1920s? A folder, I understand, in 1930. Yeah. There was a temperance organization that founded that one. I can't remember the name of the fellow that ran that. He ran for, Haldane was it? Or was it Ogren? It was either John Haldane or Oscar Ogren, I believe, one or the other. They were both, I think, active in that socialist movement. And that type of cooperative is not quite the same. Did people really care about that because there was too much socialism? It seemed to be. That was sort of on the order of the farmers' cooperatives, you know. That was a big movement. And there are still some farm cooperatives out in Nebraska and Kansas and so on. But that was a real big movement in the early part of the century, the cooperative movement. The Grange, the Farmers' Grange, or they called it the Grange Organization, was involved with it too. And it was an organization that was created kind of in opposition to the railroads, in opposition to the big grain companies and so on. They felt the farmer was not getting his fair share and so on. And so that could be kind of looked upon, I suppose, to some extent as kind of a socialist movement. This cooperative furniture business was an entirely different thing. That was not at all socialist, really. There's nothing socialist about the workers owning stock in the company. It was capitalistic. That's capitalistic, right. It was still within the capitalistic framework. It was just called cooperative. It was given that term, and I don't know if it existed in any other community. It was within Rockford anyway. It was called the cooperative system. And what it meant was that in order to get a job in a shop, a fellow had to buy at least one share of stock. But there was no organization as such with a membership or anything. You were just one, you were by yourself, you bought stocks and this is it. But the system was called cooperative system. Right. That's my understanding of it. So each individual company was its own cooperative. And they were cooperative only in that sense. They didn't buy groceries cooperatively or anything like that. It was just cooperative in the sense that they owned that factory. It was employee owned. Of course, most employees probably only owned that one share of stock that they were required to buy. It was only the wealthier ones, the ones that wanted to get ahead and wanted to be part of management and so on, that would buy more of it. And so they, of course, would control the company. But at least the men, if they all banded together, could have a lot to say about it. And it kind of put them a little bit more on par with the, and gave them a little bit more of a feeling for the company so that they realized if they wasted time, they were wasting the time of the company and it was their company, they were wasting their own time. So there wasn't a sentiment. That's right. It was a feeling that if you don't do a good job, you're hurting yourself. I think it's a good thing, really. And there's been some effort in that, I think, in more recent years too, and we call it profit sharing. But it's not in the same way. The men don't actually own any actual shares of stock, but the company's Woodward Governor is one company in Rockford that has that quite a bit. At the end of the year, they will give a bonus based on how well the company did and dividing it among the members. But isn't that a faster return of profit sharing compared to having stocks? Because most of the people probably left them in the secretary or the bureau drawer and forgot about the stocks. Yeah, but they would get dividends. In fact, sometimes their dividends were bigger than they really should have been. And then that was one reason why some of the companies didn't do so well too as time went on, because they paid out too much in dividends, and so they weren't able to upgrade their machinery, get later type of machinery and so on. They didn't put enough into the company treasury to have the money to do things that they needed to do at times. But it was the board of directors' fault, though. Yes, it was, sure. But the board of directors would be influenced by this large group of stockholders out there. Yeah, but the one with the biggest block of stocks, though, he controlled the idea. Of course, they wanted their dividends too. If they had a big block of stocks, that meant all the more dividends for them. Yeah, Rockford Standard Furniture down there on 11th Street, that was a factory. You can tell by the building that was a factory. Harry West? Yes. Now, Harry West came in it, I think, toward the very end of when it was a factory. In fact, I'm not even sure if it was a factory at all when he was there. But that was started as a factory and was run as a factory for many years. And then finally, when they could see they just weren't making it anymore, and they were losing money and about on the verge of bankruptcy, then they reorganized it to sell retail instead. And they've done very well. So he shifted gear then in the mid-stream, so to say, in the 40s or 50s? Oh, it was before that. Before that? Yeah, it was before that. I would say sometime probably in the 30s. I'm not really sure, but I know it was before the 40s. It was in the 30s. But the West, now, they are from an old furniture factory family. Oh, I don't think so. I think Harry came from some small town. I'm not sure where it was, Caledonia or Capron or Harvard or someplace like that. I think it was some small town north of here. And he trained as a bookkeeper, I believe.