 I didn't belong to the church, but I was a member. I mean, I went there. You mean in East Pembroke? Mm-hmm. You were confirmed there in the church? No, here, right in Rockford, I was confirmed. Oh, your family moved away from East Pembroke then? East Pembroke, mm-hmm. Now, I'm talking with the little girl, Mrs. Erleburg, in Rockford, Illinois, when she was born, 4th of May, 1898, in Ishpeming, Michigan. Mm-hmm. So, your parents now are Charles Boudin and Matilda Littorin. Littorin. Can you tell us about your father now, what kind of work he was doing? He was a... I don't know what, but he did something else, like, what was it? He had a bakery first, didn't he? Well, I think he tried it, but it didn't work out very well. In Ishpeming? Mm-hmm. I suppose it was there. Mm-hmm. So, then he started to work in the mines? He worked in the mines. Cleveland Cliffs. Cleveland Cliffs, yeah. Mm-hmm. And then he worked in the mines, and he had another job. Oh, goodness. What year did he come to Ishpeming, from Sweden? He came from Boudin, Värmland. Mm-hmm. Do you know roughly what year he came? They weren't married then, when he came. They were... So, they met up there, your mother and your father? Yeah. Okay. They met in Sweden. They met in Sweden. She came by boat. Mm-hmm. Probably about 1860. 1860? No, no, no, no, no. I beg your pardon. 1890? 1886. They're five. Because the oldest child... Was 1887. 1887. 1886. Because the oldest child... Was 1887. So they knew each other in Sweden, and then they came over here and married. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Exactly. So, what kind of family did he come from? A farmer's family? I suppose. I didn't know of anything else. Your mother, her name was Nitorin. Mm-hmm. It's an unusual name. I know it. Mm-hmm. Did she tell you anything about that? No, but I know she said they used to have a lot of fun as young people. But, of course, I wasn't there. They came from big families also, your mother and... My mother had Charles and John. I don't know. Did they have girls? Your Charles and John the painter, those two. Was there another? I can't remember. I'm sure. And I don't know. So, they came then to Ishpeming. Mm-hmm. And there were more people than from his relation already there, like uncles or brothers or sisters, when they just came there. He had a brother, John Bodine. In Ishpeming. Ishpeming. Oh, he was there before them. I suppose he was, but he only had one arm. I see. It was an accident, then. Something happened. So do you remember anything of Ishpeming? Well, I remember I went to school there for a while. Gray School? Mm-hmm. And you remember going to church, too? Oh, sure. There's a covenant of Mifuncirka. Mifuncirka. Mm-hmm. And it was a small church when we were going there. You went to Sunday school? Mm-hmm. But you were not confirmed up there, though? No, I was confirmed the first year here in Rockford. So then the family moved on this way. Why was the reason for that? Well, I had two brothers that had come from Ishpeming to Rockford, and they wanted us to come, so we came. So they worked in the furniture factories? Oh, yeah. Ted, his name was Theodore. He worked at Thayer, oh, this piano factory. Oh, Thayer Action? Yes. And Henry, he worked for... he worked at the hotel there, because he met every train that came in during the day. Oh, did he work at the hotel first? Mm-hmm. Then he was a chauffeur for... Oh, yeah, a chauffeur. For one of the families. Which family was it? Emerson, was it? Emerson family. Mm-hmm. So then the whole family moved on here? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Your uncle? My uncle. Your uncle? Mm-hmm. And your uncle? My uncle. Your uncle, too? They went to Minneapolis, but they moved to Minneapolis after we had left, at least for me. Were there more families moving down at the same time here to Rockford, or...? No, no, I don't think so. No? Came by train. Came by train, yeah. And it was around 1912, 1911? Well, maybe so. Actually before you were confirmed then, so it would be around that time. Yeah, probably. So how did Rockford look at that time compared to Nishpeming? Was this a bigger town then? Oh, sure, sure. Rock River went right through, you know. The first night your brother took you downtown, tell him about that. Oh. Your brother took you downtown to Rockford. Yeah. That was the first night, and I was scared stiff because we had to cross a bridge, and it was a board bridge over the Rock River. To the west side? Yeah. So there was big spaces, little spaces in between, and I was so scared, I was so scared because water flowing through there, you know. But I was just a kid. And you remember the lights, the big, there were big street lights, gas, but big balls, three or four of them. They didn't have, in Nishpeming at the time, street lights? Well, there was a man that would come around and light them. And lit them. In Nishpeming. In Nishpeming. In Nishpeming. Were you able to talk Swedish, like on 7th Avenue, they were all Swedish, I understand, in those days? Well, we had to talk Swedish to our parents. You did that all the time? Hm? You always talked Swedish to your parents? Not always. My mother would sit, she would get a paper and sit and read, and she learned to read paper by herself, because we had an English paper. What kind of Swedish paper did you have in your home? Beforsvännet? Yeah, we had that. And of course, then she, the paper we had when I was a kid, I don't know, the Reddition Gazette or something. I don't remember. Well you probably had Svenska med Kanaren? No, no, no, no. How about Rockford Post, do you remember that one? Well I remember them talking about it, but whether they took it or not, I don't know. Were you able to read the Swedish newspapers at that time, when your parents read them? I don't know. Where did you learn Swedish then, I mean to read it? Where did I learn it? Just by parents talking. You know how you talked to parents when you were a kid. But did you go to Swing School in the summer, in the church? At the Covenant Church here in Rockford? You remember that? Well you were too old then to go to Swing School, you were confirmed there you said in Rockford. My father went to Swing School. He did? He did. But I don't think you ever did, did you? I don't think so, because you were probably a little too old for it then. So when you came down there on 7th Street, when you came down there on 7th Street in Rockford, there was the Swedish Svenska Gatan. Did you have something similar up in Ishpeming? Oh yeah, we had stores. Did people talk Swedish there too? Yes. They did? In the stores? Mm-hmm. And the headman at the police department, Will Adler, I think his name was Will Adler. Up in Ishpeming? Yeah. Your parents, did they belong to any organizations up outside the church? No, just the church. Were they active church members then, your parents? Well my dad and my uncle John, they would always come in, because I know they would sing, they would love to sing. So they usually sat next to each other and they would sing like everything. Tell them about the pasties. Oh, they made pasties. Oh yes. Have you heard of it? Oh yes, sure, that was the miners. My dad would, he would carry a lunch pill and my mother would even have a pasty baked so he could take with him to work. What is this dish, now pasties, that was not known in Sweden? Uh-uh. It's like a meat pie, but who introduced that, you think? What nationality? The Welsh? I think the Irish. Cornwall. England. England, yeah. And the Swedes, they adopted the idea, so the Swedish man had to have pasties, they were smörgås. Smörgås, yes. My mother did all the baking for the family and she worked hard. You used to meet your father over there with a hot pasty. Yeah. Well, they went to the mines then. The children walked over. With their lunch. With their lunch, when it was hot pasty. Then they had to. And they would come up the shaft in the elevator. Elevator. It was just, they stood packed in that elevator when they came up from the mine. And with a light in the cap. So they came up then for lunch? Yeah. Yeah. And you didn't know him? No, I would never know, he was so dirty from working down in the mines. But he'd come over to the children. Yeah, he'd have to come over to me and get the food. It was hard to tell though who you gave the lunch to. He was a short man, so I knew him. I knew him, sure. And when they came home from work, they were as dirty as when you saw them at lunchtime? They didn't wash off at the mine site? I don't know. At that time they probably didn't have any facilities like that. I can't remember that. Did they complain at any time about hard work and dirty work or being tired? No, I never heard them complain. He was injured in the mine. He was? He was injured. He had a back injury from the mine explosions, from the blasting. And so the latter years of his life, he was on the sofa a great deal and complained about feeling bad in his back. Now I know a diamond drill. Do you know him? Yes. He worked there in the latter years because he was injured, I know, in the mine. So when he came down into Rockford, what kind of work was he doing? What was he doing? Furniture? No. Yeah, I believe he was in the factory. How about your brothers now? Did they start to work in the mines too? No, because... You don't have any children? No, we didn't. They didn't want the kids to have to go down in the mines, so that's really why we moved. I see. Because your older brothers, now they were older. Oh yes, sure. But your father didn't want them to go down there. That's right. So what did they work with then, up in Ischpeming? They took other kinds of work? Well, what was Ted doing? I know Henry, there was Ted and then Henry. Henry worked in the hotel. He met all the trains. What did Alba do up there when she was only 16? She did housework. And Elsie? She was probably too young. Oh, I don't remember. So the whole family settled down here and started to work. They rented an apartment down on... They bought a house. Right away? I think so. It's the only house I remember living in. Well the boys had a house ready on Parley Street. That's right. They had it already. It's close to Broadway. Broadway and Parley and 12th Avenue. So they had moved down here earlier than the boys? Yes, the boys had it and were established here. And then the family came. Who gave the idea, you think, to come down here? Friends? Well, your brothers, I suppose, they went down there. But the initial idea probably came from friends. It seems to me, I have heard that they went to Minneapolis to get jobs, but they didn't get any jobs. So then they came to Rockford. They came together, Ted and Henry. At the same time. So you went through... After confirmation, then, what did you do then? What kind of work? After confirmation, I worked at the shoe factory on 6th Street. And we stitched shoes and I helped to make shoes. And you know where the shoe factory is on 6th Street? Was? No. It's not there now, though. No, not now, no. It was by 10th Avenue. 10th Avenue. Right next to the railroad tracks. So there was a shoe factory, dress shoes? Sure. Well, they made different kinds of shoes. Do you remember the name they went under? Well, the regular names. Of the factory? Oh, Stonefield Evans. So then you worked there for a long time. Or until you married your husband? How did you meet your husband? How did I meet him? I met him... We played tennis. We used to go out and play tennis. Where did you play tennis? We are on 17th or 18th Avenue. There's tennis courts out there. Southeast End Park. How did you get interested in tennis at that time? Wasn't it more for the upper class to play tennis? No, I had a... Well, we had a net, I know. I remember when... Marie Chan was a girlfriend of mine. And we said, we're not going to play with those guys. Even if they ask us, we're not going to play with them. So, you know, play tennis. But sure enough, we did. So you played tennis. And they told you about him? They told me about him. And he also played tennis? Mm-hmm. He played quite a bit of tennis in his day. Was he also a mission friend, your husband? Yeah. So you went to the same church then? Yeah. Mm-hmm. And then you married, what year? Oh, in... 1923. Was it that? I remember I married Harold Berg. 1923. Mm-hmm. And then the church was downtown, or... The church... In Kishwaukee, wasn't it? It was a little church, 4th Avenue, I think, that we went to. Oh. Mm-hmm. Well... I think that's right, wasn't it? 4th Avenue. The covenant was on 4th Avenue? It was a little church. We didn't go there long. I know we didn't go there. Because they started to build a big church, the covenant church. But you weren't married there? No, no. You weren't married? I was married at home. I see. So there was a smaller congregation than in the 20s, the covenant church? Oh, yeah. They started to build later on when the new immigrants came in. I know we had an upstairs, quite a big upstairs, in the church. In the little church? No, in the big one, in the big church when we built that. So your husband, now, he was born in Oxford? Mm-hmm. And his parents, where did they come from in Sweden? Oh, Jeremy... From Borås. Huh? Borås? Borås. Västergötland? No, wait a second. No. So his parents came from Botnarid? Mm-hmm. Jönköpingsled. And I know our pastor's name was Ericsson, wasn't it? When you were married? No, we went to Frickman. Was it Frickman? No, there's a pastor, Frickman. Because when he came for the wedding, he had to go and rest a while because he wasn't able to perform right away. He went and lay down in one of our beds upstairs. So he came in from Chicago, perhaps? I don't know where he came from. Oh, he was your regular pastor, wasn't he? Huh? You said your pastor came over and had to wait a while because he was sick, but... Could that have been Frickman? No, he came later. No, there was a Frickman. Yeah. Well, we already went to him. There was an Ericsson. August Ericsson? August Ericsson. Was he the one that married you? No, he didn't marry me. Frickman did. Oh, okay. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So then you rented an apartment, or did you buy a house? We lived in a house where the... Oh, it was in your parents' house then? Yeah. You were married, but your husband, did he buy a house, or did he start to rent? Oh, I don't know. You lived above his parents' house. You lived upstairs in an apartment in his parents' home for a few months. Then you moved over on 10th Street in about the... Between 18th Avenue and 20th. What kind of work was he doing? My husband? Yeah. He worked at Greenleaf's. Oh, Greenleaf's. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So he had a steady job then until the early 30s when the Depression hit. No, he transferred to Rockford Rout Forge in 1924 when I was there. Oh, I see. And he was there until he retired from the office. He was office manager and secretary. So he was there 50 years anyway. So he worked in the management... Yeah, of Rockford Rout Forge in the office. Oh, I see. Johnson was his boss, I know. I see. There was a Swedish found at the factory, wasn't it? Yeah, well, P.A. Peterson has. Did he not have something to do with that? Well, I'm sure he has, yes. Yes, I think so. I think he did. Yeah. And a lot of Swedish people were working there, Swedish men. I think so, mm-hmm. So he was not laid off then during the Depression? No, I don't think so. He took a cut in salary. Do you remember that? Oh, yeah, I do. So you were old enough then, Mrs. Palmcrystal? To remember the Depression. To remember the Depression. Yeah. And I can remember he kept a job in the office, and to make ends meet, we did everything. She even turned the collars of his shirts, you know, where the worn side was, and turned them on the inside and sewed them back on. I remember the cardboard in our shoes, you know, when the soles wore out. When you start to leak. Sure. You had the cardboard. Yeah, but he was fortunate. He kept a job out through the Depression. Could you notice, though, that it was a hard time for a lot of people? Lost their houses, apparently, in foreclosures. Did you notice it? We were renting, and we moved to a different place for lower rent. Well, there was a tornado while he worked there, because the dean boy came running home and told me that there was a tornado and it was bad on 18th Avenue and 7th Street. So you were worried about him because it passed so close to Drop Forge office. When you were growing up then, Mrs. Palmquist, were you introduced to Swedish at that time, or did they all talk? My grandparents on both sides talked Swedish in their home. Did they live with you? No. Not at any time? No, never. They lived by themselves? Yep. But they still talked Swedish? They still talked Swedish. They could talk English also, but they seemed to always talk Swedish. How did you pick up Swedish? Just listening to them. And then I took courses at Rockford, the Board of Education, night classes in conversational Swedish. What did you do later, after school years, like during high school? Oh, no, after I was married. No, there was no Swedish offered then. They didn't offer that? No, not then. Was it strange, or there was no offer in high school, and there was so many Swedish? Well, I know. It would have been nice. We often said that. Maybe they thought it was not necessary because everybody was talking Swedish. It would have been great. Were they talking Swedish quite a bit then at that time? No, not. On the streets, for instance? Well, sure, on 7th Street you'd hear a lot of it still when I was younger. The old timers still? Oh, yeah, sure. Yeah. And I can remember my grandparents' friends and the relatives all spoke it a lot. Although as the years went on and I got to be in my teens, it was always English. So they didn't insist you to speak Swedish to your parents because they were… No. Your father was born there, well, he was born there, of course. Yes. But your grandparents, they kept going on. Yeah, although they tried very hard. They tried very hard. All four of them did. The grandparents, his name was Alfred, and her name was Wilhelmina. It was Farfar there. Hmm? Farfar. Yes. Did you call them Farfar and Farmor and Mormor and Morfar? No, we never did. We should have. What did you call them then? Grandma and Grandpa. Grandma and Grandpa. Yeah, we should have. Would have been neat. How about table prayers? Hmm? Did you teach a Swedish table prayer or small prayer? Yeah, two groups. We knew that, but in the home we didn't say that one. We didn't. We said a different one. Sitting down for dinner, for instance. Yeah, we said English ones. English. We never did say Swedish prayers. Oh, yes. We learned them in big groups and at the church and that sort of thing, but at home we didn't. But at home we had English prayer. How about you now, Mrs. Olsson, or Mrs. Berg? Did you do a Swedish table prayer? Yes, we did. And who read that one? Was it your father or mother or the children? We read all together. All together? We sat around the table, big table. Did you say thank you for the dinner after you were finished? No. There was no prayer? No, tak som yuk. Tak som yuk, no. Oh, as you left the table? We didn't. I know I didn't. Well, you taught us to say it, though. I know that. They did. Tak som yuk. They always said tak som yuk. Sure they did. They always said that. Tak som yuk. Yeah. I suppose there were so many kids that they were leaving in different times. I heard the family always said that. Always, you know. And they would pray. What was that little prayer they said after the meal? They prayed again and they said tak gud i gud för maten. That's it. That's it. That's exactly it. Yeah, which is a nice thing. So there was practice, then. How did you notice now that you were Swedish? When you started school? I don't know. We knew it before that. Before that. Didn't think much about it, really. Were there other kids in school that spoke Swedish when they came to school at that time? No, not that I can remember. No. They all knew English, then. And we did, too, so it was no... No problems. No. We lived at 618 Iron Street and for one block... Iron Street, here in Rockford? No. In Ispelmingen. The sound was like Ispelmingen, so I just wondered. Do you remember the electric car? Was it an electric car? A couple of ladies that got up in Ispelmingen, a little... Mrs. Brasted and Mrs. Kall. Wasn't it Kall? I don't know. They'd come riding in just one-seater car. It was in the early 1900s. I suppose. And they could hear that car coming far away and the kids had all run to see it. There's two ladies driving this one. Two ladies, they say. Sounds kind of unusual. They had fur coats and they were all bundled up. And they were wives of... Businessmen. Business, the owners of the mines. Brasted had a store. Oh, he had a store. Sign two. Little Burg in Rockford, Illinois. Do you remember if there was a company store in Ispelmingen? That was owned by the company? The mining company? The mining company. Yes. Or did you buy the groceries anywhere in town? No, they used to come to the house and take orders. Oh, I see. P.O. Anderson. Oh, in Rockford. Yeah. Oh, in Rockford. But how about Ispelmingen? Was there a company store there? No, it seems to me we always went to the store. E.A. Johnson. Yeah, E.A. Johnson. In Ispelmingen? Uh-huh. So there was a private... Proprietor. So here they came to the door and took the orders and then delivered the... And they had horse and buggy all the time. And during the winter they'd go to Mud Lake and shop poles in the water and get ice. And they had an ice house and they had, I know, sawdust in between the ice chunks. To keep it cool, yeah. Uh-huh. How about the climate now coming down to Rockford compared to Ispelmingen? It was cooler up there. Colder, I mean. Oh, it was colder and a lot of snow. Oh, sure. I know we had a swing by the back barns. We had barns across the back hall or back fence or the end of the... And there was an alley there. And we had a cow and a pig. But when you came to Rockford, you didn't bring the pig and the cow with you. Oh, no, no, no, no. Yeah, but there were people that had chicken coops though in Rockford. Oh, sure. Yes, that's right. But you didn't have any. No. I know when they slaughtered that pig, it hung in the backyard for a while to cook. So it really got cold. And Stenfus was a butcher. It was in late November that you probably butchered before Christmas. I think... When did we move? I'm not sure what the month was. How about the Christmas season? Do you remember when Dad brought in the Christmas tree or what kind of tree it was? Yeah, they'd go out in the woods. And we decided we, the three girls, would go with the Christmas tree one year. And we chopped it down. And we couldn't lift it over the fence, so we had to let it lay there. Was that a spruce or a fir? Was it a spruce tree? No, just an ordinary tree. Oh, I mean like a spruce or fir? Well... You know, the short needle, the Norwegian spruce. Yeah, short needles. Short needle. Yeah. And how far along before Christmas did you bring it in? A week or a couple of days? Do you remember that? Well, probably a week. And then you dressed it. You had live candles in it? Mm-hmm. Sure. There were live candles. Mm-hmm. How often were they lit, though, the live candles? Only on Christmas Eve or Christmas Day? Yeah, just about all... Not every night? Oh, no. You better watch out. And then you had a pail of water in the room, too, then? No, no, but we had to sit and watch it. Nobody could leave the room? Oh, no. We couldn't go. Did you celebrate Christmas Eve with the Christmas gifts, juleklapper? What did I...? Juleklapper. Have you heard that? Yes, Christmas photos. Christmas Eve? Or what Christmas day? My brothers were in Rockford, and they would send gifts, so we would open it then on Christmas Eve. What did they send? What did they send? Oh, what did I send? I can't remember. Clothing or toys for the younger ones? Well, there's a little of each, I think. I don't remember what we got for gifts, because... Do you remember if Santa Claus came? No, no. No Santa Claus? How about the church, now? Did you have any Christmas celebration in the church? Mm-hmm. You had a party for the young people? No, we just had one big Sunday school party. One service, we called it. Did they have a Christmas tree dressed up in the church? Yes, I think so. Inside the church? Mm-hmm. And they stayed there a few weeks, then? Yeah, just a few, short time. I know we sat upstairs in that little church, and my cousin was a teacher. And they had one seat that they could fold both ways, so the teacher sat there. So the whole church or the little one? The little church? The church was little. Do you remember if they had a party after Christmas, and you received the presents in the church, and then after you had it? No, they didn't. They didn't have that? No. And not in the homes, either? Did you went to different homes? Yeah, we... Playgrids? We go to my Uncle Dan's house, and that's the home. But you don't remember if you had a party and danced around the Christmas tree if you were out afterwards? No, no. You never did? No. Was there any difference, now, when you came down to the big city of Rockford, of the celebration of Christmas? Did you bring the tree in earlier, or about the same time? Or did you buy the tree, then? Because you couldn't cut it down around here. No, I couldn't. We couldn't cut it down here. So, it was bought by people that brought it into the farmer's market, or...? We didn't go to any market to buy a tree. There was no market here in Rockford where farmers came in and selling their stuff, like Christmas trees and wreaths and... I don't think so. Where is it? I don't know. I don't know when Chumway started. Oh, there's the one down there on State Street. Yeah. I don't know. Was that market down there when you came here? Do you remember that? On State Street? It was an old, old place. It is on... Is it on State Street? No, on State Street. State Street, by Kishwaukee. Kishwaukee. But I don't know if it was there, then. Wasn't there one on Railroad? Well, I don't know. Was it...? I can't remember. Because there must have been some... A lot of people buying, you know, Christmas trees. They got to get it from somewhere, but you don't remember where you bought it. I don't... Lutefisk. Where do you buy that? In the stores? Which? Lutefisk. Oh, yes. Every store had that. That hard thing is... Oh, sure, we had that. All of you in the family liked that? No, no. No? No, no. Why? We didn't like it. I don't know why. None in your family? We had to eat some of it, but not much. Your parents, though? Oh, sure, they liked it. They had it? Yes, oh, sure. Lutefisk, sure. But the children, they didn't want it. No, they didn't. Lingon? Huh? Were you able to get lingonberries, lingon for Christmas? They were shipped in from Sweden? And still? Yeah, I think we had lingon. I think so. And sylta? Yeah, my mother made that. It was made in the home, then, yeah. You being from Värmland, or the background, you didn't have kraftkakor in your home? No, no. Why? I don't know. My mother didn't know how to make them. But you had potatiskurdos? Sure, sure. You bet. So you were taught to make that, too, then, from your mother? We all, we each made a little one for ourselves. Every time she made, I would go out and see. And she taught us how to make it. Oh, she did? So I still make it. So you can carry it on then to your family? Mm-hmm. Sure. And you make some potatoes in it? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Mm-hmm. Potatismousse. Potatismousse, yeah. But you also make some in the corv? Yes, of course. No, we didn't. We didn't put in the... Yes, you did. And the corv, you put potatoes in it, grind up the potatoes. We chop the potatoes and put the meat and potatoes in. Oh, well, the last years we've been grinding it, though. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Nothing like it. It's wonderful. Did you go together then, before Christmas, when you were doing all this horsework, several families? Not before Christmas, no. No. No. How about the old people? Did they go together for a cup of coffee in the morning or afternoon and come together and sit and talk? Well, I remember my mother, she had one raincoat, a skirt and a cape. She wore that when it rained. And I know that Lady Zade went to the pastor's house and they had coffee there. That's the only time there was a party. On our side. So they met in church then once a month? About once a month, I think. I know the waffles were burning one day, so it was all smoky in the church. Oh. Mm-hmm. They didn't have any kitchen in the church at that time? No. No facilities to fix any food or... No. A lot of them would come driving with horse and buggy, you know, long sled, and they had fur... What do you call them? Wraps to throw over themselves. Fellas? Uh-huh. Mm-hmm. Is there much of them? No. Oh. So you were talking about playing tennis now. Was that against the church rule to play games like that, to play tennis? Well, I was older then when we played tennis. Yeah, but you still had to respect the pastor. Oh, no. You didn't? Why, no. We had a net and tennis and a ball and a band. Some people didn't see it that way, though. There was a lot of fun. I mean, I'm sure there was. Sure. Yeah, but the pastor, you know, they were usually very respectful people. When they said you couldn't do that, you didn't do it. Well... But it was not on the list then, that it was bad. No, no. Were you able to go to a movie? No, we never did. No? No. In the early years. Well, one time my dad was going to go wait, and we had a great big lamp there, and he threw it over his shoulder, and down comes the lamp, broken to pieces. It was an accident. Mm-hmm. Oh. So has it changed? You still belong to the Covenant Church? You still belong to the Covenant Church? No. No? Oh, sure. The First Covenant. Mm-hmm. And has it changed anything over the years, the sermon and the preaching and the methods used by the pastors to deliver the sermon? Well, I don't know. Do you feel at home today as you did years ago when you went with your parents, for instance, up in Nishpimmin? I think I do, because I bring her with me once in a while when she goes to the free church. She sang in the church choir for 50 years. 50 years? 50 years. Mm-hmm. Here in Rockford. And my father did also, the male chorus. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And so the church was their life and their social life. It was their life, yeah. Mm-hmm. But they didn't – you never belonged to any organizations then of any Swedish American background? No, no lodges or anything. Oh. So, but has it changed anything, like singing, for instance? A lot of hymns have been taken away. Well, some have been added, of course, but I mean, how do you like that when something new is brought in? Do you feel comfortable with it? Well, the choir always sings new songs once in a while, but we got two books in every row, several books, two kinds of books to sing on. But you are practicing singing, though, every week, in other words, when you belong to the choir? Oh, every week, every week. How about the people, now they came to church sporadically, could they feel at home when they chanced to hear those – to be able to sing with them? Was it easy for them? Because they didn't practice as often as you did, of course. Oh, no, no. Well, they were all – But they were still following along. They were singing. You know how it goes. I try. You like to come to our church? Sure, sure I do. So your daughter, she belongs to the free church? Mm-hmm. So you married – you married them from the free evangelical church? I did. Oh. As soon as we were married, it changed. So why didn't you introduce your church to him? Well, it was agreed beforehand that I would do that, so then I did it. So you had to take a pick. Yes, we had to choose one. Either him or the church. Right. So is there any difference, then, in your opinion about the covenants of the free church? No, basically I think they're very much the same, very much the same, yeah. I would say. No. Of course, you have a much sweller church than we do. I don't know about that. You've got a beautiful church. And I go with Mother now on Sunday mornings. I go with her. My husband encourages me to do that and go with her in the morning, and then she's able to go, and why shouldn't she? And then we go together at night to the free, so. Do you go to the free church, too, then? Once in a while. Once in a while. On occasion. Oh, sure. So there is no difference than the way you see it, or? No, no. You have a bigger choir that meet there. Bigger congregation, slightly, but just maybe. Are you really going for a singing, though, or? Oh, yeah, there's a, yes, you know, the music program. But years ago, there was a different tone, though, between the different denominations. You had the Methodist and the Baptist and the Lutheran. And you couldn't cross that line. Nowadays, it's more open. You can go and you. Today, I mean, years ago, though. We could go to any church. I know you could, but, I mean, there was no practice too often. Oh, no, no. Because they were really. Members, really. No, I mean, between the Baptist and the Lutherans and the Methodists, there were strict lines. That's right. And it was hard to understand each other. In other words, they were probably. That's right. Indoctrinated from one generation to another. I think so. So it's more open than today. You think there has been progress, then, within the churches, that you are cooperating more and communicating more? I think so. So did you go to North Park College after you... No, I did not. My two younger sisters did. They graduated from North Park. Did they stay in Rockford, married and stayed here? The daughter younger than me stayed and worked in Rockford. She did. When she married, she married a Rockford boy, and they moved to St. Louis and spent maybe, let me see, almost 20 years in St. Louis and then returned to Rockford. And the youngest daughter was a schoolteacher and lived in Kansas City, in Pennsylvania, and then took graduate work in library science and was a librarian in Chicago for all of her life, most of her life. How about the rest of her sisters and brothers, did they move on, did they stay here in Rockford? They stayed here. And both your parents, then, they are buried here in Rockford. Did they go back to Sweden at any time to visit? No. They never came back? Oh, our Gwen went to Sweden. No, but your parents never came back. Your parents never came back. Gwen went to Sweden. Did they talk about that at any time, your mother, to go back to Värmland and see? I can't remember that they ever, because he was a minor and he had a job. But I mean, they never felt homesick for Värmland? I don't think so. Did they talk about it often, where they came from, your parents? Once in a while, once in a while, but of course we didn't know the people they were talking about. But they never, did you have any visitors over the years from Sweden, like your second cousins or cousins to your parents? I think there was. After you were married, but not in the early years. So Rockford was going to be your home. Did you go back there each time? No. Well, I've been to visit, sure. Sure, we liked to go there. I've been there many times. So you still have friends up there? Oh, sure. There were quite a few people from Värmland that came there. Well, where you lived, you got to know your neighbors, and we called them Cousin Jacks. Cousin Jacks. Do you know that? Yeah, I heard that expression, yes. Finn Landers. Was there something they talked about, your parents, when they were sitting? Oh, I don't know. Just young people. I know they used to have fun getting together with a bunch of young people. Didn't you say your father was supposed to be one of the best dancers around that area in Sweden? He loved to dance. And they stopped when they came over here. Well, I think they became Christians up in Ishbeming. And then, you know, the church believed in complete separation, all those things, you know, do's and don'ts. He obeyed the rules. Yeah, that's right. Did he talk about that, or was it some of his friends that let that loose? How did you know about this? How did you know? I don't know. Well, did he talk about it? Because they could have encouraged you, you know, to try it out. I mean, when he did it, why couldn't you do it? I think my mother used to tell her once in a while. Once in a while, as a kid, I wasn't too interested. So the whole family then belonged to the Covenant Church? All the children? Well, except, you mean the children down here then? Yeah, well, they moved on to Rockford also. One sister joined the Trinity Lutheran Church. Oh, she married then? Yeah, when she married, joined Trinity Lutheran, but the others all were members of the Covenant Church. Well, she married a soldier. So there was two men that got their wishes through. But he was... They wouldn't have worked today, though. No, no. Was that the trend, you think, that the men put the table where they wanted it, for instance, to decide things? What kind of car do I want and the furniture? Oh, I don't know. Did you decide or tell your husband what you wanted and he had to do it that way, or who was the boss? I think we decided together. You each had to bend a little bit. I think he made the big decisions to some degree. He was the breadwinner. So buying a car, I suppose, that was his... Oh, yeah. He gave more of ours than... You didn't decide what kind of color you wanted? No, no, we had a Ford. He was one color. No problem. Yeah, right. Oh, dear. So have you visited Sweden, though, Mrs. Parker? No, and I would love to. Do you have any contacts with Sweden? Yes, we have... My mother's cousin still lives in Stockholm, and those children have been here, and they would be the same age as my children. They came down to the old homestead on 10th Avenue where the Bodins lived and talked to a neighbor and found mother. Otherwise, we wouldn't even know they existed, and that way we've kept in contact with Sweden. And that was back in the... Oh, it's just been about six years ago. Oh, I see. And she still lived on there? No, her old homestead was down on 10th Avenue. Oh, this, how they... Yes, after Parmley Street, they bought a house on 10th Avenue, the Bodins, and they lived there for, oh, 30, 40 years. And this relative in Sweden, it would be her cousin's son, had a little address, the Bodins, 904 10th Avenue, and his daughter was coming to America, to Chicago, and he said, if you get a chance, run out to Rapford and see if there's anyone at the house or if they know of them. And so luckily, it was an old neighbor who had been there and knew mother's married name and found her. And otherwise, we would have had no connection. So they came here then? They came here. Contact established. Beyond the delts. They were in their 20s, young married couple. Isn't that great? So you have that correspondence with them? Yes, we do, you bet. And my daughter has visited them when she went to Sweden. Oh. Mm-hmm. Oh, your daughter went to Sweden? My daughter, one of my daughters, who's been to Sweden. All my children have been to Sweden, but we didn't know these relatives at that time. But they insisted she stay with her, and they, of course, just treated her well. So did your daughter then go to Botnary, the boda, in Värmland, or were they able to see some of the places where they came from? No, none of them were. No, they just were in Sweden generally, and no, they did not. No fact-finding tour then in the steppes, or the–? No, no. That's what I want to do. Didn't they go with quite a group that–? My sister Gwen went with the North Park College group. Oh, the choir? Yeah. I think it was a choir. It might have been the choir. It might have been just a tour. But then she did stay with the relatives. She contacted some relatives on my father's side. And we left because she had written to them, and her name is Gwen, G-W-E-N. But the way it was written, it looked like Sven. So they were expecting a boy, a young fellow, to come. And when she stepped off the bus, they were quite surprised. Yeah. She has met some of those people, yeah. And other relatives on my father's side have been to Sweden, and there's contact there too. So we know some of the people. Have they taken up Swedish too? Oh, some of them speak it fluently because– You mean your sisters? Oh, yes, yes. They've taken conversational Swedish. All of them have, yeah. Both of them. Sure. How about the children? Are they interested in preserving the heritage of the background of the people? Or is it too many non-Swedes in the church today? So you can't– Oh, it's everything in the church, it seems. So there's no Swedishness there, then, at any particular point? No. I mean, Christmas program, receia, or– No, none of that. No? No. And they don't keep track of the Swedish heritage and that sort of thing. Because there are so many intermarried, you know, from other groups. Sure. Isn't there some darkies, black people there too? Oh, sure there are. Yeah, sure. But you still have in the hymnal, though, Swedish-oriented songs from way back. Sure. From Skog and Frickman. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Lots of Swedish books. You have some dynamic speakers there. Skogsberg and Nywahl. Oh, yes. Frickman. And what's his name now? Frickman. F.D. Johnson. Gustav F. Gustav F. Yes. Oh, my. But you don't remember him, though. Well, vaguely. Just– I don't know if I really remember. He died in the 40s, I understand. Yeah, but I don't really– I should remember. But you remember– Just like you– Don't you remember him so well? Huh? You don't remember him so well. Not so well, because I was quite young, I guess, or something. I don't know. But he became a free churchman after first being a covenantor. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. That's very deep. He had some tent meetings all over the country. All over the U.S., huh? Yes. Sure. Down in Texas and up in Minneapolis and all over. Sure. Very good. So that's– there are still a few Swedes left in Rockford. Oh, sure. Mm-hmm. You don't have a circle at the church where you meet the Swedish group, or where you sit and talk Swedish? No? No. No, not anymore? No, not at the church. We just do it for fun once in a while, you know. But there is no organized group? No. They wanted to blend in and be American, and they didn't talk about wanting to go back. They just wanted to be American.