 16th of July 1987, I'm sitting together with Walter Johnson, Rockford, Illinois. And he was born in Munkayung, Sweden, December 29th, 1915, in the United States, 1926. So, your parents, now they were born in Munkayung, you were around at the time? Well, my father was born in a small community some distance from Munkayungby. I'm trying to think of the name of the town, but they have mining there, right on the coast of Skåne. We were there this... It was Høganäs? Høganäs, yes. It was Høganäs? He was from Høganäs, originally. And we were there last year, you know, last summer we were there, visited. I didn't meet many of his, or my father's, relatives, because I never had much touch with them. But that's the area he was from. But he farmed right around Munkayungby for a number of years. So he was a farmer, then, when you were born? That's right. That's right. Was it a big farm? Well, it was a good-sized farm, you know. In fact, I think he had two farms at one time. I don't know what happened, but I think they were trading horses and one thing another, so I think he lost. But I really never knew what happened. My mother never talked about it, and he never talked about it either. You went to school there, then? I went to school there, sure. And your brother was two years older? Two years older, yeah. And then in 1924, your father, he left the United States. Right. When you stayed behind, then, with your mother. Uh-huh. Did you start work then, when you were 11? Did you take a job? Oh, no. You stayed at home? Oh, yeah. I went to school, junior high school and high school and so on. How about your brother? Did he start work? No, he went to school also. And, of course, right during the Depression is when my brother went to work, and I went to work too. And it was over here, then? Over here. But in Sweden, then, your father, he left just on effect, finding tours to the speech. Right, right. He thought. He had a brother here in Rockford, so. Well, he came to him, then. Yeah. He'd come here previously, so that's how it all got started here in Rockford, because of his brother being here. So what kind of work was he doing here? He was in construction. Of course, back then in the 20s, you know, construction work was only a matter of five, six months. You know, you had a, when it got cold, the construction went off, and he'd go into factories and work during the winter months. And it was easier to get a job then? Oh, yeah, sure. At that time, I'm pretty sure. He always had work, so it's no problem. Do you remember, was your dad, write, wrote in the letters back to your mother? Not really. Did it sound good, or? Well, he was doing all right. He could send for us, so. So he sent the tickets, then, for you? Oh, sure, sure. Yeah, he saved enough money to buy tickets for the family. What did your mother say then? Was she anxious to go, or? Well, actually, I don't think she was at the time. But she felt we had a bigger opportunity in this country, because things were bad in Sweden at that time. And I think this is the reason she decided to come, that for my brother and myself, why the opportunities were better here. So what about you two brothers now? Were you talking about going to America to your friends? Not really. You know, it was a big deal, all right. I'm sure it was. Oh, yeah. Yeah, it was. You know, a lot of them had relatives in America, and I imagine a lot of them would have liked to have gone back in those days. So you packed the trunks, then, and? That's right. Everybody was seasick, of course. Did you pack anything special in your suitcases? Would you remember of? No, not really. My mother had a friend who lived out east, and she came to meet us in a harbor in New York. We never went through Ellis Island, fortunately. I don't know if it would have been eliminated in 26. It could have been. But I know we came right into New York Harbor. And your aunt met you there, then? Well, she wasn't an aunt. She was a good friend of my mother's. Yeah. And put us on a train for Chicago, and that was it. So you didn't stay in New York, then? No, no, no. We didn't even. Well, we might have stayed overnight, but that was all. And then we came from Chicago to Rockford by train. Of course, back then you had good train service. And you had no trouble to order food on the train or anything? No, not really, not really. But, you know, it was all strange to us, of course. I knew a few words of English, but very few. What did you notice the first time you came to New York? Well, of course, the size of it and the people. The noise. Traffic and strange food and so on. But as a youngster, you know, you're interested in everything you see. So it was coming from a small village especially and then hitting a city like New York was just fantastic. So then you came to Rockford, and your dad was already here. He was already here, sure. He had an apartment ready for you then? Everything was all set, sure. What kind of work was he doing then? Construction? He was in construction, yeah. And did you enter school then? Yeah, after I imagine the first week we were here, I was in school. Started in Turner School on Broadway, which is still there. And of course I was 11, and of course they put me in practically kindergarten. The desks were so small I could hardly fit into it. Of course, didn't know hardly any English at all. Do you remember if there were any work kids from Sweden at the time? Oh yeah, there was quite a few. That you could speak with every day? Yeah, but I had very little difficulty because after a week I was out with the kids playing, and in no time at all I picked up the language. And for some reason I lost my Swedish accent in a matter of months, whereas my brother, who was two years older, never did lose his Swedish accent. So he kept it? You know, when he spoke you could tell he was Swedish. A couple of years makes a difference then. This is it. Just a couple of years makes that much difference in your speech. Of course, my first jobs were in retail, office equipment and office supplies, and I had to meet the public and speak, and my entire life has been that way. I've been in either retail or, of course, I spent most of my working career in a post office. How about in the school years? During the school years, coming home from school, you had to use Swedish, too? Oh yeah, to my mother. That's right. How about your father at that time? No, he spoke very little English. So he spoke Swedish to them? Oh yes. So you had to be bilingual back and forth? Oh sure, sure. No, my father never... He didn't have to. Back then, people he worked for were Swedish, and all your stores and so on were all Swedish. How about your brother? Did you talk Swedish to each other or English? No, we talked English most of the time. How long did it take before you did? A year or so? Oh, it took at least a year. And of course, you had a lot of trouble because, of course, the kids would make fun of you. You were a green Swede, Bukkoli or whatever. My brother was in fights constantly. I didn't do much fighting, but he did. It was kind of rough through the first few years. But you would think there would be so many of you who were Swedes coming at the time. Well, we probably had... Most of them were married men, though, coming and girls. Oh yeah. So it was a few families. Because there had been a lot of immigrants coming earlier, and most of the kids, I suppose, were somewhat older than what we were. In school, were there any Swedish-born teachers there, or were there all Americans? No, there were some that... So they understood what you meant in the beginning, though? Sure. So you started in the kindergarten, you said? Right. A few weeks? And every month or so I'd be moving up, and in a matter of four or five months I was up to what would be my normal level. And you had no trouble to follow along? No trouble whatsoever. Was there any subject that you liked more than others? For instance, home in Sweden, or...? No, not really. I think actually the Swedish education was probably better than what we had here. What did they do different in Sweden compared to here? Well, you had religious training, which you didn't have here, and you had a lot of physical activities, a lot of exercises and so on, that we had very little of here. Gymnastics was one thing that I enjoyed very much when I was in Sweden, but you had nothing like that here. But then, of course, you had baseball and all the games that we still enjoy. They didn't have a prayer meeting in the morning in school? No. No prayer meeting? No. Not as I recall it. But, of course, you did in Sweden, because the state church was still strong at that time. What church did you join when you came with your family? Well, we went to Zion Lutheran Church. I was confirmed there. Did you go to the Sunday school? Oh, yeah. Were you confirmed in Swedish? No. My brother was. That was the last year. He took it in Swedish at Zion, but then the following year it was in English when I started. So I went through it in English. Your two-year-old brother, what kind of schooling did he get? Did he go into high school then? Yeah. He didn't finish because... It must have been hard for him to start in high school. It was. He had trouble. But he was... Because it was easy for you actually, because you had to polish up for the eighth grade. Right. But he started in high school. No, he didn't start in high school. No. He started in grade school. In grade school. But he had more difficulty, but he was a lot smarter than I was really. So he went to work then? He went into the printing and became a printer and learned to trade and so on. Here in Rockford? In Rockford, yeah. So he wound up as superintendent of a big printing plant in Aurora, Illinois. Because he died young, I was, what age, 40? 47, 48? Oh, I see. Yeah. But he went through the whole printing thing. He worked in a printing plant here in Rockford, and then for a number of years he worked at Beloit Daily News as a printer, and then he went into this big plant as superintendent. So he learned to trade from the beginning then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. But, you know, things were rough right during the Depression. There was my mother with... You went through high school? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then you went into a business? Yeah, my brother was working at a printing company here in Rockford, and they also had an office equipment business along with the printing. Well, my intention was that I was going into printing, but they took a liking to me for some reason, and they said I had the right personality to be a salesman, and they put me in a store, so I never did get into the printing end of it, and I wound up in that office equipment business. Here in Rockford? Here in Rockford. I spent a few years, and I took a job in Peoria in the office equipment business and stayed there until World War II started. So you went down there during the Depression then? It was a little after the Depression, and I suppose about 1936 or 1937 I went down to Peoria. And in that business, the salesmen, they have certain territories, and they know where the jobs are and so on, and the salesman told me, he says, ìThereís an excellent job in Peoria if youíre interested.î I went down, I was interviewed, and I was hired, and I stayed there until the war started. Because of difficulty in travel, I got married down in Peoria, and we were about to have our first child, so I decided we couldnít come and see her. My family was here, and my wifeís family were here, so we decided, well, I can work in Rockford as well as anyplace else, so we decided to come back. Of course, I hadnít been back a month before I was 1A in the service, but at that time the president came out with an order that all single men had to go before married men. So I got a job at George D. Roper, and defense worked in a tool room at Roperís, and they put me on a job where I was grinding gauges that gauged 55-millimeter shells, and they brought in this grinding machine, and I was the only one in the plant who could run it. They had a representative from the manufacturer break me in on grinding gauges. So like I say, I was the only one in the plant who could run that machine. So after Iíd been there a year, I got another notice from the draft board that I was in 1A again. So Roperís tried to get a deferment for me because of the fact that I was engaged in this grinding gauges that measured these shells. So they went to the War Labor Board to get a deferment for me. Well, the War Labor Board said that the draft board where youíre registered has final jurisdiction, and of course I registered in Peoria. So Roperís wrote to Peoria and asked for a deferment for me. Well, the draft board in Peoria wrote back and said, ìWhen Johnson lived in Peoria, he was a clerk. As far as weíre concerned, heís still a clerk.î And that was it, and I was drafted. And we had a son by that time, and my wife was pregnant, yet I went into service and served in the South Pacific for two and a half years. But just because of the setup with the draft boards and so on, that the original draft board where you registered had final jurisdiction. Of course, six months after this happened, they changed it so the draft board where youíre living at the time would have jurisdiction. And of course, if Iíd been under a Rockford draft board, I would have been deferred because they realized what the situation was. But the way it worked out, these draft boards, they had a certain quota to meet, and they did soon grab a guy who lived away from their city. And of course, I never saw my daughter when she was, I think she was eight days old, and I didnít see her again until she was almost three. And of course, she didnít know me from Adam when I came back. So it was rough for my wife, of course, having two children. And the uncertainty ofÖ Yeah, nobody knew where I was for two and a half years because you couldnít write and tell them where you were. You were drafted into the Navy then? Yeah, I went into the Navy. What kind of position, what kind of work? Well, I was on the biggest fleet repair ship in the Navy, the Ajax. And we worked on destroyers and battle wagons and aircraft carriers that were damaged. And I was in a black gang. I went in as a fireman where you stand watches, I was four hours on and eight hours off. And when you were underway steaming, it was 140 degrees in the engine room. And when youíre at anchor, youíre just running auxiliary engines and so on, about 120 degrees. So it was a miserable job. But one day I came up and saw the bulletin board and they were looking for a mail clerk. The man who had the job didnít want it anymore. And out of about 30 people, I was picked to be the mail clerk on the ship, and that was the best thing that ever happened to me. So there was a real break? A real break. We had 1,600 men on the ship, so it was a big operation. So you got the training then to be a mail clerk there? Yeah, thatís right. So I think it was the best job in the Navy because everybody from the captain on down were kind of in awe of the mail clerk. They felt if they didnít play ball with the mail clerk, heíd hold up their mail, and that was actually it. So we got a new captain aboard. He was a full Navy captain. Of course, they have actually more authority than a general. Theyíre God on that ship. So the first day we was there, you had to follow a certain procedure. You had to deliver the mail to the captain first, and then executive officers, and all the way down the line to the ensigns. It had to be in that rotation. So the first day he was aboard, I knocked on the captainís door and come in. So I said, ìMy name is Johnson. Iím the mail clerk.î He looked at me and he says, ìJohnson, if you ever need anything, you see me.î And, you know, hereís a full Navy captain, and here Iím a lonely third-class petty officer. But thatís the way it was. They all tried to do you favors. So these officers had colored mess attendants. So when the officers had steak, I had steak because some of these colored guys couldnít read or write. So I used to write their money orders for them and so on. So they saw to it that I ate as well as the officers. It was a real break for me, of course. How often did the mail arrive then? There was different times during the 24-hour. How what? The mail, how did it come in? On regular times? Well, people donít understand about the South Pacific. There was nothing there. There was no harbors. Everything was done in the open sea. You get into what they call atolls. Theyíre surrounded by coral reefs, and the ships would be in there. And theyíd have an LST anchored out there someplace. What is that LST? Itís a landing craft where the front opens up, and the mail would be brought in there. Most of it would come in by planes, some by ships. And like weíd have as many as 1,600 ships in one anchorage, and everybody would go to this one LST to pick up their mail and leave their mail. So every morning, the first thing, I made a mail trip to this LST to leave the mail that accumulated on my ship and then pick up the mail that was coming to us. So it was a routine every day that a mail runó That was the most important thing, the mail run. I always had volunteers to do all the work for me. All I did was carry a satchel for registered mail. There was no postage used for the stamps? Oh, yeah, but you had what they called V-mail that was free. But otherwise, you used postage on the mail. This all just went to send it home to the United States? Yeah, sure. You had a lot of confusions, though, with the different names and the numbers and where they were stationed. Well, not really. How did they catch up with the soldiers? It was strange. I had a friend from Rockford who went into the Navy about the same time as I did, and he was a mail carrier here in Rockford. And every place I went, heíd been there or was there a few weeks before I was. Well, he wound up in a San Francisco fleet post office for the entire war, and one of his jobs was to work the mail for the ship I was on, the Ajax. So when we moved or were underway, heíd send a note to my wife and say, ìThe Ajax is moving, so you wonít have any mail for some weeks.î And Iíd get notes from him, get bundles of mail in, and thereíd always be a note on top saying, ìWell, I think Iím on a draft. Iíll probably see you out there in a few months.î But, of course, he never did leave the country. He stayed at the fleet post office throughout the war. But it was a great deal because heíd notify you. He didnít know where I was, but he knew that the ship was moving. Heíd get orders. So the mail would catch up to us eventually. San Francisco was the distribution point. That was the fleet post office. But the post office was part of the New York post office. It was kind of strange, but nobody could come into my little post office aboard the ship without my permission. Even a captain wouldnít walk in. On weekly inspection, heíd just put his head in the door. ìEverything all right, Johnson?î ìYes, sir.î And that was it. Thatís the only inspection. He never stepped inside that post office. So itísÖ and it was kind of nice for me, too. We could play poker there after hours when lights were out and so on. So it was a good deal. I slept there. I took most of my meals there in my office, and that was it. So you had a bunk right there. You didnít have to walkÖ Yeah, I was about six decks below the main deck, so I was right at the bottom of the old ship. When you were out, we ran into typhoons out there, and we had to go out to sea to get away from it. And the old ship would really bounce, and youíd be gone. I was sleeping on a camping cot, and that old ship would rock. Youíd keep going back, back, back, and you wonder, ìAm I going to come up again?î And then itíd go the other way. We had 40-foot waves at one time. It was amazing. Out in the South China Sea. Ran into a floating minefield, and it was off of Okinawa. And to this day, the Navy has never, never publicized one of the worst things that ever happened out there. We had 1,600 ships in that harbor off of Okinawa when that typhoon hit. And some small ships could do nothing. We were a big ship. We had twin screws. Weíd go out to sea, and you can, you know, fight it, get away from it. But a lot of these ships were destroyed there. Some of them areówhen we finally came back in there, some of them were high and dry two blocks away from the water. A lot of sailors lost their lives there. When we came back in, we were 20 miles out to sea, picking up bodies floating in life jackets. It was a terrible accident, but the Navy never, never took responsibility for it, leaving all those ships in an area where two typhoons a year hit that area every year. So close to land is the worst place you can be in. And then the Japanese, of course, had been on Okinawa for years, and they never built anything above ground. Everything was in caves. But we come out there and build quonset huts all over Okinawa. And, of course, when that typhoon hit, it had 155-mile-an-hour winds for five minutes, and it leveled everything on Okinawa. A lot of lives were lost, and it was just a foul-up by the Navy, allowing that to happen. So it was quite an experience, because we were out there when the atomic bomb was dropped, and we were there when peace was finally signed. So we saw history being made in front of our eyes, more or less. But it was a boring time, of course, because you had constant heat out there. So it... So then after discharge from the Navy, you came back to Prague for them. Were you staying anywhere else in between? Yeah. No. When I was finally discharged, I was stuck for six months longer than I should have been, because that particular raiding I had, as a mailman, there was a lot of work to be done because, you know, all the people were being transferred and a lot of mail to be forwarded and so on. So I had to put in an additional six months before I was discharged. When we finally came back to the States, we hit San Francisco on the 20th of December, and there were 200,000 servicemen waiting for transportation out there. But when a ship came into Hawaii, one of our officers flew back to San Francisco and arranged transportation for us. Before he left, he took the names and destination of every man on a crew. So we came in there on December 20th. They had tickets waiting for us. And that night, five complete trains left Oakland, California for the Middle West, and I got home Christmas Eve. Yeah, it was quite an experience. So then after coming back to Rockford, you had to look for a job. Well, of course, I had a job because I was still at Ropers at the time when I left. Did you go back to that? I went back to Ropers then. And then there was a notice in the paper that examinations were open for the post office, and having had the experience, why, I decided I'd take it. And 500 of us took that first postal exam after the war, and I was number two on a list out of 500, so I was assured a job. So I was the second one hired in the Rockford post office after the war, and that was the beginning of my postal career. And it was downtown at the time? Yeah, it was downtown office. I worked nights for a number of years. So you were the second one hired? I was the second one hired. And it was a good career. So you spent your whole life then at the U.S. Postal Service. Right. But then when you moved on to Peoria, away from Rockford, you didn't have a chance to join any other Swedish organizations? No, there was no such thing in Peoria. So you came away from the Swedes? Oh, entirely, entirely, sure. No, there was—we did meet—I did meet one family. In fact, a woman worked at the office equipment outfit, and her parents were of Swedish descent, so she kind of took an interest in my welfare, because I was 19 when I went down there, 19 or 20, I guess. So she was very nice to me. Her name was Tingsted, and there were three sisters, and this one worked— see, it was a bookstore plus office equipment and so on. So it's kind of an interesting thing. But they were very nice to me, and when Lola came down, she'd stay with the Tingsteds, and we finally got married, and everything worked out. So you met your wife here in Rockford? Oh, I knew her before, sure. So after being down here for a year and a half, I guess, I decided to get married, and that was it. When did you join the VEGA or IOMGT? Well, I was only, I suppose, about 15. I joined a junior lodge, because they had a lot of athletics and so on, baseball teams and track teams and one thing and another. So I was in a youth lodge, and my wife was too, and that's how I got started in it. But then during the time I was in Peoria, I more or less dropped out, and I wasn't active again until about 1950-something when they built a new building on Harrison Avenue on Charles Street. And somebody prevailed on me to be toastmaster when they opened that building, and that's how I finally got interested in it. And then on, I suppose I've been president of VEGA for probably 25 years out of the last 30. So, but it's people you've known all your life, and it's been very interesting. So were you in the, they had a theatrical group in the beginning? I guess I had a part in one. August Nielsen and Martin Johnson, or he was the name I suppose at that time. Yeah, and his wife, yeah, there was David Carleen and all those people. No, I really didn't take much, yeah, I moved away, see, and kind of lost contact there for a number of years. But they had a big group, though, they were active. Oh, it was very active, and they had an excellent youth group at that time. Had, I suppose, 20, 30 youngsters. But the war killed that whole thing because all the boys were drafted and scattered and they never came back again. So that, actually that killed the good Templars because that whole youth group disappeared because of the war. There was, I suppose, about 30, 25, 30 young fellows who were in the service, and it never came back together. How about the girls, though, did they stay on or did they move? Well, when the boys go, the girls do too. So that was the end of it. The Depression, though, was that a binding time for lodges, or did a lot of people disappear because they couldn't afford to belong to it? No, as a matter of fact, I think that brought a lot of them together. They worked together. The Depression. Yeah, during the Depression it was a very strong organization. And, you know, there were a lot of young bachelors who had come from Sweden during their early 20s, and a lot of them were in real trouble, no jobs, no families here, and they really had a rough time of it. And, you know, on the verge of starving, some of them. And a lot of the older people who had been here for a number of years helped a lot of those young fellows to survive, even. A lot of them lived out in Camp Elmwood, and some of those older families helped them all they could. So everybody worked together in those days, just to survive. So Camp Elmwood, now the building was constructed in 1941, wasn't it? Oh, no, Camp Elmwood was long before that. I was in the 20s sometime. Yeah, but the new building. Oh, the new building, no, in the 50s. Yeah, there was an older building. We had a building, yeah, at 15th Avenue and 9th Street for years and years. I think there's a sign, a stone there that says 1941, on the foundation there, or whatever it is. I believe it's on the fireplace. It says 1941. That's probably when the fireplace was built. There could be. Well, do you see that? Where's an older building on the premises then? At Camp Elmwood, one of the buildings burnt. They were going to have a Christmas Eve celebration out there, and I think the building burnt the day before. Then they constructed a new building, so that might be 41, but it doesn't seem quite. It could be, though. But the original building burnt, and then they built this other one. Of course, then they had the one on 15th Avenue and 9th Street. Yeah, the big building. Big building there, yeah. And, of course, eventually that was sold, and they built a new building on Charles Street and Warren Roads. That was in the 50s. That's when I really became active in Good Templars. So the one downtown then, on 15th Street and 9th Avenue? 9th Street and 15th Avenue. Why did they move away from that one? Was that too big for the time? Well, the trouble, no parking, and a building was old and needed a lot of repairs. At one time, you know, there was a restaurant there, and it was quite a big deal years and years ago. But I don't know what brought it on to sell it, but they did sell it, and, of course, we built a new building. And eventually we sold that, because taxes and so on and upkeep, every cent you could raise went to what would have to go to taxes, and this became too much. So organizations, they have it easy. There's always something that haunts them. That's right. Regulations. Yeah, that's right. Taxes. To own buildings is a killer, because of taxes, insurance, and all that. You have to spend all your efforts just raising money to pay the expenses. Is it strange, though, that politicians go against the unity organizations so severely against them? Well, you're a non-profit organization, but you still pay real estate taxes, and, of course, federal taxes, it's no problem, because being non-profits, you don't pay federal taxes. But real estate taxes you can't get away from. Real estate you can't get away from. That's what kills all these organizations. I see the veterans' organizations are trying to get some grants to get away from having to pay real estate taxes, but so far they haven't gotten it, because they're having the same problem we are. You know, membership is dropping all the time, and there's no way you can make it. Even those that have a liquor license have a hard time. But there's the liability insurance. Oh, it's killing them. It's killing them, yeah. So it's not easy to be a treasurer. No, no, it's not. Or a chairman for an organization. But, of course, we're more fortunate than most, because we did sell a building at a good price, so we've got more money than we know what to do with, really. Most of those Swedish buildings were constructed by Swedish workers. Oh, yeah. Oh, sure. Here in Rockford, you know, we had a lot of Swedish contractors, general contractors, mason contractors, carpenters, every trade. My brother was married to a girl whose father was Moritz Hockenson. He was a good Templar. And at Hockenson and Bloom built schools. They specialized in schools. They built schools all over this whole area. Did a lot of construction of homes. They constructed part of the Swedish American Hospital. So there were a lot of those Swedish builders that made this city what it is. And they were active, Hockenson's were active in the IOGT? Oh, very active. In fact, they were charter members back in 1911, Moritz and Wahlberg Hockenson. And their two daughters, of course, were active. My brother's wife and Baker's wife were both active in it. Stella still is. That is, Stella Hockenson was. What happened, though, with the young people? Do they have the same dedication as the older ones, or is the difference there? The problem is... Objectives are different. That's right. I think everything has changed over the years. We have no young people. Hell, I'm 71 years old, and I'm one of the youngest ones, so you can see what our future is. But you had your generation who had battles, a lot of battles, I mean, to stay alive during the Depression, but still you were able to give a lot of hours to this organizational work. That's right. That's right, because... But nowadays, I mean, there's a tremendous time on people's part. See, the problem was we had very little money. We had to make our own entertainment. And the lodges had the facilities. They had where you could dance and so on. It brought all the young people together. Whereas today, in affluent society, with automobiles, television, and all the distractions you have, it's all together different. Do you think that people today don't have the need to be together like they had years ago? No. No. There's too many other things that interest people. But back in those days, your clubs and so on, that's where people spent their time. Today, taverns get all that business. But back then, like in Camp Elmwood, man, on a Sunday, you'd have hundreds of people there. You'd have speakers, and you'd have athletic events and so on. And it kept people interested, because you had very little money, and you made your own entertainment. I think that's what brought people together, which is missing today. And that's why all fraternal organizations are in bad shape. Even the Masons are having trouble, which is just amazing that they can't make it. So it's not only the immigrant organizations that are having trouble. There's also the ones founded by Americans. All your veterans' organizations, all of them are having problems. They don't seem to have the need. Are they lazy, or what happened? Well, you know, entertainment is so fantastic today, with television and so on, with automobiles, you can travel. But looking now at the IOGP, they've always been fascinated to read. I read a lot of minutes of Swedish organizations. They actually had an outreach to get a lot of lectures, from Chicago, for instance. And they were together with Arvida Klubben, the socialists, with David Kallien and Henry Anderson. But they were very able to bring in lectures, you know, educated people, educated young people. Other groups didn't do that. No, that was one of the big things. They had these study circles, and a lot of these Swedes that came over had very little education to start with, because they left the country at a young age. But the good Templars, with their study circle, was an education for a lot of these people. And they did great work. They brought lectures, like you say, and they got into theatrical things. And it was an educational opportunity for a lot of people. And especially all these young bachelors that came over, it gave them an opportunity to have a second home. How do you remember David Kallien, for instance? Well, of course, I've known him practically all my life. How did you see him when you were growing up? Well, he was a real comic, as far as I was concerned. He was a storyteller deluxe. He used to tell me, I'm a world-class BSer, and he surely is. And of course, I'm kind of an administrator for him now. I have been for a number of years. Oh, I see. He had to home out there on Riverside. Because he was pretty sick at one time, and he simply couldn't take care of himself. Well, talking to him, even now, when he's over 90, you can detect that he has a tremendous intellect. Oh, he's... Memory and recall. Oh, yeah. Yeah, see, I was out and saw him here last week, and he just pounded my ear for an hour or more and recalled things that happened to him back in 1909 and 1910 and so forth. So he's an amazing character. And of course, he was a... I don't know if he actually was an ordained minister or not, but he was in a Baptist church. Yes, he was a Sunday school teacher. A Sunday school teacher, and he can quote the Bible at the drop of a hat. So he's one of the most interesting people I've ever met, really. But most of the people now, did they take him as a joker, or he was not serious enough, or what happened? Well, I don't know of anybody who's more popular than David. He's a likable guy because of that personality of his. Nothing bothers him, and he sees the pleasant things of life. So he was never the arrogant type? Never the arrogant type. There's anybody who doesn't? Oh, no, no. But, you know, he took tremendous interest in labor, and he was kind of a radical, like a lot of people were. Was that a stamp he got on himself, that he was a socialist? Yeah. Did that really put him down? I don't think it put him down, really, but he was in trouble, of course. I think he was on the verge of being deported at one time because the FBI was investigating him. And, you know, there were a number of those people in Rockford during the Depression. Harry Anderson was another one. Harry, yeah. I knew Harry quite well. I knew his daughter, Harriet, and there was a number of them. But Harry was a little bit different, though. He was more of a depressing type. Yeah. But also very well-educated. Well-educated, self-educated, I imagine. And he was quite a talker. I don't know if he had a political office at one time or not, but he was real sharp, real sharp. But during that period, especially during the Depression, you know, we were on the verge of a revolution in this country. And it wouldn't have taken much to change our form of government at that time. I don't think there was any doubt about that. You know, when you have hunger marches and so on and people are in dire straits like they were, it can bring a change of government. Maybe the masses were too hungry, I mean, to do anything. Because there's got to be a breaking point and you press them down. But, you know, you had nothing. You had no unemployment compensation. You had very little relief. People were in bad shape. Like, my wife's father never had a job for four years. Had a big family. I don't know how they survived. It was a very difficult period. Your father, now, he left for Sweden after 1928? Yeah, 28 or 28. So he was not here during the Depression? No. So what happened then to your mother? Well, I don't know how she did it, you know, raised two kids. But she'd been trained as a dressmaker. But she got into fur work. She was a furrier. She made and repaired fur coats, which at that time fur coats was a big deal. And she'd have as many as 75 fur coats that she was working on at one time. So she worked from early morning to late at night, repairing and... In her home? In her home. And that's how we got by. We lived on Broadway and she did a tremendous amount of work. She did very well for herself. She bought a two-family flat down on Fifth Avenue and had rent income from that, and she finally moved down into it and lived there for a number of years. She did it all on her own, that's right. She did it all on her own. You know, raised two kids during the Depression was pretty rough. But we never went without a meal. And both of us finally got jobs and helped out as much as we could. She had no desire to go back then? No, no. No, she did take one trip back, but she had no desire to leave. So she was able then to get a foothold in the business, I suppose. No, no, but she had a tremendous drive and ambition. So she must have been in the 35, 40 then when she came here? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, so she worked hard, but she knew how to handle money and take care of everything. And she didn't lose any money on the security bank? No. Wrong way? No. No, she was fortunate she didn't. But a few people had some savings there? Oh, that was a mess. Well, there was only one bank that survived in Rockford. So it was, that was the difference between Rockford and Peoria. Peoria was one of the bright spots in the country during the Depression because Caterpillar tractors started down there and Higher Walker distilleries came out of Canada and went to Peoria, and there were jobs. And it was actually one of the few bright spots in the whole country. So Caterpillar was able to stay on? Yeah. Between Caterpillar and Higher Walker, they kept that town not booming, but there were jobs available and pretty good wages. Like I say, one of the few places in the country that not only... And it was run by the Republicans? Yeah, I suppose. I don't know if politics had anything to do with it. That probably makes a lot of difference, though, if you have a good politician. But here in Rockford, you had socialists during the 20s. Yeah, there's... Herman Hallström and Brom. Yeah, yeah, a lot of those, all Swedes, they were socialists. You knew them personally, both of them, I suppose. No, I knew... Were you interested in politics? No, not really, not really. Did you take any part in running for any office? No, no, no. No, I was too busy trying to make a living. You know, no, politics never interested me. So Hallström, he was on for several terms there. Yeah, of course. That's why you came here, so you didn't pay too much attention. No, I didn't really. Of course, Blum, I probably knew a little more about Blum, because I was a little older then. And he was one of the few honest politicians, I guess. He wouldn't take a nickel from anybody. No, I don't think you could bribe him. But he had one disadvantage. He had a real pipsqueak voice. I understand he had a sickness when he was... I don't... that could have been. Some rheumatic fever or something. So he was... He was not a good... He was not a good speaker because of that quality of his voice was such that... So that was... he never made it today because of it, because of television and radio. They would disqualify him. Yeah, they would. But he was on though for a couple of terms. Oh yeah. Yeah. So he... Yeah, they claim he was the only honest man in Rockford. I don't know if that was true or not. Well, it's a pretty good statement. Yeah. But it's probably unbelievable though, regarding politicians. Yeah. Yeah. You don't find many like that anymore. Do you remember if some of the Swedes went back to the Depression because of hardships? Did they collect the money, for instance, at meetings and try to send them back over? I really didn't know any of them that did, but I understand there were some of them. And a few got sick and they managed to ship them back. But most of them, I suppose they were ashamed to write home for money or... And, you know, they had to make it the best way they could. You know, when you have no resources whatsoever. So it was harder for a man to get a job than a woman then, because they could always get restaurant jobs and hostels? Well, of course... Eventually they had it difficult. Yeah, it was difficult for them. You know, the whole furniture industry broke down at that time. And, you know, Rockford at one time, with all its furniture factories, provided a lot of employment. But that whole industry just went belly up. Some of them moved south and most of them just went out of business. But, of course, you know, for a good many years it provided employment for all these Swedes. And, of course, finally the machine tool came in, and, of course, that's gone the same way. It's disappearing. All the screw manufacturers like Rockford Products, there used to be Rockford Screw Products, they're in bad shape because... National Lock, they're all... National Lock, one of the big employers. So Rockford has had tremendous troubles providing jobs. So this seems to go in cycles. In cycles, yeah. 20, 25 years, and then there's got to be some other stuff. Yeah, this is true. Automobile plants have sprung up in the vicinity and provides quite a few jobs. Do you think the management more or less relaxed when it starts to go pretty good and they just rely on the old techniques and methods? Oh, I think so. The big problem, of course, the unions came in, and we had a lot of union troubles here, a lot of strikes and so on. But once things started to boom, why, management went along with labor, probably went along too far, you know. You've got to work together, and I think union leadership got a little hoggish. And now, of course, it's going the other way. You can see it at Sunstrands, those people on strike, they're going to keep fooling around and they're not going to have any jobs because I'm sure Sunstrand has made up their minds they're not going to give in on anything anymore. So I think the unions probably went too far, the leadership got too hoggish, so we're paying for it now. So the foresight is not there perhaps? No, I don't think so. You say, well, here's the president of Sunstrands making over a million dollars a year, and he won't give the workers 50 cents more an hour. You've got to worry about priorities. Here's a colored baseball player, he's making a million and a half dollars playing baseball, a kid's game, and the president of Sunstrands who's providing 4,500 jobs in Rockford, he's probably worth a million dollars. So, you know, wherever your priorities are. So people have changed over the years. In the 20s and 30s, people are ready to sacrifice the good days who are coming to do the honest work. Right. But they've probably disappeared over the years. You're looking for paycheck. Of course, a lot of those Swedes were pretty militant, kind of socialistic, and they were all for organizations, and they played a big part in organizing labor in this area. Because they were self-educated and have gone through the whole works. So they did a lot for organized labor. Their intention was to be reasonable. Right, that's right. Organization. Right. They probably went overboard somewhere in the 20s. Oh, I'm sure of it. The old-time organization men, you know, in the unions, they probably had the idea they've got to have something to have a wedge. But later on, the next generation, they were more hobbyish. Right. You can see it, particularly with Caterpillar Tractor in Peoria, which is the biggest employer in the state of Illinois with over 45,000 jobs, had probably the finest fringe benefits of any company in the United States. Yet those people wanted more, so they go on strike for six months, and that ruined Caterpillar. They lost those big jobs in Russia with those pipe laying machines that the government said they couldn't export, and then a six-month strike. During that time, a Japanese company took over their business more or less, and to this day Caterpillar is in trouble because of the union going too far. You know, you've got to realize they've got to make a profit too. But they had fantastic, you know, a man sweeping the floor making $15,000 an hour. Just ridiculous. And the sick leave, dental leave, all this day off on your birthday, fantastic labor.