 I'm sitting here with Florence Kallén from Rockford, Illinois. She was born on November 7, 1914 in Sandviken, Sweden and came to America in 1923 and over Boston, Massachusetts. So if we start now with your life in Sweden, Elio Olof Olsson, that was your father's name. What does he do? He works in the steel mills in Sandviken. How many children did you have in the family? My father's siblings? I don't have any siblings. Only one child. So you lived in Sandviken? Yes, we had a house in Sandviken. So that's where you were born and went to school and read for the priests? Yes. How old were you? I was nine years old when I came over. Then the parents decided to go to America. Why did they do that? Was it bad work in Sandviken? Yes, they had a sort of a lockout there. Sort of like Sunstrands is now. They locked them out. So that's when my dad came over here. He was here about six months before we came over. So he had an apartment for us on 4th Avenue. So we lived there for probably a year. Then we moved down on 5th Avenue and then we moved out in the country and back into town again. So you remember then? Oh yeah, I remember. Oh sure, I remember. We went to Gothenburg on the train. So you had to sell, did you have a house there in Sandviken? Yes, we sold that to my uncle. My mother's brother bought it. And then you had an auction of your furniture? That I don't remember. I think we just left the furniture in there. I think he got the furniture and all really. I think everything that was there was left there. I think except what my mother, you know, I don't think she brought really much of anything with her. She brought any china or silverware? No, she brought, well, yeah, she's a copper coffee service. She brought that over and a black iron stit that she used over there. Oh, she had a Coleman brush set. Well, in fact, see my mother had been here before. She had been, yeah, as a young girl, she had come over here and she had a brother that was out east. And then she came here and she lived here out east for five years, out around Boston and Maine and that. And then she went back to Sweden. My dad had also been here before. He settled in DeKalb. He had an uncle in DeKalb where he went to. And he worked in the wire mills in DeKalb there. And then he quit there and he was kind of, I guess he went out to the Dakotas where the thrash, where they were thrashing and that. And he was here about five years and then he went back home and then they met and married. And so they were all pro on traveling. Yes. No, it wasn't anything new to them. They were both happy to leave. Actually. Yeah, yeah, they were. Yeah. At that time, it was kind of rough, you know, in Sweden and work was hard to get. And you stay behind them for six months. Yeah, we were. Yeah. Yeah. He came here first and said, yeah. And so he settled here in Rockford. So you sailed through England. Yeah, we went to England first and we stayed there, I think, overnight or a couple of days. And then we got, I guess, I guess. And then on to Boston. And then on to Boston. Why do you think they landed in Boston? Was it easier to go through? Well, I really don't know. I don't know. I couldn't tell you. You don't remember if there was any control or no examination or anything like that you went through? Well, yeah, I can remember having to be almost to be re-vaccinated, you know, because my vaccination hadn't worked that they did. Yeah. But they finally decided to let me go through, I guess. You had done the vaccination home in Sweden? Yeah. In Gothenburg. Yeah. They had vaccinated me in Gothenburg. And so and it hadn't hadn't worked that good, I guess. And so they were going to do it over again in Boston, you know, but they didn't. They let me go, I guess. They let you through? Yeah, they let me through. So your mother had no trouble in speaking and understanding English? No, no, no. They both, they both of them could speak English. So I didn't have any trouble, you know. So then you came here to Rockford? I started school at John Nelson and then I went to White School and then Lincoln Junior High and the old Central High, you know. And your parents, they bought a house after a while then or they went? Well, I see it was in 1943 or 44, they built a house out by the river out on, where Marion, you know, Marion and Frank Olson's. Yes. Yeah, well, his sister, Toots, Donkoski, where she lives, my folks lived out there, you know, a couple of houses down from her along the river, so. And they sold that. Oh, my mother was sick and so they came here to live with me for a while and then, so that's before they left. But he got a job then when he came here? Yeah, he's a painter. He was a painter. A painter? For himself or with the Suncoast? No, he worked for different painting contractors and finally he went out on his own, you know. So until he retired, he was on his own really. But you would think he would look for something in mechanical field and he came for Suncoast. No, he didn't. He didn't want to work inside. I don't know why. He just never wanted to work inside. So he never worked in a factory? No, uh-uh, no. He started painting. He did, during the Depression, work at Anderson Brothers for about a week, but he couldn't stand being inside, you know. He wanted to be outside and be his own boss, I guess. So he never did. So how did you fare in the Depression? There was the perennial work before the Depression, but then... Yeah, well, that wasn't very good, you know. I had to quit school to go to work because my dad wasn't working, you know, so. He couldn't afford to keep me in school, so. Was it high school then? Yeah, high school. Yeah, I was in high school then. So there was one more person as a breadwinner? That's right, yeah. So what kind of work did you get then? Well, I worked at Ropers. I sprayed enamel on stoves, you know. I sprayed the enamel on stoves. So you became a painter too then? Yeah, sort of. Yeah. Then I got a job at National Lock. I made a little bit more money, and then I got married and quit. No more work? No more work for a long time, yeah, until I went to school at Guilford High School, and I worked in the cafeteria there for 17 years. So, and then I retired. Well, when my husband retired, I retired too. So your dad, now, he, what kind of work could he get then when the painting trade was shot down during the Depression? Well, he had to take anything he could get, and like I say, he did get a job at Anderson Brothers, but he didn't like it, so he quit. So, but we managed to get through it. My mother done housework for the lady downstairs, and so. What do you rent? Yeah, and he'd get a little job once in a while, you know, and so. To tide us over? To tide us over, yeah. We managed. So, it wasn't fun, but I guess. It was tough? Yeah, it was tough, yeah. Did they join the church? No, we were never churchgoers. Nope. So, and how about Larges now, Vikings? Well, they belong to, I think they belong to Vikings for a long time. We used to go up to Viking Hall there for, you know, and we belonged to Swithead for a good number of years, you know, but. And did you got some insurance? My dad belonged to Harmony, you know, for years. So, but that's about it. So, was he interested in being on the board or? No, no, no. Serving as secretary? No, no, no. Just as members? Just a member, yeah. Did they have a local group from Jästrikland or Norrland? They had one, they had a Jästrikland or Sandviken club in, you know, and my folks used to go in there once in a while. So, they belonged to that one then? Well, I don't know whether they really belonged because they used to go once in a while, you know. My mother had a cousin that came over from Sweden with us and she had a boyfriend that she had in Sweden and he immigrated to Chicago. So, she followed and then they got married in Chicago and so on. So, there were quite a few then, didn't she? Yeah. Nobody in Rockford over in Sandviken? No, they never had any Sandviken club here in Rockford. There was not too many here? No, uh-uh, wasn't too many. See, my dad had a cousin and that was about it. Oh, and then there was another Lixell, some Victor and Elsa Lixell. They're back in Sweden. Well, they're dead now, both of them, but they were from Sandviken. And then Johnson's, Johansson, William Johansson, she's still living. They were from, oh, not far from Sandviken. Okerbo? Oh, I can't remember. Yerbo? No, I can't remember. But there's one daughter and then her mother's still living. And they lived in Sandviken for a while, but that's about all that I, Victor Kroon and Elsa Kroon, that was my, Elsa Kroon was my dad's cousin. And they went back to Sweden, and I think they're both dead now. They have one daughter, Ingejard. Did they go back during the Depression? They went back, I think, in 19, I think they went back to Sweden in 1929. Right before the Depression, then. Yeah, yeah. So when your dad came in on 1923, did somebody help him then to get a job? How did he manage not to? He knew English enough, I think. He knew English enough, and I really don't know whether anybody helped him or not. I never heard. I suppose he just probably found it on his own, as far as I know. I don't really know whether he had any help or not. He worked for a Thalén. He was Swedish. Well, most of the people in Rockford at that time were Swedish. They had some Irish over in South Rockford. The Irish kind of lived in South Rockford, but you go down 7th Street, you could go into any store on 7th Street, any barber shop, any clothing store, any dry goods store, and they were all Swedes. And you heard Swedish spoken all over. You didn't even have to learn how to speak English in those days because everybody talked Swedish. So everybody on the east side, and there was Swedish. Yeah, it was, oh yeah. You said South Rockford. South Rockford. Was it on the east side? No, south is across the river there. Across the river. Yeah, just across the river here. They were the Italians. Well, they're Italians now, but they were Irish then. And then the Italians more or less moved in there, and then now, of course, it's all colored. The Italians moved out and the colored moved in. So there were not too many Italians or Irish on this side? Not on this side, no, uh-uh, no, uh-uh, no. Very seldom, they came across. Yeah, mm-hmm, yeah, mm-hmm. So you remember then when the Swedes had the fights with the Irish on the bridge? Oh, sure, uh-huh, yeah. It was a common thing, I understand. Oh, yes, uh-huh, and same thing with the Swedes here and the Italians. My gosh, when I was a young girl and I went to dances and that, if we even danced with an Italian, we were, you know, and they were good dancers. They were good. You looked for the Italians. Yeah, they were good dancers. You mean the Swedish boys didn't like that? No, the Swedish boys didn't like it, you know, and your folks didn't like it, you know. You were supposed to stick with your own, you know. So you weren't supposed to go find somebody else. It was hard until you see someone. Yeah, it was, yeah, it was hard, you know. Because you didn't see any difference in the... No, no, uh-uh, no, I couldn't see anything wrong with it. You didn't have any hang-ups over it? No, I didn't have no hang-ups about that, but, you know, the older people did. It's the same thing now. You know, we have hang-ups about this generation, you know, and the kids can't see it, you know. So, I mean, it's the same. Every generation has their own, you know, hang-ups. But did they dare to come over, though, the Italians and Irish, to dance with Swedish girls? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, they'd come over, you know. There was a group then. Oh, sure. I suppose they didn't want to go alone, though. No, we went out to Central Park, and there was all kinds of different nationalities out there, you know. On the east side? No, Central Park was on the northwest side. It was over, yeah. Oh, on the side of the river. Yeah, it was on the northwest side. Oh, so the Swedes went over on the west side. Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, uh-huh. We went to Central Park and danced, and, uh. Why did you do that? Well, there was dances there. You know, we had big-time bands would come, like Wayne King, and I heard Rudy Vallee out there one time sing. In fact, he'd come and ask the girl that was sitting next to me to dance, and he introduced himself as Rudy Vallee, and she looked at him so funny, she said, Well, I'm Cleopatra. She said, I don't choose to dance. And here he got up with that big megaphone, you know, after a while, and started singing, and she could have just died, because it really was Rudy Vallee, and she thought he was just, you know, pulling her leg or something like that. So, no, we had, you know, different big bands would come out. It was an open, open park, you know, and an open dance pavilion. So they were just open in the summertime, and we'd go there to dance, you know, and there wasn't that many places in those days, you know. Were they attracting bigger bands than on the west side, do you think, on the east side, where the Swedes were? Yeah, well, I don't think we ever had any, because it was just the smaller clubs. We used to go to Swithead and Viking to dance, and we danced at Lyron Hall, and I.O.G.T. Hall had dances on Saturday. But they had local. They had just little local people. But England Terra on East State Street and Central Park, they used to get the big bands, you know. I danced to Lawrence Welk at England Terra, you know, and that. So who arranged those meetings or dances? Was it Italians, the Irish? No, no, uh-uh, England Terra. I don't know who England Terra was owned by, but no, uh-uh. I don't think so. They were just owners of these clubs and, or dance places, you might say, and they just arranged it, you know. It was like the Trianon and the Aragon in Chicago, you know. Those big bands would travel then. There was a place in Freeport we used to go where they used to have big bands. We used to go to Freeport and dance. So you were both girls and boys then going over? Oh, yeah. Uh-huh, yeah, uh-huh. So, but you wouldn't dare tell your mother you were going over to dance with Italians. Well, they just, you know, it was just, let's put it this way, it was a stigma, you know. If you hung around with the Italians, then you were talked about, you know. And it was just a stigma, you know. You weren't supposed to, you know, you were supposed to hang around with your own. You wasn't supposed to hang around with, you know, South Rockford guys, you know, and that. So you didn't tell your mother about it, you know. You just went, you danced with them, and you went home with, uh. Now, you don't do that so much, but then girls would, I'd go with a girlfriend, you know, my girlfriend and I. We'd go, and then we'd dance with the fellas, and then we'd go home, we'd go home alone. You didn't date them then afterwards? No, uh-uh, no, not really, uh-uh, not really. You draw a line there between dancing and dating? Well, yeah, kind of, kind of, kind of, I guess, uh-huh, yeah. I didn't, I liked to dance with them, but I never went out with them. So they were good dancers? Oh, yeah, oh, sure, they were good dancers, uh-huh, yeah. And really, that's all that mattered, you know. When you were young in my age, that's all, if you couldn't dance, there was nothing to live for, you know. So you liked to dance? Oh, sure. What about your parents, now, were they dancers, too, or? Well, sure, my dad, yeah, my mother and dad would dance, you know, when they'd go to Viking. And my dad was a pretty good dancer, Hambo and Shottish, and, you know, Swedish Waltz. But out there on the Central? No, that wasn't, no, no, no, uh-uh, no, that was just Foxtrot and the Charleston, Charleston in my time. So they were popular then? Oh, yeah, yeah. So that was during your... That was during the 20s, you know. The 20s, late 20s. Yeah, mm-hmm, so I would say probably, oh, 29, 30, you know, 31, 32, you know, mm-hmm. So you could go out and dance then when you were 15, 16? Oh, yeah, mm-hmm, oh, yeah, yeah. So you had to be in by 10 or 11, though? Oh, sure, well, midnight, you know, Saturday night was usually midnight if we went to a dance, you know. There was no curfew for people on the 20s? No, not really, not at that time, mm-mm, no. So did any Swedish girl start a date now and eventually marry one of the Italians or Irish? Well, that... Do you know of any of your friends that did that? Well, I know a Swedish boy that lives down the street here that married an Italian through the Southeast End into an uproar for a while, you know, but they're still married, you know. They've been married for years and years and years, but, you know, kind of through the East End here into a turmoil, you know. His mother and dad didn't like it very well, but, I mean, that's the way it was, you know, so. Love is blind, they say. Yeah, that's right, love is blind, but it worked out for them. They were married for years and they're still married, so, yeah. Did he have to turn Catholic then or how did that work? I don't think so, I really don't think so. Did they have children and raise them? Yeah, they had children. I don't think he ever turned Catholic. I really don't know for sure. I never, never found, you know, but I don't think so. But it was just an exception, though. There was not too many of them. That was an exception. It wasn't the rule at that time. Of course, now it doesn't make any difference anymore, you know, but at that time it was not the thing to do, you know, but. Then you were sure to come in the news. That's right, yeah, that's right, you're sure. They were spread fast. Yeah, that's right, you hit the labor news when you done things like that in those days, you know. Olsen's daughter is dating an Italian. That's right, that would be terrible, you know. So you had the hanging over you, he was a good guy, you couldn't. No, you just didn't, you know, you just didn't do those things, you know. But, you know, young people always like to rebel, though, against old people. Yeah, well, I suppose I did, too. I danced with him. You went so far, though. Yeah, I went so far, I danced with him, you know, so. Yeah, there's one Italian fellow, he's had a shoe repair shop on 7th Street for years. Oh, he was the most wonderful dancer, you know, and just loved to dance with him, so. But he married an Italian girl and I married a Swedish boy, so, I mean, you know, we danced together, but that was it. Do you think the Italians had the same prejudice against the Swedes? I think so, yeah. It was universal. Oh, sure, sure, you didn't see very often an Italian girl marrying anything but an Italian boy. That's in the Swedish, they wanted us to stay with our own Swedish, you know, and that's the way it was then, but it's not that way anymore, you know, so. So when you danced now with an Italian boy, for instance, did they have a more gentleman-like manner, for instance, to be courteous towards the girls? I don't think so. Boys are boys and girls are girls, I guess. I don't think so, they were just good dancers and I couldn't care less about their manners. They were good dancers, that was it, you know, so, yeah. So you didn't join any church then, you were not confirmed? No, I was never confirmed, uh-uh, no. No, my folks never were church members and so I went to church, I went to Sunday school with this Swedish church on Kishwaukee Street, I can't even remember the name of it. First Lutheran? No, it was Swedish. Methodist? No, it was a Lutheran, you know, can't think of the name of it now, but. I went to Sunday school in that, but until I was about 15 or 16, you know, and then I quit. What about Yulota, did you go? Yulota? Yeah. Yeah, we used to go to Yulota at Salvation Army, you know, and yeah, that we used to do on Christmas morning, you know. They were down on East 12th? Yeah, they were on 4th Avenue, I think, at that time, yeah. When we first came over, we used to do that, you know. So did your parents have any friends they stuck together with? Yeah, they had friends, like I said, these Johnsons and Frank Olsen's mother and father, they were friends of my folks. Hallberg? Not Hallberg so much as Olsen's, you know, Maya, and that's Frank Olsen's mother and father. Frank Olsen's parents. Frank, yeah, okay, and then they, let's see, and then there was Lixels, they were here at that time, they went back to Sweden. And my uncle and aunt, Victor and Elsa Kroon, they went back to Sweden. And, oh, there was others, I can't think of all their names right now, but yeah. So your parents, now especially your father, was he involved with the politics or? No, no. He was not interested in that? No, no. Because that was a big issue in the late 20th century, the National Congress. Yeah, no, my dad was, my mother was more political than my dad was, you know. She belonged to some kind of club over in Sweden, I can't, I don't know really what kind it was or anything, but. Democratic? Well, probably, I don't know really what it was, but she was more politically inclined, I think, than my dad was, you know. But they didn't attend the activity? No, no, after they came over here, they never, like I say, they belonged to these, you know, he belonged to Harmony and that, but no, they weren't politically inclined. So, then, were you visiting Chicago, for instance, during that time with your parents, did you take the train in or? We took a train, yeah. We took the train in. How did you do that, once a year or? Oh, I don't know. We used to go around, I think it was around the first of May for May Day, you know. They used to have a big May Day doings in the San Vicans Club. San Vicans Club. Yeah, mm-hmm. Okay. And I think it was, because I can remember one time we went in there and they had a terrific blizzard, and so we couldn't get home, you know, like on Sunday night. We had to stay over because they had a blizzard here in Rockford and the trains had stopped, the trains and, you know, that kind of stuff. And, but it was around the first of May, I know. Probably. Your parents, though, they became citizens because they'd been there five years already. Yeah, mm-hmm, yeah. So, they became citizens quite fast, and then they came back. Well, I don't think they did after five years. I think my dad got his citizenship papers, was quite, I was about 20 years old when he became a citizen, yeah. I see. And then you automatically. No, I'm not a citizen yet. Oh, I see. No, I never got my papers. You never got it. No, I never got it. I never figured what, you know, never did. So, I'm still a citizen. You're a citizen of Sweden. I'm still a citizen of Sweden, yeah, mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Yeah, see, he didn't get his papers, so I wasn't in time. If he'd have done that before I was 18, then I would have automatically been a citizen with him, but. So, your mother then, and him, they became citizens. I don't think my mother, I don't know whether my mother became. Maybe she had to take it off. I think she did, too, and she never did either, so. I don't think she ever did. Can't ever remember that, no, just him. I don't know whether she became a citizen with him or not. That I couldn't tell you, but I know I didn't. It was too late for me, so. So, you had to send in the application. Yeah, I did, I did, and I made out the wrong papers for some reason or other. I was supposed to get the following year or something like that. It was, I can't remember, and he sent them back, and I just put them away and forgot about it, so. You never heard a thing. Never heard a thing, no. Just forgot the whole thing. They lost you in the shuffle of papers. That's right, and I figured as far as voting is concerned, my one vote wasn't going to count for much anyway, so. I just forgot the whole thing, yeah, so. Yeah. So, you worked in Olsen's High School? Yeah, I worked at Guilford High School for 17 years. In the cafeteria? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And, but you also worked in a factory, you said? Yeah, I worked at Clark's for a while. You worked there during the war then? No, I didn't work during the war, that was before. I worked at Clark's, well, yeah, I worked at Clark's after the war, but during the war I didn't work at all. So, you remember that 7th Street and the area? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. So, how long did it take you now to learn English? You were young, you went to school. Oh, I didn't, it didn't take me, I'll bet you it didn't take me a month, and I was talking just as fluently as I am right now. But still you had to keep up the Swedish then? Well, see, my mother and dad never spoke Swedish in the house, they spoke English all the time. They did? So, yeah, they never spoke Swedish. They did more towards in the later years, you know, than they did, but when we came over, I never heard Swedish spoken in the house at all. They both knew how to talk English, so they never spoke Swedish, so I never heard it. I think that's why I forgot to, you know, I really forgot to talk Swedish for a long, long time, just recently, since my dad's cousin died. I guess so. If I have time to think, you know, what I'm going to say, then I can probably come up with something, but otherwise I, you know, and to talk just for fun with somebody, you know, just acting up or something like that, maybe I can say, you know. But to hold a conversation with somebody all in Swedish, I can't do that anymore. So when you were growing up in the 20s, and the 30s and 40s, when you were working down there, you had no trouble to understand the Swedish? Oh, I can understand, oh no, I can understand. And you could carry a dialogue? Oh yeah, oh yeah. But then when you came home, you were all English? Yeah, yeah. So they didn't push the Swedish ending your parents' education? No, uh-uh. To entertain the Swedish? No, uh-uh, no, they didn't push that. You didn't went to school for it? No, no, no. How about high school here, though, did they taught Swedish? No, uh-uh, there was no Swedish, not at that time, not in my time. They did have Swedish classes over at East High when my kids went to high school. That was in the 50s? Yeah, let's see, 49, 59, in the 60s, you know. Must have been in the 60s because my youngest boy had took Swedish in high school, a couple of classes, you know. Isn't that strange, though, that the Swedes didn't press on to have Swedish in the 20s? No, uh-uh, uh-uh. I don't remember any Swedish. Because you understood Spanish? No, because we had Spanish. I had Spanish class, and we had to learn Latin, of all dumb things, you know, and Spanish and French, but no Swedish, uh-uh. You would think there'd been a lot of Swedes on the school board. Yeah, yeah, yeah. They were mostly all Swedes on the school board, really, at that time. And they favored Latin over Swedish. That's right, yeah, uh-huh. We had to learn Latin, you know, to write Latin, we had to learn that. And I had French class and Spanish class, but no Swedish, uh-uh. So how about you writing Swedish now? You never got the lesson really to write it? No, I went to school for one year, that's about all, yeah. One or two years, I can't just remember. But, no, I can't write Swedish to this day, you know, I can't. I can probably write it, but I don't know which curlicues to put on the top, you know. I've been going to write a letter to Ruth, this cousin of mine, to see if anybody on my mother's side is still left in Sweden, you know. She had a sister, and she had several brothers, and I know two or three of them that are dead, but I was just, I keep thinking, well, I wonder if, you know, if Phillip is still living, you know. Uncle Phillip, and I wonder if Uncle Sven is still living, you know. And I must have cousins galore over there, you know, but I don't know them. So I've never written to them, you know, and that. And since my mother and father have passed away, I haven't gotten any letters from them either, so. But the only news I got was when Ruth, you know, came. So. But it is kind of strange, though. I mean, you come home here from high school now with lessons to write letters. And not being able to write Swedish, you would think the parents would push a little bit there to retain the Swedishness? No, they never, uh-uh, they never did. So now I wish that, you know, wish they had, but at that time I suppose I never thought anything of it, you know. Because they would write, you know, they wrote to Sweden, you know, wrote letters. And they got letters from Sweden, but after they passed away, why, they just never wrote to me. So I never, never had a chance to answer them. But this, Venora Johnson, now she, I said, well, one of these days you come over and I want to write a letter to Ruth, you know. So she said, well, I'll come over and help you. But otherwise I don't know how to write. So businesses and the majority of the people, they were Swedes on this side of the country. Yeah. Was it easier than you think if you were a Swede to get a job in the factories where there were Swedish foremen? Oh, probably. They'd probably give a Swede a job before they gave an Irishman a job, you know. And I think most Swedish guys, when they came over here, they went right into furniture factories. We had a lot of furniture factories and I think there was, oh, I don't know. I heard my husband say at one time how many furniture factories there was in Rockford. And they were still going when you came? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. It was mostly all furniture. Now it's machine tool, but at that time it was mostly all furniture. They had, my husband worked in furniture practically all his life, you know. Yeah, you married then. What year did you marry? In 1935. 1935. You met... Fay. Frank Kalleen on the dance or how did you meet? Fay. My husband's name was Fay. So you met your husband, Fay Franklin Kalleen, on the dance? No. No, we just, I don't know. I don't even remember how we met. I think he used to just go past my house in his car and he used to honk at me. And then, I don't know, really. We just met. I can't even remember exactly how we met. But I know he used to go past my house. He had a cute yellow car, a Roadster, which caught my eye, you know. So I probably went out riding with him sometime or other and we met that way, you know. And he was born in Byron? He was born in Byron. Just southwest of here. Yeah. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. But his parents came from Sweden? Yeah. His mother came from around Lapland and his dad, I think, was, I don't know, used to get on, I think. Can't really remember. So what kind of work were they doing? He was a farmer. They were farmers. They farmed and, yeah. Faye was born on McCormick's, if you know where McCormick's big house. And they had a big farm, dairy farm. And he was a senator, McCormick. He was a senator here for years. And they had a big estate just as you go into Byron there. So his parents, they worked there for them? Yeah. Well, they leased the land, I guess, you know, and farmed there for a while. Yeah. That's where he was born. On Kennedy Hill, they used to call it. Kennedy Hill. Uh-huh. So he went out to school out there? Yeah. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. In the town of Byron? Yeah. Uh-huh. Yeah. And then you married in? 1935. Yeah. 1935. Uh-huh. And that was at the end of the Depression, or it was a little bit of the Depression, though. Were you working then? Well, I had worked at Ropers then, and I had worked at National Lock for a while. And he had been working. He was out of work, too, during that time for a long time while we were going together. Of course, we went together for, what, five and a half years before we could even afford to get married. So that was one of the reasons you couldn't marry because of the war? Yeah. He wasn't working, and so we couldn't get married. We just went together. We went to dances. And each one lived with his own family? Yeah. He lived with his folks, and I lived with mine. And that would happen with many youngsters. Yeah. I mean, young people at the time, they had to pull. Oh, yeah. Oh, sure. If you don't have a job, you can't very well get married. He was working on a farm, too, for some people. He was a hired man, and he only made $5 a week in his boardroom, so that wasn't very much. It was hard to save up. Yeah. You couldn't do much on that. It was hard to get a down payment on a house. Yeah, I guess so. He couldn't even afford to drive his car. He worked on Prairie Road, and he walked in to see me. I lived on 18th Avenue and Kishwaukee Street, and he walked in and walked back. So that's what you really call love. I don't see any kid doing that nowadays, you know, walking that many miles. Quite a business. Yeah. We just celebrated our 50th wedding anniversary here. Then you married, and what kind of pastor did you have to marry you? We were married down in Belvedere by Judge Oakley. Oh, I see. Justice of the Peace. Well, he was a judge. So he didn't belong to a church either? No. Faye Franklin. Isn't that a usual name, though, Faye Franklin? Where did they get those names? Well, I don't really know. His mother named all the kids short names. There's Pete. It's not Peter. It's Pete. That's on his birth certificate. And his brother is Al, A-L. And he had a sister, Eva, and he had a sister, Grace. So, I mean, they were all short names, you know. I don't know where she got them. Did they belong to a church, his parents? I think they did because Faye was confirmed at St. Lutheran, and he went to Swedish school at St. Lutheran. He learned to speak Swedish before he started school because he went to Swedish school. It was a long way, though. Well, how did he come into the church after Sunday school? Did he have to walk? No, I think his dad took him probably with a horse and wagon or horse and buggy, you know, at that time, I suppose. I don't know, really. It's a long haul, though. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, St. Lutheran Church. It's in the same place now as it was then, you know. So he was confirmed there, and he went to, like I say, Swedish school, and his brothers and sisters did, too. Did they belong to any lodges or organizations? I don't think so. They never—they weren't lodge members. Uh-uh. No. They weren't too far away, perhaps. Yeah. Mm-hmm. No, they never— Did they stay there all their lives in the— No, they farmed around in Rockford here, around—oh, it was around Prairie Road and out in that direction, south main, you know, and in that area there. They farmed in there. That's where they were farming when I met Fay. Mm-hmm. That's out on Prairie Road. Simpson Road. They farmed on Simpson Road and Prairie Road. Uh-huh. So then when you— When I first met him, he had—his dad had quit farming, and he was working at a furniture factory over here on 18th Avenue, and they bought a house on South 4th Street, so that's how I met Fay, because he—we only lived about two blocks apart. So I seen him, you know, in the car and— So then when you got married and you rented an apartment— Yeah. Mm-hmm. And moved together. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And what kind of job was he doing then or working? Well, then he was working at Illinois Cabinet. Mm-hmm. Furniture. Yeah, furniture. Mm-hmm. And he stayed with that for— Yeah, he stayed with that until the war, and then he got a defense job at Rockford Clutch. So he worked there during the war, and that kept him out of the war because they were 100 percent defense, so that kept him out of the war, and then after the war, then he went back into furniture again, and then he worked at Winnebago Cabinet for 27 years, so. Mm-hmm. He worked at Illinois Cabinet and Clutch and Winnebago. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So—and then you bought this house eventually. Yeah, we bought this in 1950—'54?—'53, I think, we bought this house. And my husband remodeled it. He put new windows in and new floors, and we fixed it up. It was an old house. In fact, they were friends of my folks, too, Carlson's. I don't—used to own this, so I've been in this house for—since I came from Sweden, really. You know. And then Mrs. Carlson wanted to sell, and we bought it, and so we bought it with the understanding that my husband would fix it up because I wouldn't live in it the way it was, so he said he'd fix it up, and he did. So we've lived here for 30—over 35 years, I guess. And it's adjacent to the park out there? Yeah, mm-hmm. It was Southeastern Park. What was it called? Southeastern? Southeastern Park, mm-hmm, yeah. So you have a beautiful view out there. Yeah, yeah. It's not as pretty as it used to be. It used to be a lot of trees around there, you know, and it used to be prettier than it is now. But you're not too far from downtown, though, for the stores and— No, of course. Now I never go downtown anymore. You know, we used to be, you know. We'd go downtown, but now we've got all the shopping malls and everything else. So the shopping malls have taken all the people there? Yeah, they have, yeah. Easy to park and— Yeah. There's no downtown anymore, per se, you know. So 7th Avenue or Snusgatan, that's the name? Yeah, yeah. 7th Street, that was called Snusgatan, you know, Snuff Alley. Snuff Street. Yeah, they used to call it. Didn't most of the young people, even the older ones, use a lot of snuff? I guess so. Because they couldn't smoke on the job, right? No, and furniture factories, you couldn't very well smoke, you know, so I suppose they did. I guess my husband did, too, but I never knew it because he never chewed snuff at home. So, uh-uh. But he had the respect for you, then? Yeah, yeah, he did. I never knew he used snuff, but— But my oldest boy and my youngest boy quit smoking here about— Well, they haven't smoked for a long time, but they use snuff now instead of smoking, so that's just exchanging one bad habit for another. But, um— So you have three boys? I have three boys, uh-huh. One in Florida, you said? Yeah, mm-hmm, mm-hmm. And the other two are around the— Yeah, one is here in Rockford and one lives out in Roscoe. Roscoe. Mm-hmm. How are they married now? Are they still Swedish girls, too? No, no, my oldest son here married a German girl. She's German and part French, I think. And my youngest boy, he married—I think she's English and probably some Scotch. I think her grandmother—on her grandmother's side, they were Scotch. And my other son in Florida, I think she's part German and probably part English. So they're not married non-Swedes, then? Yeah, they didn't marry Swedes either. What does that affect now? You carry on Swedish traditions in your heart because you came from both parents on your side. Yeah, mm-hmm. How about your boys now? Do they have any strong— They have—yeah, they like—I do that rosemaling like Marian does, you know, and they like that kind of stuff. How about food now, though? Yeah, they like some of the ethnic Swedish foods. I don't know whether they eat it here because I have it, you know. I don't know whether their wives—their wives don't fix it for them, I don't think, you know. Like if I'm going to have spareribs and root mousse, you know, I'll ask one of them over. One son likes it, the other one don't, so I'll ask them over. And oh, when I make kodalmer, they all like that. They all used to like that, you know. And as does the sauerkraut. Yeah, well, yeah. And I don't know, just—I make Swedish pancakes on Sunday mornings. They all eat—they all— Oh, yeah, they love that, yeah. But how about your daughter-in-laws now? Are they able to make Swedish pancakes or— No, I think my son—both my sons make them, but I don't think the daughter-in-laws do. But that's something that they do, you know. Like when they have Swedish pancakes, Tim makes them. And when Denny and them, they have them—I think Denny makes them, you know. So, no, I don't think the daughters-in-law really cook that much Swedish foods, you know. My sons love pea soup, but my daughter-in-law don't care that much for it, you know. She doesn't like peas of any kind or beans or anything like that. But I'll usually send a little dish home with Denny, you know, so he can have it for lunch or something like that. I like to cook more so now than when I was younger. It seems like I have gone back, you know, to more— Did you learn to bake rye bread and Swedish coffee bread? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Do you want to talk to her about it? Well, not necessarily, because when I got married and moved off by myself, I didn't have a telephone, so I couldn't call my mother and ask her how to do this and how to do that. So I asked a Swedish meat man that worked on the bill strands. When they called—his name was Wendell Olson, and they used to call him Wendy Olson. And he worked in the meat market. And I traded there when I first got married, and if I didn't know how to fix something, he'd tell me how. So I said if it hadn't been for him, my husband would have starved to death the first year we were married. And he really taught me more about Swedish cooking than my mother did, really, because, like I say, I had no telephone to ask her, you know. And I didn't see her that often, except when we'd go over there and, you know. But I bought Swedish cookbooks and learned how to, you know. And I've always baked coffee cakes and, you know, stuff like that and made Swedish cookies at Christmastime, and that's been a tradition for years, you know. You bake sprits and, you know, all that. But I've always had Swedish cookbooks to, you know, kind of go by. How about your son's Christmas now? Is that in some way Swedish ways, or do they go by their wives? I don't know. More Americanized? I think it's more Americanized, you know, than... So the Christmas gifts are on Sunday morning, I mean Christmas morning instead of... No, no, we usually get together here Christmas Eve. They all come here Christmas Eve, and then they have Christmas... Yeah, and then they have Christmas Day over to her folks or, you know. You have to kind of split it up when you've got daughters-in-law, you know. So we have the traditional Christmas Eve, Christmas here. We always have had, you know. I don't know about this year. With my husband gone, I don't know whether I'm going to go to all that work or not, you know. I think I'm going to Florida this year for Christmas. So... but we have traditional, I think, Swedish. We have the lutefisk, you know, and stuff like that. Your daughter-in-law doesn't eat that, though? No, they don't. But they eat the ham, skinka, and, you know, korv, and they like that. But your sons, though, they eat lutefisk? Oh, yeah, yeah, they like it once a year. But, you know, it's not something they want all the time, you know. Me either. I don't care that much for it either. So... but we have it around Christmas time. Not necessarily we don't have it Christmas Eve. I usually have it a week or two before Christmas, you know. And I've got friends here that like it, and we get together and have lutefisk together and stuff like that. So... Do you remember over the years if you women went together for sewing parties, you know, and stitching and... Well, yeah, yeah. I used to belong to a sewing club, you know. They met in the homes? Yeah, we met in the homes, and we'd sew and crochet. When you were younger or newly married? Yeah, when I was newly married. Not recently, no. And they were all your age group then? Yeah, it was all my own age group. Yeah, we were married, had little kids, and... And you met them in the... Oh, yeah, in our homes, yeah, in our homes. And, yeah. Just like in Sweden. Yeah, sure. Yeah, uh-huh, yeah. I still crochet. I like to crochet and do stuff like that. Yeah, needlework, you know. So I made that. This here, that's from Sweden. I made that. Yeah, I like to do stuff like that. Have you been back to Sweden? No, no, I've never been back. No, I'd like to, but I don't have the money to now, so... Yeah. But you have a context with Sweden, anyway, so you can... Well, yeah, I like this Ruth, that cousin of my dad. She'll, you know, she'll write once in a while and that. So, but like I say, a lot of them probably are gone now. I don't even know. I don't hear from them, you know, anymore, so... Your parents, did they go back? No, they never went back either. And you were never homesick, you understood of them saying anything? No, I don't think so. I never heard them say that they wanted to go back, you know. So my dad's got a brother that's still living and a nephew that my grandparents raised. He's still living, as far as I know. So your mother, she had a brother in the... Yeah, she had two brothers. She had one brother, Frederick. He was out east, and then she had another brother, Carl, that was in... He's dead, they're both dead. But your father didn't have any... No, he had nothing here but a cousin. He was the only one then? Yeah, he was the only one from there. Oh, his sister. He had a sister that was out east, too. But we never seen them, never heard from them, never, you know, they never contacted. Yeah, what's your aunt then? It was my aunt, Anna. But they were never in contact? No, uh-uh, no, they never contacted us. I don't know whether my dad ever contacted them, really. So I think there were some hard feelings there. I don't really know, I don't remember, really. But I think there were some hard feelings there, or something, I don't know what, you know. Crazy things happen. The Swedes are stubborn. Yeah, well, I guess so. But then, you can say that about all nationalities, can't you? It's probably the same. Yeah, it's the same. It's also universal. That's right, it's universal. Some people are more stubborn than others, you know, unforgiving and relentless, you know. And I think my dad was probably that kind, you know, kind of. So, yeah. When did they die, you know, here in Rockport? My dad, my mother died in 1970, and my dad died in 1971. So it was the year in between. Mm-hmm. Did they live with you then at any time? At the time, yeah. My mother lived with, yeah. They had a cottage up in Michigan, and they'd go up there in the summertime and stay, and then they'd come back and spend the winters with us here. So your children could grow up with grandparents? Yeah, they had grandparents, yeah. Were they helpful then to help you? Oh, yeah, when they were well, you know, and that. My kids grew up really out with my mother and dad out there. They'd go out there for weekends, and, you know, a week at a time, and they learned to swim out by the river there. They learned to fish, and they had kids to be with, you know, and they had a wonderful childhood. Did they come with their grandmothers and grandfathers? No, I don't think so. It was grandma and grandpa. They never picked up any Swedish language? No, they never did. Uh-uh. Because your parents... Like I say, they were more Americanized, you know. They spoke English all the time. They spoke English all the time to them, too. Mm-hmm. No. They never did call them more and more and more. I did, mine, you know, because I was in Sweden then, but they never did. It was grandpa and grandma. Mm-hmm. Yeah. So you and your husband belonged to Sweden? Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And when you came in there some years ago, there were only Swedes? Oh, yeah, there was only Swedes, you know. My girlfriend is Swedish, and her husband was French. But that was all right, that she could join? But that was all right, but she could join and he could join, you know. But no, it was mostly all Swedish, you know what I mean? They just... But I said, well, one by one, they're dying off, you know. And like I'm 71, you know, and most of the people there now that's left is my age group. And when they're gone, the younger ones are not Swedes, you know. So what will happen then, you think? I don't know. I don't know whether they'll just... These Swedish clubs, like Vikings, for instance, there used to be a club, Viking Club. I don't even know whether they're in existence anymore. Lyron still is, but I don't know, you know, when this generation of Swedes go, whether even Lyron Club will be... Lyron, no. Is that the IOGT? No. Lyron Singing Club. But they used to have another IOGT hall that wasn't Lyron, you know. Vega. Yeah. They sold. They sold, uh-huh. It's not there anymore. SM&SF, that's another Swedish, yeah. Did you belong to that one? My boys belonged to that, but we never did. But I used to go up there and dance, you know, and they used to have dances, all of them. Every Saturday night, they used to have dances. So your boys then joined the SM&SF? SM&SF, yeah. Two of them did. Mike in Florida and Denny. They both belonged at one time. I don't think they belong anymore, you know. Oh, that's not the Scandinavian fraternity? Yeah. It was Scandinavian, yeah. SM&SF, uh-huh. I don't know what it stands for, but, yeah, they belong. It's a Swedish club. But the people that joined, though, lately, they are not that active like people were before. I don't think so. Uh-uh. I don't think so. Uh-uh. Now, Swetheard used to have a choir. They don't have a choir anymore. Lyron still has a choir, I guess, but I don't know. I really haven't heard lately, you know. You remember years ago that people, they were singing much more. Oh, yeah, they did. And we sing, for instance. Yes, they did. They don't do that anymore, huh? This younger generation don't do much of anything.