 August 4th, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Mrs. Cecilia Crane, Grand Haven, Michigan. She was born 1897, 13th of January, in Allegan, Michigan. But it was not Allegan, it was out on the farm. They called it Sandham. S-A-N-D-H-A-M. Why did they call it Sandham? Well, some of those old Swedes, I guess, that came from Sweden that named it, I don't know. Because they're sandy soil, you think? Because it actually means, translated, sand hole. I know it, but I don't know. That I don't know. Past history, I don't know that. But you were born there? On the farm, yeah. And you were, how many sisters and brothers now? Well, now as Sally told you this, father and mother came from Sweden with two children. They were born in Sweden? Yes, and they were born in Sweden. And we were ten children. We were seven girls and three boys. And there were only four of us left. Four sisters left. Were they a boy and a girl that was born in Sweden? A boy and a girl. He was the oldest one. He was confirmed when he was 15, and he was struck by lightning in October and passed away. You remember that? Oh yes, I was four or five years old. Do you remember talking Swedish in the family when you were growing up? Oh yes, we were always talking Swedish. With your sister also? All of us, but then of course we went to school. How about the rest of the neighbors around there in Sandhym? They were all Swedish? They were all Swedish, uh-huh. We only had one Catholic family there, I think, in that community. How did they come in there? Was that by accident? That I don't know. Maybe they married the Swedes? No, no, they were strict Catholics. They had their church quite a ways from there, but they lived in that community. And the church was right there, walking distance from your farm? Yes, about a mile from home. I have pictures out of here. Maybe you could learn more from the pictures. Well, but you tell me a little bit, add a little bit to the pictures there. So how do you remember being brought up there on the Swedish farm? You had to help out when you were many kids, but you still all had to do your things. Did you help your mother in the kitchen, or were you out in the fields? No, I was more in the house with mother. I didn't do too much work outside, but the rest of them did a lot of work outside. In what order are you born, or were you born? In the middle, or at the end, or...? We were seven girls, and I was right in the middle. I had three sisters above me, three below me. I see. And the boys were all older. All older. Yeah. So your sister now, still living here in Greenhaven, was she like a little boss for you then? She was older. Older? Yes, she was older. Was she like in charge of you, what you were doing? She was teaching you, or did you listen to her? Oh, we all... The older ones always helped the younger ones. My older sister was a schoolteacher, and so is this sister was a schoolteacher. And then I went to school, and I was a teacher. So... But we all helped each other. It's unusual, though, there are so many kids. Your parents were very particular about sending you to school and continue your education after grade school down there. Yes. Because you went to a one-room schoolhouse, I imagine. In the country. In the country. But it was four miles into Allegan to go to high school. So we all went to school, but we didn't all graduate. There were only three of us that graduated. From high school? Yes. Did you live in Allegan then? Oh, no. We had to go back and forth. Walk every day? Well, the older ones did, but... But... I... When I went to school, I worked for my room and board. In Allegan? In Allegan, yes. So we stayed there for the winter. Were you able to study then, or were they asking too much of you at school? Yeah, the people you work for ask too much for it. They want to have their money's worth. Yeah. Were you paid for it, or...? Oh, no. No, we're just a room and board. Were you like a babysitter, or...? Yes, uh-huh, yeah, that's more like that. Cleaning and... No cooking? Well, help with everything. But... But you graduated from high school, though? Yes. And you're still living here in...? Yes, uh-huh. Yeah. So after high school, then you went to a teacher's college, or how did you get your...? Yes, I went to Kalamazoo, Western. Yes. And I studied music and art, so I graduated from Kalamazoo. Then I taught school. I taught two years at one time, and then four years at another time. Choosing the subject, now, like music and art, did your parents approve of it? Did they think it was a good idea to do that, or...? Oh, yes. Father and mother were very musical. They could sing those Swedish songs, and... They could? Oh, yes. Play too, an instrument? No, they didn't play any instrument, but my father bought an organ, and of course I was the one that played that. And later we had a piano. So... So they were coaching you a little bit, or...? Oh, yeah. Interested to see you... Uh-huh. And I played for Sunday school and church out there in that Swedish little... So I played the old psalms. That's the beginning. My dad used to say, you play them kind of fast. I see. You know, they used to sing them so slow. What made you play them faster? Did you...? Well, I was a little bit too modern, I guess. You know, how slow they sang those psalms. Did you ever sing them? No. What did the people tell you, then, when you played them a little too fast? Oh, nobody said anything, but my father told me. He was superintendent of Sunday school. So he told you. He told me. So slow it down a little bit. Yeah. But when you came to school, now, to your teacher, did you play any of those old psalms for comparison, or what did she say about it? Or he said, your teacher in music. Oh, no. That was all... That was all your own idea, the plant-based? Yeah. Then we had midsummer. We always celebrated midsummer. At your home? No, no. At the church. At the church. And we had our maypole, and we would all gather flowers, and... I had sort of charge of that when I was young. Who taught you not to put it upright? Was it a big pole? Oh, you know, in the country, it was everything. You had it like a cross, like... It wasn't anything, yeah. It wasn't anything special. We just had an old pole, and we... You know, it wasn't anything. You picked wild flowers, then? Yeah. To make your rings? Yes, uh-huh. Yeah, we had a lot of flowers and wreaths that we... Dressed it up? Just kind of, yeah. And then, and there was some midsummer day? Yeah, midsummer day. Well, the midsummer eve or... Yeah. And did you dance around it? Oh, the children did, you know. Then we had... We always had a big picnic, you know. Dinner. So the parents came together and... Yeah. And come together. Yeah. And the songs now, and the dances you had out there, were they Swedish? Oh, yes. We used to sing the Swedish songs. Oh, you danced around the maypole? Yes, uh-huh. Yeah. But it was a small community, you know. Did you know the reason why you did this every year, for midsummer? Did the parents know? Well, it was just a... Celebration of summer? Sure, uh-huh. From Sweden, you know. And that was done when you were younger? Oh, yes, uh-huh. Every year? Well, yes, we did it as long as we could. And when you moved away, did somebody else take over then to be in charge of it? No, not... No, really, they didn't. It died out then? It kind of died out on them. But, you see, our church was out there in the country. In the late years, they've sold that church, and they have a new church, a Lutheran church, in Allegan, in the city. And that's thriving. That's really doing real well. In the village? Uh-huh. But the little church still stands there, the old church. Is it kept up? Oh, no. No. You're just standing there? Yeah, just standing there. Some people came in and rented it for a while, but I don't know what's happened to it now. But my father and mother were great... They were great supporters of the church. Were they charter members, perhaps, of the church? They what? Charter members? Oh, yeah. Oh, yes. The menace, you know, they came to serve your congregation? Yeah, they were from all over. But they were of Swedish background, though. Did they have anything to do with this Midsummer Festival to encourage? Well, they would... Not especially, if it happened to be. So there was not a religious service then with Midsummer? Oh, not... No, not especially. Oh, it was for the family and the kids? Yes. Did any of you have a costume on? No, we really didn't. No. No, we didn't. It was just a small community, you know, and there wasn't much to do with it. We were all kind of ordinary people, kind of poor, all of them. So how long did you stay home now? Oh... You went to teacher's college, then after high school? Well, then after I taught school, then I came... I went back to my father and mother and took care of them until they passed away. But then you had some teaching years in between, though. But I was all through teaching then. I see. So what did you teach, Noah? Well, in those days, you could take music and art. So I taught music one day and art the next day. So they were in higher grades in high school? I had them from the grades and high school. And there was some towns in Michigan then? No, that was near Kalamazoo. I see. Little towns near Kalamazoo. They were small communities. That's a long time ago. But you still remember? Well, I hope to. So, and your parents were still on the farm then? Yes. When you were teaching. Most of the kids were flown off. Father passed away on the farm, but mother came here to live with us here in Grand Haven, and she passed away here. How about your brothers, Noah? Did anybody take over the farm? No. Well, I can't tell you all this. No, but like the ones that were born in Sweden. Did they move out first then, because they were the older ones? Well, that boy died. He died of a light stroke. Yes, yes. And my oldest sister, she taught school. She married and came to Grand Haven to live, too. She passed away just ten years ago. And there was, but I had a brother. My father had three farms. He was a great farmer, wonderful farmer. So he bought one after another on his own? He bought three farms. So my oldest brother and his family ran one farm. They charged that one farm until father had passed away. Then they picked up and went to Arizona to live. You mean they were retired then already? No, they weren't retired, no. His wife wanted to go to Arizona, so they went to Arizona to live. And they stayed there? Yeah. So the farms were sold. And as I say, mother came here to spend the rest of her life. She passed away here. Was it possible not for one of you kids to stay on the farm and make a living? No, no. No, I had a brother that was in Germany during the war, and he died over there. He maybe would have taken over the farm. But there were none of the girls. The home is still standing there, and they've kept it up. People that bought it have kept it up. I tell you, you ought to go down to my cousin that lives down there on the farm. Oh, she lives on the farm now? A cousin. You see, when my father came over here, he sent for his brother from Sweden, and they worked together. Then when the brother got married, they divided the farm. So we had cousins living on one farm right next to us, see? And there is a son that still lives on that farm. No, there are two boys left there on that. So he lives down on that farm near Allegan. So when you were growing up, there were a lot of relations around, and you had a lot of playmates. They were all Swedish, really. You'd come together quite often then. Oh, yes. We had one unit. But they had kalos. Kalos. You stuck together. Yeah. And then there was Swedish cooking with all kinds of dry bread. Did you learn to bake? Well, no, not especially. So when you were old enough, now your sister, she was older, when you started to date boys, were your parents interested for you to find a Swedish? Not especially, no. None of us married a Swedish. Was there anybody there to marry down there? Yeah, there's a family that has seven boys right there. And you bypassed them? I had a sister and a nephew. She married a Lee and you married a Kring. Yeah. So what did mother say when you came home with a boyfriend? It's okay. Not a Swede. It was okay. You didn't have to make some explanation. They didn't interfere with that, no. So, well, our family really was more advanced than many of them out there in that they were so Swedified or something. But like my oldest sister, she was so determined, she was so anxious to go to high school. And we were really, well, we were really more, I don't know what to say. We were anxious for education and so forth. So she was the one that set the trend in your... Yes, she's the first one that went to high school. No, that was Matilda. Oh, Matilda. Yes. She was just ten years older than I was. We were born on the same day. But the rest of them out there, there was only about one or two people that went into high school. You know, those families out there, they farmed and everything else, but they didn't go for education like we did in our family. So the other kids, they stayed on the farm? Yeah, more so. And they didn't learn dance or anything? Not as much as our family did. How come your ideas was different though? Well, mother. Mother was, we had a wonderful mother and dad too. They were brilliant people, really. They had to work so darn hard when they came here, you know. And mother started, she was anxious to be educated too. So she went to Uppsala in Sweden. In Sweden? Yes. And she came from down south, wasn't it? Skåne? Yes, yes. Both of you? Both of us, yeah, from Skåne. So she went to Uppsala? Yeah. For how long? She was going to study to be a teacher. And it seemed that her father, he was working on those big estates, the barren. And he had an accident. And I don't know if it was his left arm or his right arm that was cut off. So he couldn't work there anymore. So they didn't have any income. So mother had to quit. But then she took up sewing, so she did tailoring. And she made all their clothes. Oh, you know, she was so, she was, but she didn't only make clothes. She was a wonderful mother. She was so, well, she taught us. She was a go-getter and she did it. And the education she lacked or couldn't get, she wanted you to have. Your brother, Ernest, he had a daughter. He had a daughter that was very talented in art and music. But they didn't realize it, you know. In those days, you'd... And she lived to be, I guess it was only 52 when she passed away. But she was very musical. She was raised on the farm. So your brother had one of the farms. But when they went to Arizona... Oh, this is the family. Yeah, that's the family. And that's where she just loved the Western. And so she is the one that... She wrote this book now, reminiscing about her childhood and how she had horns and horses and all kinds of animals. Oh, she could train animals, too. She was very gifted. And she was a good writer, though. Oh, she was a beautiful writer. She's a good picture of it. Yeah, you saw a picture of her. Yeah, and also in the writing, I mean, she makes it very vivid. Yeah, she was very talented. Why did she die? Was she on an accident? No, she... well, she never was a strong woman. She was very frail. And she just overdid, you know, when she went to the West. She just... she was never still. She was always seeking, going places, you know. She just wore herself out. And when she came home, cancer set in. So she died of cancer. And she mentioned something in this book that's very interesting, that there were all Lutherans, of course, down there. Yeah. In society, and there was one living a little bit far away. It was like the heathens, or they didn't go to any church. Yeah. How did they fit in, though? I mean, did you play with those kids, or...? Well, I guess we did. Yes, there were people that never went to church down there. They would... They were living in a special ward, by their own? Yeah, but they lived right in our neighborhood. We had one of the Swedish boys that married one of those girls, and he brought her into the church. But... well, it was a small community. So he did some missionary work, then, by marrying an outsider. What did you discuss, though, when you were young? You were confirmed down there in this church. Yeah, I was confirmed. What kind of outlook did you have with the rest of the kids around there? Did you try to get to a big city like Detroit? No. Or Chicago, or...? No, we didn't get anywhere those days. We lived on the farm. We didn't have a car at that time. But we all were confirmed. We had these ministers that came in, and... What did they tell you? I mean, the ministers that were confirming you. Well, we had our lessons, Bible history. But he didn't give you any kind of inducement to try to get employment somewhere else? Oh, no. They never discussed that? No, it was all... Religious? Yeah, with the church. What did you take the religious teaching, though? Was it in Swedish? Oh, yeah. Yes, I was confirmed in Swedish. And you had no trouble understanding it? No, we had... oh, no. We all were taught... And you had to learn by heart, verses and psalms and hymns? Sure did. Can't remember them now. And the only thing you did was to play them a little bit faster? Was what? You played them a little bit faster than when you get into the... in charge of it. Yeah. When you played organ. Yeah, I was about the only one down there that has... that played. I got them to sing. Have a good time. So after you arrived in the church, you shortened up the service a little bit by playing a little bit faster? Well, that didn't amount to very much, but... Of course, I was away at school, too, so I wasn't home all the time. But... So... Did Sally show you any of the pictures of our church and so forth? Yes, I saw them. So there was your niece? Yeah, that's Hilma's daughter. So she married first, then your sister. And she moved to Torm, and then Hilma. She married a Lee. Yes, she came here to teach school. And she taught school here two years and then somewhere else, and she met this Wesley Lee. And she married into an English family. And she was very, very capable of taking care of... But that's interesting, though, you know, I talked to Sarah because, you know, she was growing up here in half Swedish and half English. And the English side, of course, was very strict. Very. Very English. How did your sister fit into that one, though? Did she have to swallow a lot of things that she didn't want to complain about? She seemed to fit right in. Because I remember Sarah mentioned that she had stumbled, and her heave was not too good one afternoon, and she had a rough time walking. And her mother-in-law, the English lady, her husband's mother, she came for tea, and she expected to be served. And she didn't dare complain about her. She couldn't walk or anything. Don't you think she had to swallow that kind of pride of being an underdog there, though? Yeah, but I'm telling you, she stood up for every one of them. But I tell you, it was an awful family to get into because they were so... So different. Altogether different. But, and they, you see, it was... Here they were people of, well... Of education. And then for him, for Wesley, to marry a country girl, you know, it was... But she, believe me, she fit in, and she told them off, every one of them, before she... She did. She could. She stood up to every one of them. But it was later on, though. She wouldn't dare do it in the beginning. Not at first, but she really... And she went through an awful lot. There was such a bad feeling with these next, you see, these wives that the grandfather had. The granddaughter, yes. He was married three times, you know. I guess I shouldn't say all that, but anyway. So, but she stood up for all of them, and they're all gone. Here she is living on. But she was also the kind like your mother, then. You know, you got the grain of your mother's stamina to take it. Yeah, she was real strong. She was really the strongest one in the family, you know, of the girls. And she also became an elder in the Presbyterian. There was also something I know of. Yes, she got right into the Presbyterian church. So... How did it happen, though? I mean, a woman at that time taking a step forward and raised herself to that level. Believe me, that's something. It comes from the women. This whole town knows all the good things that she has done. And her husband, too, Wesley, Sally's father and mother, they have done so much, you know, for the community. And, of course, they had the challenge machinery, the factory out here. But they still have it in the family. Yes, it's still in the family. It was just recently that the grandson was made president of the company. Of this league. Yeah. So how about her husband? Who was in charge in the home? According to Sarah, mother seems to be the one that had the last word. Well... So he took a little bit backseat then to his wife. Well... I wouldn't say that. She worked with him. They were so close and he was so interested in the factory that she was always with him and he always discussed all the business with her. So when he passed away, they wanted somebody on the board. And so they had Hilma come on the board. And she could tell them more about the factory than any of them else. So she paid attention to what she learned. So she was on the board, yes. And I don't know if she resigned a few years ago, but she still can tell you about that factory. She was so involved with it, you know, and Wesley was so... Well, the factory made everything. It meant everything to him, you know. So they were very close. But she was the background, really, you know. She held him up because it was... His father was awful hard on him. I see. He should have been more lenient with him, but he was very hard on him. I don't know if he was jealous of him or what, but my sister just held him up, see, so it was... Maybe that's the way of British upbringing, they should say. I think so. You see, Hjelma was so strong, and he needed her. It just seemed that they worked together. So those girls... Well, you only met Sally, but there were three children. Oh, Sally, I see. Yeah, Sally. I said Sarah, but it's Sally. And she remembers very vividly in her youth that when they came to the grandparents on the Leaside, they had to be very particular. Very, very particular, yeah. They couldn't sit at the table, they couldn't say anything. But when they came down to Erlingen, there was like a free world. Yeah, she's told you that. It is probably true, though. Oh, it was. They felt relaxed, and they could do anything they wanted. Sure, they were free down there. No, they were very hard on the children. I think it kind of affected them, too, you know. But... So that's a different way of... Yeah, altogether different. And your sister, now, she came in as an elder on the Presbyterian, which was one of the first. She was the first that broke the way for women to be on this board, I understand. Well, well... And she was on the school board. Yeah, she was on the school board. And she put her foot down there many times to say, Yes, she did. Peace of mind. So she was a go-getter. Oh, she was. She's been a wonderful woman, really, you know. And she's gone through so much, you know. This is I-2, this continuation with Mrs. Crane, Grand Haven, Michigan. Yeah, well... I-2. So, her husband, he died also suddenly up in Canada, wasn't he? Yes, uh-huh. He wasn't very well toward the last, you know. And they left for a vacation up in Canada. So that's where he passed away. And that's 21 years ago now. But she was already introduced to his business then, so she really didn't have to... She went right to... She could... Pay attention to what he was doing there. Yeah, she went right into it. And have you seen the chapel that they... No, I haven't, but I heard about it. Dedicated in his honor. Yes, it's out here toward the cemetery, right next to the cemetery. I see. So they have services there for funeral services? Yes, uh-huh. Weddings? No, just funerals. Funeral services. We were just... The man that built their home on woodlawn passed away just a couple weeks ago. He's 94. And my sister, they were very fond of him. And she wanted to go to that funeral. But he was buried right from the chapel. And so her grandson did get to take her up there. But that was a pretty big day for her, you know. This retirement center we are sitting in now, I also saw the Lee out there on the plaque. Is this the same family? What's that? I saw the name Lee on the list. Yeah, well, that was Mr. Lee's sister. She's the one that gave the six city blocks. The whole block? Yes, six city blocks. And to anybody that would take it. And the city didn't take it. In those days, they didn't... I don't know, they didn't think about the old people like they do now. So the church... So the Dutch churches. Reform churches. There are nine churches here that have taken it over. And so this is what they've done with it, and it's wonderful. So there's like the whole church community in this? Well, there are several. There are so many Dutch churches here, but there are only nine of them that support this. And just last summer, we had big donations from the people that have passed away. So they have done it over and made it real modern. It's a lovely place. It's the cleanest place and the best ordered place in the state of Michigan. And it's the most reasonable place. Good, right? Yes, very reasonable here. So you are... So now with... I have the loveliest room in the building. And everything is furnished. Your meals, your linens and everything. We don't have to buy anything. And you can go home and leave as you please. I still drive my car, so I have my car. A lot of them have their cars here. And we can go home, please. It's very religious. They are very serious here about their... They always have a lot of church service, you know. And that's all right. But it's open for any denomination or... Yes, yes it is. So we have Catholics in here. And we were quite a few Presbyterians in here, but there are only a couple of us now. But now I'll just tell you how reasonable this is. I only pay $475 a month and everything is furnished. But did you have to pay in then a certain amount? No, no. I've been here ten years now. So... It's really a bargain. It is. With the meals? With the meals, everything is furnished. But they must be subsidized then by the churches? The churches, just by the churches. We don't have fancy meals. They're very ordinary. Oh, you're adequate. Yes. How did you meet your husband now? I was teaching school. Oh, he was also a teacher? No. He was an engineer. Now is this on? Here in Grand Haven. Is this on? Yes. Oh, I don't know. Why do you have... You don't want that on. No, but it's history, you know, part of your life. He was a stepping stone in your life, to pick a partner for life. I don't want to think about those... How did you meet him? In school work or... No, I was teaching and he came home from Michigan State. He graduated from Michigan State. And, I don't know, he was a young man. He didn't smoke, he didn't drink. He was different than some of the other boys that I'd gone with. Did the younger people, the boys now, usually drink and smoke in your age group? Well, they... Was there a common... Not as much, of course, as there is now. Like Don and Elegant, the Swedish boys. Oh. Did they use snuff? Oh, no. Well, I suppose that... I don't know. No, I don't know anything about it, really. But he was a clean-cut... Yeah, he was, yes. But he was... He graduated from the university at 16, so he was brilliant. But he had been hurt when he was younger, so he had an operation on his leg. And he had been spoiled, too. And it just didn't work out, you know. Was he the only child in his family? Yeah, no. But there was no religion in that family, really. And he really didn't have the best background that he should have had. But really is. He had a good... Yes....strait. But I knew that he came from a good family and everything. But it was very disappointing because I had a little higher ideals than that, you know. I thought once you were married, you were married. But he was... Well, he had been spoiled, you know, and it just didn't work out. You didn't want to be his babysitter in the future. No. It was all right. We were married in 23. And a couple years, we had a child. But he, well, he passed away. So another year, we had a son. And this is the son I have in California. And as long as I could be sort of babysitter to my husband, it was okay. But he got too jealous when that, you know. Oh, I see. You know, it was just, it just didn't work out. I had spent too much time with the youngster. Now, that's all. That's interesting. Well, it is. And he was... You're own upset you get the feeling. Well, it was kind of sad. So you went each your separate ways then? We first went, you see, he applied for engineer job at one of the big power plants out in Utah. So he went out there, and then I went out there, and we were married out there. Well, he got so homesick, and that was an awful hard job that he was too inexperienced, really. So he was too anxious to come back here. So he was a native of Michigan? Yes. Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. No, no. In Homer, Michigan. Homer. But... Did you quit working then when you married? Oh, yes. I didn't work after that. So when you married, now he was not religious. You said, did you marry in the Lutheran church or... No, we were married in Utah. Utah. Yes. Justice or the Peace? No, we went to Methodist. Why did you pick a Methodist church? I don't know why. He had that all arranged before I came. We were married in Green River, Wyoming, and then we went to Grace, Idaho to live there. But then when we came back, he went to work for a consumer's power company, and, well, he was just too cocky. He wanted to get ahead. It just didn't work, so that's the way it was. So I was alone with my boy. He was only a year old when he just left. So after that... What did your mother say about it? Did she have any advice to give? Oh, well, they felt pretty bad. It's always hard to tell, I suppose. Yeah. Yeah, it's awful hard. What about your sister? She was a little bit older and the wife... Well, they all knew him. They all took him in. Took him in just like one of us, you know, but he just got too cocky, you know. It can go to your head, you know. What did your brother-in-law, Mr. Lee, and him get along? I mean, two brother-in-laws. Did they have different ideas of... Well, they were very different. Yeah, it was a big mistake that I made because I thought that he was going to be all right, you know. So what did you have to go back to teaching them again? Then I went back teaching them. Did you have to babysit her? Yes, I put my son in a friend's home. She took very good care of him. So we met. Well, anyway, that's... So you continued to live here in Grand Haven and stayed in... Then I came to Grand Haven and mother came here to live, so I took care of mother here at Matilda's home, in her house. She had a big home? Yes, it was... there was room for mother there. Is she still in that home? Oh, no, she passed... I mean your sister-in-law, she lives in the old... No.... church here, you know, but it isn't the Augustana, it's the... No, it's the... What is that other... Missouri? Yes, uh-huh. They have a big, big church here, big congregation. But the Dutch Reformed Church is the one that's the big one, right? Yeah, they're the one, yes, uh-huh. And they are religious. How do you get along now with the Dutch people, being a Swedish background... Oh, I get along fine with them. But they are very strict to the Dutch people. Very, oh yes, yes they are. They are strict with their principles. Oh yes, very, and they really do study the Bible, you know, they... And they go to their church, I'm telling you, they're very faithful. Good churchgoers. Oh yes, they're great churchgoers. They're only elegant, they can skip one Sunday once in a while. Well, we went to church too. Unless you played organ, you had to... We did go, we... Yeah, we went to church a lot down there. Dad was good, he would get us all in the sleigh and... For you, though, huh? Mother and Dad, they were very good. If you look back now, being brought home in this Swedish family with the Lutheran... Lutheran's beliefs and so on, if you compare it today, was there a simple religion they lived by? I mean, they believed in it, of course, but nowadays it's so complicated, everything. You think they were happy down there? I mean, they believed that the church and the garden was one thing. Today it's so complicated, everything. Today is, well, it is so different today. Now, we, this little church, I was down there a year ago to the Midsummer, and it's the same ritual that we went through, the very same thing. You know what that is. And I hadn't been to a church for a long time. And now they have a good attendance down there. It's growing like everything. But I didn't see any young people. And I just wondered if they could get young people in to go through those rituals. They stand there and they read back and forth. And they all know it. They all know those old people, but I didn't see any. Well, there were middle-aged people, but I didn't see any young people. And I wonder if... There's going to be a gap there, ain't there? Yes. Because we were so many young people that went to church. Ready to take over. But I wonder where they are. Where are they? But the service is not on in the Lutheran Church in Ellington. Is that the LCA, Lutheran Church? There's a Lutheran Church there. It's not Missouri. It's a Lutheran Church. No, that's Augustana. Augustana. Yeah. But they go through the same thing that we did when we grew up. And I wonder about the... But, yeah, but I wonder if the young people would resent that, you know, going through all that. How did you see it when you were growing up? Oh, well, we all had to do it. We all did it. You didn't question it. No, we never questioned it. But now the young people, I don't think that they would go for it. And when they are older, they probably like to take shortcuts. Maybe so. So the methods and the teaching will be different when the next generation comes in. They're very faithful down there at this little church. I'm telling you, they all... Do they live by the word or, I mean, outside the church? Well, I hope so. I hope so. Sometimes a lot of people can go to churches on Sunday, but they are a different life. That's right. I wish you could talk to my cousin down there, Naligan. He is one of the big men of the church there. And they stick by it. We have a lovely little cemetery there, and they keep it up so nice. Our father and mother and our brothers are all buried there. Do the younger people come down there to be buried too, or are they buried somewhere else? They mostly are out. They married some, and they're away from there. But many that have lived there, like in Arizona. Now my brother came back here to be married, and his wife, and my cousin came back here to be buried. The old ground where they were born into. Well, now are you going to meet any other Swedes around? Your sister, now, she is 94, Hilma. Hilma, no, she's going to be 93 now. 93. In September. And she had a few sicknesses. Oh, yes. She always pulled through. She's had a, she really, I don't know how, I don't know how she's been, she's real strong. I guess that's all I can say. But she has a wonderful memory on her. She can, and of course I get over there, and we can talk, and she can sit. Of course she repeats now a great deal. But. How about when you were growing up down there in Sandheim? Were you sick often, or did you call in the doctors? We had the doctor in Allegan, see. He came out. Yes, he would come out. But when did they call the doctor? You had to be really sick before they called the doctor. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Oh, yes, we had scarlet fever, and we had all the diseases there were. I don't know how we ever lived through it. But. You pulled through. Yeah, we pulled through. We were a big family, and my golly, I tell you. Your mother, did she have any special remedy for colds? Oh, yes, oh, yes, always. All the old remedies. I remember one of the Swedish ladies that lived next door to us, she was one of the old women, you know. And when I was born, I don't know, they said I was just blue, you know. She came over, and she said, Well, let me get some hot goose grease. And that's what brought me back to life. She took and massaged me with that grease. How old were you then? Oh, I was just a tiny baby, yes. So that saved my life. The goose grease? Yeah, the goose grease. And we had a big horse tank. And I was just a year, I was more than maybe three or four years old. And I fell into the tank, and my brother that was a year older pulled me out. So he saved my life. So there's some reason I don't know why I'm living all these years. You had to have a lot of luck growing up in a place like that. I was baptized again, I guess. Well, anyway. The holidays, like Christmas, do you remember anything special preparing for Christmas? That was always big. We had Yuletide, you know, and we all went to that. Do you remember when the Christmas tree was taken into the house? Did you have a spruce or a fir? Oh, yes, we always had a little Christmas tree. It wasn't very big, but we always had a Christmas tree. Was that brought in long before Christmas? Well, Dad used to get it. On his own farm? Oh, no, not on his farm. He had to buy it. Yeah, well, they went out. They didn't go and buy anything. I guess they went out and got it because, yes, we had Christmas. And that was decorated, you remember? Oh, yes, yeah. Is there anything special you remember that was decorated with? No, nothing special. No flags or...? No. The only time I remember was, you see, we were ten children, and the oldest son had been killed, but his picture was up on the wall. And we, a Swedish fellow had a camera, and he took a picture of us, the whole family. That's the only time we were all together. On the photograph? Uh-huh, on the photograph, uh-huh. Was there a visitor, or was it the...? No, well, he was one of the Swedish boys that had... Had a camera? Yeah, he had the camera, and he took this picture. I still have it. And that was when you were a little girl then? Oh, yes, I was maybe five or something like that. So early 1900s? Yeah. You remember that? Oh, yeah, I remember. Did he use a flash then? He must have, I don't know. You can't remember that? I can't remember that. Do you still have that picture? Yeah, I have pictures. I bet, I think that'd be more interesting than what I've been telling you. You have all those pictures now, and there's quite a few of them. They were friends, then they came in from Allegan. There was no one in your family having a camera at that time to take a picture of the family. There was this fellow that had been in his suite. He had been in the service, and he was a... And he's the one that had the camera. So he came to your home then? Yes. And you were only a little girl then, so it must have been 1902 or something. Oh, yes, yes. And he took that picture of us. Do you remember going in to a photographer, the whole family? Oh, yes, we used to go. Dad used to take us in. We had a whole buggy, you know. We had a double buggy where we could all go in. And we used to go in town and have our pictures taken. I don't know how Mother ever could get us ready. You were all dressed up in your nicest clothes? Yes, we were all dressed up in our nicest clothes and go in. So there was no one coming around taking your pictures when you were out in the field working with hay? No, but of course we had... No one? No, but we did afterwards. We had cameras, so we have a picture of Dad where he is with his horses and like that. But in the 30s, you remember, they were all dressed up then? Oh, yes, we were all... How often did you do that? Every five years or...? I don't know how often we did it because I don't know how Mother ever managed to... It was about five miles into Allegan to go to the photographer. I suppose that cost a little bit of money, though, to spend. I know, but I don't know how they ever did it. You were ten kids now. Did they order ten pictures or they only got a few to keep for themselves? Or how did they distribute the pictures if they were taking the photographs? Well, you see... Some were sent to Sweden, I bet. Well, I don't know. I don't believe so. They left the sisters and brothers in the Skåne? Yeah, they left their father and mothers there. But yes, and oh yes, some brothers. Dad had sisters and brothers there. Do you remember receiving any letters from the grandparents in Sweden that your mother read? Well, my mother read... They got letters all the time from Sweden. Were you able to read them or did you have to listen to them? No, I couldn't read them. It was a Swedish script, but of course Mother and Dad could, you know. And they corresponded with the relatives in Sweden all the time. So you speak Swedish when you're in Sandhem? Oh yes, we all talk Swedish. Speak a little Swedish now so I can hear how many are still sitting. Oh, I don't know what to say. When you work in the kitchen with the food. Are you Sconing or Smålänning or what? I'm Dalslänning. You're Sconing? Yes, I'm Sconing. How do you tell if they're Sconing or Smålänning or from another place? There is a little difference between them. Can you hear that? Can you listen to the difference between the different letters? Oh yes. So most of the people down there now in Sandhem, they were not from Skåne? Well, there were a lot of them from Skåne, but there were so many Smålänning too. So the dialect was not that much different? No, it wasn't. You had no trouble understanding each other? Oh no, of course not. No, not at all. Do you remember mother and father like the kitchen stove? Did they call it Stoven or? Stoven. Stoven. Yes. And the stovepipe. Yes. I remember when mother got her first range. That was quite an event, you know. There was a wood. A wood, yes. It was an important appliance. Yes, you bet. It was used. You bet it was used. Every day of the year. Yeah. So your mother, now, did she go out in the field helping her father? Oh. I mean her husband. They all helped out when it was needed? Everybody. She could do just as much as my dad could. She was so strong. In your opinion, now, you probably didn't pay attention to it, but think about it afterwards. Do you think the women had to work harder than the men? I think they did. Because they had to cook the food, go out in the field, do the washing, ironing and everything. But the husband and the men, they could lay down on the sofa and read the papers. Well, my dad wasn't like that, though. No, he was very ambitious, too. Very. But Mother could do anything on the farm. But in the wintertime, there was a long, dark season even here in Michigan. What did you do then in the snow and cold inside the house? Did you, like youngsters, play games and play horse? What did you do for entertainment? Well. There was no TV, no radio. No, you bet not. I guess we just had to entertain. How could they keep ten kids? I mean, how could they? I know it. Isn't that something? We weren't all there at one time, but. Did you have to start to mend socks and iron? Oh, yes. We all had to learn how to do things. Yeah, everybody. And the cleaning of the house, and washing. Yeah. It was not done every week like it is now. They had to be saved up for at least two, three weeks. Yeah. Then it was done on the stove, hot water. Yeah. And then hung off. It was tough, I'm telling you. I don't know how our mother ever did it. Hanging off on a line. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you know all about it. No, but I mean, you know about it. You lived through those years. Well, I know, but that's so long ago that I. Did you have any dances down in Sandheim? Yes, we used to have barn dances. So your parents were not restrictive then to tell you to go dancing? Oh, no, no, no. My mother was a good dancer. Oh, she was? Yeah, Dad didn't dance very much, but she was lively. She was lively. She could dance and she could sing. So we used to have a lot of fun once in a while. The neighborhoods would get together, you know, and they'd have these barn dances, you know. And you had what kind of instrument would they play? Well, oh, we had an old man that played the violin for one. Just one violin? Yeah. He wasn't Swedish, though. He was just a neighbor who used to come play. And all your sisters and brothers, they were dancing during the day? Yeah, we all went to the, when there were gatherings, we'd all go together. So we had fun. But not when you married, though, like your sister Hilma, when she married Mr. Lee. Was he a dancer? He was not brought up like that. No, but they, well, you see, they got into society and they belonged to the country club. But they didn't dance anymore, though, I mean, your sister. Well, they, of course, at first, they were, I guess they worked. They worked more, they thought more of work than they did. So your sister, now, she had a big room for the country club and everything. There must have been, you would think there'd be a strain in her head, though, coming up from an easy living down there in San Diego. Yeah, but she... And then we restricted, you can't do that, you can't do that all the time. But she never, to you, though, I mean, confidentially, between you and her, did she discuss it with you, that's a heck of a life I'm living here, I can't do what I want? Well, she seemed to fit right in. She didn't complain? No, she never complained. And her husband always wanted her to have the best. So they did have the best of everything, you know. Their clothes, she dressed, and she made the children's clothes, and they were beautiful. And I don't, so, but they first built one house and then another house. First they lived in a rented place, and wages weren't very high, you know. They had to make very much money, but I don't know how they made it, they got along. But compared to the rest of the people, they could afford the very best? Yes, they did. Later on in life? They had the best, really, they did. So they were with the society then, the country club? Yes, yes. And they were, you know, with the upper class here in town. Well, you visited her then, how did you... I came here to live a lot, they took my little boy, see, and kept him while I was teaching. But I came here to live, and I helped them a lot, so. She and I have been so close together, you know, and she's done a lot of things for me, and I have done a lot of things for her. You supported each other with different things? She's been very, very generous, I don't know. So, we've just been like that, you know. Now she has somebody taking care of her, and I don't get over there as often as I should. But we understand each other. Now I have two sisters in Kalamazoo. Much younger. Yeah, they're younger than I am. They're the babies on the picture. Are you going to Kalamazoo? No, not now. But they have a different memory, though, of their home. My youngest sister, Alice, she is the one.