 We have 27th of August 1987 and I'm sitting together with Myrtle Turnrose in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 28th of August 1911 in Rockford and both her parents came from Skåne, Sweden. So tell me a little bit about this painting you have on the wall from... Well from what I understand... Brontevik. That's Brontevik and that was my mother's, my mother's mother's, my mother's, let's see, wait a minute, I'll get this all straight now. It was my mother's mother. So that was my great-great-grandmother. Who painted this? The relation or... It was painted by... Lövqvist. Lövqvist, aha. Brontevik. It's located in Vemulø? Well it is, well it's in that area but it's not, I wouldn't say too close but well... Have you been there? Oh I've been by it many times. This place is still there? It's still there. The windmill is still there and Österhøn, you've heard of Österhøn, that's behind that windmill and of course I didn't see the flowers because it's just like anything else, it's all built up around there with small homes. At that time when my great-great-grandmother lived there, why then it was probably just like that. It was a big farm. Oh it's a big home and it still looks very beautiful, just as beautiful as ever. So when I look at that picture why I just reminisce that I'm right there in Sweden. So your mother's name, her maiden name was Bechwald? Bechwald, originally a Larsen. A little bit about this here genealogy. It's called the Bechwald genealogy. 1762 and it was completed 1971 and it's the descendant of Nils Larsen Bechwald, Tummark, Sweden. Are you familiar with that? Yes, I heard about it. And the genealogy is something like this. The following information submitted by a Mrs. Hugo Ines Stried, Tummark, Sweden, is an interesting story telling how the name Bechwald originated. Ines Stried is the great-great-great granddaughter of Nils Larsen Bechwald, born in 1762. The first Bechwald relative who settled down in Östra Tummark was a flour miller, Nils Larsen, grandfather for to Håkon Larsen Bechwald. Nils Larsen was born in Barsbek, October 23rd, 1762. He first came from his home to Kronovals estate and was employed as a coachman to Count Axel Hamilton. Count Hamilton thought that Nils Larsen was too common a name and he requested him to take a family name. From the last syllable in Barsbek and the last syllable in Kronoval, he formed the family name Bechwald. Nils Larsen Bechwald's descendants now live in the fourth, fifth, and sixth generation. Church deacon Ola Håkonsson was the great-grandson of Nils Larsen Bechwald. Nils Larsen was married to Signe Isse Duter, born February 26th, 1769, in Fogel-Tofta parish near Kronoval. Nils Larsen Bechwald and his wife Signe had two children, Lars and Hanna. The line of Lars Nilsen Bechwald and his descendants is the one followed through in the attached genealogy. Nils Larsen Bechwald and his wife Signe moved from Fogel-Tofta to Ostra, Tummuk, in 1800 and the daughter Hanna was born in Tummuk in the year of 1802. Then it goes on to tell about the Swedish part but I'm better at reading it in English. Okay, so your mother then stems from this family then, Larsen Bechwald? That's right, aha, because she's a, she's a daughter, she's a great, she's a, wait a minute, now she, this is my grandmother, all right, this picture of my grandmother there, that's my mother's mother, so that's my mother, my grandmother's mother, so my mother's mother, that's her, her mother. Was it a big family she came from or? Yes, it was a large family and that's why, that isn't her, my mother's home but it was her, her grandmother that took care of her because being such a large family, well there was no other way because her own mother died when she was young too. So did your mother commission somebody to paint this then, it was painted in 1916? Well, it was painted by her, her, her people. And sent here? Mm-hmm. No, it wasn't, it wasn't sent here because my folks made nine trips to Sweden. They did? Both born in Sweden, my mother and father both born in Sweden, but they made nine trips to Sweden. And the first time they came over then, were they married in Sweden? No, they were married here in Rockford. They didn't know each other in Sweden? Never knew each other in Sweden, they met in United States, got married in Chicago. And if you take your father now, he come from the same area you said, very close? He came from the same area, very close but never knew each other. From a farming family or? Well, see he lost his mother and father when he was just a little boy, so I could never tell you nothing about his family. He had a couple of sisters over there and in fact, one day I wrote but I had no response so they're gone. So you have no connection with them? No connection, no connections with my father's people at all. But I've had connections with my mother's because I've been over there three times. So I have. What year did he come over into United States? Oh boy, that was way back. I'll tell you, I'd have to look into. In the early 1900s? Oh yeah, because yeah. Your mother about the same time then? She came over about 19, yeah she came over when she was 16 years of age. I see. My grandfather's the one that brought three of them over, you know. His intentions were to go and take the rest of the family but takes money. So she was one of the children and they went with? There were three of them. With her father or grandfather? With the father. The father left his wife over there, he was going to go back and get the wife but the wife passed away over in Sweden. Were there any more children left in Sweden? Yeah, there was quite a few. They stayed in Sweden, no way to get them over here because, well, takes money. So your father now, if you go over to his side, he came then to Rockford directly or did he come to another place in the United States before he settled here in Rockford? Oh, let's see, no. Well, it's hard to tell. He had no brothers or sisters? Oh yes, my father had brothers. Here in Rockford? Here in Rockford. In fact, he was a bachelor and lived with my folks and then he passed away out in California. I see. But he was a bachelor and then my father had one brother down in Ottawa, Illinois and he's gone. They're all gone. So what kind of work was he doing then when he came to Rockford, your father? Oh, my father was what they call a machinist. A machinist? He worked in a factory. Sonstrands? No, he worked at Mechanics Universal Joint. He worked until he was 79 years old and then they didn't want him to quit. So he, had he learned that trade in Sweden? No, he was self-educated. He didn't have much schooling in Sweden whatsoever. So he came over and he learned everything he could by sailing over here. That was his education. And your mother, now when she came, did she take housework? Yeah, she took laundry work. It was working in a bakery and stuff like that. And the bakeries years ago, that was out of your homes. You know, you didn't have regular bakeries like you got now. You had them in your home. So there were quite a few of those home bakeries. Yeah, that's right. They were the home baked bread. That's for sure. So it was a lot different years ago. What were they making then? Was it coffee bread and regular sandwich bread? Regular bread, uh-huh. But she was telling me a lot of times about, oh, how she ate in Sweden. She didn't get hardly any food to eat and how she went out in the fields and picked the potatoes. No gloves, you know, hands got cold. And I said, Mother, to live to be this old, 95 years of age. What was she like? 95 when she passed away and in three months she would have been 96. Now that's living a long time. And she had no arthritis or any? Nope. Tell you, she had the most beautiful legs. No varicose veins, no bunions on her feet. The only thing that she asked me to cut her toenails. And I said, Mother, I said, I can't find the pliers. I said, the doctor has to come in and do that for you. So that's what I did for her. But she had everything. She just died of old age, I guess. Just everything deteriorated all at one time. So she lived many years after your father then? Yes, very much so. He passed away at 91 and she was 95, uh-huh. So that was pretty good. So I had a couple of elderly parents that lived a long time. And they lived with you then the last few years? I was the only one left. I'm the only one right now. They were not in the rest home. They stayed with you then? That's right. My mother passed away right in this house. I was holding her hand when she died. Yep. So that's the way it goes. She was clear in her head all the way? Clear in her head. She wanted to know if I was around and I said, yes, I'm here, Mother. And my father passed away at the hospital and all he did was just put up his hand. My sister and I went out in the lounge. When we came back, he was gone. When we left for the lounge, he had a cute little smile on his face, just put his hand up. And we thought nothing of it. When we come back, the nurse said, he's gone. So they had a beautiful passing then, no suffering or anything? Well, I think Mother suffered. She said she ached in her whole body. And then she was legally blind too. So that was one handicap of hers. Did you talk Swedish to her? Or did she learn English very fast because she was young when she came here? I had to tell my mother. I said, Mother, you have been here in this country longer than me. And I said, will you please talk English when you're out amongst the people? Because otherwise they'll think we're talking about them. So then she cut it out a little bit. But she was better at her Swedish than her English. I see. But she was 16 when she came though, but she didn't go to school here in Venezuela? No, no. She just met up. But she was able to read the English newspaper? She just learned it, just picked it up by being out with people. But how about your father now? Did they converse in Swedish most of the time then? My father was a little better in English. I'll tell you, he was a very brilliant man. My father was a very brilliant man. He would make things for himself, not to sell, but make them for himself. And the work that he had out at the factories, he was called a repairman. He had to repair all these big machines. That's how good he was. So he was a jack of all trades then? He was really a very intelligent man. It's too bad that man couldn't have had an education. So he was really a self-taught man. And they married in 19... Got married in 1905. 1905. And did they join the church then here in Rockford immediately or did they... No, I don't think... I think it was when those children had become baptized and confirmed. Who married then? What pastor or did they... Well, they got married in Chicago. In Chicago. There was like a wedding trip at the same time then. A lot of people did that from Rockford though. They went out of town. Out of Chicago. Or maybe there, quite a few. Sure. Well, I went to Chicago on my honeymoon. Why was the reason for that, you think? I don't know. Were they able to tell the people or surprise them that they could get married? Well, Chicago means so much to a lot of people. It was just like my husband and I, we got married in the Depression. And because he took care of his mother and father and there was no social security. And it was all this here insurance on the house and medical expenses on his mother. And so we finally got married. And it wasn't a big wedding like they have nowadays. And all we did was go to Chicago for the weekend. Stayed in a hotel and went to Marshall Fields. That was our honeymoon. You took the train then in there. We took the train in. To have gin in Chicago. Yeah. Had a good time. So, and with my mother and father, they got married in Chicago. Well, then they came back here and just rented places. They rented for sure. This is the first home that they had. And this is built around 1938? That they brought this home? Yeah, 39. No, they brought this home in 1950, something like that. Oh, I see. This is the state. Yeah. This was a subdivision and... See, my folks managed to have some nice places that they rented. And then if somebody else wanted the place, you know, like a member of the family, well, then they just told you that they had to have it for the family. And then my folks had to look for something else. But they managed to have very reasonable rent. It isn't like the rent that you have nowadays. But we didn't have the property that we got now. Now you got selections. And you were three... Three children. Three children, one boy and two girls. Are you the youngest or are you... I was the older. The oldest. I was... and my sister was a middle one. My brother was the youngest one. So you are the older one. Seventeen months between my sister and I. And my folks were so thrilled when they got the boy. Ooh, that was really something. You remember that? Well, I've heard them talk about it. But you were too small to remember. Just in later years, they were so thrilled about him. In fact, my mother felt so bad when he went, when he left. She said, oh, why did her son have to go before me? She said, you think... Oh, he died? He died before my mother. He's gone. So is my sister. What happened then? He had bone cancer. But he died in the hospital. And then his wife followed two years later. So it was tragic. And they had no children? My brother had a daughter. I was out with her the other day and I'm going out with her this week again. And she's got two children. In fact, this is her, this is her daughter. My brother's grandchild. And this is what her daughter did this winter. My brother's daughter made that out of snow. She came in second place. Oh, here in Rockford? Here in Rockford, the Sennissippi Gardens. That was in the newspaper, I remember. Yeah, that was her. So she is an artist. Let's see, now I haven't got the picture handy. But there's her two children right there when they were young. And they stayed here in Rockford and they bought your brother and your sister? Oh yeah. They didn't move away? They didn't move. They married people of Swedish background? My brother's wife, her mother was a Norwegian from Norway. Now I don't know where, if it was Oslo, but Norway it was. And her father was Swedish. And I've been trying to get Debra to tell me where her grandfather was born in Dalsland. He's a Dalslanding. But she hasn't been able to do that, so come up with it. And that would be fine because maybe it's right around Brolunda or... Anyplace. But he's a Dalslanding, Mr. Oscar Johnson. And he's the one that helped build the Coronado Theater. So maybe John Carlson knew him. Never know. It could be. See, it's hard to tell about these people when she can't come up with the city. And there's no way that I can find out where he was born in Dalsland because they say you can find out from a church. What church did you go to, Sunday school or... Zion. Zion Lutheran Church. So you were Lutheran then? That's Zion Lutheran. So your parents joined them? They joined. They got their picture. You went to Sunday school there? Did you take any Swedish in church? At any time, confirmation? Yeah, I took a little bit. So I can write a little Swedish and read it, but I'm a little... I'm a little rusty at that. So I'm... Were you confirmed in Swedish? Oh, confirmed. No, I was confirmed... In English. Wait a minute, now I got to stop to think. I better not say. I think it was both. I think... See, years ago, they're doing it different nowadays. Nowadays, so I got to put it, it probably was half and half. Because I know that I can talk Swedish. Because then in 1930s, then it was all English. Yeah, so now they do it so different, so... It's all different. So you remember then, you were old enough to... To start working then during the depression. How did that affect your family? Did your father have a work... Did he work then during the depression? Oh, my family's been working. No trouble during the depression? No trouble, no. They've made money, I mean, so they've been working. And it hasn't been any hardship that way. So your father had a steady work then during the depression? Oh, they had steady... What happened to you now when you came out in the workforce? Did you get a job during that time? Well, I was very lucky. I had an education, but I didn't have the college education that the people get nowadays. Did you have a business college? That they go first to a smaller college and go to a bigger college. I went to a Brown's Business College. Here in Rockford? Here in Rockford. And that took me into a scenographic work and bookkeeping and typing. So I learned all of that. And I managed to have a job during the whole depression. How did you get the job? Did you go out and look for it? I had to go out and look for it. I didn't answer any ads in the paper because I don't think I looked in the paper. I just went out from one place to another. In fact, what I wanted to get was to work for a railroad company. I tried very hard to work for a railroad company because I thought if I started to work for a railroad company, I could get the free passes to go on the train and travel. So you were adventurous then, early. Uh-huh, but I had no luck because it was all filled. So I had to take a job working for wholesale companies. And I was a typist, so type out the orders and that was about it. But I was lucky. Nine dollars a week. That was good money. Now they make about two hundred dollars a week. Some people, you know, it all depends on. What profession they're in. You stayed with that job then until you married? Or did you continue on after that? Oh, well, I was more advanced then. The longer I stayed working, you know, then I got advanced jobs, you know. But you worked then during the Depression the whole time? The whole time. So I really had work. Then you met your husband Bertil Tönros. How did you meet? Did you go to dances or? How did I meet him? I'll tell you how I was. You remember the carpet line down on 7th Street where they on 4th Avenue by the Amcor Bank? Yes. They had some long mirrors there. All right. This is very interesting. I was standing there because I was looking to see if my slip showed. Malcolm come up to me and he says, hi. And I said, well, hi. Should I know you? And he says, no, but he says, I know you pretty well. I says, well, how'd you get to know me? Oh, I know you. And that's how we started. No acquaintance. So we dated that way. How did he know you then? Did he tell you that? He got to know. Years ago, everybody was friendly. Now you don't dare to do things like that. You don't. That was sort of a pickup. But you could do that years ago. You could do that years ago. And I could see he was a clean cut fella. And so I had him over to my house for Sunday dinners. And his mother would have me over to his house for Sunday dinners. Oh, it was nice. They did things different than they do now. And your family then approved of him because he was a... Oh, yeah. He was a good guy. He was born here in Rockport. Born here. So his name was Malcolm. Malcolm. Malcolm Baxter Turner. I'll show you a picture of him after a while. Oh. So then you... You went and studied there for a while. Did you marry immediately or how did... No, no. We went for a long time together because, as I say, he was taking care of his mother and father. I see. And he wanted to get married. But I said, well, I said, that's a little bit kind of rough. I said, after all, I said, you're going to leave your mother and father. And I said, you've got to take care of them. Because when you get married, there's a lot of things to think about. And that was during the Depression you met him. Yep. Did people put on the wedding plans then during that time because it was rough? Yeah. Hard to get... Well, when I got married, my folks couldn't put on the weddings that they have nowadays because they're too expensive. And you didn't hear too much about that. We just went to the parsonage and got married. We had my sister and her husband. They got married. And so they stood up for us. And all we went to a restaurant and had our reception. Nowadays, it's got to be real swell with an orchestra and everything. So you married them by the Zion Lutheran minister. Yep. I was married. And it was 1935? 37. 37. I had 40 years with them. So that was pretty good. Nowadays, did you read the paper this morning about all of the divorces? It's an old page almost. It's terrible, isn't it? I thought... I wonder if Bernard looked at it today because he's always telling me. He said, my goodness, look at all the divorces. So there are more divorces than marriages? It seems that way. And a lot of times he would tell me, he says, look at that one. She hasn't even got a husband. Have a baby without the husband. But that was unheard of years ago, though. I mean, it didn't come into the papers, though. They didn't print it like that. No. I imagine things happened years ago, too, that... But that would never come in the paper like it does today. This... Everything is reported now from city hall. Yeah. If we only knew it went on years ago... We... I don't... I'm going to tell you something. I don't... I'm telling you, I hear some stuff, you know. That is really something, isn't it? So did you quit working then when you got married or you continued to work? I continued to work. What kind of work was he doing then, your husband? He worked in a machine shop. Machine shop. So... He went for an apprentice. They call it apprenticeship course, you know, for machine work. That's what he did. And nothing else. He wasn't a college man. He was just... And I think I kind of like that because some of these college people, what do they amount to? Some of them probably make a go of it, but... So your mother then, she... Did she warn you to go out on dances and meet Italians and Irish guys and stuff like that? Well, I guess... It was not easy to control a girl going out for dances when she was 17, 18. No, I'll tell you. That Lyron Hall. You know where Lyron Hall is? Yes. I can remember when we girls went over there and danced. And, you know, the Italians came from South Rockford. They call it South Rockford. And, of course, the women liked the Italians. They called them dagels. But they were good dancers. But they were wonderful dancers. And all of us Swedish gals loved them. And some of them Swedish guys, they said, them darn guys coming from South Rockford. How did they go up there with all those Swedish guys around? They could get... Well, I think that's where some of the Swedish... Some of the Rockford gals met some of these Swedish fellows because they wanted to dance and they wanted to meet somebody. Because I noticed a lot of my friends are married to Swedes. Swedish... From Sweden. Yes. A lot of my friends are married to people from Sweden. With me, I got married to one that was married in Rockford. I was born in Rockford. In Rockford. Yes, but how about... Were there any girls that married any Italians or dagels? Oh, yes. I know a few of my friends that got married to the Italians. But what happened then when they brought them home for the first date? I mean, to a Swedish mother and a Swedish father. What do you think? Well, that I never come into, so I... It was probably not easy, you know, to explain. And I never did have... I never did have a date with an Italian. But they were good dancers. They were marvelous. Oh, they were just absolutely wonderful. And that's what us Swedish gals liked, was their dancing. But I never dated any of them. In fact, I didn't date very many guys at all. I mean, I did too, but I had a lot of clean fun because I went to England. Oh, I see. So, but were they able to... At Lyra, now, did they play Swedish music or American music? It was American music. American music. Uh-huh, that's why... Foxtrot and tango and... Uh-huh, and that's why the Italians liked that place, because it's such a nice big dance hall. And we didn't have too many of them across the way. In fact, we don't have anything now either. It's mostly supper clubs, you know. You go up to the Butterfly and have a drink at the bar and your dinner. Then you can dance in just a small floor. So we actually don't have a dance hall. The only dance hall that we got is down to a Lyra. You've been down there. Well, that's a big dance hall where they have a dance every Saturday night. And then they got a dance out to the Moose Club. But you got to be a member to get into the Moose Club. So that's not for a public... But a Lyra, you don't have to be a member. You don't have to be a Viking member. You don't have to be a member there to come in to dance on Saturday night. They just charge you a dollar for a non-member. You don't have to pay... You have to pay a dollar. But a member gets in free. So if you're not a member of the Lyra and go down and dance on a Saturday night, you have to pay one dollar. That's a cover charge. But with me that's a member, I don't have to pay anything. So I get in free. So are there other groups coming in there today too? Are there only Swedish background people or Italians coming in there? A little of everything. Just a little of everything. That's for sure. No restrictions at all. No. Did the Swedes go over to the west side to dance? You know, I really... Do you remember that? I really never heard of... Oh, there was down on Madison Street, I think there was... What surprises me is that the Italians dare to come to do Swedish doings. Because you always heard about fights, you know, among the Irish and the Swedes. Well, I... But they were not afraid to mingle with the Swedes. They probably had it that I really didn't get into it. And when they asked the Swedish girl to dance, then they didn't nab them off. They didn't refuse. Yeah, no. Because they were good dancers. They were good dancers. Everybody says that. Yeah. Oh, there were... Side two, continuation with Myrtle Turnrose, Rockford, Illinois. Side two. They were good looking ones too. Yeah. And you know, in your youth, why? But when they were brought home to mother, there was a different idea then. One never knows, because I never brought one home. The worst problem there, I suppose, was the religion, though. I mean, they were 100% Catholics, the Italians. Could be. And the Poles and... So you had to be... Well, say, for instance... Nowadays, they don't care about the religion anymore. I mean, who they are, what they are. But at that time, they did. Well, maybe some of them are pretty... Because I noticed one couple in church. He's Catholic, but he doesn't go up for communion. But he's married to one that goes up for her communion. But he's a very good man. And so... But evidently, he goes to his own church for communion. But he's a good worker in our church. But, well, it's hard to tell about everything, isn't it? The church has changed over the years, though. It's not as strict as it was years ago. No, that's for sure. See, I don't know too much about it, because I'll tell you, I never got mixed up with the Italians. I don't know. I never had a date with them. I only danced with them, if they asked me to dance. So put it that way. If you're going to sit or hold up the wall, why... You've got to be asked to dance. Was there a special dance years ago where you could go up and ask for a dance? They had what they called the ladies' dance, that you could go up and ask anybody. Well... Would you dare go up to an Italian then and ask him? That would be like an invitation to a date. I'll tell you, I'm not much for that at all. I want them to ask me. But didn't they have that custom? Oh, well, I suppose. You know how some women are, even now. They are more brave. They are more brave. And women call the men. As soon as a woman dies, some women will call a man on the telephone, come on over for dinner. I'm having so-and-so, and I'd like to have you come over. I can't do a thing like that. But some women are that way, I suppose. And it's the same way when I go down to a dance to a Lida. I can't go up to a man and say, oh, could I have that dance with you? Because I'm afraid I'm going to be turned down, that he's got the dance with somebody else. So the only dance I will get in with is if a man asks me to dance, and there's what they call a circle two-step. Then you have to exchange partners. Then from that time on, you probably get a dance. So you are still an active dancer, then? Oh, I like to dance. You don't know this, Bernard, he's learned to dance since he's been hanging around with me. Bernard Magnuson. Bernard Magnuson. But I don't know if he can do too much of it now, because we was down to a Lida, you know, down to Camp Hillcrest about, oh, I think it was about a month ago. And there was one song that came up, that orchestra, and I said, Bernard, and I said, Bernard, I said, that's your music, Beer Barrel Polka. He sat there, he just didn't even register. But otherwise, he says, come on, let's dance that, because that's the one he likes to dance, but he didn't budge. So I think it's been coming on a little at a time about Bernard. What did you think about him today? But he is 93 now, though. He's going to be 92 in November. 92. But it's pretty good, though, too. Oh, sure it is. But see, he fell down. Well, he didn't break anything. He got what they call a squeezed vertebrae. Squashed. Oh, it hurts, I guess. Did they have him up in a chair today? No, no, no. He was in the bed when I was there. So you taught him to dance? Well, yes. I kind of told him, I said, now this, you go like this with the music, and he followed it. And all the women sat down there, boy, he sure caught on in a hurry. And he was not able to dance before you met him? He said he never. He never danced? He and his wife never went around like that at all. Never danced. So it's never too late to learn, then. That's right. Yeah, you've got to get the right people. So, see, he's been depending on me now today to come over, because the nurse is coming at six o'clock. And his nephew, I suppose, is over there right now. But Bernard wanted me to come over this afternoon. See, the nurse probably sits and does her study work. There's nothing for the nurse to do, but he wanted someone to talk to. So it was nice that you went over there this morning. He is probably going to recuperate. He looks like he's being peppy. Well, it's hard to tell, because... But he's got to be in bed, though, a few weeks. Well, he's got to get up a little bit, too. If he lays too much, it's no good. And he's got to walk. Otherwise, his bowels won't work, either. So it'll be one thing after the other. But his nephew's doing pretty good about taking him to the doctor and everything. So... Your parents, though, you said they went back to Sweden many times. Nine times. So the first time then they went back, what year was that? Do you know that? Oh, boy, this goes... Way way back. I'll tell you, I've got so many passports around here. I mean, yeah, the books, you know, that tells about all the people that went on a boat. See, my folks used to sail on the Gripsholm and the Kungsholm. And no longer can you take the boats over to Sweden like that. You can take freighters, I guess, but not... Did you go along with them? No, I only went to New York and saw them off, waved them off. So they never took any of your children along then? My sister went five times. Five times? She went back, went to Sweden with them five times. So you were working then, so you didn't want to... I was taking care of the household around here. Somebody had to stay home, take care of things. And I couldn't afford it anyway. So they were... They felt it tied them with Sweden after going back so many times. Oh, my mother... Were they able to do that, though? He must have made pretty good money, your father. Yeah, he did. He made good money, yeah, sure. Did they talk about Sweden often? Well, my father wasn't too keen about going back to Sweden because he figured that there was nothing for him to go there. Lost his mother and father, but my mother went alone to begin with. She went a couple times alone. Then she finally got him to go. Otherwise, he hesitated about going, but he finally went. And they stayed three months at a time and rented themselves a little stuga. Oh, I see. Close to Vemuluden. Well, yeah, it was close to water. And then they had walking distance over to a little store that they could buy home for a little groceries to do a little cooking. But that was in the summertime? Yeah, that was... So your father apparently liked it because he went back then so many times after your mother went first, you said. Yeah, she went a couple times before. And he went alone. Uh-huh. When did you know your first visit to Sweden? The first time I went to Sweden was... Last year was 86. I went in 85 and 85. I went six years ago. So you go back six years. I went back in 1981 then. That was my first trip. First trip. Then you met your cousins over there? Then I met my cousins over there. Have you had any previous contact with them through letters or anything? No, just received the Christmas cards and everything. And then this here... Genealogy. So I got to know who everybody... Because see, this goes on and tells about the family, see? So you got all the names there? Uh-huh, this tells about everybody. So which is first one, it tells about the Beckvall genealogy. Like I told you, Nils Larsen Beckvall, born 1762. And the wife, Signe Issa daughter, she was born 1769. So there was seven years difference between them two. Well, they had two children, Lars and Hannah. And then they named them Håkan and Mata. Håkan and Mata. It means something to you because not to me it doesn't, but they're kind of different. And Håkan was born 1828 and died 1909. And Mata, 1838 and 1901, she died. And Hannah was born 1802. 1802. And then it goes, then for those two Lars and Lars that had the two children, then it tells what they had. All these children that Håkan and Mata had these. That was Martin, Nils, Ola, Håkansson, Johanna, Elgina, and Jons, that was my grandfather. Did you meet any of those Håkan and Mata? Oh, they're gone long. I know, I understand. But they must have children. Oh, yeah. Grandchildren. I can tell you which ones I met over there. That was... That was... wait a minute now. I'll tell you. When you met those people, what did they ask you about? Did they remember your parents coming over there, for instance? Oh, my mother and father had been with my mother's people so much in those nine times that I was over there. So they had no problems then to remember you? No, they really had a good time because they were with my mother's sisters. I met my mother's sisters over there. That's the only ones I can tell you. And I met my... She must have been older. My mother's... My mother's one of the older ones. Oh, they were younger than your aunts. All right. This is my mother right here. And the reason for that picture right there, that's her brother. So it was my mother and her brother right there, and my Aunt Ellen that's out in New York, nursing home. She's 88 years old right now, I guess, and she's in a New York nursing home because her kids stuck her there. So they were younger then, so you were able to meet them. That's right. What did they talk about? What did they ask you about your parents, your mother, for instance? Oh, we... Specifically, they were interested to know about... No, they didn't ask me too many questions about anything because they were just happy to see me. And they said from... My mother is the one that paid my trip over there. She wanted to go, and she was a little bit... She was legally blind, and then she couldn't walk very well either. So from the airport, they took her in a wheelchair. Oh, I got wonderful service at O'Hare Field and in Copenhagen, but then when you get over to Sweden, you're on your own. And of course, the young people worked at the hospital, so they brought wheelchair home for my mother, and I would go along them stugas and wheel her in the wheelchair. So you had your mother with you then? Yeah, she's the one that paid my trip the first time I went over. 81? Mm-hmm, she gave me $5,000. That was pretty good. So she was a seasoned traveler, and she was never afraid of anything. My mother was determined to do what she wanted to. In fact, the next year, 81, 82, she says, you go down to the travel bureau. She said, I'm going to pay your trip again, and we're going to Sweden again. I says, mother, I says, I don't know. I said, I think we both have had it. I said, you've been so many times to Sweden. And I said, no, I've been once. And I said, I think that's enough. Oh, she said, you don't do nothing for me. I had to go down to the travel bureau and put in a reservation. But she got sick, so she landed in the hospital instead. So then, of course, I went down to the accent travel, canceled. Got my money back. So she— So that was out. But then I went to—then my second trip to Sweden was to Dalsland. That was with Bernard. But he didn't pay my trip, though. A lot of people ask me, did he pay my trip? That was no. He didn't do that. I paid my own. But anyway, that was my second trip to Dalsland, to Veniceborg. And Brolanda. You didn't go down to school then at that time? No, that time I didn't go to school. And that was two weeks I was with Bernard, with his relation. That Helgi—did you ever get to meet Helgi over there? Yeah, but I know who he is. That's his nephew on his sister's side in Sweden. And the one here in Rockford is on his brother's side. So I stayed over there, went walking. I looked at the woods. And they took me into town, and that was about it. Then the next year, I went to Malmö for one week. And then from Malmö, I took a train over to Uxrude or something like that. And they picked me up there in Dalsland. And then I stayed a week over— Uxrude. Uxrude, yeah. Uxrude. I can't pronounce it very good. These dull names, you know. And so I was in Dalsland for a week with them. And stayed with Leonard Bengston. Did you ever get to meet Leonard Bengston? No, I don't know him. That's Helgi's son-in-law. Oh, I see. So— So you've been— Three times. Three times in Sweden. But your mother, she went back nine times, you said? Nine times. And they didn't only stay two weeks. They stayed three months. So she enjoyed then coming back and talking to people. Oh, she really enjoyed it. And that's how she got that oil painting, because they figured that it really belonged to her, because she was in that house, and Grandma took care of her there. So they brought it back, and then she bought a new frame for it, because it was in an old frame. They didn't like the frame, so that's a new frame. But that's beautiful, isn't it? Yes. That is just gorgeous. It's a piece of Sweden. Now you have the maps out here on your sofa. You take a trip— I'm taking a trip every day. That one takes me to Sweden. That one comes back from Sweden. I think so, if I haven't reversed them. You have an article about the carving from Skåne. Yeah, it's kind of fun, because when I— When I left for Sweden, then I asked them if they would give it to me when I got off the plane at Copenhagen. So they gave it to me. And when I left Copenhagen, I went over and I asked them, I said, can I have the map now when I get off at O'Hare Field? They said, you sure can. So that was pretty good. Your mother, now, did she taught you to bake? Anything special, bread from Skåne, like kavling, for instance. Did she have any special dish or food? She taught me how to make some good Swedish coffee cake. I see. So I used to make that, but I don't make any more, because I tell you, you get too fat on that homemade stuff. So what I served you today was that bought from Forsberg Bakery. How about the— You know, in Skåne, they have in November soup of goose. And I used to make my own bread, too. I used to make my bread that my mother taught me. You don't remember your parents celebrating November of the goose soup? Oh, what they call— What? Martin's Gros? Yeah, Martin's Gros. Sure, they belonged to a club, were they? Here in Rockford. Uh-huh. The Sconing Club. They belonged to the Sconing Club. And they celebrated the— They used to have that, but that dissolved, that club dissolved. Now we're trying to get all these clubs together. I belonged to the Vestgata Club. Yeah, I remember that. Have you heard about that? Yeah. They're trying to get us, so they're going to call it like a— just a club. How does it work out? I don't know. I don't think it's working out too good, because you know, there's not too many with— were a few members, but they don't seem to attend. And I understand the president of the Smålandsklubben, he died. Lennart Kalsvik. Kalsvik, yeah, I was at the funeral. Only 62 years old. Yeah. So— He is gone. I wonder who's going to take his place. So what happens now when they pass away? I mean, he was only 62, and it was unfortunate, of course, but some of the old people, there are no new members coming in, like the kids or children, they are not interested. They don't seem like they're interested. They don't seem to be connected with anything. No, see, I don't know too much about these people that have the children. If they could only get them interested, why could it be— So, Ölendingarna, they have Kroppkaker. Yep. And Skåningarna, they had Mortenskås. Do you remember having gosthen for a dinner? Do you remember having gosthen for a dinner? Well, I just heard about it and talked about it. You heard about it? Well, my mother would serve a gus once in a while, so, but it wasn't traditional for us or anything like that, but it was just that we kind of liked the gus. It tasted pretty good, kind of a greasy, greasy ant. But as far as food, now they say that Kroppkaker, that's an öl—what is it, ölending? Ölending. Well, the Skånings liked the Kroppkakers too, because my mother and father and I'm just crazy about Kroppkaker, and my mother used to make delicious Kroppkaker. She did. Oh, you bet your life. And she was a Skåning, but she still liked the ölending food, and that is strictly ölending. Yes. How about Christmas now, did you celebrate giving out gifts on Christmas Eve or Christmas morning? It was Christmas Eve. Christmas Eve. Yeah, that was traditional for us. How about your Christmas tree, was it a spruce or a fir? You know, with the long needles, they used long needle Christmas trees there. Oh, well, we had the real Christmas tree when we were little, but— The Swedish type. And towards the last knot was just the artificials. And you children then dressed it up. Yeah, it was just family. We wasn't a big relation here, so it was just sort of the family. You stayed together then. That's right. On your own. And mother would probably invite a few couples over around that time if they wanted to come, and that was it. Everybody has their own families to celebrate with. But it was very nice. I miss my parents because we were very close. We were a very close family. Sometimes people thought we were a little bit too close because whenever I had any doings, I always invited my parents. And I don't know if people liked it very well, but I don't care, and I'm glad that I stuck by them because I got plenty of time to be with other people now. So they were never in the nursing home then, they stayed with you? Stayed with me. My father died right at the Swedish American Hospital. My mother died right here in her bedroom. So you had a long life together with your parents. Yep, very fortunate. And I had wonderful parents. Here's my mother and father. My mother would say, Mother, you shouldn't talk like that to father. My father would say, Girls, let mother say what she wants. So she was kind of a boss then. Well, she would just say, Come on, Dad, walk a little faster or something like that. We girls couldn't stand that. We said, Well, let dad do what he pleases. My dad would say, Don't pay any attention. Just let her rave off. He said, She won't feel good unless she... So she was... I'm telling you, he thought so much of that woman that, oh, he worshipped the ground she walked on. So he was more relaxed then? Oh, yeah, he never worried about a thing. He was such a good guy. I had a laugh one day. I was out to Colonial Village and there was a fella that got a hold of me. And I don't know, he kind of joked a little bit. And he says, I don't want to get married. I thought, well, Jiminy Christmas. I'm sitting down on this bench because I got tired feet. I had high heels on. So we got in a conversation. He says, Say, why don't we take a trip to Hawaii with all our money? I said, Well, how do you know I got any money to take a trip to Hawaii? And we got to joking and so funny. He asked me my name and he says, What about your father? He said, Where did your father work? I said, Oh, he worked at mechanics. Same place he worked. So I think he knew who I was. You know what I mean? So he's just going to be kind of funny. Oh, he was. And so then I told him all about my dad. And he says, Oh, he says that father of yours, he said he was just a great guy. So that was wonderful to hear that. Did they belong to Vikings and Vasa? Yeah, I should have joined the Vikings years ago, but I was I went in about, oh, I think all about probably seven years ago. So I haven't been a member too long. But at that time when your parents joined, that was because of the hospitalization, because there was the only insurance they probably had. Well, they had insurance, too. From work? Oh, yeah. My mother got my father's insurance and I got my mother's insurance. Oh, yeah. Well, they had the insurance with it, too. So I collected my mother's insurance. They figured that I was entitled to that. So but there were a lot of people who didn't have any insurance, more than the clubs. Well, see, I can't I couldn't get the insurance because I was too old. You had to be a certain age and see with my folks that joined so many years ago, why they were below that age limit. So that was pretty nice. Both of my sister belong to. So that was pretty nice. It's a nice organization. How about the young people? Do they join it or is it hard? I'll tell you, I don't know what's the matter with young people nowadays. They don't seem to their lifestyle is different. Where they go, I don't know. I don't know what they do for excitement. I really don't because I've never asked my niece what her. Well, I know that my her son, he's in the show business and then he works in a store when he isn't in the show business because he's one of the main stars. And also the other day when we went to the fireside, she was called theater mother because her son works out of the Great American in Chicago. So he's a main tap dancer and a main singer in the whole show. So that's his occupation. But with the daughter that's 20 years old, why she's been made assistant manager of a dress shop and then she goes to college. So that's about the extent there. But as far as what their activities are, just buy a new car and drive around, I guess. That's about it for the young people. And that's the end of interview with Myrtle Turnrose, Rockford, Illinois. And we have the 27th of August, 1987. End of interview.