 Well, we have October 1st, 1987. I'm sitting together with Pauline Nelson, Omaha, Nebraska, and she was born 1905, 4th of April, in Stanton, Iowa. Your grandparents, they came from Sweden. Do you have any idea where they came from? I don't know they exactly, yes I know. You never met them? Were you too small when they... I know grandfather and grandmother on mother's side, but dads were dead. They were dead. But you met morfarra och morbord? Oh yes, and I lived down in Stanton with, well, see when I was born, we lived practically, I guess, across the street or next door, and I learned to speak Swedish before I did English, but I forgot most of that. So when I went to Sweden a few years ago, I was hunting frantically for words, and one of my cousins over there, where grandmother Rylander came from, kept saying, get the lexicon, get the lexicon, because she couldn't think of the words either. So between the two of us working on it, we managed to communicate, and the husbands all laughed at us. I said, the trouble with you people is you're afraid we'll laugh at you the way you laugh at us. But anyhow, we kept on. So you tried to trace your mother's side then, Rylander? Yeah. You had cousins, second cousins over there? Well, I don't know what degree of cousins they are, but they're something. So we always called each other cousins, and I write in English and they write, one of them writes in English, the rest write in Swedish. Where do they live, in Småland? No, they live in Östergötland, up near Sisa, if you know where that is. And so I got to see the places up there. I didn't get to Sisa, I got every place else around there, and I was going to stay only a week, and they said, do you know how many relatives you've got all around here? You'll never get through all of them. Well, I didn't get to all of them. But you met quite a few of them. Oh, yes, I met all of those up in that community, but I didn't get down to Vimmerby where some others were, and up around the lake on another area, but all down around the southern part of the lake there, I got to them, and they took me to old churches down there that they thought were the ones that Grandfather had probably attended when he lived over there, and then after his father died, he came from, he was the youngest child in a string of 12, and his father died, so he and his mother had to go from, they said, from one place to the other to stay until I guess he decided he would come to America. But I don't know what year that was, and I don't know where he landed first, but I've got pictures here that he had had friends that lived over in Keokuk and places like that, so I suspect that he must have been over in eastern Iowa for a while, and then he came to Stanton. So he must have come, arrived there when the settlement was started then? No. He came after? Oh yes, long after. None of them were here for the start of the settlement. Grandmother and her family, she was a young woman at that time, and I think they, I have heard that it took them five weeks to cross the Atlantic Ocean, and I think they landed in New York City, and it was hot during the Civil War because there was an older brother who went off and got in the Army and nobody ever heard from him again. Maybe he was killed. But anyhow, the rest of them stayed together, and somebody had told them about Bishop Hill, so they got over to Bishop Hill, and they lived in that area for a couple of years until I guess Reverend Holland got hold of them and attracted them to go over to western Iowa to farm over there. Well, they'd been better off if they'd stayed over there in Illinois because it was better land. Your first stint, it looks pretty good today, the land, but at that time it might have been different. Well, it was pretty good farmland, but it's better farmland over in Illinois and also in that part of Iowa. So, like your mormon or mormor, did they met Holland at any time? They never did? No, I don't know whether they did or not. Did they talk about the founder of Stanton when you were growing up there in school, for instance? Well, I only went to school a year and a half down there in high school when my family moved out of Omaha, and I had to go over and live with Grandfather and my two aunts. So, anyway, the first language I spoke was Swedish. Then we moved to Omaha, and Mother said I immediately learned English, and then I never talked Swedish again. So, when I would go back to visit Grandfather and Grandmother, well, Grandmother lived a few years and then died, and then Grandfather lived longer, but he had a stroke, a terrible one, which not only made it difficult for him to get around, but it took his speech. And so I never could talk to him and never could find out stuff before. And when I started finally asking questions of my aunts, they said they had never thought of asking questions. So, there's an awful lot we don't know. There was a lot of things that were never said then, though. Yeah. So, anyhow... Did he farm there at Instanton? Yes. All farmers? He had the farm, and then when he moved off, his son took it over and farmed it for a number of years, and then Uncle Gil gave it up and retired. Was the right, Instanton, was off at New... Southeast of Stanton. What's it called now? Fremont is one place? No, it wasn't there. It's not that far away. It was closest to Stanton. It was only... And Nyman, Nyman is... No, I know, but it wasn't there either. It was about five miles southeast of Stanton. And the farm is still there, but it's sold, of course, to somebody else. I sold it a few years ago. Well, you still have the connection there with the... went back and visited the people there? Oh, yeah. I had to... After Aunt Atelier and Emma died, I had to take over the running of the farm because my brother said he was too busy. He didn't want to bother with it, and he didn't know as much about it as I did. Was he younger than you? Oh, yes. He's nine years younger. So, and he had inherited Dad's store. Dad had a hardware store here. And Vincent took it on and became a... Oh, what do you call it? A special architectural person in hardware. Dad had been that, too. And so I had to keep going over and fussing with the renter that had been... Oh, you rented all the land then to him? Yes, to somebody else, and he was absolutely no good. So I came up here and stormed at the farm rental place up here, and I said, you've got somebody over there who isn't any good at all, and the man you've got supposedly in charge of it isn't any good either, so you can just take them both off. I'm going to sell the farm. Well, they didn't make a very good job of selling it either. I didn't get as much for it as I should have. But anyhow, I gave it up, and it was bought by a neighbor who wanted it very badly. He's a big cattle producer. How did they come about now that your father moved to Omaha? Well, he wanted to start... He was tired of farming? Oh, he didn't stay in farming down there. He organized his own hardware store down there, and he and a friend operated it for a few years, and then he decided he'd make more money coming to Omaha, so he came up here and joined one of the big hardware stores up here, hardware firms, and then he wanted to get into the business with them, and they were reluctant to let anybody in except their own family. So Dad said, okay, he was going to quit. He was going to go back and do some farming, much to my mother's disgust. She said, you never liked farming when you were on it. But anyway, they moved up to South Dakota for a year. Oh, South Dakota? And lost money on that deal, so they came back, and Dad went in with another hardware company for a number of years until he finally started his own and did very well in it because during the war years particularly, he supplied the hardware to all of the big government contracts in this part of the country, not just in Nebraska but around too. And he finally decided that he'd have to give it up, and Vincent was grown by that time, and so he took him into the business, and Vincent's had it ever since. This your brother? Mm-hmm. Was this during the Depression he moved up to South Dakota or...? It was in the 1920s. It was after the Depression. Why didn't he go back to Iowa, to Stanton? No, he wanted to go up there because some friend was up there who had told him it was such good farmland. Well, that was a mistake. It wasn't as good as it was over in Iowa. But anyhow, he had to learn, I guess. So after school now, and you were confirmed in the Mamre Lund Lutheran Church. Yes. And who was the pastor there at that time? What is it now? He's dead. They always had good, strong pastors. Yes, they did. It was a strong Lutheran church. Oh dear, it's a long name. Larimer? No, no, he was in Omaha. He was in Omaha. Well, maybe I can find it in a book. Oh, well, I will help you. So you went to Sunday school there, and you had Swedish confirmation classes? No, it was English. They had switched to English by the time I was down there. I started confirmation in Omaha, and then the family moved up to Dakota, so I had to go down there to live with my relatives, and that's where I finished the confirmation, and was confirmed down there. Very elaborate confirmation. Yeah, the Stanton Church, you know, there was like a spire for the whole Montgomery and Page County. It was prominent in the whole community. So at that time you were growing up, also they had white houses in Stanton. Has it always been that? Always been. Everything is white. And a big coffee pot. Yeah, he saw the coffee pot. It's still there? Yes. So when you were growing up, did they have a lot of, some of the Swedish festivals then, midsummer or? Yeah, but you see, I lived up here with my father and mother except when I went to school down there those two years. Do you remember if they had any midsummer festivals at that time? Celebration or any Swedish? I don't remember midsummer, but I know they had a big festival in the fall about Thanksgiving time, and then they also did for Santa Lucia. Oh, they had that? Oh, yes. It was in the church? They always have had that, I think. That's back, way back then. Were you selected to be Lucia or? No. You had a young girl though? Yeah. And most of the people were Swedish? Well, at that time they were, now they're mixed up. There are a lot of others in there. Did they intermarry then, the Swedes, with others? I don't know whether they have or not. They probably have. But you could hear Swedish spoken on the streets in Stanton? Yeah. The old farmers came in. How about your parents now? They were as good in Swedish as in English? Well, Dad was, but Mother wasn't. But your mother was born here, though? Yeah. Dad said Mother didn't know how to speak good Swedish. Oh, I see. They argued about how a certain word was to be pronounced, and he says, You call a bird a flugel. And he says, That isn't right. Because I wanted them to teach me Swedish, and since they couldn't agree on it, you know how it was to be spoken, we just didn't do it. It was dropped off then completely, so. But when you went back to Sweden, you were able to understand it after a couple of weeks? Yes, and they told me if I'd be over there a little longer, I'd be speaking just very fluently. I came back, see. But I didn't stay more than about two weeks with them. You were alone then? Yes. So your mother and father never visited? They were gone. They were gone. I think Dad would have liked to have gone back. He never did get to, and Mother didn't want to ever go. But Dad came from, or Dad's folks came from Skåne. And Mother used to teach me a funny little ditty about skåning, skåning, Imordeforskade, etta grød om dependen i håning, så det blir god och sød. That was the way she said it, see. And I said, Oh, I think that sounds terrible. She says, Well, that's the way they talk down in Skåne. They don't know how to talk. And then Dad would say, Well, but at least they can feed their people, and that's more they could do up in Småland. Of course, now that Småland's well to do with all those factories and glass things up there. But I guess at the time they came over, it was very poor. So they were kidding each other about where they came from in Sweden. Where their parents came from. So your grandparents never went back to Sweden? Oh, Grandfather went back three times by himself. But Grandmother never wanted to go back. So he was able then to get enough money to go back three times? Oh, yeah. He also sent the minister of the church down there back to Sweden on a trip. Which one was he now? I used to know him. I know his name as well as can be. Can't think of it now. Now that I've gotten to be 83 years older almost, why, my memory is slipping. So how big of a farm did he have, your Grandfather? Half section. Half section? Grandmother had started it when she first went there, because she had married over in Illinois. And she had two children born over there, and then they all came to Iowa. And her husband was out cutting down trees, chopping trees, because he was going to build a house. I wonder if that would have been a log house, because that's what Swedes taught everybody over here how to do, you know. They didn't know how to build log houses until the Swedes came. So anyway, one of the trees fell on him and killed him. And so she was left with a quarter section of land and two little babies. How she ever did it, I don't know. She was a tiny little thing, smaller than I. But she did. She ran that farm. She had some sheep out there, because she sheared the sheep, and she had some carters, and she carted out the wool. And she had spinning wheels, which disappeared before I ever knew they were out there. You know, farmers, I mean, renters, kids, just destroy things. So I never saw them. But she spun the yarn, and then she knitted it. I have a pair of black stockings, children's stockings, that she knitted for me when I was a child. They are old. I should say so. I've got them tucked away in the cedar chest. I don't know what my brother will do with them when I'm gone. Maybe he'll throw them out. But I'm going to tell him to give them to the Douglas County Historical Society, because I've given them quite a lot of things anyway. So your grandfather, then, he came over from Sweden and married your grandmother? Yeah, and we don't know how he happened to come to Iowa, but he got over there somehow. And then I guess grandmother needed somebody to help at the farm, and so somebody told him to go out there and try to get a job with her. So he did, and I don't know how long he was there before he and she decided to get married. At any rate, they married, and they had one son and three daughters, all of whom stayed in that community. And one of them was your father, then, or your mother? No, one of them was mother. The youngest child, girl, was mother. Oh, well. So your grandparents in a forest, you never saw them because they— No, they died in 1898. In Sweden? No, here in this country, in Stam. They were here, okay, because he was born here. It's hard to distinguish between two generations like that. So they also had a farm, then, nearby. They were on the other side of town, toward the west. So your parents, then, they probably met in church? I suppose down there. Confirmation, and— They had a great big church wedding. I've had the account of that. It's just a huge two-column thing in the paper. And a list of all the food they served that night. Oh, so they had a big wedding. Well, they had a big wedding and a big supper afterwards. Was it a church wedding? Mm-hmm. Manderlohn Church. Mm-hmm. So when you were growing up, then, you went to church then every Sunday. There was no way to get out of that. No. I went to church up here, you see, because I lived up here. But when I lived in Stam, I went to church down there. And then there were eight of us girls who formed the center part of the choir. And we would sing Sunday night at services, just the eight of us, and for other special occasions. And— And then when you came to Omaha, then, or after confirmation, what kind of work did you— Well, I went to school here, you see. You went to school. I finished high school, and I went to the university. And I went a couple of years, and then I quit and worked for a while here. And then finally I got interested in getting into social work, so I had to go back and finish my college. And I got—during the war, this was—I got a scholarship with the American Red Cross, and I went to work for them. And they furnished my tuition at the University of Chicago for two years, so I got my degree there. And when you were finished with the school, then, what kind of degree did you have then? Well, I had a master's degree in social work. Social work. And there was going to be your employment then later on. It was for a good many years. Here in Omaha? No, I was in Michigan most of the time, and Chicago. And then I finally came back here because the Veterans Administration wrote to me and said that there wasn't a psychiatric social worker in the state of Nebraska, and they wanted somebody to come here—come back here and start with a psychiatrist to start a clinic. So, but I come back, so I came back and talked to them, and I thought, Dad and Mother were getting old, and maybe I'd better stick around, so I came back here, and I worked for the government then for 21 years, and then I retired. And your title then was—what was your title? I was the casework supervisor. For the U.S. government? In the mental hygiene clinic, yes. Oh. So did you—when you came here, did you join the Lutheran Church in Augustana, or—? Yeah, Dad and Mother, you see, belonged to that, and so I came back to it. And did you join any other Swedish organizations there? Viking, Vasa, Norden? The Viking. You belonged to Viking? Mm-hmm. Vasa. Vasa also? Have you been active as an officer in those organizations? Not as an officer, and since I came out here, I haven't been able to get to any meetings because I'm just tied to this place. I'm a prisoner in the place. I don't even get out—I don't get to church. I don't get to anything. Well, they don't have a shuttle bus from this place? Well, the church would come and get me with a cab, but I just can't go. I'm not able to. I'm not able to go out anyplace. Too tired sometimes? Well, I get sick. Oh, I see. And your brother, he's in Omaha also, he—? Yeah, he's retired. Retired, yeah. So he sold the business then? Mm-hmm. Have you been back to Stanton lately, or is it many years? I've been able to get back there, pardon me, for at least three or four years. I don't get out of this building. But otherwise, I used to go back frequently. See, well, I had mother and my two aunts, so I went back frequently, and I managed to get— excuse me, mother had had a stroke, so she was quite a care, and I would get her out into the car and drive her to Stanton so that she could see Autotilia and them on the old house, which is still down there, of course. Did you take care of your parents then when they were old, or did you have to take them to a home? Well, I could take care of dad at home. He died of a heart condition, but mother was crippled up from the stroke, and I had to keep her up here at the home for the aged in Emanuel, and she died up here. For five years she was up here, but I would come up every day after work, and all day Saturday and Sunday, and take care of her and work on her and walk her and massage her. And she said that it was awfully tiring to her and hurt her, and I said, well, we'll just stop then, mother, but I said, if we don't keep on working on you and having the physical therapist over here to keep you going, then I won't be able to take you out and take you home into Stanton. She said, you just keep right on going. Well, that's what she said? Mm-hmm. So that's how we did it for five years. And they all go in here in Omaha? Yes, both of them. So they never came back to— Oh, no, wait a minute. They aren't buried here. They're buried over in the Stanton Church, the new cemetery. And the Marmalade Loon, they're still the biggest and largest congregation in— I think so. The Covenant is much smaller. Oh, yes. Do you remember if they had some communion service with the Covenant way back, or there was a division between the Loons and the Covenant? I don't remember that they had anything together, but they were very friendly. Grandfather's house was right on the corner next door to the Covenant Church. And, of course, on Sunday morning, you could hear them sing, especially one man who had such a strong voice. And I would say to Aunt Attila, Oh, dear, I'm tired of hearing that man sing. Why did Grandfather build here? I said, He's right in between the two churches, Covenant down here and the Marmalade just up the hill. And she said, Oh, he liked to go to both of them. So that's why he built it there. So he went to both churches. Mm-hmm. How about Christmas way back when you were a little girl? Do you remember taking in the Christmas tree and you dressed it? Do you remember how far ahead of Christmas they took it in? No, I don't. Mother didn't want it in too early because she said it did too much shedding. But they had a Christmas tree here and one in Stanton, and we always went to Stanton for Christmas. It was as long as the grandparents? No, even after they were gone. Oh, they also went to Stanton then? Mm-hmm. Oh, I see. So they had two houses then to go back and forth to. How about the renter? Didn't he use the house? The one that rented the land? Well, he wasn't in town. He had his lake. He rented the land and the house on the farm. It didn't have anything to do with the house in Stanton. I see. There was a separate house. So, growing up now in Stanton, it was quite a bit different than coming to Omaha. Did you like to come to the big city? Well, I went back every summer, spent my summer vacations down there because I had so many friends down there, you know. But I went to school up here. But it was a relaxing atmosphere in Stanton. You could easily grab around it. And I had my old friends down there. How are the Swedish... Swedish visitors to Stanton now? Are they aware of being Swedes there still? I don't know. I haven't been there for several years. You haven't talked to anybody from there? I can't keep in touch with anyone. And they don't visit you here either? No. In fact, I don't get any visitors for them up here either. Even my brother doesn't come to see me. He doesn't? He doesn't realize how lonesome I get and how lonely it is. He doesn't want to come and talk to you and reminisce about the old time? I guess not. Well, you see, he's married to a Chicago girl. I guess she just doesn't care much about coming over here. So her idea about Stanton is not the same as... Oh, no. And she's not Swedish? No. She's German. Oh, I see. So he probably lost his Swedish identity in one way or another. Well, he never did speak it. He doesn't eat lutefisk either? He doesn't eat lutefisk either? They don't now, but when my mother was still alive, she would sometimes fix it and ask him over. He didn't care for it, and I didn't care for it either. So we weren't looking forward to lutefisk at Christmas. But they used lutefisk in Stanton? Oh, yes. I can remember when Aunt Emma used to go down and buy it at the grocery store. Our meat market, and bring it home and soak it in wood ashes. She said that was the safest thing. And they changed the water? Oh, yeah. It was an awful nuisance. Yeah. So, there was no life on the farm? That was in town. In town, yeah. But you were still out there. You knew how the farm life was going on, though. Yeah. My uncle lived out there at that time. So we would go out and visit, but I would live with my aunts and grandfather in town. The interview continues next slide. People in Stanton could tell you the date of the church founding. So your dad, he said there was a lot of nails in that church? Oh, yes. They made it strong? Big square nails. They were probably homemade or? Well, whatever they made at that time. You see, that was way back in the 1860s and 70s. Do you remember when it burned down? Yeah, 1938. You remember that? You were in Omaha then? Mm-hmm. The whole church burned down? The whole church burned. And there was lightning? Yeah. They managed to rescue most of the books of church records, but that's about all. And then they went on building a new one? Mm-hmm. Which isn't near as pretty. So you think the other one was more? Oh, it was beautiful. It was white wood with gold trim. They must have been an undertaking though for the people because they were not too well off to begin with. No, they weren't, and they were not skilled carpenters. They just built. But they built it strong. They sure did. So they have pretty good homes though in Stanton, if I remember right. Yeah, they do. Very sturdy, good, large homes. Mm-hmm. They've always had nice homes down there. So you left Rome. How about the other girls in your age group? Did they marry farmers in Stanton? No. The other girls that I knew down there, one of them is living out in California now. She married a man who was an athletic director and became head of the National Athletic Association. Bob became a very important person in that whole organization. What was his last name? Crawford. Crawford. And they live out in Colorado or California now. And Helen married a young fellow who was also a teacher. She was a teacher, and she married a teacher. And a couple of others died. I don't know what happened to the rest of them. It was usual that you went to college, but most of the girls from the farming community, they never went to higher learning, though. Well, my friends did. They did? Yes, both Dorothy and Helen did. So the families were well off enough to be able to send them. How about the boys, though? Did they go to college? Down there? Yeah. Some of them. Do you know anyone that went to Augustana? From down there? No, I don't. I had a friend up here who is now dead, but she graduated from Augustana, and she was from Illinois. Moline. Moline, Illinois. She said that in the early days, the companies that manufactured the farm equipment. John Deere? Yeah. They used to go over to Sweden and bring a lot of Swedish men over to work in the factory. And they said that one time they had a couple of carloads of them. They were just sitting there and didn't pay any attention when they called out the name of the town. And so finally the conductor was desperate, and he yelled out, Yanni Deere! And they all got up and got off. So they were real greenhorns. Yep. Do you remember any immigrants coming from Sweden when you were growing up? No. The immigration had already stopped them? I guess so. The quota was already filled to Stanton, Iowa. When did they put this coffee pot up in Stanton? Oh dear, you'd have to ask them. Was it there when you were growing up? It was already built when I was down there going to school in high school. Well, it does that already, huh? But they can tell you when it was put up. I don't know. Yeah, it is a trademark. The coffee pot in Marmorow, London, Church. And then Mrs. What was it, the woman who used to advertise the coffee, she grew up down there. Oh, Mrs. Olsen. Yeah, she grew up down there too. And I knew her. She was not a Swedish back then? Oh yes. Oh yes, very Swedish. So she married an American out in California? I think so. Because she lives out in the Los Angeles area? I think so. So you knew her? I haven't seen her for several years. She used to come back to Stanton, I said, and visit. So she put Stanton on the map, Mrs. Olsen and Folgers Coffee. Yeah. I met a man one time when I was down in, where was I, I think I was out in Colorado, no, someplace else on a trip. And when he heard I was from Stanton, he said, did you know Mrs. Olsen? I said, oh yes, I grew up with her. Oh, he said, I think she's wonderful and we always use her coffee. So they pays off? Yes, so. The advertising. So you have been retired for a few years? Oh yes. So you have had an interesting job then as a case supervisor. Is it more in that field today to do, you think, than in your days? Oh, I think there will always be that kind of work to do, but I don't know how many people are in it right now. There's probably more need for it today than... I think so. So we never got out to that one. But you found out... But I was down in the southern school now anyway. But the others came up from around, where the relatives are still living up there in Easter Island. So you have better luck to find... Yeah, we got... Out of a relation. Yeah. You were mentioning they drank a lot of coffee and cookies and served you all over. How was it in Stanton years ago? Did they also have coffee in the morning and the afternoon? Capri? And you had to come and sit and sit while they got all this food. Then you had to have a potor. Potor, yeah. Did they drink the coffee on the saucer? No. You never seen that? Only in the cup? Just the cup. But I understand that the boys were going to the seminary in Rock Island for fun. Why, they would have their own dinners and they would pour coffee in the saucer and drink it. And drink it. But you never seen it practiced out in the country then? No. They never drank it that way. Were the older people smoking pipe or cigar or... I don't know what they smoked. Grandfather never smoked anything. He never used snuff either? No. How about liquor? Were they having schnapps to their dinner sometimes for different parties and so on? Well, not in my grandfather's family. They were pretty strict. They were religious and strict. So you couldn't go to any dances then? No. Were there dances around Stanton area? They did have them when I was in high school. Barn dances? Not barn dances. You danced in town. But we had to, during confirmation down there... What was his name? Inquist? No, that isn't right. He made us all agree in the confirmation class that nobody would go to any dances. I think they weren't allowed to go to picture shows either. He was very strict. Uh-huh. Do you remember if they... during the First World War, the governor of Iowa, he proclaimed a resolution that they could not speak any foreign language in churches and in meeting halls and so on. Do you remember? I don't remember anything like that. I know that up here they wouldn't let them speak German. In Omaha? Uh-huh. In Iowa there was... I didn't know anything about appropriation of any other language. How were they dressed now, the real old-timers, as you remember them? Just ordinary clothes. They used a lot of black dresses to the women, like the dress you have on today. You never saw a lady years ago dressed like that? No, but I don't remember a lot of black clothes. Not in my family anyway. What color was it, gray or...? No, they just wore ordinary clothes. I mean a flowery dress, for instance. You would never see a lady years ago with that? Oh, in the summertime we did. They had? Yes. Because they seemed to be so strict and... Not the children of the pioneers. They changed ideas? Uh-huh. And then you had to obey all the rules? Uh-huh. They had a farm that they bought through the efforts, I guess, or maybe the railroad company had the farm and they bought it from them. He said that farms' times were hard in the 1880s and 1890s, and during that time there was a terrible depression. And he said grandfather lost the farm three times and had to buy it back at a higher price, with 18% interest. Isn't that terrible? It's unbelievable. It was 1893 when they had the depression? Yes. So he bought it back three times? And each time it was cost more and they had to pay more interest. And he said that the farm was so hard that he had to buy it back at a higher price. But he didn't give in? In other words, he... He stuck it until he died. Was he a stubborn old man or... I don't know anything about him. No. Well, there was the one that died, your father's father. Yeah. And then grandmother died just about a month later. Oh. So I didn't ever know either one of them. That was dad's mother over there. Uh-huh. That's mother and me up there. Dad's picture is over here on the table. And that's my brother up there. So he doesn't want to come over and talk about the steppe? No. Does that make a difference, you think, when they marry in another nationality? The interest will... I don't know. Will disappear then? I don't know whether that has anything to do with it or not. I think he just doesn't care anything about his sister. But you are older now. You should have a... Oh, I can't tell him. I can't do that. I think he thought I did too much of that when we were younger. You were the boss then. I must have been. That wasn't good. That wasn't good.