 He first moved from church to Mikkel. When I got old enough to get into grade school, Yngwie was a Swedish name and they couldn't pronounce it. It was spelled Y-N-G-V-E. And they called me Yngwie and Yungie and all that stuff. So I came back home and I told my sister, who was seven years older than I am, I says, I'm not going to school with that name. And she said, well you can't do anything about it. And I told my father about changing it. Dy-vuh-duh-deh-eh-vuh-mung-ruh-thing-ruh. That's got to bleed. So I told my mother and she says, I can't do anything. She says, I was busy. You weighed fourteen pounds. I didn't have anything to do with your name or anything. So I went down to DeKalb County, County seat at DeKalb and got my birth certificate. And on the birth certificate it says, Baby Boy Sundberg. So I says, scratch the baby boy off and write Colleen, C-O-L-L-I-N, that's my mother's maiden name, and Yngwie. But I just used initial. And so I came back and changed everything in the Higgs School. I was going to high school first year. And I changed everything in my papers. My mother and father didn't know anything about it until finally I told my mother and was alright with her because I took her name. But my dad, he never called me anything but Yngwie. You always did that. He'd never call me Collins. And then when I went to high school it changed that they put an S on it. I was stuck. I didn't want to get caught. So I let it go, see. Should have stopped it right there. It should have been Colleen. Colleen. Instead of Collins. Collins is Irish. Collins, yeah. But you didn't understand at that time though. He couldn't do anything with the teachers. I did it. I changed the name. He couldn't do anything with the teachers. Couldn't do anything with my parents. Well, didn't I tell you? You signed the papers and said that permission to change the name. You signed the whole thing for my mother. Signed to Sophie Sundberg. I remember that. She said she didn't know anything about it? I knew enough to get somebody older and then she signed my mother's name and my mother never knew it either. Never told her. You see, I found out that I was baby girl Sundberg in Chicago when I was born and I didn't like my name and I wanted names like my cousins had. So when I found out I was baby girl I changed it to Evelyn Carlin. And I scooted all those Swedish names off. And so I told him about it. So that's why we went in cahoots. You did it pretty well. Yep. S-U-N-D-H. And when he came to this country his two brothers had changed their name to Sundberg and so he changed his too. That was the most foolish thing he ever made. I've got more people by the name of Sundberg that I'm not even related to. And I never seen Sund except an obituary from Uncle Klaus who was a fireman on a Stockholm fire department and he was Klaus C-L-A-S. Sund. S-U-N-D-H. Why did he change it away from Sundberg? That was a good name. I mean from Sund. Oh, I don't know. Well, that's what they did when they came through Ellis Island. Yeah, but he changed it in Sweden though with his two brothers. No, when he came to this country. He changed it. He didn't change it in Ellis Island. He changed it in Sterling, Illinois. That's where he changed it. But the citizen paper says it. His brothers did when they came through. And then when he came here to this country, I mean, into Sterling, why then he changed his name so that they'd be all the same. And I'd much rather have Sund instead of Sundberg because I've been taken for a Jew all the time. She looks like a Jew, don't she? Well, we have 12th of March, 1987. I'm sitting together with Collins Ingve Sundberg, born 1911, 29th of May in DeKalb, Illinois, and his sister Evelyn Caroline Sundberg, born 11th of March, 1904 in Chicago, Illinois. So your parents now, Axel Anton Sundberg and his wife, Sophia Colleen, they came from Sweden, what, 1900? My father came in 1962 and my mother came in 1892. They were teenagers, I think, both of them. He came out of the Army. He went AWL in Sweden, got on a fishing boat, and came to the Guernsey Islands where the English have the Guernsey cows. And there was a boat going over to America with these cows and he worked this passage. And they said it had a one engine, I don't know if it was a diesel or steam engine, and then he had one sail on it. It took him about 40 days to get over the ocean, the Atlantic Ocean. He had the money for a ticket then or did he work? No, no, he worked his way over. And then he said because they burnt the manure, you know, they got from the cows that was left and they burned all the wood that they could get their hands on. They had a hell of a time getting over here. But he went AWL, but he went back to Sweden after he was a citizen here and they didn't pick him up so I guess they didn't know. So he was alright then? But he was alone, there was no friend with him from Sweden? No, not when he came here, no. But he had brothers here. But when he got here, well, he didn't have any money or nothing and they picked him up and put him in Ellis Island for two weeks. And he was there and then in the meantime, when the government got a hold of my uncles, Fred and Algot, and they arranged it with a judge that they would be responsible for him and then sent fare for him and some money I guess to eat on which he didn't get the chance to eat very much. So he came into Chicago and then he got waylaid in Chicago there for a while. Oh no, no, Andrew. I'll bite you. Were they in Chicago at that time then? Yeah, well, what happened, he had no money and he walked by a tavern. In those days they used to have, maybe they did in Sweden, I don't know, but they would have a buffet lunch and you buy a beer for a nickel and you get a sandwich or whatever you wanted. And so the guy says, come in. He couldn't talk any English and then they pointed at the food, go ahead, go ahead, help yourself. So he loaded up his plate and sat down at the table. The guy expected him to buy a beer and he didn't have any money to buy a beer so they came over and took the plate away. Well, there was a fellow by the name of Pearson, he was a funeral director in Chicago, and he could talk some Swedish. I mean, he came from Sweden, they're Swedish parents. And he says, he talked to my dad and he said, well, you don't have any money to eat? And my dad says, no, yeah, I can, you know, I can. And so he says, well, I'll take care of it. So he bought him a beer or two and they sat there and conversed and he says, do you know anything about horses? And my father says, well, he was in the cavalry in Sweden. So he said, I got a little mare over there, I can't get a halter on her. She goes wild. Maybe you can help us. So he went over to Mr. Pearson and they went over to the livery barn and my dad looked and he looked around the horse to see what's wrong and then looked in the ears and they had boils. So they took out his penknife and he slit the boil and one on each side. The ears were maybe several boils. And the pus ran out and the horse quieted right down. So he says, it seems like you know about horses. My dad said he could shoe a horse. I mean, he was taught to all this in the Army. So then he gave him a job. He slept in a barn, a stable barn. Then he called or got in touch with his brothers and said he'd be a few weeks late. And they knew where he was and so he made some money and then he went on the train to Sterling and when he got into Sterling, he had no trade. He was a cabinet maker in Sweden because his father was a cabinet maker and he could do that. But he ended up in a steel mill that was in Chicago, I mean in Sterling. And that guy ran it up to a few years ago. He was over 100 years old when he died. And he worked in a steel mill and he didn't like that. So then he went, after six months or so, he came back to Chicago and went to work for Pearson. And Pearson, later on he died, but he had a nephew that was in the laundry business and would call there and he, what was his name now? Adams, Carl Adams. And so Carl wanted Dad to stay with him. My dad didn't want to, but Pearson, in the meantime, when he came back, he sent him to school. Now he couldn't read English and he couldn't write English, but how do you pass an examination? You know what that is under the table, you know. Went six weeks, eight weeks I think it was, to night school, to an embalming school by the name of, well Worsham was a professor there, Carl Barnes Embalming College. And he went to that school and he got his license and both of them, you know, the embalmer's license, that's all you need in those days. And so he stayed with Pearson quite a while. Then he got interested in my mother and how he met her. He must have been able to do some writing because he typed letters, Collins, that he wrote. Oh, later on he learned. He was sharp, you know. In fact, he had a Swedish typewriter. I have a letter of his that he wrote to Winnie in Axle. So the old gent was pretty sharp, I say. He picked up the English language and he had a scroll of his own when he signed his name, you know. So after the examination from the embalming school, he went back to Pearson then? Oh, yeah. He was working there at Pearson. He went to him, he went to school when he was working for Pearson. And Pearson up and dies. And then Adams came in and took over. But then my dad left and he came to DeKalb for some reason. I don't know why he went to DeKalb. He used to work for the piano company. Oh, piano. Well, it's their piano company, which is still in existence. And he was going with my aunt, my wife's sister. And she pissed him off for some reason. You mean your mother's sister? Yeah. And so then he went after my mother and of course he married her. The reason he got mad at her was that he had gotten a brand new straw hat. Millie took and knocked it off and stepped on it. And those clothes meant a lot to my father at that time. And he just, that was the end of that. So then he started looking around and then he looked around and saw, Millie was prettier than my mother. But my mother was a different type of person. I mean, she was a crackerjack, but he didn't know that he had met up with a crackerjack. He found out later on. So they got engaged then in DeKalb? Yeah. Yeah, married. They were married there too. First Lutheran Church, weren't they? I don't know, counts. Yeah, I think they were. So he stayed there and then he went, he was a roamer, so he went back to Chicago. He went to Chicago because I was born in Chicago. Yeah, where was he working now? Was he with Pearson again? He was with Pearson again. Was he on the north side or the south side? South side. South side. The railroad tracks, they said that that area is all Grand Boulevard. Grand Crossing. Grand Crossing was there, across the railroad tracks. He was down in that neck of the woods. A lot of Swedes were down there, see. So, let's see how he went then. Well, after she was born, then they came back to DeKalb, didn't they? Yeah. And then he wanted to go in the funeral business for himself, which he did. Well, honey, he worked at Werlitzer because how did they get the house? I don't know. They had the house before he went in business. Yeah, well, I could have been in between. I wasn't born, so I don't know. Well, because Leonard was born. Oh, Leonard. I had a brother, Leonard. And when Leonard died, they up and sold everything. Yeah, they lived on 11th Street then, I think. That's when he went into business. And he would go, they'd dig basements, you know, had these beautiful horses they had for funerals, and Dahl and, what was the other one's name? But he had a nice pair of mares, you know, for the rig, but he used them to dig out basements as hell on the horse, see. Oh, I see. During the week, what did he use them for funerals? Yeah. So he had his own hearse and a team of horses. Yeah. Wooden, you know, they were wooden hearses, and he got that, and he got himself in debt, I think, too much, and he couldn't cut the mustard because there was, Ronan was there, was a farm, and another one was Wurtz, and he couldn't cut it. And then Nelson was a Swedish. There were three funeral homes there in our undertaking parlors, they call them. But he couldn't cut the mustard, and so he went broke. Then he came to Kingston first and then to St. Charles, Illinois. He was working for the coroner in Joliet. Joliet. See, she says you don't know anything about it. Then from Joliet, now he was in Kingston, and then from that he went to St. Charles. Worked for James in the furniture business because he was a natural cabinetmaker. And where did he go from there? Well, that's a period during a period I got blind, and they took, James gave them that house, their portable house. I know that, and James pulled the furniture store out. Oh, he was in Aurora, and he had this branch in St. Charles. Yeah, he pulled it out. So then he had a picture framing business, and then he had the undertaking business. Well, he didn't do much for the undertaking business there. Well, that wasn't in St. Charles. Yes, it was. Was it? Yes, it was. Well, Western Shade Cloth Company, I know they were familiar with him because he bought from them for years and years window shades, rollers, and then they'd make their own shades. At that reform school, St. Charles Reform School, he put in all the window shades there. See, that was a big job. That was a big school. So then my mother was up to DeKalb with us kids one weekend. He loaded all the furniture aboard a truck. He had a little Model T truck and moved to Rockford, and she didn't even know about it. Then he called Uncle Oscar on the telephone, and she was there at their house and told him that he'd moved to Rockford. I didn't know. I was too little for that, but she may remember what happened. He took you and went up to Rockford. No, I was with you and Mother in DeKalb. I stayed at Aunt Millie's. But she was pretty upset. You could imagine a woman to have her house moved, and she liked it in St. Charles, and she liked it. And of course, I was at home wherever I went, see, so we went to Rockford. She was a nurse, and she worked in the St. Charles Hospital under Dr. Lambert, and the RN worked at night during the day, and Mother worked at night. And she had been doing that for a long time, and she was set. Mother was sharp. She was really sharp. No wonder she pushed me all the time. But she was a sharp woman, and she was a doggone good businesswoman, too. Yeah. My arm fell and broke my arm, and she said she'd never work nights again. She'd be home, you know, available, because when she's at the hospital where the old Moose Club used to be, because I'd go down there and say hi, you know, and see her, and she'd have to try to get me back to the house again. So she went to work for Clark's, and then she worked for, that's a mix of tin cans, and then she worked for National Lock. She had a store for five years. And then she had, well, she had a store, you tell it. You know all up to date. She had a store for five years. The grocery store? During the war, see, the World War I was on then. And, you know, the boys were going out to Camp Grant, and Dad was having a hard time making a go of it, you know. Funeral directors don't make money. They get one or two or three funerals a year, and you can't live off of that. So Mother was the mainstay of the family. And so the consequence was, these boys, there was no bus service. There was no way for the boys to get out to Camp Grant. They just had to walk, that's all. Because in those days, they had no transportation. The streetcar or the interurban came just up to 9th Street, and that was all. Anyway, she started frying hamburgers and making pie and cooking coffee. She started out with that. Well, Dad decided to move out of the store he was in, and he moved up to Broadway. And the consequence was, she took over the store. Then she started putting in, so really it was Broadway's first delicatessen. The first delicatessen store that she started. Fortune Cabin was then. Yeah, and it was, she was in it five years, until she got so big, so that, you know, it affected her health. And so she sold the store, and the reason she had the store was because Collins had broke his arm. She says, I won't leave you, she says, so you can take care of yourself. And the consequence was that she had this store. Well, then she had to have work, so she went to work for Clark. What is it? J.L. Clark. And she would walk to work every morning and walk home. And you see, then she started to lose that weight, you see, that was ahead of her. And so she got down to normal. And I don't know how long she worked at Clark's. I don't know, but I took her to work after that, because I was about ten years old when I was driving a Model T Ford. Didn't need a license in those days. And so I took my, she sat up in front, and then the two gals that we'd pick up in the morning, Salomon and what was the other one's name, Astrid, they sat in the back. And they all worked at Clark's, and so I picked them up in the morning. I took them to work in the morning at 6.30, a quarter to 7, and I picked them up at night at 5, say 5.30, in this old Model T. So I remember that trip, and then she went from there to National Lock, and then that Swedish guy, she worked for him. He was a superintendent there. Well, she went into nursing, too, you know. Well, she, yeah, she was working someplace all the time. But she got out of nursing when I fell and broke my arm. That was once, but then Connie, she went back to the third district and worked for the third district. She was a practical nurse and a midwife, you know, in the farm. She worked mostly in the rural areas, New Milford and Davis Junction and places like that. How did she manage to get out into the rural areas? Well, I suppose they come and got her, because she couldn't drive unless I took her. And then she stayed over in the... In those days, they worked 21 hours. Then they got three hours off in the afternoon that they could come home or do what they wanted to do. And so she'd come home, you know, or try to get home. She arranged it. Well, now you're giving the wrong impression, because Connie, she worked for the doctors here in town. She worked in their family. She was trusted. They would go on vacations, and she would take care of the families. Well, babysitting, she'd done that. And if anybody got sick. And another thing, she would take care of the cases when the RNs had been on the case, and the people couldn't afford in those days to keep an RN a long time, she took the case over. And every time she took the case over, she did a good job, everybody. And the doctors trusted her explicitly. But she was so... she was the type of person that would say what she thought. And she'd tell the doctors. She is now, 83. She would tell the doctors just exactly how things were and everything, and she would tell them off. And I said to Mother, I said, how can you dare? We were scared stiff of them. She was a nurse, see, a graduate of Swedish American. And we didn't dare say anything to her. And I said, how can you tell them, talk to them? She didn't bother her at all. She'd just tell them, that's all. They'd just laugh. So they respected her, they all respected her? Sure. How many children were you in your family then? Three. One died before I was born. That was Leonard. He was a year old. And so they... and then after he died, then I was born, and Christ, they all went nuts. So then you were only two then in the family? Evelyn and I, yeah. I'm seven years older, and I've been chasing him ever since he was born. They didn't spoil him a bit. They didn't? You didn't spoil him? No, I've been chasing him ever since he was born. She sure as hell did spoil me. I mean, anything I wanted, if she could get it for me, she did. How about your mother now? Could you... Who was the boss in the family, your mother or your father? Well, we always went to my mother. Well, Bill was the one you had the biggest respect for. Yeah. We always went to my mother. So during this time then, your father still had undertaking businesses? Yeah, but he had bovine tuberculosis that the family contacted in Sweden. And five of the... let's see, five of the seven kids died from it, including Grandma. And so they... and he died from it finally. He had a hemorrhage. He was out at the sanitarium. The last stinge was 14 years, not out of bed. He was in bed the whole time. But he was there from 1930 to 1944 when he died at the sanitarium. But Evelyn said he was... I thought he had a heart attack, but Evelyn said no, that he died from tuberculosis, hemorrhaging, you know. So when he came to Rockford, did he set up his own undertaking business? Oh, yeah. He gradually got into that. In 1926, he built a building on Broadway, a one-storey, but before that, he ran a store building, undertaking partners. So he actually had the first funeral home that was in Rockford. And he built that, and we lived upstairs with a tile building. I stayed out of school for three months or so to help build it. I was a helper and carried the tile to the mason, you know. And then they stuccoed it on the outside, and then on the inside they plastered it. The result, it was the coldest building that I have ever lived in. Is it still standing? Yeah, it stands right next to the Broadway Methodist Church, 1511 Broadway. Vince the tailor has been there for quite a while. He painted it green at night. It was eerie, positively eerie, because the moonlight was shining on that green. And the consequence was that when the boys came to get me, it was all right, but when they took me home at night, they were scared green. They'd say good night, and away they'd run. That was your date? Yeah, that's my date. That was a motive to your dates. That was a good watchdog for your mother. She didn't have to worry about you then. Or me, you know. I knocked down on her boyfriend. Two bets. What did your mother tell you when you started to date boys? Did she warn you of fried cabbages and Irish and Polish? No. But at that time, they favored the Swedish livestore more or less. We were on the east side, and I was going with the boys on the east side. Most of the boys, their fathers were factory workers. We lived in the factory area. But mostly Swedes? Some were, most of them were Swedes, because we were in the Scandinavian area. But I was never told one way or the other. He was always messing around. Your brother? Oh, yes. Why? What was he doing? He was standing around. There was no teeth in his mouth and everything. Snotty kid. Every time I'd look around, there he was. If I went to the football games, there he was. No matter where I went, he was hanging around. We came in about 1917 to Rockford. 1918. 1918? I thought it was 17. Anyway, there was 176 furniture factories in Rockford at that time. 176 furniture factories. Now you only have one in the whole town. Now it's all machine tool. But at that time, some of the most beautiful furniture was made in Rockford. Rockford, Rochester, Minnesota, and the place in New York, now that was... Jamestown. Jamestown. They were the high-class furniture. I mean, the traditional deal. And my father worked there, I guess, a little because he was a cabinet maker. They had a plane and they had it all broke up. They said they had, like the automobiles are manufactured, you know, lines, but they never got to that. Pretty much everything was handwork. And the Swedes were, and Norse, because any of the Scandinavians were good at wood, anything wood carving. I've got a bunch of wood carvings here that's from Sweden. But it was natural for them. But I didn't think they'd ever go to machine tool like they have. It was during the 30s they shifted over to mechanics. Yeah, in the 30s there. Metal. So you went to school here then. Your sister, she was not through. Yes, you were through high school already. When did you graduate from Rockford? I graduated from Rockford High School in 1923, and I graduated from Swedish American School of Nursing in 1927. So you were in the Central High School. Central High School. You were a registered nurse then when you came over. I've been a registered nurse until just the other year. I dropped my registration. Otherwise I carried it all the time. I also was registered out in California. You spent some time in California? I spent nearly 30 years out in California. I see. Then you went away from your brother. He couldn't watch you anymore. No. The doctor sent me out to California in the first place because I was having colds all the time here. So they figured that the only thing to do was for me to get into a warmer climate. So that's how I happened to go out in California. And that helped? Yeah. I stayed there. I didn't have those terrible heavy colds that I had here. I couldn't take care of patients either because if I had a patient that had a cold, I'd catch it. So my work got almost down to what you might call surgical work. I had to do clean cases. I couldn't do any of the dirty work because I was susceptible to it. The doctor told me I should have never been a nurse in the first place because of my physical condition. But like they said, Swedes got a lot of guts, you know. When I got out in California, I realized that the Swedes were considered the people because in the movie colony, and I was asked when I was out there, what descent are you? And I said I'm Swedish descent. Boy, I'm telling you, that was a plus for me. And it was a plus out in California for all those people that worked for the movie people. If you were Scandinavian, that was good. Did you work for any of the movie stars in Beverly Hills? Well, I took care of them in the hospital. But at any rate, and then of course I came from Swedish American Hospital. So that was a plus. And I was the first Swedish American nurse to get my California license. Well, you had to take a new license out in the... Well, you know, you have reciprocation and your papers and everything have to go out. But anyway, I was the first one. So for 30 years you spent out there. For 30 years I spent out there. And the smog got the best of me. And so it affected my chest. And the doctor told me I had to leave. So then I didn't know what to do with mother. She was over 90. And I wanted to go up to Montana because that's where all the people from Redlands were doing because of the terrible smog out in California. When did the smog problem start out there? After the war or before? That smog problem was when I was out there in 50. When I went to Santa Ana, when was the bucket heat? Well, what they did out there in California, they got motor-driven buses. And for transportation, it used to be all electrical. And then so much traffic out there, the population kept growing in California and still is growing. And this brought in a lot of automobile traffic. It was the traffic then that you mean? I think so. I think that the oil refineries had a lot to do with it too. So they affected your health then considerably? I thought I was having heart trouble. And when they finally checked on me, he says, it's not hard, it's in your chest. And of course my chest had been weak anyway. So he told me then, he says, for me to get out. He says, get out fast. Of course I was near retirement age at that time. You see, I didn't retire until I was 68. And so I was over 65 and I was going to work until I was 70. But I had to leave because of this condition. Because, you see, I'd wake up 2, 3 o'clock in the morning and I didn't know whether I had a heart attack or not. And I didn't know whether I should go to the hospital or not. And I couldn't depend on mother for anything. So, at any rate, I was told to leave. And I felt, I really hated to leave California. I loved California. Did your mother live with you out there too? Yeah. Well, she lived. My mother was with me more or less. And she died in 44. So she liked California at the time? Mother was with me most of the time. I was only... You went to Arizona too. I was alone for about 5 years and then after that things got so bad. And so, well, Collins was a teenager. And dad was, had TB. And so, and I was out in Arizona. And I left a perfectly good job out in Arizona when everybody else couldn't make 5 cents here in Rockford and came back. It was during the Depression then. Because, you see, he was a teenager. He couldn't take care of 2 old people. Both of them sick. And I didn't think it was right. So I came back. So that's why I came back. But then I kept going back and forth. So, my love for California is deep. I mean, I've always had work in California. That's more than I can say about Illinois. I always had work there. Every time I came back there was always work for me. Was that in the Los Angeles area then? Uh-huh. I worked out of Good Samaritan Hospital. And Good Samaritan Hospital at that time was the hospital on the West Coast. And I was in there. And I could be here for probably a year or so, go back there, be there about 2 or 3 days. And I registered and I had work. I couldn't have bought a job here. You couldn't buy a job. My classmates were working for a dollar a day as Swedish-Americans during the Depression. They didn't get any food or anything else. And I got my laundry and I get paid and I got everything when I worked at Good Sam. So California was good to me. They didn't have so bad Depression in the Northwest or what? Well, you see, it hadn't rolled out that fast. I mean, but at any rate, but of course now it's terrible things. They're terrible out there. And that's because we didn't have those people at that time. We didn't have the people from Chicago. We didn't have the people from New York and the class of people. We had a nice class of people out there. You don't have a nice class of people out there. You have people that don't care. Did you belong to any Swedish church out in? No, I didn't. You didn't. How about organizations like Warsaw? I belonged to my nursing organizations in that. But no Swedish? No, I had nothing more to do with this. I was entirely different. And then, of course, I was sick too. So I had expensive doctors that I would go to. So I really say that if it wasn't the good doctors in California that I went to, I wouldn't be alive today. Well, here you had Urbom and Olsson. Have what? You had Dr. Urbom here in Rockford. Oh, herre gud. Dr. Olsson, Axel Olsson. Yeah, they were homopaths. You didn't have anything to do with them? I did. My experience with them was wonderful. With Urbom and Olsson? Urbom. Urbom. I had tried to treat sciatic rheumatism, and I went to the orthopedic physician. I went to my medical doctor at that time, and I went to chiropractors and osteopaths. And Norma, my wife's mother, says, Why don't you go up and see Dr. Urbom? So we got two bucks together. We went up there. You paid him $2 for a visit. You couldn't pay two. You could pay one. And he asked me some questions. Do I eat strawberries? Do I eat tomatoes? And I says, Yeah, both. And he says, Well, you're going to have to cut them out for a while and take these pills. Take one every 3 hours, I think it was, those sugar pills. That's what they call what they give you. In 24 hours, my sciatic rheumatism was gone. So they healed. His healing was very good, I think. They're what they claim. But you don't believe in that? Homopaths, you don't. They're MDs. They're MDs just like the rest of them. Homopaths are MDs. Dr. Urbom, I scrubbed for an OB case. And I was scared green because he wasn't one of the regular MDs on the case and that. And I was wondering how it was going to come out. It came out fine. And he went over to her, and after the delivery, he says, Open your mouth, and he opens some papers. And so this powder he put in her mouth. That's all she got. And she got along fine. She got along better than any of the other patients. And I couldn't believe it. So he had patients at the Swedish American, that Urbom. He could have that. He was an MD. He and one by the name of Olson. Olson, Oxon Olson. Yeah, he was across the street above the drugstore, and Urbom was at the Scandia Hardware. He was up three flights, little guy with a big goatee. Hardware is where Nicholson's hardware is. Yeah, well, now it's where Gustafson's furniture. Who was the guy that took care of your arm? What was his name? I never had anybody take care of my arm. They couldn't do it because it was shattered, and they only had one. I know, but the first guy that was called, Dad called that guy. Well, that's Erickson. Yeah, well, he was a, and that was the reason you couldn't get any help. Well, I couldn't set the arm. The arm was smashed. You had the damage to your thumb? My elbow. See, I don't straighten it. My mother took care of me with cocoa butter. She rubbed, and then she had exercises for me. What did you do after that? Huh? Was that in the Swedish? No, that was about, well, we didn't go to Sweden because Sweden didn't have an X-ray machine. We went to St. Anthony. The Swedes were just getting going. And my, it was never, the arm was never set. It's the ankylosis of the right elbow. And when I was in the Navy, I was put in for four years in the Navy, three years and ten months and 28 days in the Navy. And I was supposed to have duty within the continental limits, United States only. When I was out to sea within six, five months, I was at sea in anti-submarine patrol. And I was on various ships and finally ended up on a transport. We brought troops to the scene of the invasion, and then we'd wait around, go out about 20 miles out in the ocean and wait. And then we'd come in at dawn or just cracking dawn or night before dusk. That's right. We'd put them off before dark in the morning before it got lightened up. And then at night we would put them in the, come back and pick up the wounded and macerated. We acted like a hospital ship, took them to Hawaii. The Army we took to Australia, and the Navy we took, and Marine Corps we took those guys to New Zealand. That was the two bases that we had. So I ended up on that ship and finally we gave the ship to Brazil, and then I was home for 30 days and I went out to leave, and then I went up to near Seattle, Tacoma, Washington, and it was a shipbuilding place. And there we were on shakedown cruise, and I got word from Washington that I was to be called in the Naval Hospital and said, Where have you been? Well, they'd give that old excuse. But I'd been right in the Navy, and so then I was dismissed from the Honorable Discharge from there. That was October the 7th, 1945 when I came out of service. I wrote the letter to the Navy. Don't say that. Just don't talk about that. He was supposed to be at 4F. He was never supposed to leave continental United States, and there he was out in the South Pacific. He was at Iwo Jima and all those places. I told them, told the whole thing. I didn't know whether anything was come of it or not, but I thought, by gum, I'm going to tell them. It did come of it. Did you get a reply from the Navy? No. They acted on it, though. They called me into the hospital at Seattle, Washington, and examined me and then discharged me. I blew my fuse. So you looked after your brother. Let your voice be heard. That's right. I didn't think it was going to be heard. I really didn't. But after all, I was a nurse. I was out making things with people, and I wasn't alert. And another thing, we got guts, we Swedes. And you have to use it sometimes. And Pa always told me, never forget, he said, you're a Swede. Well, he said that? Oh, yes. Boy, he preached. He preached, and if I would have married anybody but a Swede, he'd have died. But that's what I mean. That's what I asked you when you dated. Yeah, that's what he asked. I asked you about that, you know. Well, he didn't make any difference at that time, but I mean... He wanted her to marry a Swede, but I married a Swede, and the Lutheran... And I thought it was a good marriage. I had married 43 years, and I lost her a year ago in February. So during the Depression, then, you were old enough. You were 20 years old, 19, 30. No, I wasn't. Yeah. What kind of work had you gotten into then? Anything I could, but I got to doing trading bombing. So you worked with your father, then? No, I worked for other funeral homes. My father never run enough business, so I worked for Frank Fitzgerald here in Rockford and Walter Julian, and they had funeral homes, and I grew up under them, and they taught me the business. So that's where I learned the business. So during the Depression, then, you were not without a job. No, no, I made it, you know. We didn't have it, and I didn't get married, and she didn't get married, and we just had a kitty, and we'd drop our money in the kitty, and my mother would dole it out. We didn't go on leave. No. We just kept our heads up, that's all. And when did you marry, then, after the Depression? I married in 1945, let's see, 1942, June 20, 1942. And you started to date? Oh, this woman, I went with her for 8 years before I married her. So you put the wedding off, then, because of the Depression? Yeah, because everybody had to fight to eat, you know, to exist. There were 3 of us, and we stuck together. And her parents now? He was a carpenter, and he always worked. So what year did you start with your own undertaking business? When I opened for business, I took a house and remodeled it, and it was 34 years ago. In 1952, I started the funeral business. On July 19, I opened for business, and I've been there, same location ever since. Did you buy someone out, or did you...? No, I started out from scratch. And that was the home you have today on Paul Street, or was it...? Of course, I've had to buy a lot of property around there, houses, so we have parking lots. So I own all but 2 houses in the block there. And that's a big house. That was built for Brolin. He was a Swedish......company in Moline, and he lost his fanny there. You know, everything went to... So he ended up sweeping floors for National Tea Company. Hoagland, who was the president of National Locks, had given him a job, and he says he don't take charity. He says he works for what he gets. So he went, and he left Hoagland and went down and went to work for the National Tea Company sweeping floors. That's the last I remember that he died. He died a pauper. The children have all come out of it. They had college educations and background. He sought to that. And he was the only man. At one time he was a millionaire, or better. Just like P.A. Peterson. He was one of his cronies. And John Hoagland and those people, they were... But he just went broke. It makes you think how these people, like P.A. Peterson, Frank Hoagland, Hugo Olsen, and that's Willard Brolin. Brolin. Levine Foss. Levine Foss. And those seniors and everything. They were right. The whole East Side was Swedes. They would start these furniture factories, and then they would import Swedes. Just like that Karl XII, I guess it was, that killed all the men in Sweden. They're practically eligible men in these wars that he was fighting. Well, these guys went over there, and then they'd pay him 15, 16 cents an hour. And then they had the company store, and that was John Anderson that was a congressman here from this district. His father had a grocery store, and he had what they call a company store. They could charge there, and then they'd pay him on payday. But they were constantly in debt. They never got out of debt. So they just had to stay there until they could get strong enough, save enough money to quit. And then they could get a job with somebody else, and they owed the company store, and they owed P.A. Peterson here. Oh, yeah, I remember that. So you remember P.A. Peterson? Oh, sure. His nephew was my doctor. His name was Perry Anderson, and he was my doctor. He had nephews and nieces. But the thing I noticed about his grave, his lot, there's never a flower on his lot. There are no descendants? Oh, yeah, there are descendants, but they never cared for him, I guess. He was a... The Hanva Snol kind of death first. But how was he able to... He pulled out of the Depression in 1893, they said. And he was not declared bankruptcy, but he paid off... All his debts. Very cheap, of course. How was he able to manipulate so many millions of dollars to his ears later on? I don't know. It was all given away in places. YMCA got a big chunk of it. He built the first building for them right down there in the corner of... They're now remodeling it. It's on the corner of Madison and State Street. Some of them got a hold of it, and they're remodeling it. He's buried in the Scandinavian Cemetery up the top of the hill there. He has a big lot that he and his people were buried on. But he was a... He never wore an overcoat. He didn't rest long enough to wear a coat. He'd leave it around someplace. So he just had one of those shiny coats that the stock... the storekeepers would wear and things like that. That's all he wore. And they said he never used a handkerchief either. He'd wipe it on his sleeve. That's what I did when I was little. Yeah, you were good at that. You probably saw P.I. Peterson. No. He was the biggest man in Rockford. He was considered to be the biggest pillar in Rockford, though. Yeah. He was with the Swedish-American Bank and also the hospital. He started those things, Swedish-American Hospital, and then he contributed big amounts. Big amounts were counted he'd give generously. But his workers and that, he sure as hell didn't. And the Swedish-American Bank was solid during the whole Depression. Yes, never closed. That and Third National Bank, which is now First National. Those two stayed open. The rest of them closed. Like the People's Bank on the west side, they went belly up, and the Broadway Bank, Security. Security National Bank. Truman, Janssen, Engstrom. Some of those went to jail. I don't know what the... And then the Four City National Bank paid 110 percent over what people had deposited, and they closed the bank. But they did that, and what they paid off, they liquidated. And that building still stands. It's known as a... On the corner of Church and State Street. Rock River Savings and Loan was in there. So there were hard times. Yeah. Rockford was hit hard because... And the furniture went under also then during the Depression. Oh, yeah. And then they moved out one by one because they got hired. They were non-union labor down south. Was it the union that drove the furniture factory? I would say so, yeah. Were they asking too much to... Too much money. They had a rough time, though. They didn't pay them much. No, but this is what they were after, and of course, I guess they needed a union, you know. The Furniture Workers Union. What about the management, the rudders? Managed with a bunch of hardheads. Bullheaded Swedes, you know. But that's the only way they succeeded, because they were bullheaded in Wiesen. Kind of did that also. See, the Swede comes in every once in a while. You may sound like you're being a good union organizer. You never thought of that? Well, I worked hard enough. I'm telling you, as far as nurses were concerned, we were working 21 hours a day when I came out of training. Were you unionized in your work? Well, we didn't unionize, no. We had organization, but we didn't call it union. So you had bargaining power, then? Then we got it down to... so that we worked 12 hours a day. Seven dollars a day. And we got seven dollars a day for 12 hours, or otherwise for 21 hours. And you slept in the patient's room. What time was that? The early 40s or 30s? No, this was in the 30s. In the 30s? Yeah, this was when I came out of training. I finished in 27. So they paid seven dollars a day? Seven dollars a day for 21 hours, or otherwise. But there was high pay, though. There was tremendous pay. Well, we didn't think so. But the furniture workers didn't get more than a dollar fifty a day. On top of that, you didn't get paid half the time, because there was no insurance, and if the people didn't have money, you didn't get paid. So there was more nurses that went to the mental hospitals and to the TB sanatoriums because they didn't have any family. I was lucky I had family, so if I didn't get paid, at least I knew I would get bread and butter at home. But there was a lot of girls that didn't. We went, and the doctors were mean. They wouldn't even call you. You wouldn't get any calls in the hospital or anything else when we were battling for change. So I'm telling you, these nurses here at Rockford can thank us that they got 8-hour duty because we worked for it. We sweat for it. And a lot of girls lost their life for it. So there was really a union. That was between the doctors. And the doctors were mean. Don't think they weren't mean. But they were Swedes, though. Not Swedes. They were the whole city. You think there would have been more union? No. You mean there was no brotherhood between the Swedes? No. It was everybody. The Rockford Hospital and St. Anthony Hospital and Swedish American. We all were fighting for it. And nobody was for us. They wanted to keep us down. No, we had to fight for it. But you had a very important job, I mean, to keep people healthy and getting back to work. Everybody else was in the same boat as I was. The ones that I felt sorry for were the ones that didn't have family. How were the patients when they came into the hospital? They were not mean against you, though. Weren't they lucky to get some good care? Good care, my gosh. We had such antiquated beds and equipment in those days. It was a miracle that we ever pulled patients through. It was terrible. It was hard to lift them away from... We had to lift patients, and you didn't have a bed that had a decent backrest. It just came up at the head of the bed. And that meant that you had to take and pull with all your energy that you had to take and pull the patient up. And if you had a heart case, you just couldn't get them up. And if you asked anybody to help you. And union men were the meanest men there were, because they thought that we had been trained to stay awake and trained to do all the lifting and everything. So I hated union men, because they wouldn't do anything to help us at all. Whereas another man would say, well, can I help you? And he would get in, and he would get on one side of the patient, you on the other, and you could get them up. You see, we didn't have interns in those days. We didn't have people to help us. We had very few men in the hospital, and we were all women. And we didn't have enough help. You just worked like a nut. And the doctors didn't help a bit. They were just like a bunch of big brass, that was all. We mentioned Urbom here and Axel Olsson before. Was there quarrel between the regular doctor and those two doctors, Urbom and Olsson? Well, I don't know, because the only time I saw Urbom was when he was in for that OB case. And I never saw him or heard about him after that. And this Olsson, I never heard about him. A lot of people brag about him, though. They solved a lot of cases. Oh, yeah. The old Swedes will tell you the wonders that they performed. So they were cheaper to go to those doctors than regular doctors. Oh, yeah. The rates were cheaper. And the fraternity wasn't there between the homopaths, because they believed in light medication. And all their treatment was by powders and their pills that they made themselves, usually. But it's unusual, though, that Urbom told you about the strawberries and the... Oh, that's acid. See, I was having too much acid in my system, and I got that cut out of there, and I got this pill that neutralized the acid in my... and I was over my thing. I was on crutches when I went in there. Oh, did they act up and let go, or too much... if you eat too much tomatoes, for instance? Yeah, you had acid in the tomatoes and acid in the strawberries. You still have to stay away from that? No, not now, but... Oh, just when you were growing up? I have to laugh when you talk about tomatoes. When Dad came to this country, he saw all this fruit, and he thought, oh, these apples are nice and red and everything. And he didn't have very much money, so he bought a bag of what he thought was apples, and they turned out to be tomatoes. He never was so... he never got over that. He said he threw the whole bag away. He said he thought he'd gotten a bag of apples. So there was a disappointment? It was a complete disappointment. I don't know how he felt about it, about tomatoes, but he certainly didn't have... he was so disappointed because he didn't get apples. So you can see how hard it was for the immigrants when they came to this country because of all the different fruits that we had that they didn't have over in Sweden. They had to learn. And he thought, you see, he thought, well, they were apples. Well, when he made his transportation from Ellis Island to Le Kelp or to Chicago and then to Kelp, he just had so much money, so he bought three apples, and he bought three bananas and three oranges. Well, he bit into the orange, peeling it, got to take off an orange to eat it, and the same way with a banana. He didn't know that. But the apples he knew, and that's all he had was three apples to eat the whole trip, you know, on the train back from New York to Chicago on what they call the Broadway Limited, but, gee, terrible. But, I mean, that's terrible hard on people who aren't accustomed to our fruits. That's right. You have to learn. Well, we get fruit from all over, but they don't know. So your dad, now then, what did he do then in his later years? He worked for a factory or he... No, no, he was in the funeral business up until he died, or until he went to the sanitarium. Did he help you out then? No, no, I took over, left high school and took over when he went to the sanitarium. And I lasted about two years and had depression, and you sold a casket and you didn't have money to buy another one. So the people that died in the 30s, for instance, could they afford to buy a piece of funeral? No, county funerals, it was $50 for a county funeral. Complete service? Yeah, everything we furnished, and the cemetery was extra. I think it was $10 for opening a grave, or $5, depending on the grave location and the cemetery. And that was the cheapest casket then? Yeah, $50 included a hearse and a casket and a pickup and the embalming. Did they still use horses in the late 20s and 30s? Well, they used horses, and then this Levine Foss started the motor livery. He had a livery with horses, and he was the first one to bring in the motor coach. And then his cars were pallbearer cars, or seven-pastures. They were Chandler cars. They were all Chandlers. So they just borrowed them from him then? Oh, they had to rent them, yeah. He rented his livery, yeah. So each undertaker, they didn't have their own hearse then? No. So Levine Foss, he was in that business too? Well, yeah. And he went broke? I guess he ended up with nothing. Olsen had the National Mirror Works, and that was a big company, you know. Hugo Olsen? Not Hugo. What Olsen was that? His name was Olsen anyway, and he had the National Mirror Company. Now, Hugo Olsen, he stayed on to be the president of Sunstrand? Yeah. Well, see, he was in that kind of business. And Frank Hogan, he died in 1936, is something like that? Yeah. Well, he was the one that tried to befriend Brolin, and he wouldn't let him do it, see? I mean, he wanted to stand on his own feet. They were independent, those old Swedes. They were independent, and like I say, envious, and they stuck to their guns, see? They had tremendous pride. Oh, yeah. Proud people. And I was proud of Sweden until the Swedes took $32 million. What's the man's name that was killed not too long ago? Ulo Palme? Yeah, and he was prime minister, and so he gave the North Vietnamese $32 million because they had to, for humanitarian reasons. And we had 550,000 American boys over there fighting this war with Vietnamese, and the politics we had here was terrible. They killed Nixon, practically, tried to kill him, because he blockaded the harbors, and he started bombing North Vietnamese. And then our liberals got in there, and you've got them in Sweden, too, like Palmer, and they got in and put a stop to it, see? I don't know how they got their power, but they did. I think the greatest presidents you're going to see are Roosevelt and Nixon and this man we got in there now, Reagan. Reagan assigned the man to do this job, and now he's being crucified by the press. But all that money that they're talking about was the money of the Republican Party. It was not government money that he spent and used to watch the other party. But he's a guy that had enough guts to tell Khrushchev to go sit in a corner until he's through talking. He was speaking, he was in Russia then. But he's a gutsy guy, and he's had far more diplomatic balance than any president or secretary of state I've ever seen. But you mentioned Roosevelt. Was he a good president? Oh, yeah. He went right into the Depression. Herbert Hoover was honest, but the guys went after him, see? And they forced him into this thing that, you know, I think he was one of the smartest presidents we had was Herbert Hoover. Did you listen to any of those fire jets? That Roosevelt had? Sure. He built confidence into the American people. He got them to wake up and to try, you know. He gave them hope. You'd almost think that he was sweet. So most of the people liked him, then. He came in at the right time? Oh, yeah. Then Social Security, he's the father of that. And, of course, I think he got those ideas from Sweden and from other countries that had retirement. But Roosevelt and Churchill and Chamberlain, they were a couple of dummies because they let Russia take everything over, you know. Russia didn't deserve to. All these countries, they took over Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and they tried to take over Yugoslavia, but Tito knocked hell out of them. They got out of there. But they went to these other countries and took them over, like Hungary. We saw it right on TV and in the motion pictures how they went in there with their tanks and that and blew these people away. No, the Russians, the Russians have got to be handled with a steel fist and it better be somebody like Nixon that can handle them. Because Reagan, I think, is that kind of a man. I don't think he'll let them get away with the way they have been. They've got a bunch of old-timers in there, too, these Russians. So when you were listening to Roosevelt, then you became a Democrat then? No. Yeah, well, I did for a few years. With Roosevelt? With Roosevelt, yeah, because I believe that what he was doing for the American people, he had a WPA, put the men to work, WPA. You liked his program like CCC? Yeah, I liked what he was doing then, see, but I didn't like his foreign program. That was, you know, and how he got us into the war, you know. He knew that this attack by Japan was coming at Pearl Harbor, but he didn't say anything to anybody. Those guys were still in this country, those diplomats, Japanese diplomats, when they did this. And I believe in Truman up to the Korean War. Now, Truman was one that... Now, he gave them an okay for the B-29s to drop the atomic bomb. And I think that was right, because if they hadn't dropped it, they'd have lost a million people. But they went in there, and they scared the living hell out of Japan, and they sued for a peace. And MacArthur was the guy who took care of them. Now, MacArthur went into Korea the same way, went all the way to the top, to the Eula River. And on the other side of the Eula River was 600,000 Chinese and all their equipment. And he wanted to bomb them and bomb and destroy the equipment. And all these damn fools in Washington, like your palma, wouldn't let him do it. So he fired them right in the crucial time. And then we lost the war. We had to retreat all the way down to the 32nd parallel. And we had to reorganize that country and fight off the northern Koreans. And look at that country got help from us to manufacture, just like West Germany and a lot of these countries, Belgium and a lot of these countries. They forgot where their help came from. The American people haveand the American people are not one nationality. There are many nationalities. There are Swedish, Danes, Yugoslavs, Lithuanians, all kind of nationalities. But it proved to the world that they could all live together. And they're forgetting sometimes that we have a democracy here. And they're trying to take over. And they're fighting the atomic bomb or the nuclear bombs. And I say, just leave it alone. Both countries have fear of it. They'll never use it. Now in Sweden and Germany and all these European countries, they have these atomic or nuclear plants. And they're pretty successful over there, except the Russians. And the Russians don't know anything they can copy. They're like the Japanese. And they build them wrong and they do it cheaper. And the result, they just had a catastrophe there. And I talk to Donald Lyron, one of the Swedish organizations I belong, talking with an old Sweden engineer that was at Sunstrands. And I says, why is it that Europe can go along and not have the problems that we in the United States do? He says, because those guys are mechanics and they're not conniving. The American people are greedy. Everybody wants their chunk, you know. Automobiles are going out of sight. You got the same damn thing as you had when you, now they got unions and they blame it all on the unions. Well, unions, they're in there getting their chunk, but so is the capital. They have millions of dollars overnight. Look at Chrysler, how Chrysler's come, Iococca. And now he's going to take over the old Nash plant, which is American Motors. And so they're still growing, but they have so many millions in excess. In 1926, I bought a car, a Ford Model T from the Ford company for $757. It was a sporty little roadster. Now, the same Ford today, or comparable to it today, runs you $8,000, $9,000, $10,000. See, this is wrong. I don't know what they get for the Volvo in the United States, or in Europe, but I know in the United States it's around $15,000, $20,000. I can't believe it's that expensive in Europe. So I think that Are we going to be any good around here? Well, I don't know. I had three paper routes, and two of them were the evening paper, one was the morning paper. They found out about it, so they made me drop one. But I could handle them because I had a dog, Teddy, little dog, black dog, and she'd take the papers across the street and lay them right by the screen door. So she took one side of the street and I took the other. And then she knew, later became, you know. And you could keep all this money you made from those My mother took care of it, bought all my own clothes. And she put some in the bank, or Oh, sure, she put it in the bank. My father tried to get ahold of it and couldn't. Alf Alstrand got the money, sold the machines for it, and my mother got that. But he was afraid he was going to be liable, see. And Alf told him, what an asinine thing to do, actually. He says, he's making more money than you are in the funeral business. My mother and Alf Alstrand, they were my best friends when I was younger. At the Swedish gym now, you were active in more than boxing? Oh, yeah, and then exercise, you know, make yourself strong. But Arnie Esp was a Swedish boy that was a lightweight, and he could have gone far. He had nose problems, you know, he had his nose broken. And he had trouble there with his nose, kind of flat, you know. But he was athey came from Sweden. And when he came from Sweden, he couldn't talk English, and I couldn't talk very much Swedish, a little bit. But I learned from him, see, and his family, because they all talked Swedish, and I picked it up. So I never forget one time my mother and I were at a party for the Swedish Historical Society. I belonged to that, too. And the ambassador from Sweden was there, and he spoke to us. And I told my mother, I don't understand him. Mother said, I don't complain. It's the same to me. She had the same problem, high Swedish, like Oxford English, you know. And so it was difficult for me there to understand. But I belonged towell, I belonged to all kinds of Swedish organizations. Baltic Lodge, I went in there when I was 16, and I still belong. So you see, I've been there for over 50 years. And I belonged to the Svea Srners, and belonged to the Harmony Club, which is a Norwegian club, a singing club. And then SM&SF, which is Swedish Mutual Benefit Society. I think is the name of that when it's spelled out. And then, of course, the Rock for Mutual Society, that's Swedish. And let's see, Lyron. Lyron, too? Lyron, yeah, I belonged to Lyron. And Svea Srners. Svea Srners and Harmony Club, and SM&SF, Baltic Lodge. And your wife, did she belong to those lodges, too? Well, some of them she did. She wasn't very active socially. I'm an extrovert. I mean, I like to be around people, with people and politicians. I was coroner of the county for 23 years here. 23 years? And there was an office you had to run for? Oh, sure. You ran as a Democrat or Republican? Republican. When did you turn to be a Republican, after Truman? Yeah. When he did that to MacArthur, then I quit, you know, Korean War, because I didn't think that was right. Were you active in the local politics during the Truman era? Oh, yeah. I belonged to the  that's when I was the most active, was as a Republican, and I belonged to the Winnebago County Republican Society, or association. And I was  then I've been on several boards, Goldie Floberg's board, and Home for the Children, Retarded Children, now it is. Yeah, it's all in the book up there. So this who's who now? You said your wife is in there. What did she do? My wife is in there, and I'm in there. What did she do then? Well, they pick you, pick you out, and then they write you up. She was doing charitable work for some organization, or? I don't know what  she was doing anything special to get that, but she was an outstanding woman in her day, a businesswoman in that. And she was a licensed funeral director. Oh, she was helping out in your business then? Oh, yeah. Yeah. She came  had to come in when I started, because I had to have all the help I could get, see. You were the one man show then when you started. That's right. No, uh-uh. So how did you start it out then? How long did it take before it was profitable enough? Well, it hit right the first year, because I was working for one firm, and I was responsible for 14 funerals in one month, and from 10 to 14, I was bringing in that business, see. And then when I got teed off this guy, then I quit, and just like I did the coroner's office, I quit right in the middle of the term, because they wouldn't raise my salary to the standards of the other office holders that were elected office holders, and they wouldn't pay a lot of expenses that you incur, like for long distance calls and gasoline for the cars. And the cars, they didn't buy the cars. Did they have the whole of Winnebago County? Oh, yeah. Conducted all the inquests there, yes, that were accidental homicide, you know, murders are accidental or even natural if there's no doctor. So you were on call 24 hours a day then? Sure. That's what I told these guys. I'm on call 24 hours a day and seven days a week, and I said, these guys What did you do then if you traveled to Chicago, for instance, or Well, I had somebody to stand by for me. The doctors would, some of them, you know, who were friends of mine, they would cover me, pathologists in the local hospitals, they would cover me on that, Dr. Van Pertus and Dr. Van Hosek and Andrews, well, just the pathologists in the local hospital. I used them for diagnosis as to death, and if we could find out, they could get a history of it, why they would sign the death certificate accordingly, otherwise we did the autopsies on them. So did you have to go through a special training for this? No, but I've been in the I was at 11 years on my apprenticeship license when I went into Worsham College of Embalming for embalming, and I graduated in 1938 from there, but I had been in the business before that, and so being in the business, when they brought the new law in, the funeral director's law, I was automatically promoted to a funeral director, whereas my wife had to study for it. She was in a class of about 300 people, and she was about 17th in her class, so she was doing it. Which college you went to? What was the name of it? Worsham. W-o-r-s-h-a-m. Where is it located? It's in Chicago. Chicago. Now it's in Skokie, Illinois, but it was Chicago down by the Cook County Hospital when I went to school there. So after each inquest, now you're in the coroner. You had to write a detailed report? No, I had a secretary that did that, a scribe we call him. The girl that's my office girl now, she's been with me 23 years, and she's three years older than I am. She was she took down all the inquests. She wrote the inquests, the depositions for years, and now she's been with me in the funeral business for 23 years. And then my wife came home, and then my wife would do the book work at home here, the checks, writing the checks for the bills and that. So we've been very successful. We don't owe any money. We own our building free and clear, and we have I was running along there with low operation. I wasn't getting enough money for funerals. And we didn't notice it because all our bills are clear. We didn't have bills to meet every month, see. Some of these guys had problems, you know. That's where they get in problems. They get the intake is lower than the outgoal, see. My wife saw to that. She was a good person for that purpose. So we've been happy. I lost her. She died now in February 9th, and she was buried on the 11th. Q Of this year? A Last year. Q Last year? A So she was buried from Alpine Lutheran Church, and there was five ministers on the platform, two from our church, and then the one from St. Paul's Lutheran, that Missouri Synod, you know. And then we had three Catholic priests that were friends of hers that I invited, and they came. So we had a full church, and these fellows all volunteered. I had one friend, Joe Cleveland, and he was down in Aruba on a vacation for the winter, and he gave me help because I didn't call him, see. And I said, I didn't want you to go to that expense. He said, no expense for me. He said I'd fly government way. So he was upset that I hadn't called him for Norma's funeral because they were such good friends. She's the quiet type that made friends easy. Q So what church did you join when you came here to Rockwood? A Salem Lutheran Church. Q Salem Lutheran? A And I was confirmed there. Now, when was that? I don't know, 26 or something like that. I was 13 years old when I was confirmed because I was going to, they were going to send me to a military school because they had so many problems. Evelyn never caused any problems, but my mother says when I raised her, I didn't know I raised a child. She says when I raised you, I thought I raised six of them, see. Q Your sister was not able to keep you in check, so to speak? A No. She took care of me because my mother worked and my father was sick, and she took care of me. Q So you had Pastor Ben Anderlin as a college teacher? A Oh, yeah. Yeah. And his son, Rudy, and I were confirmed together. Q Oh, I see. A And Ruth, that's his twin sister. Yeah. No, we were confirmed together. We had a big class there. Never forget one time I wore we met on Saturday mornings, and I wore a scout shirt. It said Boy Scouts of America on it. I'm blessed so, oh, I'm blessed. He was so mad that he just blew up, you know. Q Well, he didn't like it? A He marched me in. Oh, no. He said we're training for war. The khaki uniform and the staff, that was a gun and a weapon, you know. He had no use for them at all, just like the Lutheran Church doesn't have any use for the Masonic Order. And my father didn't. In Sweden, he said it was a secret order, and they had a lot of clout. And so he belonged to the odd fellows, but he would not join the Masonic Order. But I belonged to all the whole thing, the masonry, the shrine and all of them. Q So like Pastor Benander now, they didn't have any scout groups at the time? A Oh, now they have a scout group. Q But not at that time? A Not when he was alive, no. Q So he was a respectful man? A Never forget that Rudy and I got into the communion wine. They had communion wine in the house in fruit jars. And so like kids, why, Rudy went in and got that communion wine, and so when Benander come home, there we were both wearing stones, you know. And he took me, he sent Rudy up to bed, and he took me home. And my father, of course, had fun with him, poked fun at him. He didn't care, you know. He wasn't hurt. But he says, I didn't think they would drink at Salem. Well, Benander says, Axel, now you listen to me, he says. We don't drink over at Salem. But he says, they were kids and they got into it. And he says, you can't blame them. He says, you're going to have to find a better place to hide it than that. Q So Rudy and Benander, he was a little bit curious too about certain things? A Oh, I never forget at our house one time, there were three couples, my father and two other Swedish couples. And they were making, they were going to make glug. And so when they finished with the glug, they were going to throw the fruit away, you see. And my mother says, you cannot throw that away, she says. That's good. She says, the girls and I, we each have a sauce dish. So they each had a sauce dish of that glug. And they got so drunk, I never saw my mother drunk in her life or afterwards. But she was, she was giggly and wanted to get my father out of the room. She wanted to get him alone or something. I think she had ideas. And I was sitting watching all that. She didn't think I knew, you know. But that was Q They didn't belong to the Temperance then? A No. No. My dad, later on he quit because he had a good friend that was in the Temperance Union. And that was Jacob, not Jacobson, but they had their factory on Kishwaukee Street. And they belonged to the good Templars. Huh? Q After the Renberg? A Renberg, yeah. Renberg and my father were very good friends. In fact, my father got him a contract with the International Harvester Company because my uncle was superintendent of it, of the International Harvester at Sterling, Illinois, in Rock Falls, had their factory. And he got this guy up there to introduce him to Renberg, and Renberg sold him, you know, quite a few thousand dollars worth of machinery and what have you. So they were always good friends. Both had Axel. So our stone on the cemetery is the same as Axel's stone there. The monument, same thing. The only thing I didn't get the Swedish marble, I wanted to get that for him because that's what he wanted, the old Viking stone, you know, like this. Q It's at the Swedish seminary. A Scandinavian, yeah. Q Or P.A. Peterson has this monument. A We're just about 300 feet from his grave, our lot. There's a section in between. We're on one end of a section, and he's right in the drive that you come up. So the second drive is where our lot is on the first drive. Q And in that cemetery, you have buried many of the old Swedes over the years. A Oh, yeah. And I've buried a lot of them since I've been in. I had kind of a rough go. I never forget, I was burying all the Belgians. They all came to the place, and I couldn't figure out why they were having me, you know, bury them. Q Were there all Belgian people here? A Oh, yeah, quite a few, and they were pigeon people, you know, and I had pigeon, see, flyers. And so I'm saying to one of the leaders of the organization, I said, I can't understand why me being a Swede that they, the Belgian people call me for their death call. They can't figure out what happened. All of a sudden, it started, and it's been that way ever since for about ten years. And he says, Don't you know? And I says, No. Well, he says, I do. He says, I was young at the time, but your father's name is Axel. And I says, Yeah. Well, that's it. Axel Sundberg. He took care of all the Belgians down in St. Charles. And when they come up here and they found out that I was Axel's boy, well, they came to me. Isn't that something? Q It's strange. A So this is the way our business is. Our business is made up of all different nationalities. Q And they were Catholics, though. A Oh, yeah, sure. My 35, better than 40 percent of my business is Catholic now. I'm a Lutheran. Well, we came from the Catholics, like I say. And then Frank Fitzgerald taught me the Catholic ritual and went on and on. So I was directing funerals when I was 13, 14 years old. And he was gone. I was there. So I took care of it. Yeah. Q So there's been a big service. A Funny. Yeah. I bury all the Jews in town. They come to us. Q Well, they don't have their own funeral home. A But I know how they want things. And I do. You got to do things as people want them. And I know how to. Q How are they different than other Jewish people? A Well, they don't embalm. Q They don't? A Not all of them. The Reformed will. Q There's no state law that you have to embalm people. A No, you don't have to. But you can't show them. Of course, they don't show the bodies. Q They never do that? A No, they don't have any, except the Reformed. Then the Reformed, they bring in clothes. They want them embalmed, and they show them, and they have a visitation. But the Orthodox Jew, the old Jew, no way. You know. And they bury on Sunday morning usually. They want their funeral. Q How many days do they have? A Well, they try to get it as soon as they can, but they sometimes I've buried many of them the same day that died, see. If they die early enough so we can get the grave dug and everything, we have it the same day. And they're very loyal to one another. They're very fine people to do business with. The Jews, I don't have any problem with them at all. Because I know I told them, I says, we have an old casket that's all doweled together. There's no nails, no metal in it. It's all doweled and glued. And I told them, I went to their meeting one night, and they had, and I said I wanted to come there and speak. And I told them about the casket. I says, the caskets are going up in price, and I can't control that. Therefore, we're going to have to raise our prices. And they said, well, look, we're all businessmen here in this group, maybe all but a couple of doctors and that. And he says, we know how to run it. In running a business, you have to price your merchandise according to what you pay for it. And he said, as long as it doesn't get out of line, forget it. We'll be there. We understand. And if you have anybody that doesn't have the money, you see our officers, and they will pay for the funeral. So we have one casket that we use for them entirely, and now we, that firm has gone out, so now we have another firm. And they