 This is cassette 2, this is a continuation with Hillemar Thornblom, Moline, Hanoi. Cassette 2, side 1. It seems to me that the union demand or the workers' demand for a vacation was less eminent in the late 30s and 40s. Do you think there was an undertone of, you had already a lot of slack time during the 30s, in other words you were tired of being off of work, so you didn't care too much for vacation. It came later, in the 50s and 60s, and you started to increase it to one week and two weeks and three weeks. But I still say, there again, it was unreasonable, because when I quit work I had six weeks paid vacation a year. I don't think anybody's entitled to that much time. I think they should have stopped maybe four weeks, but after so many years you got more. Well I think that's ridiculous. So you didn't care for so much vacation, in other words, did you take it in the last week? No, I took it gradually. Oh, I liked it of course, don't misunderstand me, I liked it. But I think it's unreasonable in a way. Of course now they maybe did that to give more people work, I don't know. If it figured that way then it was okay. Of course I just don't know. But I think people, I think the world is full of greed, that's what I think. That goes for the whole world. Everybody figures they're entitled to everything. I don't figure you're entitled to any more than you're willing to work for. So and the unions now can bring forward a lot of rights and demands, so if there are sloppy workers in the workforce, the unions seem to have protected them over the years. In other words, they can't fire anybody for many different things. Which was another wrong thing, but our union finally wised up on that because we had people that were not fair, they were not fair to themselves or to anybody else. And the union did protect them. Now that's wrong. That is not the right, that is not what a union is for. A union is to protect you if you've been wrong. But if you're the one that's doing wrong, the union should recognize that too, I think. But they don't do that at all. They don't do that at all. So did you attend most of the union meetings? Not most of them. I did attend, but I wasn't really a working union member. Did you speak up at the meetings if you saw something that didn't fit your... Well, not too much, although I was asked to run for union steward many times. But I didn't think I would be a fit union steward because I'm a little bit outspoken with things like that. And I knew that... Maybe that's why they wanted you on their side, of course. Well, as I say, I believe in unions, but I believe in unions that should be run a little bit different than they were. And I would have not been that kind of a union steward because I didn't hate management. I liked the people I worked for. I always liked the people I worked for. Do you think there would have been a conflict then if you had to run for steward? Of course. The union wouldn't allow me to like management. If you were a union steward, you were to hate management. That didn't go with me. I don't believe that way. Never did. But it seems to me that's the kind of person that is needed to speak. It's exactly what's needed, but I think I don't have any doubts. I could have been elected very readily, but I don't think I would have lasted long with my views. So you would have been voted out? I would have been probably thrown out. You know what? Like the unions, I mean, there are workers like you. They are elected for that party of people. Why don't they sit down and reason with themselves like you are doing? It sounds like a lot of sense. Sure, but they don't seem to believe that way. Your views are too liberal. They are unbelievable. You can't go that way. You've got to be aggressive. You've got to be radical, not aggressive. If you're aggressive, that's fine. But radicalism is what counts. Then you're a good union member. Well, they've been practiced over the last 50 years in the unionism. But you can't go so far, though. And there's a breaking point. And then it was dangerous. Like you, for instance, how do you vote? Republican or...? Democrat. I vote for the person. I vote for the person. Actually I have been a Democrat. But it wouldn't matter to me. I vote for the person. Could you be a Republican, for instance, or be a union steward? I think so. They would tolerate that? I think so. You don't think they would say that you are caving to the management, then, if you're being a Republican? Well, probably. I think there's probably a lot of politics in it now. But see, 15 years ago I don't think there was. But probably now there is. So you didn't step forward when they called you as a union steward? No, no. I was really never much interested in having an office of any kind, even in the lodges. Well, I did hold an office in the Vikings for many years. But that's just not my line. I just don't care for that. Because I'm not a public speaker, and I don't ever care to be one. Never did care to be one. And I think you have to have a certain knack if you're going to run for any kind of office. You have to have a sense, though, when you talk. Well that might be, but you really got to have a lot of push to put that sense over. Which is probably what I didn't care to do. You need a little radicalism. Yeah. I don't think you can get along without some radicalism. A lot of fire. A lot of push. If I ask the question about the Swedes and the Belgian people. You were not living close to the Belgian over on 7th Street, but you were close enough so you know who they were. Oh yeah. How did they go together with the Swedes now? Did they cooperate in various doings? Or did they stay? No, they were each one here and there. They didn't mix all that much. Why was it like that? I mean, there was two different kind of people. You could see that when you were growing up. You knew they accepted without asking anybody that they were Belgians and a Swede you could detect them. What made the difference? The religion, you think? Well, yeah, I think the religion may have something to do with it. But I think it's just clannishness. You're a Belgian, you belong to that clan. You're a Swede, you belong to this one. I don't think it was any like or dislike. I don't think that that was it. I think it was just that they clanned together. Which was more so years ago than it is now. So you could see it years ago? Oh, you could see it awfully plain years ago. But people are still maybe a little clannish, but not quite that much. Of course, I'm still clannish. If you're a Swede, you're okay. If you're not a Swede... It's easy to think that way. Forget it. But I've always thought that way, and to a certain extent, I still do. I find myself, you know, not that I make much of it. But deep down in my heart, I still feel that way. If you're a Swede, you're okay. If you're not a Swede, forget it. In other words, you have a rough time to trust that person without seeking out a little bit more. I don't... If a person isn't Swedish, I don't take to them as quickly as if they are Swedish. They have to build a bridge first before you acknowledge his existence, so to speak. Now, that's kind of foolish, but that's how I am. Well, but years ago, though, the people, don't you think... Like your mother, now, what did she tell you when you walked out on the street? You should beware of things and guard against certain characters. Well, you didn't have to do that when I was a child. You understood it yourself? Well, you... Things were easier. Nobody ever did things when I was a child. So you were not afraid to walk downtown? Oh, never, never. Even when I was 16, 17 years old, I could come walk right down the street at four o'clock in the morning and never think anything of it. We never had locks on our doors. So people living today, and their mothers and fathers, they have to tell their children maybe more lessons than they did to you. Oh, much more, much more, much more. Because, like I say, when we grew up, we never had locks on our doors. Would you dare not have a lock on your door today? No way. So when you went to dance, though, in either place, like Temperance or Oddfellows, Valsa, Vikings, Richard, Eagles... You could dance with anybody? Yeah, anybody. You didn't have to refuse if somebody... You could trust anybody that came to the dance? Anybody that was there, you trusted. And you could walk with them out in the street or walk with them home? Yes. You took... You were in charge. But today they can't do that? No. Because, of course, mostly the dances we went to, you did know everybody, because they went all the time, you know. So no bad guys came into a Swedish dance, for instance? Well, maybe one or two, but not generally speaking. But if you did, you could detect them very easily. In other words, you didn't mix with the crowd. It was easy for you to see that. Yes, it was easy. It was a foreigner. Mm-hm. And the Belgians, they were not soccer players? No, I don't think they were much soccer players. They were much more for this roly-poly. They're good at that, and they play that a lot. They still play it. And the Swedes never played roly-poly? Not that I know of. Why was that, do you think? I mean, there's a game and... Well, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Why was that, do you think, I mean, there's a game and... Well, I think it's just the way they were brought up. See, Belgians are brought up with that. Swedes are brought up with soccer, skiing and skating and stuff like that. I think that's the whole reason. So you never tried roly-poly? No, I never tried it. But I have watched it a lot. They used to have it out at Riverside Park. I have watched it quite a bit. Looks like a fun game, you know. But it doesn't attract the Swedes? No, it just, like I say, I think it's how you're brought up. What you're brought up to enjoy. And the Belgians are brought up that way and the Swedes are brought up a different way. Do you think the Belgians girls and boys were stricter brought up in the life than the Swedes, for instance? I think so. I worked with a lot of Belgian people. And I think they were brought up much stricter because they didn't have the freedom that I had. Do you think there was a religion played a part in that? In other words, they went to the Catholic Church and Catholic school? I think so. They all went to parochial schools. And I don't think the Swedes cared much for Catholics. I don't know. But I think if they were Catholic, you kind of wrote them off. You didn't want nothing to do with it. Just keep away from them. I don't think they hated them or anything, but they didn't mingle with them. Do you think the education was better in the Catholic school, private schools, than the one you got in the public school? You were as smart as the rest of them when you came out to work for us. Well, of course, I really couldn't say that because I never went to a Catholic school. But I think so. Well, now there's one thing here. I had a niece that went to a Catholic school just when she was a very young person. Now they taught her some things that she never forgot. She went there only for a couple of years when she was a very little girl. But she did get a lot of good pointers, like with manners and poise and things like that, that she has never forgotten. So I suppose in that way, of course, it was a private school. Were they more sufficient or had a better self-esteem, you think, those people that went to a private school compared to the... Well, I think they got more attention is where they may have had a better education, because they got more attention. There were fewer students and probably more teachers, which naturally would make for better education. But how were they personally in the workplace, for instance? Were they more demanding or pushy? Did you have a foreman that was of Belgian or any non-Swede nationality? Oh, yeah. I had bosses that were not Swedish, a lot of bosses. Were they easy to work with than the ones that were... Well, I don't know. I really don't know what I would answer to that. Everybody for me was easy to work with because I made it a point... To meet them halfway. To meet them halfway. And if they didn't meet me halfway, then of course there was trouble. But I always went halfway. So I wouldn't say Swedish or otherwise made any difference in that respect. So in your way, looking from their side, maybe you were demanding or pushy or... Well, I... In other words, you had skin in your nose. I wouldn't doubt that. Would they say then that she isn't Swede or was there... No, no, I don't think so. Were you different from other Swedish girls, you think? No, no, I don't think so. I don't think in that respect anybody would come right out and say it. Not in my work. Because they always been saying, you know, the Swedes, they worked as hard as devils without asking any questions and so on. But you, in your case, you wouldn't do that. In other words, you would... If something was wrong, you would tell them so. I certainly would. So that's a different talk. The Swedes never asked any questions. But you are the first generation born here and you could see, in one way or another, in other words, that you were not going to take a licking on anybody. No, I wouldn't take any pushing around from anyone. I've been that way since I was a child. What do you get there from, you think? Well, I really... From the outside world or from your parents or how did you... Well, I really couldn't say. I really think I got it from my parents because I saw that my parents had a hard time. Maybe I saw them get a little pushing around and I made up my mind it wasn't going to happen to me. I see. So you observed the circumstances. I think so. I think so. Because they figured... I don't know if they figured that, but it seemed to me that they always thought because they were foreign, they had to take just so much. Well, that's not the case with me, foreign or otherwise. I don't take anything from anybody because I don't think anybody has to. But I think that's how deep inside that they felt, you know, that they weren't quite as good as the next fella, which is not the way I feel. Your parents, did they talk anything about the royalty in Sweden, the king and the queen or anything like that? No, no. They had no certain respect for that kind of... They talked very little about it because I don't think they ever were near enough, you know, to observe it. So they didn't mean anything? No, I don't think so. I don't think so. Did they have any pictures of the royalty? No, no. In fact, I don't ever remember. I know that they named the kids after kings, you know. That was a known thing. The Riga brothers? Yeah. But I don't think that was out of respect for the... But they talked...I don't ever remember them saying anything about the royalty. But you know, they didn't live in the town where the royalty was. If they had, it might have been different. In your home, who was the boss, your mother or your father? I mean, you had eleven children and all that. It takes a lot of respect and know-how to raise a family like that. Well, I think my father was the boss, actually. He had the last word. Well, yes, in many ways. But they had very few problems that way. They kind of worked together. They worked together very well. Although I know my mother was... I wanted to do something and she'd say no. And I'd keep on, you know, and she'd say, well, go... All I wanted her to say was, ask your father, because if she said, ask your father, I knew I had it. Because he would say yes in a minute. You must be his favorite girl. I was. I was. So you were just waiting for the right command. But otherwise, I think... I would say they were both kind of bosses, because they worked very well together where the children were concerned. Well, I don't really know how that worked out, because my mother favored the boys, my father favored the girls. Maybe that's how it worked out so well. How many boys and girls? Five boys and six girls. It's hard to imagine, though, I mean, to be a mother, you know, for so many kids, and being able to serve the next meal at the next meal. I mean, it's hard for the father to get the money, but I mean, for a mother to really have that on the table, and everybody screaming. I wouldn't have had her job for anything. She was still relaxed and in command of things. She would think she would be the nose of Trachan. I don't see how she could help it, but she never was. My mother was a very soft-spoken woman, and she didn't care how much noise we made. We could make all the noise in the world, but we could not fight. Then she stepped in. So no fighting? No fighting. But if you made noise, you know, just having fun. She never said a word. But a fight was stopped right now. But having all this crowd, now you were not home all the time, all at the same time, I suppose, because the older ones went off to work, or did they stay at home? Well, we all lived at home until they started getting married. But there was one time we was always at home. That was on holidays. Like Christmas, we always came home. All the whole crowd. You were thinking of your mother fixing the breakfast here, and the lunch, and coffee in between. Then you had all these meetings, you know, with young people coming in that evening and playing and dancing. When did she get the rest? Well, I don't think she ever got enough rest. I don't believe so. But of course, my mother always went to bed early at night. And another thing, she always got up before everybody else. My mother didn't fix one breakfast. She fixed about six or seven, because everybody worked at a different time. And she didn't believe in sending anybody out without a breakfast. So I used to think that was real stupid, you know. We were all grown up. There was no reason why we couldn't go out and fix our own breakfast. But we didn't have to do that. You got spoiled ever? I would say so. I would say so. She was content with it and never complained? She figured that was her job. She brought the children into the world and it was her job to take care of them. I used to tell her, I don't think that's the way it ought to be. I said, you brought them into the world, but you know, they're grown up now. They should learn to take care of themselves a little bit. Were you the one that spoke up then, perhaps later on, when you got old enough to tell your sister and brothers to mice up a little bit? Right. I wouldn't wait on them. Because I don't think that has to be. I think by the time you get that old, you know, you should be waiting on your parents a little bit. But of course, you know, that was their way. That's the way they were brought up. At Christmas time, though, you had a Christmas tree? Always. Did you bring it home from Paul? Well, I don't know that he brought it home. One of the boys probably did. A real Christmas tree? Oh yeah, always a real one. Was it a fir or a spruce? I don't really know, but it was always a real Christmas tree. Paul won the light candles. How was the dress? Did it have any special things in it, ornaments? Oh, it had a lot of ornaments, but I can't really remember what they were, save from year to year, you know. Were some of them from Sweden, perhaps? Well, there might have been, but I doubt it. I doubt it. No flags or anything like that? No, no. But we had a little clip on candles. We never had lights on our trees until later, way later. We had candles. So you had to be especially careful, you know, when you lit them. That was only on Christmas Eve, though? That was Christmas Eve. Did you receive the Christmas presents, julklappar? Oh yeah. In the evening? Uh-huh. Did you have Santa Claus coming? No, we didn't have Santa Claus, but we always exchanged gifts. We had gifts piled to the ceiling, because there was so many of us, everybody gave everybody a gift. Nothing special, nothing expensive, but there was a gift for everybody from everybody. So it was a lot of packages. You all helped out, like your mother. How did she fix it? You had lutefisk? Oh, always. My father fixed the lutefisk, you know. He took it from the time, from the dried up stage. And I have never tasted lutefisk like that since my father didn't fix it, because he could fix lutefisk. So it tasted like lutefisk. It was just delicious. And you had just only one stent, Christmas? Oh no, we had, he'd always fix it in a wooden tub, and he'd fix a lot of it, so we may have had it for several meals. But you didn't go to Jyllota on Sunday? I went to Jyllota. My parents didn't go, but I did. My parents might have gone when I was much younger, that I can't remember. But I went to Jyllota. So Madrishi, did you have chickens behind your house? Not since we lived in town. My brother at one time raised rabbits behind the house. But a lot of people had their own chickens and eggs. Yeah, but we never had that after we moved into the city. It was only up in the farm. And in those days, farmers brought in chickens and eggs, and you bought right off of their wagons, you know. You didn't go to the store for chickens and eggs. You had those brought in from the farmers. You bought them directly from the farmers. Or did they have the marketplace in the morning? Or was the place where the farmers came in and sold their eggs and butter? There wasn't any marketplace. They just drove from house to house. There was never a marketplace in the morning. Well yeah, there was later on. But not at that time. So they drove from house to house. Because you got to be a regular customer, you know. They knew exactly how much you wanted. How about the groceries? Did your mother write a note to the grocery man and he deliver it? Or did she go to the grocery store and pick it up herself? No. She went to the store. Some of your kids did. You always went to the grocery store because you always got a street of candy from the... Oh, I see. Well, that was a common thing. Mm-hmm. It was a common thing. The grocery man always fixed you a street of candy. And so you didn't object to going to the grocery store. How often did you go? Do you think a couple times a week? No. I would imagine we went probably every other day at least. Because see, we ran a boarding house when we first moved to the city here. When we were there where Swanson's store is now. So she had even more customers in the breakfast then? Yeah, but you see, my father helped her. Because my father was a good cook too. So he helped when they first started out. And it was, well, it was a good living, see? So they were living upstairs then, the boarders? No, the boarders didn't live. They just boarded. I see. They just took three meals a day. So they came home then from the factories, like John Deere and Mori, Minneapolis, Mori. And of course, in those days, of course I was very young then, but in those days boarding houses were very popular. So how long did they continue with that? When the family started to grow, then? Well, after we moved from this place up to 12th Street, we discontinued that. Because by that time, my mother was, she was not feeling well at all. How old was she when she died? She was only 58. 58. Very, very, very... A heart attack? Hm? What did she die from, a heart attack? Yes, not a heart attack, a weak heart. I see. She had a long work day. She had a hard life. And your father, how old was he? He was 76. So he lived with some of you people, John? He lived with my brother for a while, and then he lived with me. And you lived out here for several years, or? In this house for seven years. For seven years. But I lived in an apartment in Rock Island for 18 years. Because see, I don't drive, and the bus service got so bad, I had to move from Moline to Rock Island. And I lived in an apartment building in Rock Island where I could walk to work. More convenient. Yeah, more convenient. Have you been visiting Sweden? No. You've never been to Sweden? Do you have any contacts with the... I've had a lot of contacts with Sweden since I've been working on this family tree. And right now, we are... they're having on July, in the first part of July, they're having a celebration for a kinsman of ours. He is buried in the Kalskuga churchyard. He was a bell ringer in the Kalskuga church for 40 years. And so we sent money over to put up a monument for him. And how was he related to you, you said? He was my grandmother's father. His name is Varelius. Varelius? Mm-hmm. And that wasn't really his... his name really was Anderson. He took the name of Varelius. But they're putting up this monument for him. So when you write to Sweden or to your cousins and second cousins, do you write in Swedish then or...? No, I write in English because they all understand English. And they write back in English to you? Uh-huh. So you have it with them all the time. But... well, if I had to, I could write in Swedish. It would probably take me a little while, but I still could handle it. And you still feel for Sweden? I see all the daughter-in-laws here and a lot of art you have on the walls. Looks like Swedish. No, that isn't... that picture in the corner, that's a Swedish. That was painted by... I really don't know, but it was a relative of my brother-in-law. No, these paintings I've done myself. Would you have done those? Mm-hmm. Is that your main then or the... Well, they're just these number pictures, you know. You paint by number, and that was very popular at one time. So this has been your hobby? Yeah. It was a very popular hobby at one time. Of course, these were done 25 years ago. But I painted all of these. I see. Well, it's very bright, nice colors. And then you have the dollar horses. You started collecting them many years ago because there's a lot of them. Well, I've been collecting through the years. All the sizes there are. But if you want to come, I'll show you my collection. I have quite a collection of Scandinavian things. So we'll go in a couple other rooms there, and I'll show you some collections. Well, you've got quite a display there of crystal and all kinds of different things from Sweden. Candle holders. Mm-hmm. And also a plate with Björn Borg. Yes, indeed. I'm very proud of that. I was very glad to get it. How did you get that? They sell it here in... I sent to Downs in... I think it's in Wisconsin, company there. They feature things like that. And it so happened that I watched that match. That's why I was so interested in that pose of him. Because I watched him the day he won that match. So you are still interested in sports, then, and how about soccer? Do you still watch it on TV? I watch sometimes, but it's kind of hard to follow. It's too fast. But I do watch. I don't watch a lot, but I do watch it sometimes. So do they play different than 1930? Well, they play... It seems like the field is bigger. I don't know that it is, but when I watched the play, I was sitting right in the bleachers. It's easier to watch it live than it is on television. And then, of course, I was familiar with the scoring. Now I have forgotten how the scoring goes. But then I was familiar with the scoring. So if you're familiar with the scoring, any game is interesting. You can root for the right team. Yeah. And overlook the rules, you know, if it's needed. I don't always root for the right team. I root for my team. But the same law or rules governs both teams, you know. But sometimes they can be overlooking what's right and wrong. There was one thing I forgot to ask you. During the Depression, some people lost money in the banks here in Moline. How about your parents? Or did you lose any money? No. We may have lost some, but a very insignificant amount, because we didn't have that much money. What money we had went from day to day. We had nothing to save up. Our saving came in later years, when it really wasn't very beneficial to our parents, because it just wasn't there. It didn't have it. They had to live most of their lives day to day. Day to day. That's how it was. So what do you think now, when the unions are screaming job security? Your parents never had any job security. That was just from day to day. Do they have a right to do that today, you think? Or how can they do that? Well, they're not making a very good job. If they take a little more responsibility, like my parents did, to take care of themselves instead of looking for somebody else to take care of them, the world would be a better place. But, you see, my parents had nobody to look to but themselves, and that's what they did. And I think that generation deserves so much credit, because they were building a world worth living in. These people nowadays, all they do is scream for more. They get more, they want still more. So your generation are born of the immigrants that came from, in this case, Sweden. You worked hard and with the same idea as your father and mother, and tried to improve it, but you still have respect for the next fellow or whatever is beside you. But it is the third generation then, or the fourth, they are the ones that are screaming now. Oh, they got their hand out. So what went wrong then? What happened here? Well I think it's probably our generation started it. It's our fault. Because you always hear this, I want to give him more than I've had. I want to give them more than I've had. Well, that's commendable in a lot of ways. But that person should have had to work for a lot of what this generation gave them, which they didn't have to. But like your parents now, they never gave you more than you could digest, so you could see it. No. They didn't overspend anything on you. No, they didn't, because they didn't have it to spend. But there were some though that ruined or spoiled the children. But you see, then my generation comes up. Well, they didn't give my parents and that generation enough credit. They always figured they're going to do better than that generation did. But they never will do better. Because they're going to give their children more than they got. There they start handing it out for free. That's what's wrong. My parents probably would have done the same thing, but they didn't have it to give. We never went hungry. I think that was a big accomplishment with all these mouths to feed. We didn't have the fanciest clothes in the world, but we always had warm clothes. And that was a big thing. So I think this way of living now started with my generation and this generation's children. I think that's where it all started. And I don't think they made a very good job, but I could see it in my own family. You're like your grandchildren now. They have what you call a more affluent life than what you were used to. That's right. Do they appreciate it? No, they don't. No, they don't. I don't think anybody does, because all they do is ask for more. If you're never satisfied, you're never happy either. So that's where I think it started. I think it started with my generation. I don't have any children, but my sisters and brothers had children. Well, I heard that from the time their kids were born. I'm going to give them more than I got. Not smart. So you never married them? No. No. So if you had children, you would have been very... I think I would have made them appreciate what I could give them, not for them to expect me to give them everything. And I would have insisted that they work for a lot of the things they wanted, not just to wait for me to hand it to them, because nobody handed me anything, you know, for free. I've worked all my life. But you are enjoying your things. In other words, you know how much it took to get just one certain thing. Believe me, I enjoy them. I have books, I have music, and I think those are two things. If you've got books, if you've got music, you've got an awful lot. Now I don't have to go on all kinds of trips. I don't have to have big cars to be satisfied, because I am satisfied. Because I think if you can sit down and... And of course, years ago I could play, then music was even more fun. But now I have all kinds of recordings, both Scandinavian and English. So now you can listen to Combadion's Avskild and Nidelund. Oh boy, can I ever. And you can also play it yourself. Well, eventually I'll be able to. I had the music at one time, but I haven't got it now. But I did remember how to pick out the melody. Now I'm going to learn to play it with both hands. But I had to pick out the melody first, because I didn't have the music. And you read a lot of books. I see you have fresh ones right here on the table. Oh yeah. I read and I re-read a lot of books. I have lots of the old classics, you know. And some books I re-read three, four times. Because there's always something you didn't get the first time or the second time. I love to read. I love to play.