 Cassette 2, side 1, continuation with George Carlson, Linton, Iowa. Cassette 2, side 1. The question I had was that your grandparents and your father, they came here in the early 1900s, 1895, your grandparents. And they lived as farmers and sustained a family life. And they had a future, of course, to make it better for their children. Do you think they had an easier life, more, less stress than the farmer of 1980s? If they are starting as farmers today, what do they have to look for? I think as to whether they had less stress or not, I couldn't say. But it's certainly an entirely different type of stress. Because nobody was pushing them around to say, you do this, you do that. That is true. They had more freedom of choice insofar as that is concerned. However, the limitations imposed on them from far as economic opportunities are concerned might have been as severe then in a way as they are now. For example, in my neighborhood, the idea of farm kids going off to college and going into something other than farming was a rather foreign type of thing. It wasn't really considered a viable option for very many people. Most of my friends felt their destiny was to be farmers or work in a little town in a shop or something like that. The horizons were pretty limited. So from that standpoint, there were stresses and restrictions on them that had been opened up for the existing generation of farm people. Which is fortunate because with the trends that have taken place, larger and larger farms, fewer and fewer farmers, if all the farm kids today were restricted in their dreams toward the idea of farming, there just absolutely wouldn't be room for everybody to farm. And so these other opportunities outside of farming have opened up and that is good. But there's no question the process creates some stress. There's no doubt of that. You mentioned earlier that the families, the Swedish ones, Lutherans, Methodists, Covenants, they came together on Sundays, Sunday afternoons. They had a gathering and they seemed to release themselves and they were happy and everything. That's true. Do they do that today for instance? No, everybody's too busy. Everybody's too busy. I think it varies from one group to another, one neighborhood to another. But there isn't the spirit of neighborhoodness that there used to be. I'm sure of that. The contact you have with a lot of your rural neighbors anymore is maybe a hand wave when you see them go by on the road. They're too busy to stop and visit them very often since this exchange of help from one neighbor to another at thrashing time is no longer a viable thing. You don't have that opportunity to exchange ideas and so forth. So the old neighborhood concept, whether we think of in geographical terms of a few square miles or if we think in terms of expanded families, cousins and so forth, that old concept has pretty well disappeared. And that's unfortunate I think in a lot of ways. I think it has happened and I don't see much of a reversal of the trend really. This modern technology has pushed away the thrashing days. That's right. Nobody wants to go back to it, they say. Well, I wouldn't say that I'd like to go back to those days, but I realize that it probably isn't a possibility. It's true that a lot of new options have opened up and a lot of new technology that has supposedly improved the quality of life. We think that electricity and TV sets and fast automobiles are all a big improvement over what we had 50 years ago. In some aspects they are, but on the other hand, they've all come at a certain cost to us from a sociological standpoint. I don't think there's any doubt of that. But you being close to conservation, has it stopped all the erosion and all the poisoning of the... No. No, we've got a long, long ways to go. A long ways to go. In some respects, the so-called revolution from a technology standpoint in agriculture that's taken place in the last 40 years have made it possible for us to accomplish some good things, but also it's created some monsters, some problems that we quite frankly don't know how to deal with. The fact that by using insecticides and herbicides and fertilizers and so forth, we can produce 200 plus bushels of corn per acre on the surface sounds good. And it's only been just very recently that we're beginning to ask ourselves just what damage we're doing to the streams and the subsurface waters and all that, and the air itself from the standpoint of the use of these chemicals. Quite frankly, I don't think anybody has a real answer to it. I really don't think they do. But that's part of the price we've paid for this so-called progress. We didn't have to worry about that. So there was one less stress than here. That is right. No. No, one—I say when I was a kid, we didn't worry about that type of thing. The only water pollution we might have had at all was if somebody's manure pile sat too close to the bank of the creek. I mean, we didn't worry about chemicals. There was clean dirt, or in other words, chemical we controlled with. Right. With the seasons. In the winter it was— Yeah. No, I say progress is a fine thing, or change sometimes is a fine thing, but it isn't always necessarily to our benefit. You pay a price for everything like that. And it becomes a question of maybe we've paid too high a price for what's happened. I'd rather think we have. So in your family now, George, you met Mary Skinner. She was of English background, or— English, I would say. It was predominantly English. And she was born in the— In Manchester, Iowa. So your philosophy then with your children, it was education. That is right. You didn't stress the farming too much? No, we didn't primarily because we could see the limitations and the problems that were associated with it at the time. We always had the feeling that you could farm and go broke and they could take the farm away from you, but once you had an education, that was yours. They bankrupt you or nothing else, they can't take it away from you. And it's always there. It's always yours. So like I say, that's sort of accepted. Did you have a plan then, or your wife, when you went through high school, that you were going to continue, maybe through college? It was sort of, at that time, it was sort of a wish, sort of a hope, rather than a plan. You just sort of played things from day to day and you sort of hoped that when you got through high school that you could maybe go to college for a year, and if you made it through one year, you sort of hoped you'd find finances to make it through a second year and so forth. And like I say, it was sort of something that you, more of a hope than a plan, we'll put it that way. So they all went through Vinton High School? Well, where is the high school around here? My children? Yes. They all went, with the exception of Kathy, all graduated from Manchester High School. I see, so you've been living there in Manchester? Yeah, we were living in Manchester, except on weekends we lived at the barn. So how lately have you moved back down to your... We actually moved down here full-time in 1981. Prior to that time, we had this farm home, next farm up the road, and weekends and vacation times and we spent a lot of time at the farm, but our residence legally was in Manchester and that's where the kids... Did you rent out the land then to somebody or...? Yes, well I farmed part of it myself and most of it I farmed on a share, or rented on a share basis with a neighboring farmer and we took care of keeping the jungle from taking over and building fences and all that type of thing, you know, maintenance on the buildings and this type of thing. So did you practice then what you were teaching over there? Yes, yes, just about had to. You had the pressure on yourself. Yeah. But that was the only way to do it. So then you're... except your youngest daughter, she is on the way into college I understand. That's what her plans are, you know. They all went through college? Yes, like I say, my oldest son graduated from Cornell and then went to... took graduate work, got his doctor's degree at the University of Illinois at Champaign. What kind of subject then? Psychology. Psychology. And now he's on the staff out at Penn State. And Tom, he... well you were at Iowa City for one semester, weren't you Tom? One year. One year. Then to Stanford out in California and now at Harvard. And the youngest boy, he graduated in engineering from the state, Iowa State University at Ames. And he's working with an engineering firm in Kansas City, Missouri now. And then my oldest daughter who died here a month ago, she went to Cornell College for two years Tom. And then she got married and then she went... she continued going to college at Cedar Falls, University of Northern Iowa until about a year ago when this problem came back. And of course the last year she's been downhill all the way. So what did your father bring into your family in the question of Swedishness, of the Swedish culture? Is it something that you remember that he talked about quite often? Yeah. That you should be proud of being of Swedish... He was, I'm sure he was proud to have Swedish heritage and he sort of passed that on down through the family by example I suppose more than anything else. And the fact that he was able to become, well, an educated man you say, without a formal education, sort of give you a little different sense of values perhaps than one might suspect under the circumstances. So if he had grown up with the Bellar Foundation, that means he probably would have ended up in a college or university somewhere. Oh I suspect he probably would, I mean, but I don't think he ever had any regrets. I think he loved the life he led as far as that's concerned. I don't think he ever... He never talked about it? No he never did. I say I don't think his generation or under his circumstances, I don't think the idea of going to college was ever even a thought, I mean even a valid option. But his love of reading and books and that type of thing, I don't know where it came from but it was always with him and he sort of passed that on down there again by example I think more than anything else to the rest of the family. Well Tom Carlson, you are the second oldest child of your family. You were born 1957, 15th of February, Manchester, Iowa. So what have you now tried to learn about your Swedish ancestry? Your father was of Swedish background and your mother, born Skinner, she was of English background. Have you tried to trace the background of whom? I've tried to trace the background of both sides of the family. When I was in college I took Swedish for a couple of years and during that time came into contact with the Mormon Church and their project for recording family histories and I was able to get copies of the church records in Sweden on microfilm and so I was able to look at the microfilm for the parish in Sweden that my grandfather came from and was able to actually trace the family back quite a few generations in Sweden through those records. You found the Tengene in Grestorpen in Västergötland. How were you able not to read it? Did you help them with the genealogical society in Utah? No, as I say I was studying Swedish language while I was in college and that was enough to help to be able to make out most of the records. It got to be difficult back in the late 1700s when the script that they were using changed but you generally could puzzle out most of it. You can anticipate what sort of information should be in the records and then can make sense of it that way. Was it easy on both sides? How about the mother's side? Could you trace that back? It was actually much more difficult to trace my mother's family back because the American records aren't as good as Swedish records. The family unit isn't as closely associated with the parish and in a lot of cases the people had no church affiliation or at least no apparent church affiliation, none that I could detect and no place I could turn to to find the records. And you have had excellent schooling from the beginning. Did you have an easy time in school? I think I always had a fairly easy time in school. As I got farther along it certainly got more difficult and I feel like I have to work now that I'm in graduate school in order to do as well as I am used to doing but no, I've always had a fairly easy time. But when you look back now, your grandfather, he went to seventh grade and you are at Harvard, the best school in the world. There's a tremendous step in between there. It's a tremendous step in between there but I think that it's at least in part due to the fact that my grandfather was so tremendously well educated outside of the context of formal schooling that gave me some of the impetus to carry on with my studies as far as I have. So you have studied his articles and poems he sent in to the rapids and they are written in English of course. So how do you find the writing on his? Well as a poet I'm not quite sure what to say about him. His grasp of the languages is remarkable but there are certain infelicities of I guess meter and rhyme you'd say. More than anything else I'm impressed by the powerful point of view behind what's writing. He had a very interesting outlook on life and when you read a large number of these poems you begin to get quite a sense of what this point of view is like and I feel like that's really the legacy that I have from him. So they gave you some insight of his observations over the years, they were quite accurate. I think he had a very keen sense of psychology, of human failings as much as anything else. And that's your subject? Full time? To a certain extent yes, that is what my subject is full time. As a philosopher I study human nature and just what the consequences of that might be. How about your father now, is he a psychologist in a sort of way or is this from your grandfather you inherited mostly? Well I mean I inherited from my grandfather but through my father it's something that's passed along. I had the good fortune of knowing my grandfather so I got some of it directly but I think that it comes through just as clearly second hand. Well he was still, he died in 1981? He died in 1981. So you had to see him quite a few. What did he say about Sweden? Did you ask any questions about his homeland? Well I can't honestly remember. I started getting interested, strongly interested in this family history just shortly after he passed away. I wish now that I had been able to spend more time talking to him. It was unfortunate that in the final years of his life when I had gotten to the age that I could truly appreciate this that well he just wasn't really there to be able to tell it to me. Is the age made him fail that too? The last few years his mental capacities were pretty diminished. We had, he did tell things now and again and there were pictures around the house and he would comment occasionally on what life was like in Sweden but you have to remember that he left Sweden when he was five too so I don't think that he had that strong an image of what life in Sweden was all about either. Do you think his parents though told him more about it, what he missed about their lives in Sweden, his parents? I don't know. I mean I never got. Did he talk much about the... I never heard him really talk much about his parents. Something I always thought was a little peculiar. I guess I got the sense that... He was only 15 when his father died. He was only 15 when his father died. But his father died later on. His mother died 10 years later than when he was about 25 and his father was significantly older. His father was almost 70 when he died and so I imagine that it was a little... Generation gap. Yeah, another generation gap there. Just like a generation gap between Kathy and myself. He's 14 and I'm 66 so... That's good though because she will teach you all the newer things. She finds it real frustrating. I guess in part I feel like there is this feeling that well Sweden was the old country and this was our new country and this was what we should be concerned with here and not with that back there. So he saw this as a future to raise the family. Did he talk at any time, maybe I should ask your father about that, but he wanted you to get it better than he had it? You know like his parents, they came here with nothing I suppose, starting out with bare hands more or less. And they were looking forward for their children more or less. Nowadays it's a different story. Everybody has to fend for himself. Did he have the same kind of feeling that he wanted you to get it better? I think perhaps in a way, however, I think he was perfectly satisfied with his way of life. In other words, I never had the impression that he was reaching for something that he didn't have. Or that he wanted us to reach for anything that he didn't have. I think he was satisfied with life as he found it and he assumed that we would be happy with life as we found it. Well, what I mean is that years ago, they went ahead and did things, even if it didn't pay. Today is always the outlook, if it doesn't pay, forget it. But in that generation, way back, two generations, they had to do it, whether it paid or not, just to sustain life and make it better for the next generation. Well that's the idea that do what you want to do or do what's right, even if it doesn't pay is something that has been passed down in our family. Certainly I didn't go to school with the idea of vocational training. I went to school because it was an end in itself. That education had an absolute value regardless of what practical applications that it had. Certainly my graduate studies now have no particular practical, or at least immediately practical applications. I think that it's largely due to this being passed down in the family that I'm able to feel comfortable doing that. I mean with his writing, he wrote about 1,500 plus articles. I am sure he was not reimbursed for the time he spent on it, but he still did it as a service from the communities he was living in and to the readers. Today very few will do that. They will say, you know, it doesn't pay, so why should we do it? But he never questioned that. Do you have some kind of philosophy you think that you'd like to serve somebody without even getting reimbursement for it, or do something good to humanity? I'm not sure I have any really clear-cut philosophy on these sort of things. I like to feel that, say, as a philosopher or as somebody who claims to be a student of philosophy, that what I do has a value for society, even though it bakes no bread. There aren't any immediately practical applications for it, nor am I particularly clear that what I would be able to teach once I have this training is going to have any immediate practical application for anybody. I have a sense of the absolute value of what I do as part of the culture, regardless of questions of so-called practical application. But you are writing a thesis now, then? Right, I'm working on my thesis now on philosophy. You're looking to learn more, and you have investigated the human behavior. Well, I've spent quite a bit of time trying to figure out how people think and why they think that way. I'm not sure I've come to any conclusions yet, but then again I think that it… Do you have any aspirations to go back to Sweden to find out actually where they trampled the ground there? Yes, I've wanted to for many years to be able to get over there. We apparently still have some sort of cousins that are still in the immediate area that our grandfather came from. I would give anything to be able to afford to go over and do it, it's just that I've never been able to have the time and the money together at the same time. But we have a rich relative in Rockford, Illinois, though, Joe Carlson. Well, I should write him a letter and see if he'll finance the trip. Tell him that I told you that. It would give you an encouragement, you know, to write it. Well, Joe's kept his ties there strongly. Every year, I understand. So he should be a good guy for you. I mean, you'll court your own, though. Yeah, I'd like to talk to him sometime about… He was here, I guess it was a couple of years ago, just after having gotten back from a trip to Sweden, but I didn't get much of an opportunity to talk to him at that point. He said he's coming up again this year. Yeah, he'll be… He'll be outside, you know. End of interview.