 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Lawrence Olsen, Ruffer, Illinois, cassette two, side one. It was unusual though that they sent the girls to college at that time. What was the, they felt that they get... Well, the girls surely went to a teacher's college. They went to Northern Illinois, which was called DeKalb Teacher's College. Yes. And they became teachers. Very few girls went to medical school. We had a few, but not many. Well, the old people had a feeling that the girls, they got married anyway. That was the feeling. Waste of money. Waste of money. And they said it was a waste of money for anybody to go to school after the 16th. And maybe there was a feeling about the young strong boy, too, that these were the workers who would finish high school. Well, you know, they had a hard time. The Swedes had a hard time. And they thought if they get another source of income, that would help them. They were determined to have a home. But they had to have 50 percent of it down to make down payment. When you went to Champaign, did your dad and mother have a nursery at that time? Yes. And it was not the question you should stay home to help them? No. I made up my mind I was going. And they said, well, if you're going to go, we'll help you. And I helped. And I helped. Were you interested in that kind of business? In the floral business? Yes. No, not too much. I thought I was damn tired of picking sweet peas. Well, that was not an easy part. Yeah, but I had to do it every morning. You know, they had big business there. Sweet peas was one of the major flowers at that time. And they were all short stem. We didn't learn how to grow the long stem type, you know. But I wanted to be in the field. I really wanted to be in the National Park Service. And I got into it. I worked in the National Parks, in the National Forest, National Parks Southwest, my summer times. How about during the war, though? Were you deferred from draft then because of the National Forest? My ear. Oh, I see. That's all the difference. I tried again. You had some accidents then or what happened? No. Like so many of my generation, we, so many got these childhood diseases. And measles and chicken pox, I guess, caused it. And it left a weakness someplace. It left a scar. It left it on my ears. So one ear was completely gone. So I went to school with only one ear. What had to do, or did you lose the hearing? I had to do a lot of concentrating. So you stayed in the National Park Service? Yeah, I stayed in the National Park Service, but they transferred me out to Illinois. So you have had a lot to do with the politicians, then, too? A lot of politics in Illinois. So Henry Bloom and Herman Halstrom's words of wisdom has been of good help for you. Very good help. Are you a Democrat or a Republican? Like Herman Halstrom, wasn't he actually a Republican during the later years? I don't know. Really don't know. He was a progressive to the end, really. He was? Yeah. And I think Bloom was a Democrat at the end. But I think there were still—I think that was bad when they made two different parties out of it, the Republican Party and the Democratic. It hasn't been running straight since. We've had too many fingers in the pie now. What— We copied small when you had the Labor Party and the Rockford Party or something like that. But it made it more local. But when you made it national—I mean, put the National Party in it, that involved too many people in there. So we had too many other people saying something that shouldn't have been involved. It's almost like the unions then. In other words, you have outsiders coming in and telling you what to do on the local front. Yeah. So how—but when you—it's interesting to see today the politicians, they rely on consultants so much from outside, from New Jersey, New York, Barrington, Illinois, come in and tell the small towns, you know, what to do. Why can't the politicians—most of the politicians are college-educated. A lot of them are lawyers. But they won't even sign their name until they have a consultant for $155,000 telling them what to do. Why is it like that? Well, we're defeating ourselves today. We are a weak nation, really. Is there a habit they come into? We don't have any strength in our politics today. I don't see any. We have about a handful of them, and that's about it. Reagan, I know. I knew him personally. I lived in Dixon when he lived in Dixon. And I knew he was going to be something up there in the top. He had a gift of a voice and he had a—and he spoke common sense, but he's gotten away from common sense here lately. But he was well-liked by boys and girls both. I knew the mother and the father real well. So you worked in Dixon? I worked in Dixon District, yeah, highways. I worked there for two years or three years and they transferred me down to Springfield to take over the whole state. So you worked under many governors then? Well, I worked under the Director of Public Works and Buildings when he took the professional man out there and put a politician in there. I couldn't see any progress that way at all because they didn't know the stuff. I felt like whatever I brought into them, suggestions or anything like that, I felt like it should have been—the answer should have been right there. So the politicians, they can come in and shoot it down any way they want? Yeah, they change it, yeah. Of course, in Illinois it being as bad as it is because Chicago, Chicago wants all the cake and the rest of them get the crumbs. Yeah, they always complain about the West of Illinois, that the Cook County, they get everything. Well, this part of the state has become a political debt. Yeah, but Rockford is not too bad, though, is it? Oh, yeah. Rockford has suffered a lot. Yeah, but you would think that being the second largest city— Yeah, but that didn't mean anything. We were under Chicago. We had decided that Illinois was divided in three parts politically. Southern Illinois, they could see seed from Illinois without any trouble at all. They could go out and join where the St. Louis Cardinals are, and they were Cardinal fans. The central Illinois, all the cities got together. But Rockford got to go. There's no big cities for it to get together with. Rock Island was in the central part of the state, and they would listen to what Peoria and Champaign and Springfield and so on, all those cities, and they'd get together and they'd get their programs. But Rockford's in here like a sitting duck. But you had good representation there, with John B. Anderson and— John B. was no good. Absolutely no good at all. He got you a good post office up here on Harrison. Sure, because his cousin owned the land. You heard that too, huh? No, I haven't heard that one. Is that really true? Yeah, that's true. Gregory Anderson's owned the land. He didn't do a bit for the state. The best one we've ever had is the one we got now. Little Martin. She can tell you more about these towns than any of them can. John B. Anderson would never run again because it would have beat him 3 to 1. But he was in there over 17 years. Yeah, that's before. I don't know why he lasted that long. There was nobody running against him, I suppose. No, he had a beautiful voice. My mother said he's going to destroy himself with that voice. He's got a sweet but a gifted voice. They always go down the hill. And she was right. So your mother, she lived to notice all those John B. Anderson and— Oh yeah, she knew them all. She helped develop the Swan Hillman. Swan Hillman didn't amount to anything until my mother took a hold of him. He came about the same time as Halstead, didn't he? I suppose. I don't know. And Ernest Swenson. Ernest Swenson was later, wasn't he? Yeah, he came probably later. I know his wife. We grew up together. She lived there by White School. She was a smart girl. Ernest didn't have any diplomacy at all. He just brusqued through there. He was entranced with his work. But he was well-educated from Sweden. I don't know. Yes, he was. I know that. But he was a little bit abusive, wasn't he? He was a little bit abrasive. Very abrasive. He would ignore you. You'd go out there and work around his house there and he wouldn't even see you. His wife would know what's going on. She was a very, very practical girl. And his secretary. Was his secretary. But they could get away with it though in some of those days because everything was going up. They delivered the product. Well, we had some outstanding Swedes. I can think of a lot of them there. The smartest one of the whole bunch was Nils Tester. The Swedes hated him. They did? Yep. He had a college education. He graduated from Uppsala. And he was smart. I don't know whether you've ever heard that or not, but you hear Swedes talking against him. That's jealousy. The Swedes are notoriously jealous. I saw it when I went to Sweden. My son says, Dad, do you feel like this is all Rockford over again? I said, John, I can see it. Here I have all these first cousins over here and they didn't know each other. I must have had twenty first cousins over there. They didn't know each other. I had to introduce them. I had to introduce them all. It takes so many years to introduce yourself, you know. So this surprised you. Did they go to church, your cousins in Sweden? I don't know. Didn't hear any of them talk about church. I think I have a few of them there. I had to go to the old church my mother was confirmed in. That's a beautiful church. They all are pretty churches over there. I didn't feel that there was any closeness to my cousins. They were closer to me than they were to each other in Sweden. I think they were closer to me because they respected, they thought the world of my mother. My mother was very dynamic. A little overweight sometimes. But she was very strong. She knew what the cabinet was supposed to send? Yes, sir. She said, butter, sticker and water. Your father, now, was he interested in politics and socialist ideas even in later years? No. He was interested in government. He was? He was interested in government. I think as he grew older, he got more progressive in his thinking. And I don't know whether he ever... But I think my father was interested in Rockford. He wanted to see Rockford go ahead. Whether he was a Democrat, a Republican, a Socialist or a Labor member or what, he wanted Rockford to get ahead. And he was able to live to see that also, how it progressed? He died in 1965. He saw my son when he graduated from the university. That was pride and joy. And there was when, in the late 50s, that Mayor Langren, was it Langren? There was a Mayor here in Rockford. Was his name Langren or Langren? He said that it won't take long now until Belvedere will be incorporated with Rockford, he said. Langren? Yeah, I thought it was Langren, the Mayor. Maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I have the wrong name. But there was one of the Mayors that said that in the 50s. There won't be long now until Belvedere is going to join hands with... That might have been Schleicher. He was a lousy Mayor. Because he had all the opportunities to really develop this town. Why this town didn't go ahead, they didn't want any government money to help them. That was Bloom's idea. But Halstrom would have taken the government money. And Bloom didn't want any government money? No, he didn't want anything. No handouts? He offered me the job to be Director of Public Works and Buildings. I said, Henry, you and I are very good friends, but if I took this job, I want a little vision. I want a little foresight planning. Well, you told him that? I told him that, yeah. What did he say then? He said, I'll work with you. I said, Henry, I know you too well. I said, if you were Harmon Halstrom, I would take it. And that was fighting words. It was the period. Yeah. But... Was that because they didn't want to sell themselves off or be afraid to be attached to something they couldn't get rid of? Well, they operated on different accounting books. But they were just like going in business. He says, it cost me this much money to run the day, and this is what I made today. The difference is the profit. Every day was important to them, but tomorrow was not important to them. Henry. So he was not the type to... He had no vision at all....to put the city in a hold then for a few years. They didn't go in a hold, but they blew him in there. They didn't use any government money either. Did it stop then, the progress of Rockford during his term? Yeah, it stopped, really. It did? Because there was no visionary planning. What did Halstrom say about that? Because he was living then. He died in 62. Well, Halstrom didn't like that at all. He didn't? No, no. He said, I never got into any arguments between them. I didn't see much of Halstrom after I went, as I got out of college. I'd see him socially, and I think he refrained from getting involved too much in discussion. He was mayor three times? No, he was more than that. I think he was mayor ten years, and I think he was elected five times, two years at a time. Oh, there's two-year terms. Yeah. Maybe I'm wrong on that, but I think he was mayor ten years. And Blum was? Gosh, I don't know how long he was mayor. He was a, I think he was mayor. How about the children of the politicians of the 20s and 30s? Were they interested in it? Well, you look at the city council now, for instance, there are not too many Swedish names there. Well, there's a few Johnsons and Gustafsons, but there are mostly other Swedes. Well, you're talking about my generation. Yeah, yes. I don't know what happened to my generation. Were they relaxed more? They wouldn't care to jump into any— They were not interested in politics. I don't know. If my generation had got in there and fought for a little bit more, we could have saved this town. So if you had stayed in Rockport, you would have been getting involved politically? I'm sure. It determined what got me in there. I've had people ask me to run for mayor, but I said I don't want any part of it. I'm a Swede, and the Swedes would be my worst enemy. Well, here's the way they look at it. I don't know whether you've seen that or heard that. Well, that's Oskar's boy. What does he know? I grew up in this town. They didn't have feeling, huh? Yeah. And honesty was another thing. Do you think he's honest? I don't know. They wouldn't have any reason to ask if he was honest or not, but that was— He said, what does Oskar's boy know? Is he honest? That isn't deep thinking. Is that why they take a lot of outsiders into Rockport government? Well, that's when we made our problems. You have this Mr. Logan, for instance. He is not a Swede. He comes from New Jersey. The newspapers put him in. I think the newspapers destroyed this town. So they have a lot to say, then. Well, what did they say during the Hallstroms and the Blums? Well, then they had three papers. Three papers. And then your leader then was Barney Thompson in the papers. He was a Norwegian, but he was very effective. And he backed Blum all the time. And I'm sure he backed Hallstrom. Barney was a very effective speaker. And I would be a bit surprised that maybe Barney Thompson put Hallstrom up there the first time. Although I think the Labor Party put him in there. I think he beat Gus Logan. Now, I saw this city develop. When Herman Hallstrom went in there as mayor, the city limits was 18th Street and Shaw Street. And probably Rome Avenue. You know where they are? When Herman went in there, then we developed Rockview, which is where the Hallstrom School is. He put that in there. He says every street is going to have concrete. And he did a good job. And he built a subdivision, a wealthy subdivision off East State Street through Calvin Park Boulevard. He was instrumental in Calvin Park Boulevard. He loved his parks. And he contributed a lot to the parks. That there's the difference was between Hallstrom and Blum. Blum was not interested in things like that. I think Blum was raised as an orphan child and he had a tough time at home. Of course, he had scarlet fever and he had a tough youth. And that is why he had the squeaky voice. If he hadn't had that squeaky voice, he wouldn't go into Congress. Because he was a debater. Whatever he talked about, he was well-versed and read on it. But he had a hard time putting it across because of his voice. But there were many of those socialists. They had very little schooling, but they were tremendously educated and well-read. They had a lot of education. So you don't remember this David Kahlil? Who? David Kahlil. He was a barber in Rockford and he belonged to the... Kahlil? C-A-R-L-I-N? Well, there was a Kahlil that I know, Manford Kahlil. No, that's not the one. This was David. I don't know how old David would be. He's 92. Well, I remember Kahlil. They lived right off of East A Street down there and Longwood Street or someplace like that. Is that the ones? He's out in the home on Riverside. Yeah, but there's one boy that got crippled on one knee. Is that the one you're talking about? No. I don't know him. He was a friend of this Harry Anderson. Harry Anderson was the brother-in-law of Ecklund, the Swedenhouse. Harry Anderson was a relative of mine. He was? He was the chairman of the Communist Party in Rockford. I didn't think Harry was. He was a well-rounded speaker. We had a lot of good speakers in this town. The Swedes were good speakers in those days. Nobody can beat Carl Bruce. He's not living, no? No. He was the... Entertainer. Yeah, entertainer, yeah. But he could speak. He and Frixell. Frixell, yeah. They was one of the teachers in... And Anderson. Those three were entertainers. They had... They were as good as... Oh, what's this guy that always acts like a drunk in there and died a long time ago? But they had him beat. But Carl Bruce was the sharp one. He was an entertainer with the first word. And every word after that, he kept you in stitches. Of course, he was spoken in Swedish dialect. Did he do it in English or in Swedish? He do both ways. And Frixell was good. He had a limp knee. He had a game knee. And he'd talk. He lived across the street from us on 10th Street there. And he'd come over and talk to my mother all the time. And he kept my mother laughing all the time. And she'd... He said, Well, I'm too busy. But she was still laughing. So they entertained the people then on those different movies? No, they were good entertainers. At the Säersöner, they had a theater up there. And they should have never let that get away from... That is what I'm bitter about. They've taken too many historical spots away from our... But that's why there seems to be a generation gap between one generation and another one. The old one gets a little bit too old, and the young ones don't care. They are not old enough to care. I don't know what happened. My generation didn't fight for those things. My son... would fight for it. I don't know. He doesn't look at it like I do. Of course, he's half English and half Swede. What happened then? Is he interested in the Swedish background? Oh, yeah. We went to Sweden. He enjoyed it over there. And he converses with him, my cousins, and they keep coming. Now, I think you can talk to him in Swedish. He talks half Swedish and half English, probably. But he's got a lot of ability. He's the head of the sanitary district. He's been a head of it for 15 years. He's 42 years old now. He's a tough one. He could be on the city council and represent the Swedes. I told him not to go on the city council. He's got a good name. He's got a very good name. How do you know he had a good name? Have you talked to other people? No, well, I mean, I was the old son. I mean, he... Yeah, well, he's got a good reputation. He's got a good reputation nationally, too. He's on the national setup for sanitary districts in the United States. So he travels then? He travels all over the country. He goes to Europe, too. He's going places. If he's not already there, I don't know. But he's been offered jobs in other cities. And he's turned them down. He says, I like my Rock River. So he'll never leave there. But you left Rockford for several years, though. Yeah, well, I wanted to come back here. I wasn't going to come back, but my wife wanted to come back here. Is your wife from Rockford? She's from Byron. Oh, Byron. When it was only 500 to 1,000. It was a pretty good-sized city. Her family goes back to 1600, 16 or something like that, the history here. In your opinion, was Franklin Delano Roosevelt one of the best presidents? He stole everybody's ideas. What do you mean? Well, the conservation ideas was not his at all. It was Eleanor's? No. No, it was Pinchoff's idea, Governor Pinchoff's idea, and he was a strong conservationist. He come in a time when we had some real good, strong conservationists. He was a leader in that bunch. Governor Pinchoff of Pennsylvania. And he set up that whole program for Hoover. And the housing program was set up by Hoover. I know because one of my pops was working on that program when Hoover was in there. I was in school in Hoover's time. And the bank moratorium was set up by Hoover. And he couldn't get it passed because of the Democratic Congress. So he has actually been unfavorably looked upon than Hoover. A lot of ideas came to him. They say even the Social Security was worked upon by the Hoover administration. He did a lot of that. Federal Housing and FHA was Hoover's idea. But he got some of the best men in the country to set up that program. Hoover was a guy that knew how to handle things, how to get things done. But he never stole it. You want me for something? This is my grandson. During this 90-day period of Roosevelt, it was actually 100 days, he had a lot of meetings and committees were being formed and everything to set up Social Security and CCC and housing projects and everything. But some of that was Hoover's idea that he implemented on or acted upon. I don't think conservation, I think all of that was Governor Pinchoff's idea. Because he wanted work camps. He thought for youth camps, they train these young kids to get out. He was a naturalist. He wanted to get out there and teach them something about nature. And there was the CCC camps. There was the CCC camps. But there was a lot of political stuff involved there because people were against it. They said that... Yeah, they didn't understand what they were going to do. But it was probably one of the best programs. That's the best program we've ever had. Look what they've done in Rockford. They cleaned up Keith Creek and it's all concrete and water gets out of there for years. We'd have floods down there every time we got a force... Who got out the bad words about it though? Because they stopped in 1939 or 40, was it? The opposite party. The Republicans then. I'm sure they did. But they said... I don't know. It was a clash between... Who followed Roosevelt? The only thing that Roosevelt had in his cabinet, the only woman. She was a labor secretary. Wasn't it a risky business to take a lady to the one most important department in the whole government? They probably figured she was the only one that could handle Lewis. The Perkins handled Lewis, you know, the mind guy. He had the brows on his eyes. He was tough. But she was tough too. I had no quarrels with him. I had no quarrels with Ickes. Who was secretary of interior. Because he developed some damn good parks. I think he was very capable of picking some very gifted men. He had Wallace for agriculture. Who's the one that issued out to kill all the little piglets. But he developed a lot of distinct... He had Rockford plan, his vision. He put in what we call rolling green. You know where that is? That was put in his time. That was a beautiful subdivision. But he insisted on neighborhood parks. And wherever he had put in a subdivision, they had to put a park in. But he had Rockford subdivided all the way up to Alpine. And he had a subdivision in the Alpine. He had Rockford subdivided all the way up to Alpine Road. And it was nothing but a dirt road. But he had a vision. He had a vision. Alpine Road was going to be the main thoroughfare around Rockford. And it should have been. In that time in the 1920s, was Alpine Road still... Was it already Alpine then? Was it called that? Not all of it. No, just part of it. The upper part was called Biddle Road. And Alpine Road only went down to Santee Hollow Road. And then there was a jog in there. And then it became something else, Thompson Road or something down there. So he was actually looking far beyond that east. He was looking way ahead. He was 50, 75 years ahead in his thinking. And Woodruff Avenue would be a complete parkway from east to west. And it would be fed by a road coming from Chicago to St. Charles and Genoa in the Rockford. And it would exit out on Kilburn Avenue and then go toward Lena, Illinois. Would be it. That's the old Stagecoach Trail. You know where Lena is? It's north of Freeport. And from there, it would branch off. The south branch would tie into what is now 20. And the north branch would go up to Warren and follow the old trail. And the other ones would branch into 20 and go to Stockton and Elizabeth and to Galena, take the high road. And I worked on that. And that's what our plans were. But all those plans were killed. But then you had spent a lot of money on the preparation for it and planning and so on. We didn't spend that much money. We did it on a regular time. We did it on our own personnel. Who was against it? Chicago. Chicago killed it. They thought it was too much money to spend on it? No. They wanted the money. Yeah, I mean, if you had spent it here, they didn't like that. They want to have the... I don't think they wanted to do much for this part of the state. They thought there were still Indians out here. But Rockford is not too bad though with state parks. You have Ruben Aldean Park here and you have several. It's actually a green city though. Yeah, but you know when those things were put in? Before 1920. Or say 1930. Where Ruben Aldean Park is later in the 60s, isn't it? That was put in the 30s. Aldean Park? Aldean Park. They put that park in there when they built the dam and they bought that land. Aldean put his name on there. That was nothing but a political trade-off and a tax write-off. He was on the city council at the time? No, he was on the park board. The park board, yeah. He was a lousy park board member. Well, he didn't have the beautification program in his mind? He didn't have it in like Gieter did. Gieter was the one that loved the city. I don't care whether you tell him or not because he knows me. I don't know, you'll probably get a lot of praise from the Free Church bunch because they gave all the land out there. But just think of the tax deduction in the end. And he really used it. I knew his bookkeeper. We went to school together. We were roommates. So there is always a trade-off. Gieter Aldean never worked that way. He says, I owe this country to taxes and that's the way I'm going to pay taxes. Show them I appreciate it. So that's two different kinds of philosophers. Two different kinds of philosophers and two different kinds of brothers. And I don't think they got the same pension. They were that different. So how many acres did he donate then to the city of Aldean Park out there at the Empire? Twenty? That Aldean Park at one time belonged to the Forest Preserve. It was going to be the county Forest Preserve. And then it went back to the private sector? And then he bought it from the county Forest Preserve almost 25 cents on the dollar and he gave it to the city. And then he appraised it for much more. It was probably worth $10,000 an acre. I don't know what it was. $50,000. I could find out easy enough. But I do know it was used for a tax write-off. But the county didn't. It was kind of a burdensome thing because it was nearer the Rockford and they had to drive it down there and just take care of that small park. And our park system was laid out by the Baywood County. Is that on there now? Yeah, it's on there. Our park system was laid out by Toggy Lindquist. And she's probably the best park planner that the county's ever had. And he set up the whole county park system at that time. We've added on to it because he was planning on this and that addition. And the city parks was the same way. Who is the one that's most opposing to park districts and recreation? Is that a business, big business, to develop McDonald's and Burger Kings and stuff like that? I don't know. That's handled through Chamber of Commerce and things. But there's always opposing factors. Opposing, oh. I thought you said proposing. No, opposing. I don't know. I think it's the neighborhoods. Because when you see all those parks, it's a wonderful thing for people to stop a little bit and think and enjoy it. But now they're complaining it's too expensive to keep and too few people to work with it. That's why the CCC should come in again. We need another Herman Hallstrom here. It's going to have to come from Europe. Unless they can get my son in there. He can handle it. But I told him not to. And he's listening to me. He is a powerful guy. Those people that came, though, like Hallstrom, Swan Hillman, Ernie Swenson, and Eric Anderson. There's another one that probably came from the same area that your mother came from. Which Eric Anderson is that? The one at Rockford Forge, I believe. Eric Ekerbom's wife's father. Oh, yeah. I knew him real well. He come from the same part of Sweden as my mother. All those guys, they came with very small means. They had very minimum education. Only maybe three, four years. Some didn't probably have that. Well, as I said. So they had a tremendous... They had desire, pursuit. They could only go one way, but it seems they had the right things to do with it. Well, what's his name? Axel Renberg. There's another one. Not many people know about what he did. He spent two years in Russia during the war to get them to help them make trucks. You didn't know that, did you? During the first, second World War. Second World War. He spent two years, and he got them in the truck making thing. So he was sent over by the government? He was sent over by the government. And he used to go up to Detroit all the time to iron out their problems. We got another guy named Gunnar Wallmark. Oh, yes. I know him. You know him? Have you talked to him? Yes. Wonderful man. Well, you get around, don't you? Did you see Rags Ericson, too, then, when you were down there? No, not him. He and I were buddies. We went to school together. He was born in Sweden, and he was highway chief. So you know Gunnar Wallmark, then? Huh? You know Gunnar Wallmark? I know him and his brother both. Harold's gone now, I guess. Then I knew his sister, and I used to date Ruby Wallmark. She married a doctor. They were in Thailand. Huh? She married a Swedish doctor. He was a doctor in Thailand, University, in Bangkok. Oh. And now he died over a couple of years ago. Oh. So what is Wallmark now? I mean, there is not a case. He had absolutely no education. No. It was all up in there. No. But he had big wigs on there all the time, asking them to make this kind of a universal joint and that kind of a joint and so on. He can do it. He can't get away from their machine. I think it's gone to his mind now. Last time I saw him, I couldn't get him to concentrate on anything else. There was one guy that told me there wouldn't have been a Sundstrand today if Gunnar Wallmark hadn't been there. How much he meant to it during the— Well, he developed all our important pumps. Yes. His theory is what they're using over Sundstrand. Yeah. He was a big wheel over there, and he was— Nobody—Ryston was his boss, but pump man down there, you probably heard that. Ryston? No, I never heard anything. But tell Ryston it wouldn't hold a candle if it wasn't for Wallmark. Ryston wouldn't hold that job. And I knew Hugo Olsen pretty well. I knew the Hexton boys pretty well. But here's a second in my generation there. Hexton's had a son that didn't mount to a hoop in hell. Maybe they had it too easy then. I don't know. I don't know what happened. John Hillman, no, he didn't have any children. He had a boy. He had two boys. He had a boy and a girl. Why didn't he continue in his footsteps? Well, the boy wasn't worth a damn. The girl married—she was kind of flighty. And Ernie Swenson didn't have any children. He remarried. No, he had no children now. And Levin Foss, he didn't have any children. No. John Nelson, the knitting man, he had a lot of children. He had four or five boys. Yeah. He fought like hell to get one factory. So there was competition in those days. I think the streets—I think really my generation destroyed itself. They had— Was it too easy? They were jealousy, very much jealousy in my generation. That's why I didn't take the job as a director of public works in Bellingham. I'd have to help with them. And I think I could have done a lot for the city because I would have developed a parkway around on Alpine Road. I worked on 51 south of Sandy Hollow Road. That's a lot of my work. And the Beltline was my work. I wanted to tie the Bell Bowl in. I was going to call it Sam Mandel Bowl because he was a famous fighter from Rockford. Do you know baseball was developed in Rockford? In 1882? No. Developed—A.G. Spalding was from Rockford. He was—there's an editorial about him in the paper this morning. What do you mean with the Spalding— Sporting Goods, yeah. Sporting Goods? The barn raised down by our—right next to my wife down there. And the Spaldings and the Kendals were very close. They both came from England or Scotland? No. They were all from America, but they were migrants from the east. They were immigrants. Spalding, is there an English name there? No, I'm just saying, you know, back in those days, 50 percent of the people here were of English descent. But the English here, they disappeared when all the Swedes came in on 7th Street. Because the English were here first. They had the knitting mills, the woolen factories, knitting machines, technical stuff. But then when the Swedes came in, well, there's too many of them. The little— They talked funny on 7th Street, so they couldn't understand them. How did they get along with the English, the Swedes, you think? Well, they got along a lot better than they did during the First World War. They had no use for—the Swedes had no use for the English. That's strange, though. I think it's because when the immigrants come over, they stopped in England on their way over. Liverpool. And they were treated terrible. I used to hear from my mother. She never complained very much, but my father complained. And they stayed with them as long as they lived? Oh, yeah. When war came out to fight the Germans, they fought them tooth and nail. They took a long time for the Rockford Swedes to warm up to it. But I used to hear a lot of stories about how they treated them in England. I went and talked to my wife, and she said, I heard that, too. No, but the press has a lot to do with it, though. I mean, they can really screw people up. Because you have a tendency to believe what you read in the papers. I think the papers, it's overbearing now. It's too misleading now. You don't even know what to believe anymore. They're going to have to do something with the press. They get all excited about something that's unimportant, and they try to magnify the importance of it. It's wrong. They're picking on Reagan like mad there, but he's pretty strong. Yeah, he went the wrong way pretty fast. It's strange to hear. He shouldn't have got in this contra thing. When he got caught, he should have said, okay, I got involved. But I thought I was trying to save a couple lives over there, and just put a nursing home. But he's that way. He's impulsive, and too impulsive sometimes. But the guy I had no use for was Nixon. He never came out and told the truth. He doesn't have any respect in this country at all. They have a lot more respect for his wife than they do him. He's treated as mistreated. No. Politics is a strange business. Yeah. Probably very dirty. It's dirty in Illinois. Wisconsin's a lot cleaner, yeah. They have better government up there. It's because the fallout got them started, right? Got better state laws. Of course, they don't have that big fight, fighting Chicago, or Chicago fighting the down state. I saw all that going on. But the people, they don't know that, though, do they, sir? No. I tell them about it. I tell Rags Erickson about what happened down in Springfield, and he won't believe me. I said, well, I said, now only engineers can run and build the highways, and they're doing a hell of a lousy job on that. I said, you can blame that on the professor Babbitt. He said, no, I can't. I said, he decided that only engineers could be in the highway department. I said, the best highway engineers never went to college. He said, that's right. Is it easy enough to build the road and get access to land because farmland is cheap now compared to what it was 10 years, 5 years ago? You know, this highway out here, part of it is a bit of steel in it. It isn't? No. It's just poured like, rolled out like dough. You must have something. There was no steel in that at all. It was just poured just in a layer of cake. Do you mean on mine, there? No, right out here, Mulford Road. On Mulford Road? It's got joints that cut, there were just saw joints. And how old is that? That's about 20 years old now. And you're still keeping up? I went over a highway here, 51 north, and it was busting open on Sunday when it was so hot. We saw one place where these reinforcing rods were sticking out. They formed a V like that. And they were sticking about 5, 6 inches above the pavement. Road 5 did the same thing last week. Where? Road 5? Yeah, I heard about that. Was that reinforcing rods and that? Yes, yes. I think we must be wrong there. I think we've got to learn. There's no iron or reinforcement in this concrete out here? This one out here, there's no reinforcing rods in there at all. But what is underneath then, sand? No, limestone. The worst thing you put on, sand should have been in it. The sand drains, but limestone doesn't drain. You go out here and put a sidewalk on it, and you put on limestone, and in the spring of the year it's all soggy, but sand drains out the water. But that's Illinois specification. They're finally waking up to it. I saw an article in the paper the other day. The guy says, maybe we can do without the reinforcing rods. I called him. I said, you know, that's what we talked about in 1930, but nobody's listening. I said, the trouble with the highway department is that one bureau won't listen to the other. They will kill you, Esteem, for good. There will be no Gary, Indiana anymore. No. Well, I suppose it's got a lot to do with it. It's probably a lot of politics, you know, lobbying. I want to sell so many bags of cement. I'd like to have so many reinforcement rods in there. Because they were talking about billions. They accused Halstrom for building a bridge and cutting down a number of bags. They needed to cut down one bag per mix, per yard or something like that. How many? I forgot just what the proportion was. Heck, that bridge is in better shape than the others. And it was built in the 1920s. Why don't they call that the Halstrom Bridge instead of Jefferson? Oh, no. The Westlanders wouldn't stand for it. But I think that's a good idea, really, because he pushed for it. And he was planning on putting a civic center up there. You mean put it on the east side, though, a big... A civic center shouldn't go on any place in town. It should have gone out of town like in Madison. So there was a misnomer than the civic center downtown. No, they should never have put it there. That plan was laid when we hit the horse and buggy. 1918, we didn't have many cars then. It should go down to Belleville or it should have gone out east of town here, tied in with Cherryvale or something like that. They're going to get something out there and it's going to take it all from downtown. You're not going to stop that money out there, no. There's going to be big money going out there. So Rockford is really progressing, though. You see it going up, all shopping centers. It's progressing, but nobody wants to be in Rockford. Churches. There's probably no city in Nashville, Tennessee, that has more churches. But if you go Alpine, church after church, you go Montfort, church after church, How can they support so many? I don't know. It's remarkable. I don't know. I get surprised when I go out and see all these churches. I didn't tell them. They go to a church and they tell me where it is. I said I didn't know there was a church there. They got a rock church down here. It's off of Charles Street. Have you seen that? Nobody knows where it is. You can't see it from any place. I know there's one there. There's one on Newburgh. There's another one. Big one. But this one out there is tremendous. This one is tremendous. Look at the big ones they built up. The Free Church and the Assembly of God. Yes. Five thousand. Gosh. The Lutherans are all leaving the Lutheran Church and going out to the Assembly of God now. A new Lutheran church? No. The Lutheran church. A lot of Lutherans. My cousins are all going up here. The Lutherans have been, they've got to change their ways. So they are losing ground. They are losing ground. They are too quiet. Well, anytime you want to talk again, I'm listening here. But I want to convey the message that it was through the vision of Hallström that Rockford developed the way it did during the 20s and 30s. He was the guy that got the Faust Hotel going. And he's the one that got the Chalkett building going in downtown. There's a lot of buildings that were built during Hallström's time. Yes. I can't number them all. All the banks were built. Manufacture bank, the Forest City Bank was built, Security Bank was built, and Commercial Bank was built. As on 7th Street there was commercial mortgages now. And that was going under too, but it was taken over by Third National. How about the labor questions now during the 30s when they had the unrest of strikes and lockouts and everything? Was he with the workers' side in Hallström or did he... Well, he didn't get into many labor strikes, really. He didn't have any problems. The real labor strikes began in the 30s, really, and Hallström was out of there. Bloom was in there. Bloom was in. How did he handle that? I don't know. They had, they won a national lock there. But that destroyed national lock. You know, the Aldeans and Hillmans and everybody else working at the national lock took their patents with them and went out and built up factories. I bet there's 50 factories that came out of national lock. Helco School, Cam Car, the guy I knew, Ray Carlson, real well, he made money. He owned the whole corner around there. But he died as a young guy? Sure, because he was greedy. He destroyed himself. But he seemed to be so relaxed, though. No, he wasn't. His stomach was muscle-bound. We were with him one time and he was overcome with pain. My wife took care of him. She said, great, you're going to have to learn to relax. Your muscles feel like a snare drum. My wife was a nurse at the time, a supervisor. And she relaxed him, but boy, he had pain. So there's many ways to live. What's-her-name was in with him, Aspling was in with him, but he was much more relaxed. He'd get mad and he'd blow his top, but Ray would never blow his top, you know, and he was too religious. He built that church out there. The First Covenant. Yeah, that was designed after a church in Sweden. But Aspling, isn't he religious too, though? Yeah, he went to a free church. But he's altogether different, though. He's more relaxed. What the hell ain't that going to work? Well, Ray would never say that. I knew them both real well, because I was confirmed in a free church and got to know Aspling. So you have met some of them. You also remember P.A. Peterson, I suppose, in the last... Well, I saw him. He used to go down there with Henry Bloom a lot. Sit down there. He had two daughters and they would get down there. That was kind of a newspaper corner there. The reporters would gather there, two or three or five of them, you know, and find out what's going on today. Henry would tell them. In his drugstore? Yeah, that was almost a second council. So they was more open in those days then, in other words? No, you weren't afraid to tell them what you think. And I think that's the way it should be. Then they weren't afraid that whatever they said would be held against them. They were quartered in the paper. And they didn't back off what they had said either. In other words, if they did something wrong, they had this sense to correct it before it went too big. Yeah, they had to check it pretty fast. Because it's not easy to submit. I mean, you had done something wrong, but maybe it was easier years ago. The first article kills you, you know, and then when you try to get in there to try to correct it, it doesn't work. You don't get that many watchers. You got to be consistent. I think people want to hear the dirt. But not so much of it, so it doesn't make sense anymore. It sure doesn't make sense. And it's very destructive. It's going to be destructive to democracy. We're seeing a lot of it now. We don't have the candidates for mayor like we used to have. Nobody wants to be mayor anymore. So nobody's actually running for it then? No. Something that... It's a good chance. Consequently, we're not getting the best qualified. But you would think with all this education people have today, they would be more enlightened with... They don't want to be involved in politics. But they don't have the foresight maybe as they used to. You got to see what's happening 10 years from now. But it seems that they want to have as much as possible themselves the first year they're in. They like to think of themselves before they think of the community. I think we don't have that dedicated community effort anymore. What do you think about this salary question? The more you pay them, the better they are. Is there any truth to that? That isn't working, is it? It's getting worse. We're the laziest country in the world today. The lowest paid guy's got a boat on Rock River now about as high as you can look. You can't see over it anymore. Rock River never had too many boats on it. Now you can't find a place to boat. And this was the end of the interview with Lawrence Olsen, Rockford, Illinois. End of interview.