 Yeah, I'm still together with Herbert Lieberg, the WAC for Illinois. He was born on March 16, 1926 in St. Paul, Minnesota. His parents came from Hjellfors in Västergötland in the early 1900s. Today is September 9, 1986. Tell us a little bit about your father, Herbert Lieberg. What did he do in Hjellfors? Okay, he worked, like I say, for Pripp's Brewery. He was an accountant there. And then he was also a carpenter, but his main job was working for Pripp's. But then, like I said before, the Army went after him, so he left and came to this country. So he came as a young guy then, to avoid military service. To avoid the military service, right. How about his parents? Now, they were also born in Hjellfors, right? Yes, yeah. They had a farm. They had a farm. They rented a farm. And when we went there, we saw that we were over there in Hjellfors. The buildings were torn down, but we saw the grounds where they were. Still in the family, perhaps? No, he rented. He rented that. He rented, yeah. Yes. No, no. But I met all of his brothers who were still living, and cousins over there. What I did when we went there, this was the best part of the trip. I got a hold of my cousin, who I'd never met before, but I talked to her on the phone, and I said, I will rent a room in a hotel in Jyttabori, and I want you to invite all the people who are relatives of mine to come there. And so I made arrangements to have a party, and everything that goes with it, see. So they all came, and we introduced them. I had them stand up. They'd tell me who they were, what they do, and I took a picture of them, and each one, and that was the nicest part of the whole trip, because I noticed the resemblance of this man to my brother, this one to my sister. It was amazing. It was a thrill to see it that way, just like magic took place. So your father then was the only one in the family that left? No. After a while, his cousin came to St. Paul. His name was Harry Lidberg. How did he do? But he came to St. Paul. That's the only two, though. Only two. How many brothers did you have? Oh, a bunch of them. I think about eight, in the family, brothers and sisters. And they all stayed in the city? All stayed in the city, yeah. So he had a pretty good job then when he left. Yes, and he got a good job when he came here. And because, well, even as I was young, I recognized he had talent and ambition, and the talent and ambition produced what he wanted. So he was a very fine man, a very religious man, and so was my mother. Both were very religious. They joined the Augustano-Lutheran Church, and that's where all those kids were confirmed in St. Paul. Did they meet in Sweden, then, your father and mother? Yeah, they were neighbors. They grew up together. And then, like I say, he wanted to avoid the army, so he left there and came to the United States. But they were in love when he left, so they kept communicating while he was here. And then when he earned enough money, he sent it over to her to come back over or come over to the United States. When he left, did he have anybody to come to him? Yeah, their name was Rosen, and he had a tannery in St. Paul, A.T. Rosen. A suite? A suite, yes. And that's where he went and worked for him in this tannery. And then he became very proud of his occupation there, too, because, like I say, he was ambitious, he was intelligent. Put them together, and he made well. So this man, Rosen, was that Rosén, you think? Rosén, I think it used to be. I call him Rosen, but Rosén was the Swedish way. That was in St. Paul. There was no relation to your father, though, in any way? Not to my knowledge, no. Only a friend? A friend? Oh, it could be a distant relative. Do you think he paid for your father's trip over? No. No, but my father had saved money there all the way. He was a very conservative man. He saved and he knew what he was doing. Did he tell you at any time about the trip over, the boat he came on? See, he died when I was 10 years old, so I didn't know him that well as far as the economics were concerned. But he was a very fine man. I enjoyed his company all the way, and he enjoyed mine, and we had a lot of fun together. But it was just in that type of relationship, nothing serious. There was no talk about Sweden at that time? No. After a while, my mother talked about it, but then I became too busy. I was working. I got a job when I was 12 years old, and I worked right after school, Saturdays and Sundays into the evening, 11 o'clock at night, so my home life was very sparse. So your mother, she came over in about 1905, you said? A little later, in that area, yeah. And your father had been there? He had been there for, yes. And they married then? We got married in St. Paul. St. Paul and Augustine, a little church. How many children were you in the family then? Three. I was the youngest. Only boy? No, I had an older brother, Henry, and a sister, Hazel, and me. And you were the youngest then? The youngest. Oh, you were born in the 1960s, and then your father, he died? He died in 1927. He was not that old then, was he? He was 50. What happened? Stroke. What? Yeah, it was sudden. Boom. It was on a Sunday, I was playing dominoes, I gave her dominoes on the kitchen table, and all of a sudden, boom. That was it. No forewarning, it was just to happen that fast. So what happened then to your family? Did you have to go out and work yourself? I got a job when I was 12 years old at a drugstore, yeah, and I helped support my mother and this and that. And she never married? No, she stayed single. In fact, no, she was single all the way through. She at one time said she wanted to get married, I'll leave home. She said, you're just a punk, you do that, I'll leave. Because as a kid, you have a strong devotion to your parents, and I couldn't see some other man sitting in that chair. That was a youthful decision, but it was not right. She should have gotten married. There was a strong one, too. Oh, yeah, she had bided her time, yes. You were the only one home then at the time. No, my brother and sister were at home, too. My brother had just got through high school. My sister was just graduating high school, and I was in junior high at the time. So we were all kids. So she held us all together, and I give a lot of credit for that because she was very conservative, as the Swedes are, and she made everything go right, and we respected her mother more than anything else because we could see what she had done for us. So they had a house then, your father had? Yes. My father had this house. It was all paid for in St. Paul, and it was a nice house. I think when I was born there. On what street? State Street in St. Paul. When he died, the house was about 17 years old. No, 11 years old because my mother and father just bought it. I lived there about a year or so when I was born. So he left, so he had that foundation, which he made sure that his family had that. So he had done pretty good then in those times. Yes, that's right. I say he was very ambitious. That's what gave him the stroke. He was intelligent with high ambition, and it killed him. What kind of work was he having then at the time? Well, when he worked for the Tannery, I think he was a stationary engineer. He was in charge of all the machines that created the power through the whole building. He was very adept to it, too. He was a real intelligent man. There's no question about it. He could do anything. He worked for the safety roads, like I say, and he did a fine job. So because the First World War was not too good with the high wages and everything like that. It was pretty tough. Oh, yes. But he had a good... He was like a very forward man. He did it and did it well. And you said that they were religious people. Very religious, yes. And you also had to go to that assembly school? Oh, yes. You lot, every time, everything. And it stayed with me. They embedded me with this, and it has never left me because they did a good job in taking its kids and doing it. And I respect. You went every Sunday then? Oh, no, never miss. Never miss. How about after confirmation? Did you continue with Luther League? Yes, yes, yes. We stayed there, and then I got married, and I was Lutheran and Peg was Episcopalian. Well, I said, either I go to your church or you go to my church. Let's go to our church. So we became Presbyterian. And that worked out well. We are still Presbyterians. I'm an elder in the church right now. So it was like a middle way then. Right. We felt there would never be, come to my church, you know, we went to our church. And that was a fast, quick solution. Now, did you see anything different then between the Episcopalian and the Newt, Augustine Lutheran, for instance? Well, Episcopalian, they're much more ritual. Oh, yes. But now the Lutherans have become more ritual. And Presbyterian is more of a simple service, the way the Lutherans were in the beginning. But the same God is there, you know. Either he's Episcopalian or Lutheran or whatever Methodist, the same God. When you went to church, then, you saw the Lutherans as a very simple service? In the beginning. Well, yeah, it was a Swedish service and an English service. We mingled both of them on Sunday. Did you go to church in Swedish? No, I was not. But I used to go to Swedish service with my folks. You had no problem understanding it? No. See, they always talked to us in Swedish at home. I'd answer back in English, but they wouldn't speak to us in Swedish. So I had a one-way learning, you know, because I couldn't deliver to them only in English. But then I taught them English by doing it that way, too, and they taught me Swedish by speaking Swedish to me. So we both were compatible to each other through these two languages. How about your brother now and your sister? Did they speak the same way? Yeah, they spoke, no. When they went to school, they only spoke Swedish. And when I came along, it was over that. Did you answer back in Swedish to them? Yes. Yeah, my folks, both, my brother and sister, both spoke to each other in Swedish. And like I say, when they went to school, they only spoke Swedish. But it didn't take too long, mainly with the kids in school, they were speaking English. But when you came along, then your parents had learned more English then? Oh, right, right. Especially my father. My mother did not. She was working in the house, so she didn't mingle as much as he did. You never worked outside the house then? No. But my father, he spoke good English. My mother, like I say, working with the kids and everything else, she was restricted due advancement there. So you were confirmed in English, then? Was there a Swedish confirmation class at that time? Do you remember that? There was before, but not when I was confirmed. Not at that time? It was eliminated. And then the Swedish ceremony was maybe once a month? And then it was left out. It was gone with. They didn't continue. Yeah, yeah. See, the true Swedes, the first generation Swedes, either had died, the second generation, they weren't as interested in that as English. So it just left it. So how about the societies now, and the Vasa, Viking, and groups like that, did your parents belong to them? No, they did not. Not at all. The church was the only one? The church was the only outlet they had, yes. And they were both very, very active in the church. We'd have meetings in the house, church meetings. Do you think they were on your mother's side that came, or were your father's family also religious as well? Both. They were both very religious, yes. And like I say, they implanted that with us kids, and it stayed. It didn't disappear. It stayed with us. It stayed with all of you? Yeah. Not much my sister. She was the least. But my brother was. He was in the Lutheran church in St. Paul, and my sister sort of pulled away, dropped off. But we've kept up, like I say, I'm an elder now, in the Presbyterian church, and enjoying it very much. And you went to high school in St. Paul? St. Paul. And you continue your work with the drugstore? Well, yeah. In other words, when my father died, I would say I was 10 years old, I got this job at the drugstore when I was 12, and I stayed there until I was 21 at the drugstore. I had graduated school, high school, and then I got a job at a bank in St. Paul, so I held on two jobs, working at the bank in the daytime, the drugstore at night, and on the weekends, until 1938, when I went into the insurance business. And that was my, I stayed with that through my whole business career. Oh, I see. Did you go to school at College General? No, just picked up it myself. But then I was transferred here, I became district manager in our Rockford office, and that's where I retired from here. What insurance? John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance. So you started there in St. Paul, then? Yes, in 1938. So there was the means then that prohibited you to go to college? Right, there wasn't any... But you had an interest for it. Oh, yeah, I still regret it. My one regret is I didn't go to college now, but at that point, that dollar bill wasn't there. Because whatever you made, you had to... Bring it home....give it to your mother. That's right. Can't help. So that was it, but now I'm happy I did it, but I still have that regret I didn't go to college. But not that I have any regret of helping my mother, no. So... And all your kids had the same feeling, in other words, you all pitched in? Oh, absolutely. We became a closer-knit family than anybody, because we all did it together. It was good training. How about the other people in the neighborhood? Now, they were Swedes, or...? Some, not... It was scattered. So it was not the Swedish clan then? No, no. Was there a Swedish neighborhood in St. Paul that you would say was Swedish? Yes, yeah. Paine Avenue is considered the Swedish settlement of St. Paul. But you lived... Away from that, yes. They call it Snoos Boulevard, Paine Avenue. That's where all the Swedes ended, I think, in... So you didn't have any connection with that clan then? No. I think there were more Germans where we lived than... Tusk. How did you... May I ask you a question? I mean, with the other groups, I mean, you were husky and strong, and you were not afraid to be called a Swede? Oh, I was proud of it. But did you stress that fact in high school, for instance? I... Yes. I'd always say, I'm a Swede. No, I never shied away from that at all. And today, I am proud that I'm a Swede. So at that time, you didn't want to melt into the... No, I still... Common denominator, being an American. No, no. I still felt I wanted to be a Swede. I wanted to be known as a Swede. Was there a school in St. Paul that was more or less Swedish? No. Not that I'm aware of, no. How about on the Minneapolis side? I'm not that acquainted. I don't think so either. I don't think so. It was the melting pot, like you say, and that's what they were working on, to get them all together. But Minneapolis is much more Swedish than St. Paul. See, St. Paul is called Little Boston, if you've heard that before. Katolik. That's why they became Little Boston. That's right. We call that for that reason, plus the way the streets are winding around, and Boston's the same way. So we say St. Paul is a small Boston, Little Boston. And it's the big cathedral there, Catholic cathedral, and it's become a Catholic center in Minnesota, St. Paul. So the Lutherans had to be very knit together then. They were over on, I guess, on Paine Avenue. That's where they settled. And there was no intermingling in between them, I think. No, there was a little bit of friction between the Catholics and the Lutherans. I'm sure you were aware of that. I remember that. Oh, yes. We'd walk past a Catholic school and we're ready to schluss. How about now, you went to public school. Yes. There were no Catholics in that school. There were some, not many. See, the ones that couldn't afford it. They went to public school. Yes. The others went, too. And they had a big attendance, big attendance there. Were you one or not, did you date any Catholics or Irish or anything? Yes. But I didn't listen to that. You can take it. I used to go with some real fine Catholic girls. And my fat Catholic male friends, boyfriends, were in school were Catholic. Pat Lynch, you can't get more Catholic and Irish than that. He was a very good friend of mine. So perhaps you were looking for the best in that person. Right. That's right. You were born a gangster. Yes. I make my own decision who I want. I mean, just because a boy was born this doesn't mean he's no good. I don't believe that. But the people that came from Germany or Sweden or Denmark, they had a different feeling, of course. They never had the same feeling as you have as a growing up. I don't think so. Growing up in it. Yes. I think my best training was in the drugstore when I worked in the drugstore as a kid. I meet all these people and I get to know each one of them. This was German, this was Italian, this was a Swede, Norwegian. As far as I'm concerned, they're all fine people. And you'd be the best in them. Right. So you had no one. That training at the drugstore to me was the best foundation I could have received. I'm a Jewish boy, a fine, fine man, a real fine man. In fact, my folks, my mother, didn't like the idea that I was working for this Jewish place. That feeling was there, it was all the way through. And I said, no, he's a good guy, a good fine man. And he proved that he was a good man. We celebrated our 25th wedding anniversary. We came down here by ferry from St. Paul just to pay his respects to our marriage. And he enjoyed doing that. We got gifts that we received from him because he enjoyed me as much as I enjoyed him. You appreciated his being and he did yours. Right, yeah. And we did right to each other and that was life, that's life. But it was hard for the people born in Sweden to understand that. I'm sure, yes. Oh, they worked for, you know. See, the Swedes with their limited speaking ability, plus the depression that came on, they had a rough time because they just couldn't express themselves right and it was rough. Well, it happened all because I'm sure there was somebody that married outside of Sweden, so you did also. And you had a happy marriage, but how about the others? The married in Italy and the other Irish. Do you recall anybody? Oh, there were some rough go, yes. It was hard to get together. Yeah, right. There were some problems, I can think of a lot of them. Working in the orchestra, again, I heard all the rumors about everything around. So there were some real problems there. You must have had into that place. Yeah, right. So I suppose the catalysis and the neutering, that was just too far apart, you think? Yeah. There was no compromise in that. No, no. It's just there was that barrier for some reason. The old time, we had a barrier that if you're Lutheran, you couldn't mingle with those Catholics, and the Catholics couldn't mingle with the Lutherans, and that was it. What happened then when the kids grew up? Well, that's when the division came through school. Like I say, I met this one kid in school, Pat Lynch, Irish, he said, Paul, get out. But there was a barrier between us, we enjoyed each other and had a lot of fun. And a lot of my friends were Catholic in school. So it dissipated itself. Why does Sweden argue that a boy married a Catholic, for instance? Did he have to drop the Lutheran and become a Catholic? Yeah, yeah. Or stay out of the complete? Well, yeah, but they would, well, if they did stay out of the complete, they had to sign a statement that any children born of that marriage would be Catholic. But was there binding on the Lutheran? It wouldn't be binding, you could do whatever you want, but at that point, you made a statement to your bride-to-be that any children born of that marriage would be Catholic. So, and it held pretty true. And they were strong enough to keep? Yeah, yeah. They held fast to that one, very, very much so. It was more for the kids, though, to understand what? Yeah, no, but they held strong. So you married a non-Swede? A non-Stockholm, I should make that. But I made her a Swede. She, Peg, can you speak as well as I can? Oh, yeah. That means you have been as strong with the couple years like you've had, right? Yeah, I know. My aunt, aunt and uncle were coming from Sweden to stay here for three months. They couldn't speak one word of English. He was going to work every day, leaving me with them. I had to learn a little bit. And she did well. And then when they went back, they wanted me to write in Swedish. I can write it better than I can speak it. So you also have been to Sweden, then, to your family? Oh, yeah. So how do you see the Swedes? Some odd kind of people? No, no, no. No, no, very... I'm the only odd one? I don't know. I want to go back, but most of those people have passed away since Irv and I were there in 60. We've been back to England, but my parents came from England. How different was this now for you to marry the Swedes? Oh, she was elevated. She was elevated. No. Well, I ask you, her not. I think it has worked out very well. Like the customs, for instance, now. Oh, they're very different. Yeah, like Christmas now. You don't have the plum party in the Swedish family, but... She will have it here, though. You have it here. We do. In other words, you mix in some of it. You have nothing else to use it. No, no. I'm terribly fond of lutefisk. Oh, ho, ho, ho. Well, you're used to that. Oh, yes. And I have made it. Yes. Excellent cook. Excellent cook. But, no, the customs are quite different. I think I wasn't used to so much drinking at the table with their meals as I saw over there. Oh, you mean in Sweden? Yeah. Not much here in the United States? No, when you met her... No, I know his parents didn't do anything. They didn't drink? No. Not at all. Didn't allow it in the house, nor did my parents. But when we went over there, some of, not all relatives either, just the friends of the relatives seemed to think that was the thing to party. Not to get drunk, so to speak, but... More sociable. Sociable, with their meals, it seemed, and I wasn't used to that. It was the old Viking custom. Skål, skål, skål! A little sipping. Yeah. Little sips of different things that I wasn't used to at meals. How was that? It's been enjoyable because I learned her culture, and then she learned my culture. And it's been very interesting. So do you still have the custom of tea drinking in the morning, for instance, or... I drink tea, yes. You drink tea? Of course. Does it still sit in your blood and... You still like your tea, right? How about Herbert now, anything? Blandvinn. It's like medicine, cheese. Bara blandvinn, ald. He doesn't have the cake for tea. No, never did. Do you like tea? Yes, but it's probably the later years. So why, do you think as a youth you had to be used to it, or... Did you drink coffee now, Herbert, for instance, when you were younger? Oh, yes, always. You started early with coffee. Early. Herb said the pot was always on. It was always on, yeah. Oh, and the kids could use it as much as they wanted to. As much as they wanted to. But like, there was no liquor in the house. No liquor, no. Did they belong to the Templars? No, just their own belief, no liquor. And her folks, same way, they were the same way. No liquor. So your parents, Mrs. Lidberg, what kind of work were they doing? My father was assistant postmaster. In St. Paul. In St. Paul, before he died. Real fine men. And my mother didn't work, she was at home. Very active woman in the church, Episcopal church. How did you meet now? Not through the church, because... No, no. It wasn't his church, I'm sure. We met at a... Well, it was a town hall. I lived out in the country, in St. Paul. And the country young people had groups called the 4-H Club and different clubs like that, and they were having a dance at the local town hall. And his friend, whom he worked with, lived out there. And he invited a bunch from the bank, where he heard was working at that town hall. It was his birthday, his mother invited, birthday party. And so they all came up to the dance, and that's where I met him. Stock cash, I heard, Rick. So you both danced then? Oh, yes. Were you allowed to dance, Tommy, because you were a major star? Yeah, we could dance, but not... There was still a taboo, though, on it. Yes, there was. But being younger and coming up, we just sort of pushed it aside. There was no taboo in that. No, but there was with us, with the church and stuff. Do you think you had a stricter upbringing than her with your wife? I think so, yes. But then I disregarded it quickly after, but she still hung on. So when you took your wife home now as a girlfriend on a date and presented her to your mother, what did she say then? Stock cash, Herbert. When Herb's parents came to St. Paul, they did belong to an Episcopal church for a while. I don't know why. They did? I don't know why either, but they did. He was baptized. No, and Hank was. I wasn't. I was baptized and confirmed in the Augustana. But they were baptized in the Episcopal church. Maybe because it was closed? We don't know that answer, no. But all my people have gone. They still do, that are up there, go to the Episcopal church. You were well-received then in the family. I think so. They liked me. At that time, you were not that talkative, I suppose. Oh, very modest. Well, my mother was a widow, and we used to take her with us much out to my parents' home for Christmas and Thanksgiving and the things that groups were together. Did you get to, became engaged soon after you met? A couple of years later. A couple of years. I was in school. I was in college. She went to the University of Minnesota. Yes, I heard you mention that. So? Now, we intermingled beautifully. There was never a harsh word between the families. See that's all. Fortsetting made her very rough for you in life. See that's all. So you hit the depression then. You went to college, you said. You were working in a drugstore. And during the Depression, I was in a drugstore. So I started working in a drugstore in 1927. Yes, I think. Now, just at this, the Depression started in 1929. So I just got to the drugstore, and the Depression hit. And lucky enough that I had this job, and this Jewish friend of mine made sure that I worked there and had this income. So I held her very dearly to my heart. So his business now in the drugstore business, did it affect the people? Oh, yes, it did. It did? Yes. He said, I'm losing money paying you, Herb, but I'm going to keep paying you. And I thought that was very wonderful. You would think people needed the necessities of medicine and work. Well, they bypassed that, though. They did? Yeah. There would be some days there would be no business in the store at all. I see my father being with the government in the post office. He never laid off. We didn't feel that. So you didn't feel the Depression then at all? Not as much. Because you could buy much cheaper, and the... That's right. The money level was up there. My dad had originally been a teacher in the public schools before he went into the post office as a young man. And he used to walk three miles to get to his school. And then he got a... What kind of car did he have? It was a Model A Ford. And he got the job as a clerk at the post office, and he built himself up to the assistant postmaster. Very fine man. Pretty big town. How many of your family were in Newham? I had two brothers. Two brothers. And they're both gone. So you went to the University of Minnesota? Both my brothers. It's never been the same since she's there, too. And what ambition did you look for? I was looking... I was going to be a dietician in an institution. Wow. Yeah. So there was also... So I've been a dietician in this house. And the best. Who gave you the idea? Was some counselor or just on your own? I don't know. I always liked baking and cooking and things, so I suppose... I don't know why. I just thought that would be a good field to get into. You know, like in a big institution of some kind, a hospital or nursing home or whatever. But you met Herbert, then, before the final day. Yes. Come dancing out together. You married him after the depression? Yeah. We got married in 1939. September 16, 1939. Were you drafted then into the... Yes, I was drafted in 1944, 43. You had both children. Both children were born, and I was drafted, yeah. You were sent overseas? No, I stayed in this country. I served two years in the Army. Hitler heard that I was in. He gave up. He said, that's news. That is news. You taught her this news? He listened. So your mother was living after the war then? Mine? Yes. Yeah, she was living when I went in the service, yeah. When you married now, did you rent an apartment or did you buy a house? Both. Both, yeah. We rented an apartment for six months, and I bought a house in Singapore. Then when he went, he was stationed in Washington. State of Washington, yeah. State of Washington. During the war. Yeah, Fort Lewis. I rented the house out, and we moved the two children there. Yeah, right. For about a year and a little over. Did your wife work out fine? You didn't hurt her in the bed? No. The year before you got married, you started an insurance business. 1938. How did you get the idea? Well, I'll tell you. I worked in the drugstore again, and I'd meet all these various insurance men come in there, and they always appeared to me as having an extra dollar in their pocket to somebody else. I said, well, if it's that good, I can be that good with it. So I started with it. I became successful immediately. In other words, you started door-to-door? Yeah, any way I wanted to. See, I met all these people from the drugstore. See, they all were my friends. So I'd contact all these people and sold insurance. And I'll say this. I became the leader in St. Paul the first year and stayed the leader in sales up until I left, when I was transferred to Chicago. I came from Chicago, came to Oxford. And that was your own ambitions with people. Was it good incentives to work for? Oh, yeah. See, in fact, I loved my job. I never felt I had a job. It was just meeting people, talking with them. So I never had a job. And if you could do something in your lifetime, and you don't have a job, and enjoy it, you'd be successful. And I felt that was my good fortune. I came to the insurance business with a good company, and everything went well, with no regrets, none the least. So how long did you... you had your own office then in St. Paul? No. No, I worked in the company's office. Down the handcuff? Yes. You didn't have to rent an office then? No, no. No, I've always been an employee of the company. And then from there I was transferred to Chicago in the regional department. There for four years, and I came here, became district manager, and that's when I retired here. And it was all kind of insurance, life, office? No, not at that time. It was all life. All life. All life. Since then they've changed now in everything. But when I went with them and stayed with them until I retired, it was all life. They had just gone into the other side, but very nominally. Was it easy at that time when you started in 1938 to push the life insurance? To me it was. I had no problem. Nothing. I never had a problem in the business. Was it easy because people had the rough time during the Depression? Well, I said, okay, if it's rough in the Depression, how about if your father dies? It would be rougher, wouldn't it? You don't want that one. Take some insurance. So I used that to sell. You've tasted a rough time with the Depression. You're all used to better than the Depression. Yes. So I said, if you want a rougher, don't have any insurance. Protect yourself. And they did. It made sense. It still makes sense. You take my mother, who when she lost her husband, that was a real Depression. You saw it. I saw it, right. I used that expression. I said, she had the Depression. She couldn't control it. You can control this for your family. And it worked. How about the Social Security coming in on 1936 and paying off in the first 1940s? Was there a drawback you think that... No, that helped. Because it brought everybody to the fact that they needed income for either an early death or for retirement. But it wasn't sufficient. So then we came along and said, now you have this as a base, you build up on it. You can exist with this, but you can't live. Let's live. Get some more and make it so you can live. And it worked well. So you had the proof of that on a piece of paper? Oh, sure. You had no trouble to do that? None. And you had no more of a school to go to? No. Not in the least. None. And you were close with your school to go on to? You have this? Yes. And all I say is I never had a job in my life because I enjoyed what I do so well. It was like a hobby. And truly, that's actually the truth. Peg has heard me say that a thousand times. I never go out of the way to do a job. I loved it that much. And when you love something, you become successful. But in your business, it's a common knowledge that you have to join a lot of organizations to meet people. Did you do that? No. I would meet people as I'm meeting them without the organization. I felt that if I join the organization, that's time-consuming. I'd rather be talking to you, selling you some insurance, rather than joining this organization over there. It's up to me to meet you and the guy next door and around. But how did you meet them? I mean, at the meetings and so on. No, I'll say, okay, I met you now. They weren't so high? Well, in a way, but I'll say I meet you, and I sell you some insurance. I say, now, the reason you're buying this insurance is because you want it. You think it's good. Now, what I want from you now is two men who are friends of yours that would enjoy it the same as you. So you tell me about Eric over here and Fred over here. So I go over and meet Fred and Eric. I do the same thing with them. Now, you're buying this because you like it. Now, tell me two friends who you think you would like the same thing. So I take Jimmy Snus and Sven, so I go over and meet them and branch out that way. So it was a continuous growth picture that I established myself, not through any other organization. So it was easy then to meet people in the meeting hall, for instance, to get names and addresses. Yeah, because if you say, go see Fred and Eric, I'd say, I'm here because your friend is my friend, and bing. You know, open the door, you're sitting down. And that was what I found all through my business career when I was an agent. Well, once you got big enough, everybody knew you, so they were just coming into you and you were like a flypaper. Right. And through all the years I had been in St. Paul, my name is still mentioned up there, in good taste, that they enjoyed doing business with me. That was just given to me about six months ago. I met a guy who's now retired, and he heard your name is still mentioned up here in St. Paul. I was very proud. So it seems to me that you were a typical example of what was built into you, rather than what you were trained to do. I think so. My personality seemed to blend right with it. Do you think it's hard for somebody, some say you can train anybody to do just almost anything, but is that true? I don't think so. You've got to have it in you. If somebody says I could be a mechanic, I'd say no. I can't be a mechanic. All the training they could give me, I would be a bum at it. I couldn't do it. Like with Edna, he had a good effort. He didn't go into your life. No, my brother got it, though. My brother picked it up from him. He's got an oyster, so it's good. Uh-oh. Got noise. If you were him, I'm happy. I would not call him, though. I would call him a journalist. Yes. We've had a good life in this country, thankful to my folks who gave us birth in this country. There's no question about it. You didn't join the Masons, for instance, in Rockport when you came here? I belonged to the Masons when I was in St. Paul. I joined the Masons in St. Paul and continued right through, and now I belong to the Shriners here in Rockport. And then Lyron. You belong to Lyron? I belong to Lyron. I belonged to the Smithy's, but I left there. But I still belong to Lyron. That's the only group you belong to? Lyron. All right. Berger. See, you're going to pick me up. During what time was it easier to settle? After the war, of course, people made a lot of money during the war. Both members of the family worked, and they could save for a house and a wife and children, perhaps. But was the 50s a good time, or 60s or 70s? I'll say they were all good times. But there must have been some... As I look at it, they were all good times. I didn't have any bad times. It was always increasing. Always. That was it. There was no other way it could be. That was it. And I've enjoyed every minute of it. When the times were tough, I enjoyed it. And as it got better, I enjoyed it. And got real good, I enjoyed it. And I had a good... I won two trophies here in Rockford, being the best district in the entire country on selling group insurance. That's for companies. For companies? Yes. Two years, I won two group trophies, which is like saying we were the best for two different years. And then in the meantime, I won citations, which wasn't the best, but it was up in the top. Because you had the big companies there. Yeah. You know John's Group? Yes. Rockford Products? Yeah, I sold Rockford Products group insurance. Swan Hillman. Yeah, Swan Hillman. Yeah, very fine friend of mine. Did they help to be a three then? Well, yes, but not in all cases, no. It did help in certain cases, you know. Yeah, because you could talk with them. Yeah, right, right. But not always. Not always, no. Somebody ignored it completely. But I had good success in business insurance in this town. They were the big money, of course, because John Hancock was my premier figure. Bravo! You betcha. Did the children of those insurance takers continue on with life insurance? Yes. There was no drop-off? No, no. So the parents recommended it? Right, that's right. So in other words, if we had done the job properly with the parents, they would just convey it to their children. If it made sense to them, it would make sense to the kids. How about the unions? They have such a tremendous coverage with dental and hospitalization. Well... Was there any need for life insurance? Oh, yeah, right. See, how could you... But what did the people say? Well, how can you say there's enough life insurance? You can't say there's enough. I got $10,000 with Sunstrand. That's plenty. Okay. Your wife has got three kids, and she'll have them support them for, say, 15 years. You take that $10,000 and break it down so there's enough money for 15 years. No way! So he sees then that what he thought was enough is not enough. But it's up to us as a salesman to prove that to him. And while we prove it to him, it makes sense. It makes sense. And once he studies, you're right. And if you love your family, you wouldn't say, I'll support you as long as I live after that. I don't care what happens to you. You don't say that. You want to take care of the children as long as you can, possibly, through life insurance, you can do that. That's it. That's it. That's it. That's it. That's it. That's it. So how long have you been here in Rockford? Came here in... Right? 56, yeah. 56? Yeah. 30 years. Well, you're established for good then. Oh, yeah. In this town. I have my children here, and children here, and children, children, children here! We're a great grandparent. Student point. What do you tell your... you have two children, one boy and a girl? Yeah. What do you tell them about your heritage, your mother, for instance, I mean your wife, about her heritage? When the... How do you convey that to them? When the time arises, we'll mention it. But we never force it on them. But if... Do you ask any questions about it? Once in a while, yeah. But we don't force the issue. Like, when she's on holidays, like Lutfisk, we give the thoughts on Lutfisk, and all these very Swedish dishes. And they might ask you the question, what does this crazy thing do? Right, how could you like this? Do they eat this, for instance? Very sparingly. I eat up... well, they can't eat, I eat it. Oh, I love it. So you have a craving for it? Yes. But only at Christmas. I don't want Lutfisk... I'd rather have roast beef and Yorkshire pudding. See? It's all good. So you are spoiled by two cultures. Yes. And with her background of dietitian, she is a marvelous cook. And she does it beautifully. And you can see... Well, you ought to be in the Husky family. Oh, yeah. But she's been a good cook as long as I've known her. She's always been excellent. Because she likes it, again, she likes it. She took this training in the University of Minnesota because she wanted to do that. We got married, and she still wanted to do it, and prepared the foods in top-notch excellence. She has the craze now to be very particular with everything. Yeah, she is. But she knew that years ago. Yeah. No, she's been a good gal. She's gotten the best out of America. You missed. The sweets and the... Absolutely. The British. No question. Anybody who doesn't stand up and say, God bless America, they're either crazy. Because it's pretty wonderful. Like your mother now. When did she die? Well, she died, I thought, 1955. We came here in 1956, she died in 1955. So she didn't go down there to live with you? No, no. She stayed in St. Paul? She stayed there. She came to Chicago, as I worked out of the Chicago office, and she came to St. Paul and visited us in Chicago. But when we were transferred here, she did not come, she died. She died in 1955, like I said, we were moved here in 1956, one year later. So your brother and sister, do they live in St. Paul now? Well, my brother's dead, my sister lives in St. Paul. Near Snus Boulevard, near Paine Avenue. I see. Yeah. Did she marry this week? Yeah. Arthur Lennell. And your brother married a Swedish girl, too, or? Half. Half Swedish, no, all Swedish. All Swedish. Named Gilbert. He changed his name. His name was Israelson, and he changed it from that to Gilbert when he came to this country. They're both Swedes. When your mother got older, did she wander back then in her memory to Sweden more often? Not too much, no. She didn't talk too much about the airport? Not too much, no. How did you get the interest of going back to Sweden? Was it something that you were looking for? I just wanted to go back and see where my folks were born and meet my relatives, who I had never met. Did you have correspondence with them in Sweden? No, only before we went there. But I never had a grandparent. I never had any cousins in this country, because my father and mother were the only ones that came here. There was something that was missing. So I wanted to go over and fulfill it, and we did that on my side, and she met her aunt over in England. So she fulfilled that too, who she had never met before. So to us, both of us, it was a real event, a fulfilling event. So you wrote a letter to one of them over there? Yeah, and had us meet them in a hotel. That was the best. Fantastic. And do you perceive some resemblance? Oh, my brother walked in, and his name was something else. My sister came in, and her name was something else. But the family resemblance was strong. So what were you talking about then? What did you ask? Well, I asked them what they were doing, you know, and they would tell me. They could speak pretty good English over there, and especially the kids. They all could speak English over there. There was no question there. But we had a grand time. I remember the name of the hotel in Uttabori. And then you went to Yerpos? Went to Yerpos. My uncle drove us there, introduced me to all the neighbors, and then he introduced us to my mother's relatives who lived close. But they were still living there? Yeah. But they aged very old. But then I met their children, like I was a child of that generation. So you had to tell them that your parents were there? Oh, yeah. But they all knew that we were coming. The word had spread that we were coming to Yerpos. Then we can call another conversation. Yeah, right. And that we had a good time. They treated us like kings. Oh, my. They all knew my folks. It was a thrill to have them express themselves to us about them. What time of the year did you go? It was in the fall, August, September. You had the Kef Tivaro? Oh, yes. The schnapps? Oh, yes. That's what she thought. Oh, Kef, Klaus, they're all things. You were all crawling like horses. Yeah. Oh, that was a good time. And the color, everything was set up in red. Oh, beautiful, beautiful. That was nice. We had a good time. You saw the land of the ancestors. And then Fred and Mary and Peggy and I, we then rented a car, and we toured up to the northern part of Sweden, then crossed over to Norway, and came down Norway, came back to Ypteburi. Beautiful trip. Rented a little Volvo. So you didn't have to join any unions or anything like that when you were in your lifetime? I never was in favor of a union. Why should I have somebody represent me? I didn't want that. It's up to me to take care of myself. You've got to see it this way. You are a good salesman now. You can talk to yourself. But there are hundreds, you know, you are only one, maybe in a thousand. No. The rest of them, they've got to have a salesman like you. Perhaps you'd be a good union organizer. No, I wouldn't have. No. No. But don't you think the workers needed a representation, someone to talk to? I won't disagree, but they allowed leaders to take over that were no good. Now, common sense. You take Jimmy Hoffa. Let all these teamsters, you know. He's a crook. He's trying to kill them, even though he is. But they allowed him to be their head man. That's where they're wrong. What do you think got to happen, though? Because Jimmy Hoffa said, listen, join with me, I'll get you five dollars more a week. Yay! He didn't care how he got it, but vote for him, get him up there, and he'll get you five bucks. And that's how he grew, and he grew, and he grew. He was unethical. He was no principle to a man at all. He probably got more than five dollars a week. Oh, you know that. He was killed because he had swindled money. But the people in the union voted him in. That's my gripe. They were weak to allow that man to come in. You take any unions around, they're still weak. You'll see them in Oslo. They allow this man to get up there, and he pilfers, steals, embezzles. That's who they support. So here in Iraq, there are quite a few organizations, I mean factories, they have their own unions. Right. Does that work? That's a little better, yes. You can control it. Ah, right. You know the man who's there better. But these big unions are absolutely awful. AFL-CIO, they're a blemish in our history. Truly. The thought of a union, like you say, is good, but it was spoiled. They allowed the worst man to come in and leave them. They were operating from outside. That's right. They swindled, and they killed, they did anything to get power. That isn't what you want. But like you say, a good man to help this man over here elevate himself, get more incentive within himself, fine. But not the other way around. You had to deal with quite a few other unions, though. Oh, yeah. How were you affected? Like in Hillman's case, no. Oh, there were unions. They were non-union. But they wanted a union by themselves, though. Well, not that I was aware of. No, I don't think so. See, he held a good respect with his employees. And he paid a pretty decent wage. Right. So he knocked out the unions from coming in because he was that kind of a man. Well-respected, fine man, and my dealings with him were top-notch. So he had a group insurance with you then rather than the workers. In other words, he organized the union. We sold it to him, and he gave the insurance to the workers, right. And it was operating for many years. Yes, many, many years. So in Hillman's, real fine man. In fact, I went to his funeral. It was the biggest funeral I've ever gone to at Bethesda Lutheran Church. It was the biggest funeral I've ever gone to. You mean Bethesda Covenant? Oh, is it the Covenant? It was Bethesda, no. Oh, from Washington's Covenant Church. Yeah, that was the biggest funeral I've ever gone to. In Washington, that's right. They were lined up. So he was a religious man? I don't think he was that religious, but he belonged to this church, and apparently he had donated many things to the church, and for that reason he was well-respected, and he was a fine man. But I don't think he was overly religious, as I hear the story. But a real fine gentleman, by the way. So you met some of those people, business leaders, who were in the Rockwell thing. Do they have in this generation, or can you see any leaders like those people that you can see now in the days of Rottweiler in Minneapolis? Or is somebody emerging from this crowd now, like Hillman, Eric Anderson? There was a special breed. I don't think so. You don't think so? Not with the depth that these men had. They all came from very religious. Right, and they uplifted themselves up. Driving higher and higher. Right, right. So maybe we have a platform today that's hard to elevate from. I think so. Yeah, it's tougher now. Too much politics goes into the thing now. But I want Hillman, he just built by his muscles, his brains, and he made it. And very proudly so. Well, Eric Anderson was another one. Another one, exactly. Very fine man. Absolutely. But a gentleman, absolutely the finest gentleman that you could ever meet. And I like that for a joke, so. Excuse me? I want the best of you. Oh, yeah, that's right, I know. I'm thirsty. Yes. I come from Västra Götland. In fact, there are a lot of Swedes that come from Västra Götland here in this town. So you give Rockport a good mark then? You betcha, top notch. Maybe you had better than St. Paul. I've enjoyed life more here because I became more associated directly with the Swedes. I like Fred Merian and Eric Anderson, Eric Ekbom. I'm closer to the Swedes now because I have more time, leisure time. And with that, I'm enjoying it more. But you had a successful career in both St. Paul and Rockport. Oh, yeah. So do you remember depression as a mean time period in your life? Yeah. I remember working the drugstore then. I'd cash checks on men who had children, $10 a week. I was making $12.50 a week working in the drugstore and going to school, and these men would come in from Switzerland Armored with $10 a week. Henry Schlemmer, and I knew his son very well, and he earned $10 a week. I said, how can you support that family? And that's how I was earned. And some of them lost money through the bank too. Oh, yeah. Banks failed. A number of banks failed. Yeah. So those were rough times. Had you ever known what unions did in Switzerland Armored? No, no. But then the unions came in, and then they went the other way. They became too strong and went lopsided with those things, and that caused problems. See, the employer at the beginning, he got too tough. Then the unions came in, and they got tougher than the employer. Now you've got fighting and clashing, and that destroys the purpose of a union. It's to try to build together the compatibility of two forces, make them better, but they're always fighting. That's why I'm no union man.