 This is cassette two, side one, continuation with Burdette Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side one. And then I did a lot for A.J. Stranquist, who was his right man. You see, when F.G. Hoagland sat here at his table, and even if one of the vice presidents assail wanted to talk to F.G. Hoagland, he didn't just go up to him and pull down a chair and sit down and start talking. He would come up to Mr. Hoagland and he'd stand over there. And he would not go, no there was no door. It was just open. He'd stand about three feet away from the desk. And he would just stand there until Mr. Hoagland recognized him. He would not dare go sit down at the desk or pull up a chair and sit there in front of him. Hoagland might be writing something. Hoagland might stay like this for five minutes. He knew he was standing there. He'd do that and then he'd say, yes, come over. And he'd come over and sit down and talk. I saw him in there and stand there and stand there sometimes for ten minutes and never get to see him, depending on what he's doing. But the same man always picking up a pin on the floor. And he was producing. Yeah, but see, he's got something on his mind that's got to be taken care of right now. See, he'd finish that. Now, he wouldn't purposely just let him stand there and look at him. He was just, his mind was completely. That's right, he was on something, see. And I saw there was only one man, and that was Stranquist, who could ever walk over and dare handle F.G. Hoagland. That was the man closest to him. That's right. That's the man that hired me, A.J. Stranquist. I used to see A.J. Stranquist, you know. Sometimes Hoagland sat here and right over there was A.J. Stranquist's desk. And he was the office manager and kind of the head of the whole thing. And he went to all the court cases with Hoagland. I have the whole write-up of that. And those two went to all the court trials and that. And I would have to drive them many a times. I'd take them both. And we didn't have no company car. And I remember many a times I would see Stranquist. Hoagland would get up sometimes. See, we'd work till 5.15. That was our hours. Sometimes Hoagland would leave at 4.30. I suppose he had to go to Swedish Hospital or something for a meeting. So he'd get up, you know, and he'd take his glasses off like this, and he'd stand and he'd look out the office and he'd close his glasses, you know, and he'd put them down in here. And he'd stand and look. And then he'd look at the clock. And now in the meantime, he had put his glasses away and he pulled his coat. Then he'd walk over to the hall tree. And just then, Mr. Stranquist would see him walking. He'd jump up, you know, and go over there and grab his coat and hold it, you know. And he'd slap the old man on the back and he'd whisper something. When I'd see the old man, he'd laugh a little bit. And down the steps he'd go. He was the only one that ever dared do that. Anybody else do that, been gone like that probably. But Hoagland, Stranny was just as tough as Hoagland. Oh, he was tough. He made money for that company, boy. He run that place. What did he do differently now than Hoagland? He was just good. He learned from nothing. He didn't even finish high school. But he was with Hoagland on so many court cases and worked with so many lawyers that he just absorbed all that stuff. He got to be almost like a lawyer himself. Oh, many people just would fearful to sit in front of Stranny. He'd look right at him, you know, those eyes would penetrate. He was powerful. And boy, I tell you, see, he got Hoagland, I think there's a couple of times that Hoagland would have just as soon terminated Stranquist if he would have dared. But I don't think he dared because he needed him because Stranquist stuck by Hoagland faithfully. Never betrayed him. So your replacement would be impossible then for Stranquist. I mean, he could have replaced him, but he wouldn't have had the loyalty. When he got up in bad courts, it was A.J. Stranquist who backed him up and supported him. Got the facts, got the figures, proved things. It's been said that there was Hoagland, Leeuwen Faust, P.A. Peterson, but also Oskar Landström. He was a stockholder there. They tried to force Hoagland in the early 30s. Yeah, that was before my time, but that was a big squabble. Why did they come on bad footing with each other? I don't know. They told me, I had heard that they had two sets of books, but you know, I never found any trace of that because eventually I got in and closed the financial statements. I did all the posting of the figures and I did a lot of researching and I could never find two sets of books. You know, people talked like that, you heard those things. At that time, I wasn't high enough up to be that nosy. You don't remember Oskar Landström coming into his office? I know who he was, but I don't remember them associating, no. But I think it's in some of the write-ups. Because the story goes that Hoagland had to go over to Willard Brolin and have 75,000 pairs so he could get the majority of the stocks. Yeah, I suppose so. I imagine it was. So there was a lot of infighting. Because I remember when I had the accounting department, and I don't know what year that was, and one day, well Hoagland was still living, it was before Hoagland died. They said I was going to get this old gentleman to work in my department and here it was Mr. Brolin. Goodness sakes, he must have been 82. Well, that was in 36. Yeah, he must have been 82. He was a whipped person then with the depression. Yeah, see Hoagland says you have a job here. So he brought him in and paid him. That's what he did. All I had him do was sit, I put a nice little desk for him, they told me what to do, and I had him sit and sort my green copies from the blue and the yellow. All day long he'd sit to be a big pile of our invoices, and then he'd count them, and then I think I had him add them up, you know. There was no pressure, nothing. Sometimes the old man would sit there and he'd fall asleep like this, and I wouldn't want to wake him up, so I had a paperweight over here on the desk and when I'd come over there I'd push it on the floor, and then he'd wake up, see when the paperweight hit the floor, and then I'd say, oh, we dropped something, you know, and I'd pick it up and set it there, see. And then the old man would be awake again, you know. That happened many times, but I knew that, see, because I associated the name and I knew it was a gesture for old friendship. So we put him back in a corner where nobody could see him, you know. But he got his paycheck every week, see. That old, F.G. Hoagland kept that old place going during the Depression. So he probably owed him some loyalty then, or? Well, for all the money and stuff they borrowed without notes, you know, they were friends from way back. You know, in the old days you couldn't break that good old loyalty, you know. That was a handshake and that was it. There wasn't any signed notes and stacks of paper that went to an attorney and signed everything away, you know. And they all were into things together. Sometimes those same three fellas had stock in the same furniture factory. How long was he working there? Not too long, though, Brolin, according to his son, Bob. No, it wasn't too long. He went downhill and got sick. He didn't feel good, did he, the Depression? Yeah, yeah. He worked for a while. But he gave him an income. Now, I don't know if Mr. Hoagland paid him after he left the plant. He might have kept paying him. I've seen some of the correspondence between Brolin and Hugo Olsson, that man in the machine. Brolin, he knows a lot. Yes. Yeah, you talked to him. Yeah, because he was old enough to understand. He's a nice boy, nice fella. But it must have been a tremendous blow. I mean, this Wendell Brolin, he was a talented man, there's no question about it. You could see the letter writing and everything. What did he do wrong, you think? I mean, Hoagland, he pulled through with his national lock, no? Well, I think they all got into those furniture factories. You know, I remember when my father worked in that furniture factory. And I remember the Depression coming. I was just still in grade school, just going to go into junior high school. And I remember my dad would come home and he'd say, I haven't got any money. And I said, well, you know, I need 25 cents for school. Well, you're going to have to wait a couple days. And it was hard for me to believe that we didn't have a quarter, you know. And then my dad would show me and he says, well, I got three checks here, but I can't cash them. You know, I've been carrying them, I want my men to get paid. And the fella that ran the furniture factory felt my dad was making enough money and he knew he had a little money and they had insurance policies. And he would say, well, Gus, here's a check, but don't cash it. We really don't have the money in the bank. And he said, let's let the few workers have it, you know, so they have it. So my dad would do that. He did that for many years. And I remember my father cashing in on $10,000 insurance policy. Then it was a $15,000 insurance policy. And he would draw the money out of that. And we would just be very careful how we spent it. And we kept our home. We had a nice, beautiful bungalow with laid on two, three big lots. And we had a beautiful home. Everybody came to our place in the Depression days on Sundays because we had a little golf, Tom Tom golf course. And we had a horseshoe courts out there. And we had a little fish pool out there. It was like a park. And everybody liked to spend the weekends there because my mother always had a little food in the refrigerator. And we'd have meatballs and rice pudding all the time, you know. And that's the way we lived. Well, I can remember those days. And then I would say to my dad, it was getting to be winter. And he says, well, boy, he said, it's getting awful cold in that factory. He says, I'm going to have to wear my overshoes this winter. He says, it just isn't warm enough out there because they cut back on coal. They didn't have the money. And you see, the furniture factories, when they made money, they never put anything aside. They didn't do like the tool industry does today, you know. Now they set money aside and they do capital improvements and they do maintenance things. I never remember ever going out to that furniture factory and ever see them painting the windows outside. They didn't paint the windows until they started to rattle in the wind and start almost falling out. Then they'd go and scrape a window and paint it. There was no such thing as preventive maintenance. And I can remember, I used to tell my dad when I got into accounting and started to work at National Lock and we had a cost system, you know. And I was explaining to my father then because then the factory had closed up and that. My dad was kind of retired and I said, Dad, I said, how did you ever figure out what those dining room sets should cost? You had a big table, six chairs, a big buffet and a china closet. I said, how did you figure your cost? Oh, there was no problem, he says. You know, I did that, son. He said I would go and he said I had all the upholsters who did all the upholstering on the chairs, I had all the cabinet makers who hung all the doors in the buffets and put the hinges in by hand. None of that was done by machine. Put the handles on. All that stuff comes from National Lock. Then he says I had the finishers who finished the tables and they rubbed them and I had the packers who packed it. Well, he says I would go look at the drawings and I would go and figure out how many days it took us to finish the cabinets and put all the doors on and all the glass inlays and all that. Then I would figure out how long we spent on finishing it and how many days we spent on rubbing it and roughly what lumber we put to crate it. And then he says I would take a piece of paper and I would sit there and I would say, well, you know, really that cost us about, we'll say, $300. So he'd say, ah, we should get $300 for that set. So then he'd tear that off and his name was Gus so he'd put his name in there like that and fold it up. Then he'd go to the president whose name was Axel Wilson and he'd say, Axel, why don't you go up and take a look at that set I got all set up there. They had like a little dining room up there. Showroom they called it. Why don't you go up and look at that and see what you think we should get for that. So he would go up and look at that and he'd say, oh, gee, you know, I think I'll use this same piece of paper. He'd probably say, well, I think we should get $400. My dad didn't know that he put this down. Then he'd go to the superintendent who made the drawings for this and all that and he'd come up and he'd say, well, he probably would misjudge and he might have said, well, we'll just say a figure probably $200. Well then the three guys would sit down and they'd all look at this and they'd say, well, there's $300, $200. The other guy said $400. Well let's see, that's $300, $500, that's $900. We're going to sell it for $450. That's our price. That's what they sold it for. Well, they don't know if they lost money or made money. That's the way they run the furniture factory with everything. But the demand was so big then in the 20s that it was okay for a while. Oh, when they were selling it faster than they could make it and keep doing it. The next time probably if it was a little short they'd say, well, you know, we come up with, why don't we make it even $500? Probably they could get it then because it was in demand. Well then when business started to fall off, this isn't sharp enough. Now the South is coming in and saying, hey, we're putting them out regularly at $400. $375, automate it. We spray it, pack it, and everything in one day. Oh, we get it down to $275. Here they sit up here milking the old way yet. No assembly lines, no conveyors. You see what I mean? Then all of a sudden you say, well, we don't really have the money to do that. That costs money to come in here and put automation and have this stuff keep moving on the belt all the time. We don't have no belts. We don't have no motors. Who's going to do all that? See? Well then pretty soon, see, this is all what causes all this collapse. That's my opinion. Do you remember the North 2nd place that Scandia was located on? Yeah. And it was flooded repeatedly all the time and it was closed off for weeks. The motors got wet. Down on the first floor, yeah. Yeah. Why didn't they move out of there? I mean, instead of- Who knows? Be like muskrats. Who knows? Who knows? My grandpa used to be night watchman there. And we lived up on top of the hill up there. Close to the factory. Yeah. We lived up on the hill going east, up on top of the park. And nobody up there in those days when I was a little baby had any bathrooms. You know, we had outhouses. So Saturday night, he would invite all the neighborhoods. And the neighborhood, they'd say, well, come on down to the factory. I got the boiler going. You can have a nice hot shower. And he had a big old wood barrel there, big one. You know, you fill up with hot water. So I'd undress, and my dad would undress, and the men would go in naked and take a bath there. And then they'd clean up. And then he'd dump the water and put some more hot water in. The women would go in and go down there Saturday night and take their bath. For those that knew my grandpa, see, because he kind of controlled that, see. Walk around with it, they call him- there he goes with a bisseye. He had a gun. I don't think he could even shoot it if he had it. He had a gun. Sure. And then a lantern. And walk through a furniture factory. Imagine how they could start a fire. That was the watchmen. That's the way they used to do it. But they had what you call very tolerant and hardworking people. They never asked for a raise. No union. No. They stayed there from the time they come in until they probably died. Well, I remember at National Lock when it got so bad that, you know, we'd have some people work like Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and the others would work Tuesday, Thursday, and something like that. Well, rather than come to a department and say, you've got to get rid of five people, Hoagland felt it was better to let all five work with a little bit less than to lay off three and keep two or lay off two and keep three. So he had a lot of good things, too. And like when he started Swedish Hospital, you know. He just insisted that everybody in the factory had to use Swedish American Hospital. It was like a united appeal then. Sure. We don't want that hospital to go under. We want that to be successful. Did you as an employee have to give to the hospital, I mean, to any fund or anything? You used to use it. Oh, as we got older we did. You know, when I got to be higher up in a position, I worked a lot for the hospital on company time. So much money for the hospital. Hoagland had long gone, but A.J. Strankos was a terrific man, too, you know. He was on the board and was chairman of the board of Swedish Hospital for many years. And I would go to him because he was kind of my boss for a while. And then the Keystone man came up and I got in real good with him. And I said, well, Mark Summer, his name was, he was a son-in-law or one of the grandsons of the founder who founded Keystone Steel and Wire. I said, well, you know, by now I was up to a VP and that stuff. And I said, well, they want me to work on a hospital. And I said, what I'm going to do is belong to their ambassador club. And I said, that's about 50 executives around town. I said, we're going to go out and raise money with all the smaller companies. And I said, it may involve where some of this I should do on company time. I can't do it on Saturdays. To see these other men, I got to go on company time. I can't go after work. And I said, before I do it, I certainly want to clear it with you so that if I'm missing for a couple hours some afternoon, you know, oh, perfect. We don't even worry about you, but we want you to be active with those things. Anything for the community, you have our authority to work with it. So I went on that board. Well, I was on there for three years. And every year we'd raise $50,000, $75,000 just going to little shops like this and getting anywhere from $50,000 to $500,000 to $1,000. And we'd pledge them and follow up. Well, then I'd have to go back and I'd write a letter and thank the man for visiting his plant and I'd give him a little garbage and tell him what a nice little plant he had. And I enjoyed my visit. And I'm going to stop and see you again sometime, you know. And I'd put it in to my girl for a follow up. So I did that off and on. Well, other people did the same thing, but nothing ever forced. Stranny would come to me sometimes. And sometimes he'd come to me like this and he'd say, he'd give me a list of names, you know. He says, Bernat, there's 10 men. They all work at our shop. I knew what they all made. I controlled all the salaries, all the bonuses. So I knew what strength was. He says, I want you to go up this morning. I've got to go to meetings this afternoon, he says. He says, I want $1,000. And this was a time when money was hard to get. He says, I want $1,000 this afternoon when I go to the board meeting at the hospital. He says, go up to Head North and get $100. Go to John Kramer and get $100. Go over and see John Baum and get $100. Go over here and see the chief engineer and get $100 out of him. He had all listed down, see, the $100. Gee, I looked at that and I thought, boy, that's a lot of nerve. Go tell a guy you want $100. So of course, I knew Stranny like a book, you know. And I said, well, what if they don't want to give it to me? Well, then you just go pick up the phone and call me. Wherever you are, pick up the phone and call me. Okay, so I take this slip of paper and I got these names. So I go out to Head North and I said, Ed, I was talking to Stranny this morning and I said he wants a check for $100 for Swedish Hospital. He said, are you kidding? I said, no, he wants it. Well, okay. So Ed, he goes in his closet and pulls out the bank book or his checkbook out of his suit coat, you know, and he comes and who should I make it out to? Make it out to Swedish American Hospital. Swedish American Hospital, $100. Okay. So I put that in my pocket and go up there. Now I'm going up to a guy by the name of Mr. Cramond. He was our plant superintendent. Don't know if he was a Catholic or not, but he was very active in the St. Anthony Hospital. So I go up to him and I said, John, because see, I at this time was a VP and I was real close to Strankos and Mark Summer. Nobody ever tangled with me. So I said, John, I said, I got to get a check from you this morning for $1,000 and make it out to Swedish American Hospital. Geez, he stood up and he slammed the paper down and he swore, I ain't giving him no $100. If I'm going to give anybody $100, I'm going to give it to St. Anthony Hospital. I shouldn't be talking like that. Well, I says, I know you're active on there. You're on the board over at St. Anthony, but I said, Stranny's going to meetings afternoon and he wants $100. Well, I'm not giving it to him. Tell him that. I says, okay. So I got up and I walked over to his condenser and I picked up the phone. He said, what are you going to do now? I said, I got to call Stranny and tell him you're not going to give him the $100. Well, put the phone down. Put the phone down. He says, sit down a minute. Then he talks and argues some more with me. I said, listen, are you going to give it to me or aren't you? I said, I haven't got time to sit and talk to you. I got eight other guys to go see. Are you going to give it to me or aren't you? I said, if you're not going to give it to me, all I have to do is call him and I said, he'll talk to you. Oh, I don't want that. I'll give it to you. So he pulls out his drawer and takes out his checkbook and he writes me a check for $100. Any other fellas, they all give it to me. So in about 25 minutes, I come down with $1,000 and give it to Stranny. He's going to board me. I don't know, something they were going to do at the hospital. I suppose 10 other guys come in with $10,000. You know, that's the way these guys operated. Well, he knew what those guys made. Cramond, he probably was working on getting a $10,000, $15,000 bonus in a few months in those days. But what would this poor guy say? Tell his wife now he comes home and he just gave $100. Didn't make no difference. Didn't make no difference. Because he wouldn't tangle with Stranny, you know. See? That's the way it was in those days. What kind of relation was there between Strangquist and the workers? Good. Oh, best we ever had. He would go out, I would go to Mr. Strangquist in his office, and we called him Stranny. And I'd say, Stranny, you know, one of the toolmakers has been here 40 years. I could. I could go in him and say Stranny. So there was a different relation then between Hoagland and— Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He was not that formal. No, no. He was sharp, but he was formal. But he was faithful to the workers. And he, I'd say, you know, there's a tool and dime man down in the tool room that's going to, he's been there 40 years. And I said, we're going to have a little coffee and cake for him at 10 o'clock. I said, I'd appreciate, Stranny, if you'd stop down. I said, he's one of your old buddies. Oh, yeah, I want to get there. Takes his pencil, writes it on his counter pad. Tool room, 10 o'clock. He says, you come and remind me now. I don't want to depend on it. You come in here. I don't care who's sitting in his hall. You come in and tell me. So next day I come. Jeez, here's two guys sitting in his office. I thought, oh, Jesus, 10 minutes at 10. We're going to have a coffee. And these things only last 10 minutes. And then the whistle blows, you know, you got to go back to work. But I went in. I said, excuse me, gentlemen. And I said, don't forget. I said, we got to go down. And I turned around. Yeah, OK, I'll go right. And he stood up. He said, would you fellas excuse me? I'm going to be gone for 15 minutes. He says, if you'd like a cup of coffee, have my secretary get you one. But I'll be back in 15 minutes. And he went with me down there. Man, he's shaking the old hands, doing a good job. You know, oh, those guys. Jeez, here's the president, you know. Big company, 44,000 people, you know. They thought that was wonderful. Well, I got that reputation after they would always call on me, see. You suppose you could get Stranney this or Stranney that or Mark that, because a lot of people didn't even dare go to him, you know. You were the conductor. Oh, yeah. I had good relations, see. Same with the fishing club. We had a fishing club. We had a bowling league. They'd run behind on money, you know. And then we had big steak fries in the summertime for the foreman. Well, then they'd come, you know, and they'd be $500 short, because they'd have beer and steak and brats and all that, you know. Nothing dirty. Everybody'd have a beer or two if they wanted it, you know. And they'd charge each foreman $5. Well, prices were going up, you know. The two fellas that were running said, boy, I don't know about that, if we can do it or not, you know. He says, we should really raise it to $7 a piece. I said, you can't do that. Keep it $5. And I said, if you get in trouble, you come to me. I'll give you a check. They go out and have it. Well, they're $500 short. They're just sweating, you know. And so the one that at that time, you know, Stranny, he'd come out to this, and they'd say, well, go see Bradette. Well, come to me with your problems, you know. He didn't have time for that. Well, then he'd come see me, and I said, well, what's your problem? Yeah, I'll take care of you. I said, you come down tomorrow. I'll have a check for you. Let me know what you're short. So I'd give him $500. Well, I'd bury that. Nobody knew about that. But we never raised that price. Well, the foreman and priest, they knew somebody was helping. Same thing when we'd have the bowling leagues, you know. And they wanted to give everybody a jacket. Well, they didn't have enough money. I said, that team deserves a nice $30 jacket. You buy 15 jackets, and I'll pay for them. Well, so I was the intermediate, see, because I was high enough that if I wanted to write a check for $10,000, I could write it. I didn't have to ask anybody. I didn't have to have 15 signatures or 10 OKs. See, if I said so, it was that. I always had people come in to me, and they'd say, never saw a man have a job like yours with so much authority. If you decide you want to buy something, you can sit right down now and write a check out. And it's good. So Stankiewicz, he trusted you then for the— Oh, anything. Anything. He'd always send them to me. Did he change now from Hoagland's regimentation? In other words, he didn't go out and sit in the table and look at people. What did he do that was better? Oh, I don't know. Not much of anything, really. Hoagland just kind of dropped out of the picture, and I think Stranny was a little more friendly, and Stranny wasn't quite so threatening as Hoagland was. Did he seek the Keystone Corporation out, or did they seek him out for the— He went to them. Was it because of financial— Well, it was going to go for sale on the block. See, they were going to auction and sell it. The whole thing? Yeah. It was after he died, Hoagland? Yes, yes. It was going to be sold on the courthouse steps. And— That was in 36? Yeah, because I went back and worked several nights making up figures. I had to do that confidentially. And I worked up all the assets and everything for that so they could—so he could have those figures. And then he went to Keystone, because prior to that, Strankus had been a purchasing agent. And as a purchasing agent, he knew Keystone Steel & Wire well, because that was our biggest supplier. We bought just thousands and thousands of dollars of steel from them regularly. And Keystone was a profitable, money-making, dividend-paying company for many, many years. And Stranny knew that, because he had stock in it. Just as a purchasing man, see, he had a little stock in it. So when he found out that this thing could be—who knows? It could have been sold to some New York people or anybody. He thought, hey, for the benefit of this company and the people, my best bet is if I could get Keystone Steel interested in buying this. So boy, he went down there right away and talked to the top— In Sterling or— No, Peoria. Oh, Peoria. Yeah. He went down to them right away and negotiated and told them, you know, here's how everything stands. And it's to your advantage to get it. And boy, they bought it. And at that time, there was no Berlin, there was no P.A. Peterson, there was no Oskar Landström. It was all controlled by stockholders. And then Mrs. Wortham, of course, that was the daughter of P.A. Peterson, she had a tremendous amount of stock in the Hoagland estate. And so immediately when Hoagland's death, they got together, and of course, Stranny was a board member, too. They immediately appointed him temporary manager of the hardware plant of National Lock with the board acting. Well, that's when he got busy and got negotiations going. And then when Keystone bought it, they immediately held a board meeting because they had controlling stock and said, well, we are making Mr. Stranquus president and general manager of National Lock. And of course, Stranny, he just made that company grow and grow and grow. And the workers, they were happy for that? Oh, sure, sure. And Keystone loved it. And when he needed, if he needed two, three, or a half a million dollars, he'd call up Keystone. It was no problem. We got new equipment. We started to fix the windows outside. We did a lot of renovation. So Keystone, they were not affected by the Depression then? Well, not as bad. They made an awful lot of farming fences and barbed wire fences in World War II, World War I. And they were into a lot of wire steel for the wire companies. But during the Depression itself, though, they were still able to pull through. Oh, yeah. So did they get it cheap then? Or what happened? Was it? Yeah, I don't remember what the prices were. But there was no choice? No, they got their money back in, I think, a very short time, very short time. One of their best investments they'd ever made. This is side two of cassette two. Continuation with Woodard Carlson, Rockford, Illinois. Cassette two, side two. Their money back in, I think, a very short time, very short time, paid off. One of their best investments they'd ever made. And then Keystone kept growing with the aid of National Lock. At the time when I was assistant secretary of Keystone, they were up to that they had 28 subsidiaries, including National Lock and the different ones. 28 total. Did the Keystone Corporation put their personnel in the short-term on the various divisions? No, all they brought up this March summer came up. He was a principle fellow. And he and I hit it off real good. I had my office next to him for 15 years. And I really got along better with him than I did the president. Because although they were on par, they both had the same salaries and everything. Mark Summer, Strank was still president until he retired. Mark Summer never said, look, Stranny knows this business inside out, and we're on par. We have an executive committee. We're both on it. That's the way it was. And whenever Stranny needed money, he'd go to the Mark Summer, and Mark would get the money. Well, then when Stranny passed away, then Mark became chairman of the board, and John Summer came in and became president, which was another grandson of the Summers. Very nice fellow. He's the one that owned several bowling alleys around. Now retired, all retired. So then you started out with all this diversifying of locks and spark plugs and toys and collector boxes. How were you able to do that? I mean, you had, it seems to be mind-boggling. Well, it was a big plant, you know. Did you work under the theory of JIT, just-in-time principle? In other words, you got to be right into it, like the Cracker Box toy store, for instance. I don't know how this came about. Who got that idea? See, we had a vice president of plastics division, and we had a vice president of the refrigeration. And refrigeration covered everything like deep freezers and refrigerators and stoves and all that. And the vice president of plastics, that covered a multitude of things. That's where you got into the Cracker Jack stuff and all that stuff. Then you had a vice president of just general hardware, and then vice president of, at that time they called it screw and bolts. How were you able not to keep everything, like in stocking, for instance, the raw material? You always had plenty of it. I think his idea was to, if you get something left over, you kept it up there in the bins. So but there were 50,000 customers now. Well, in the old system, yeah. See, in the old days, you didn't really have a real good automated inventory control. And you just kind of estimated if a customer ordered 50,000 parts, then you made it. But so many of our customers were contracts for the year, like Whirlpool refrigerator. We made all their hinges and all their handles. And that would be for a whole year. And we knew pretty much how many units they were going to make. And then you see, our engineers would meet with their engineers and design new handles and new things for the following year. So that way, when I got time to make that, we knew how many we were projected for making. And our problem there was to make enough each day to keep their assembly lines going. Well, then after a while, that grew to be so big with Whirlpool. And we did a big business with General Electric down in Louisville, Kentucky. We finally had to go down by the airport there. And we rented a big warehouse. We put a man down there. We had a little pickup truck. And then our sales representative operated out of there. And then we stocked about a week's supply of parts for General Electric. And I know many times I would go down there, and trucks were going every day from our warehouse to General Electric. And then we would ship from Rockford down to the warehouse. And I know many a times I would be down there and just checking around, because it was my responsibility for the warehouses. And I'd be standing there, and GE would call up and say, we need 10,000 of these hinges right away. We need them in 20 minutes, or the line is going down. Well now, you have to understand that if the line goes down to General Electric, somebody's going to get fired, because that involves probably 50, 60 people. And those foremen and assistant foremen and set-up men don't ever want that to happen. And I remember, I'll give you an incident. I was down there one day, and in come this call, and the man says, got to have 10,000 of those hinges right away. And the fellow said, we just shipped you eight big cases the day before yesterday. Where are they? We can't find them. Now you understand, General Electric is huge. He says, we can get them quicker by getting another 10,000 from the warehouse. We'll probably find those tomorrow. But we got to have them within 20 minutes. So he takes a case of them, puts them in 10,000, he can get in a big box, put them in the back of the trunk of the car, and we drive up to General Electric. Well now, if I were to go to General Electric, I would have to go into the front door and go to the receptionist and go in the lobby. We don't do that. We go around the back. We stop outside, and I take off my suit coat. He takes off his suit coat. We loosen up our tie, open up our, roll up our sleeve. We're servicemen. And he says, don't tell anybody where you're from now. We're just going to drive in, and we're in to fix something. He says, I'll show you how to get in here without signing a piece of paper. So we go in the back door, go down through the gate, and the guy says, good morning. We say, well, we're going in here. We're only going to park right around. No, you can't. Well, I'm only going to be there 10 minutes. Okay, be out of there in 15 minutes, or we'll pull the car out. You can only stay there 15 minutes. Okay, we're in to fix something. Go in there. We both walk out like we're old-timers, and here we aren't. We go in the back of the trunk, take this out, and we walk in. This fellow knows where to go. Here comes the assistant foreman running, throws his arm around him. He says, Bob, I love you. Boy, you saved the day. He says, in another 10 minutes, this line would be down. You saved 60 workers from being laid off. He says, we know the hinges are here somewhere. They got misplaced. The electric truck left them somewhere else. The place is huge. And I can understand that. You see how the warehouse works? Many a times, that saved the day, see? That wasn't the purpose of it, but that's what the relation is, see? I remember one time I was down there, too, and I said, what in the world are all these boxes for? Well, he said, the quality control man rejected our hinges. And Bob said, there's nothing wrong with them. So I talked to the foreman. He says, take them back to your warehouse and just shift the packages around, put a new label around them, bring them back. And that's what we did, and he went through. Some guy was ornery that day, and for some reason or other, found one hinge that was bad and rejected the whole load. Well, there was nothing wrong with them. So they take it back to the warehouse and flip them around and put a new strap around them, brought them back on the next truck, and then he went through. So for your company now, nowadays when you walk into a store, for instance, or you ask for a part or you want to buy, it's this backorder business. How was the years ago when you were manufacturing things? They call it backorder. Yeah, yeah. Five months. Yeah, yeah. Would you afford to do that? Were you not afraid to lose the customer? Well, there was a lot of standard items in the beginning. You didn't have many specials. Like the basics were wood screws and sheet metal screws, and then you had leg screws. Most of that was in the furniture business. Then when you started to get into the automotive and you get special screws, special heads, special threads, special links, some of them are round and then they're cut flat on the side. Now you say, well, we got to produce 10,000 of these a day. That means we got to ship 10,000 a day. Well then if your machine breaks down, you got to have a few extra. Now sometimes you fall behind. Well then you try to make it up a little bit, you know. You try to compensate. And once in a while, orders come in and they say, well, we got to have delivery in 30 days. And you call them back and say, well, there's no way we can get it for you in 30 days. We don't have any in stock. We got to set up a machine. We're tied up. We can't set the machine up until next week. And sometimes they have to take their business. Well, they can't go anywhere else because nobody's got it. It's a special item. But you try to keep your good customers going. If you know what they're buying and at what pace, you've always got a surplus for them. In some cases, a contract would read, if they canceled out, they'd have to pay you for the surplus. But then as you get into the computers and it got a little more sophisticated, then you run a little tighter ship because then you can cut down the inventory cost. But it was very interesting what you told me about the computers though because there was the big thing. That's another long story by itself. We've got to have that in the service. I've got to think about that a little because that would make a wonderful three-act play. And that's gospel truth. People never realize that I – What year was it that you put an IBM computer in the – Well, I'd have to do a little researching. I think about – Early 50s? Yeah, yeah. Probably 1948, 1949 we started to get in there. We started to survey. Remington had some equipment too. They were coming out with – And Burroughs. And Burroughs, yeah. And IBM. There were three. There were the three. IBM was the big one. IBM was the only one that had the big schools and were more units out than any of the other two. Remington was on a smaller scale. Burroughs went on a smaller scale. And every time we made the analysis in those days, we felt IBM could do more and had more manpower, had more schools. I felt they had better engineers working, that is customer engineers, than the others did. Now, that was just my opinion in that time. And I think it was true because IBM is still going and I think Remington, Rand, and Burroughs, I think both are out of it now. And there was 30 years before Apple too. That's right. And before the fancy typewriters now, you know. We thought that the Electromatic was just something sensational, you know. But – I'm seeing a lot of different things now coming out of, for instance, National Lockers. Mind-boggling to see all those different pieces you have shown me here. And I'm sure a lot of people said over the years, you can't make this thing better and it won't be any better. There is no borderline. There will always be improvement. Things will be better. Well, we had a pretty good size. See, we had a good size engineering department and we had a good size research department. And then in our research department, we had a lab where we tested. For example, you could walk in this great big room. There would be a door going like this all the time, slamming. And all it had was a little bullet catch, a little round thing that was like a ball bearing in the end with a spring in it. And then there was a little catch with indentation and that would go in there. So before they ever put it on the market and then when they put their advertising, they'd say, well, this is good for a million slams. So that's how you tested it? Oh, they all had counters on. Everything we did was tested. Those spark plugs, we had engines upstairs on the sixth floor with exhaust pipes running out the stacks, out the walls. And we'd put those certain amount of plugs in and we'd run them all day and all night in the gasoline engines. Test them. This wizard, the spark plug, was that developed in your plant at National Lock? Yeah. Yeah. We had a national plug and then we got into the wizard. Wizard was a Western auto store at that time. They were exclusive. I can't remember what the other one we made it for. And then we made makeup lamps and oh, they made so many different things. We made Venetian blinds. We came out with the Venetian blinds that had that little steel chain in it. You probably see some around yet. And when we came out with that, my goodness, all the commercial buildings went to it. We had them in the Swedish hospital, in the courthouse, in all the big public buildings because there was never any string or tapes to wear out. At that time, they were all tapes. There was no strings, you know. They had tapes down the side. Well, this one had this little fine chain. And they were out of wood, you know. We made those at the plant there. Oh, we made jelly. And they were developed there, too, then? Oh, sure. You didn't, never had any outside? Oh, we bought a lot of things. A lot of times, people would come in with an idea, and sometimes we would buy it and say, all right, we'll buy the patent for, sometimes we'd buy it for $1,000, you know. Then we'd pick it up and develop it further. A lot of things were done that way. And there was a local people then or other state or how did they? You mean the people that came in with patents? With ideas, with ideas. Oh, you know, National Lock was a big company. It was recognized all over. And when they would look down on Bradstreet, they would see, you know, it tells the value of it. And they would say it's a AAA rating. It discounts all its bills. And people say, boy, this is a place to call. Peddlers, we call them peddlers, salesmen. Whenever they go by and see the clock, oh, man, I got to call it this company because whatever they buy, it's in the thousands. You know, they all like to have that for an account. And then usually we'd get a better discount because like even with gloves, everybody in the plating department, we probably bought thousands of gloves at a time. Well, the other little shop, they probably buy a hundred. Well, we'd get an extra ten or something because it's such a big quantity, see. And I know when the people used to come in with me and deal and I'd say, well, I got to buy a year's supply of invoices. They couldn't get over how many that was, you know. Man, it'd line up a whole wall of boxes of them, you know. They had to be all in sequential numbers. You couldn't just buy enough for a couple of months. You'd have to buy for, we'd decide to buy for a year's purchase and we'd run with that. And the same with checks and vouchers. Everything was big quality, you know. A company that employs 4,600 people at its peak and running all the time at 3,200 to 4,000, that's a lot of people. I think we used to, when we were running furnaces and boilers over there, we were rolling eight carloads of coal a day. Eight carloads. A lot of coal. You had your own plant of everything. Sure. And like for safety, you know, you had a doctor on the premises. Oh, yeah. We had a hospital. Our own hospital. It was like a hospital. It was, yeah. It was a hospital. Sure. Beds. Sure. Had three full-time nurses and a doctor full-time in a little operating room. And we had three individual rooms. They could go lay down and if they got sick, they'd come down and lay down for an hour and then the nurse would check them out and they could go back to work. And we used to do amputating of fingers there, right there. Any minor surgery was all done right in our own hospital. If only if they got the arm crushed, then they would fix it and then take them to the hospital. But so far as if they got the finger, they did amputations there and things like that. Oh, yeah. He had regular surgical and anesthetics and everything. In the 30s, OSHA, was they in the— OSHA? Yeah, OSHA, yeah. Well, that started to create a lot of problems. It was in the 50s, the 60s. Yeah, yeah. And then they got into—oh, it just kept growing. Everything got more complicated after the war. The women started to work, you know, they didn't work, now they were working. Now you had just as many women as you did men. Then it got so that you allowed them to smoke during the day because they'd run off and smoke in the room. So you'd say, well, it's better to sit at your desk and smoke and keep working, you know. So that worked good. And then finally it come to that you had to allow a little coffee break in the morning, you know. And then pretty soon they got that they could work and they could have a baby. And then you'd have to try to take them back if they wanted to come back. Just everything kept getting more complicated. Then OSHA came in. And then you had to have certain restrictions on ladders. One man had to hold a ladder when another man crawled up to screw the light bulb in. And then they came in with equal rights. And then a girl comes in to me and she says, I want to see your whole payroll. And I want that payroll to show me who's a male and who's a female. And then I want you to show me what ethnic groups they are. I'm not interested in the money. Now all I'm interested in is the list of all your people, what sex they are, also if they're black or white. And you had to supply that? Sure. You never got paid for that. You had to give it to them. Well, then what was lucky was I had the payroll at that time on a little computer, a little separate computer, because I knew these things were coming. So I just tell my girl, well, I told this girl, I said, well, you come back next week and I'll have that all for you. I said, tell me how you want it. And she not laid out there. She wanted their name and she wanted to know if they were male or female, what their job title was and were they black or white. Those days you could show that. Now you don't dare show if they're black or white. Now you got to guess. Oh, that's a yes. And then she'd come back and she'd say, well, I don't like what I see. You have no black people in your engineering department. See I would list the engineering department here and there was only two girls and they were clerks and the rest were engineers and that, but they were all white. She can't have that. She says, I want 10% black in there next time I come back. Hey, how are we going to do that? Well, that's your problem, not mine. You know, that, then that started a new can of worms. Oh, geez. So then the production went down of course, because you had to keep your money. It all costs money. And pretty soon instead of having three accountants, you got four accountants. Instead of five cost people, you got six cost people. Then you got analysts. Pretty soon you got people analyzing people. Never had that, see. And I keep sitting there and I'd say, you know, and the guys would come in and I'd say, you know, geez, I wish we could go back to the old strenuous days and run this place like we used to. I said, we'd make so much money, you know, and all it did, the profits kept going down, profits kept going down, down, down. Used to make big profits. All they did is kept going down like this. Never went up. How could they go anywhere without, instead of increasing production, you'd go down. Increase people and jobs and titles. Then pretty soon we hired a guy, you know. I'm getting near retirement of course. They hire a guy and he had been a consultant around there. I always got to work with consultants. They always ended up throwing them to me, see. And they were always good to me because they knew I could make it miserable for them or I could make it enjoyable. And then they finally hired this consultant. I said, what are you going to do now? Well, he says, I'm going to take care of all your training program and I'm going to go out and train all your people. I said, that's fine. What are you going to train them for? I said, I could be very blunt to this guy because I'd worked with him. And he's sitting there and he says, well, he says, first of all, brother, I think we're going to start a little management training program. I said, fine. I said, what are you going to do? Well, he says, we'll take a few people, say about 15. And then he says, we're going to run courses at night and I'm going to make up some books and we're going to teach them all about log company and all that. And I sit here now and my brains are going around. You know, I'm boiling a little bit, see. Of course, what's bad is I haven't gone to college and I don't have that outlook that he does. See, all I see is profit, people and money and products. And I said, that's fine. And fine. And then I said to him, I said, now, Dick, you're all through with the program. You went out here and you took five of our key foremen and you put them in this program. You took a couple of our good accountants. You put them in this program. You took a good sale of women here. And I said, right away, are you aware that the ego of these people went up like that? Yeah, that's what we want. Yeah, I said, now, the first thing is they'll want more money because they think they're more important. Because you picked them out, they think they're great. To me, they don't mean more than the other stuff out there. I said, that guy you picked, he'll never have another job here. What do we want him for? What he's doing now, that's his quality. He's doing a good job. We don't ever want to take him off. We'll never get anybody to do that job like you. I'd rather pay him a little bit more money and keep him on that job. Oh, yeah, but that's not the new attitude. That man should progress in your organization. I can't say what I want to say, but I'd say, no way. When you get a good girl or a good man on a job, keep him there. Everybody can't be president. I said, where are you going to put those 15 people? Now when you take them out to the club and they graduate, you're going to want me to come out there and give a speech. You're going to give them a speech all about the company, how great it is, and that's good. But they're going to go out there and say, boy, now I'm educated. I know more about Lock Company. The next promotion comes along, I bet I get it. We ain't going to consider that. We might have one in there. But we know that already. I said, how do you think I got to this job? I didn't go through any special program with 20 guys and they selected me before they put me in the program. When you're serious, then stick the man in there and build him. Now I said, you got 15 guys all nibbling like fish out there wanting something. Yeah, but you got the wrong attitude for that, they'd say to me. They said, that's the old school. I said, you're not going to change me. Fine, I'll come. Let me know when you graduate and I'll be there. Well then pretty soon they graduated and they started another one. Then they started a program on politics. They're teaching them all about politics. I said, that's all overhead. I said, we never used to teach our employees about politics. That's something you learn on yourself. Why do we have to tell them about our government and about city politics and how the council is run and the mayor and all that, I said. Why should we take company time and teach them that? Yeah, but you're educating them. I said, they get too smart. You're better off sometimes not to have too smart people working on jobs. Stay smart within your job. Who hired this consultant now, the stockholders? Oh no, somebody vice president above me who's general vice president or manager. I said, Dick, I don't regret, I believe in education. But I said, we can't afford to do what you're doing. We're not that kind of a company. We're not a GE. We're not a General Motors. Our profits aren't that big. Oh yeah, but this is going to be your future management. And he and I would just go toe to toe. Well I sat there and pretty soon business got better. What'd they do? They got rid of them. I said, goodbye. No, I said, I was smart enough. I would have got rid of you three years ago. See I said, they wasted three years. Plus you, plus the guys, plus all the equipment and printing and literature and books that you've been giving them. Probably cost us $50,000. And not one of them got any of those jobs. I said, you haven't seen a change in this organization, have you? I said, the guy above me is a relative. Who's going to take his job? I can't even get it. I said, I can't even get a raise that a relative gets a raise. So there was the old nepotism. But I was nice about it. I never fought it because I do believe in education and I could see the times were coming. And that's why I said to my wife, I said, you know honey, I said, boy, this ballgame is changing fast. And I said, right now things are good. And I said, you know, I hold a lot of responsibility. And I said, you know, I said, I think I'm going to tell them that I'm planning on retiring. I'm going to tell the board of directors that I'm planning to leave in about six months. And I said, I want to feel them out. And of course, they didn't want me to retire. And they said, well, why don't you come up with some ideas what we can do if you retire? Can we eliminate your job? Can we put your responsibility on other people and things like that? And I said, yeah, you can do some of that. And they were good to me. I had anything I wanted to. I got a good pension. I had a good profit sharing. They paid me for a long time after I left. They gave me a company car and presented it to me. I mean, they were good. I just couldn't ask for anything better. But those are one in a million, see? You had profit sharing in the management, but how about the workers? No, no profit sharing, yeah. The union? All union, yeah. UAW? Yep. Did they have any representation of local people on the union? Oh, sure, sure, sure. But they also had outsiders giving them clues what to do. Oh, sure, but they had a local man here that lived out at the plant all the time that was working for the union. Could you discuss things with him in the – Oh, our – – in the union personally? No, I never got involved. I wasn't in that end of it all. The industrial engineers got closer and closer to that, and pretty soon they took the whole thing over. They dealt primarily with the union, because that's where most of the grievance were, on productions and parts and the quantity and the prices. And then, of course, when the labor contracts come up to rewrite, all that came in. So eventually they took over the whole situation. They did? The industrial engineers, yeah. Were they confronted with the idea of profit sharing instead of the union and the workers? Would they favor the union instead of profit sharing? Which one is the best way to go, do you think? I don't know. I don't know. Because if it's a loss, they have to bear the loss as far as management. Yeah. So many of them are – I looked into that Scanlon plan. I don't know a lot about it, but like Antwoods have Scanlon plan, and I've heard a lot about that. That's supposed to be pretty good. The only thing I can't understand is how can you go month after month after month and always do things better? There's got to be a few months that you say, hey, we got this thing cut down so fine now, everybody's doing top product. How can we do anything more to make more money? And then if you can't, don't the people get discouraged? That would be my question. How do you continually keep making profit? It's just like I say, you make more and more profits and then what you need is a good depression. Then you start over. So the depression is actually good then to keep people in the – Well, how can you keep going up and up and up and up and up and up? When is it going to stop? Just like now. How long can prices keep going up? Of course, today, it's nothing for a young clerk or a beginner to start out at $25,000. Well, we thought if you made $30,000 in the old days and had a big top job, that was a tops. Like Amarok now, they are not unionized. I don't think so. They have brought national luck, so to speak, back to rock for the game. Well, they bought up a cabinet hardware end on there, yes. And they have saved the old national luck symbols. Well, parts of it, yes. Why has – what has made them so great now and how do they develop? I don't know. That would be a lot of other things I don't want to talk about. Could they learn anything from national luck's mistakes or what happened over the years? Maybe unionism, a role to play there? I would say most of our downfall – well, a lot of downfall was with the compete of Japan, of course, too, in the foreign imports. That hurt us. It's just like the wood screws. We finally had to give up making wood screws. We finally ended up buying them and packaging them. We just had to close the line down. It wasn't profitable to pay union wages and package screws and come out. It used to be more difficult. You couldn't afford it. You were paying too much wages. You were paying the same union wages they were paying in General Motors. You couldn't do that. Goodness sakes, they got eyeglasses and hearing aids and dentures and every little sneeze and cough you had to pay. We had two full-time people just working on insurance claims. When I first started Lock Company, you didn't have no insurance claim. There was no such – you didn't have no insurance. You didn't have no Social Security. You didn't have no taxes. You had nothing. You got $80, you got an $80 check. If you needed – if you got stuck in your driveway, for 50 cents, we'd give you a whole load of washed cinders. So, you see the beginning to the end. The city didn't even take care of our streets out there. And Strank was coming and says, well, now when you get here in the morning, if the streets are icy out there, he says, get a couple of our trucks out there and spread sand for the three blocks around the shop. So I'd get the guy out there in the morning with the truck and we'd spread sand and coat the streets so people wouldn't slip coming to work because the city hadn't got out there yet. We would do all kinds of things like that. We tried to help people, you know. You were mentioning now the – Then the war came. Then we had to have a nursery. So then we had to start up a nursery across the street. We went and bought an old house over there. You mean like a daycare center? Sure. And – You took the babies with you? Well, sure. World War II, my goodness, you couldn't get people to work for you. It was so short. And then they'd bring them and then they'd leave the kid across the street and go to work. We had a daycare center back in 40. And then we had a girl with a white uniform there and she'd give them a soda cracker and a graham cracker and a glass of milk and –