 Shall I just read that? At age seven, Otto Carl Johnson, with his parents, came to the United States where they lived on the Hudson River at Tompkins Grove, New York, near Stony Point. Stony Point is what I have always heard. He was the youngest of four boys and a girl who grew up to adulthood. Two younger brothers died of diphtheria at Tompkins Grove. While a boy in school, he was called Charles. In his Bible, dated 1875, Tompkins Grove, New York, his name was signed Charles Otto Johnson. As he was then thirteen years old, it was likely a gift from his church for confirmation. Until, let's see, when he was sixteen years of age at Tompkins Grove, being a good swimmer enabled him to save a boy of his age from drowning. He moved with his parents to Moline in the late autumn of 1880, when he was eighteen years old. Then it just tells about how tall he was and everything. And it tells about he belonged to the Swedish Independent Order of Oddfellows, you want that information? Of Moline, and the Modern Woodmen of America. And he was in the private company of Company Number Three and the Sixth Regiment of Infantry of the Illinois National Guards of Moline from June 8, 1882 to August of 1887. And the captain rated his characters very good. And then it tells what he did. Do you want that information? When he was twenty years, he became a molder, and he worked in various local foundries, and at the time of his death in 1980 was an expert on special assignment of molding, where no regular equipment had yet been available. This was at John Deere Union Malibu Ironworks in East Moline, where he had been employed for many years. He was sometimes the person his molder peers requested to talk to the shop management about their problems. He was a constant reader on any subject and read many books a week, generally while lying in bed. And he often read all night, so he only had two or three hours of sleep. On March 3, 1887, at age twenty-four, he received his citizenship papers. He became a member of the Third District Volunteer Hose Company of the Moline Fire Department, perhaps at age twenty-one, and served until April 30, 1887. He represented the Odd Fellows at the Springfield Annual Meetings in November 85, 86, 87, and 98, and he was elected again in 99, but refused the election. He had allowed himself to be nominated merely to prove he could win, as someone had threatened to defeat him. In April 29, 97, the Odd Fellows held a surprise party for Otto and Jenny, his wife, at the hall, and there were refreshments, and they gave him a fine mahogany bookcase and writing desk in appreciation of all his work. I don't know if you want this or not. He voted as a socialist, was against temperance as a law, and he was strong physically, and he wanted his sons to be strong, too, so he tried to teach them that. My father and mother moved to their new bungalow at 1030 18th Avenue Moline on October 6, 1897. At that time, it was a thinly populated neighborhood. All of their seven children, except the first, were born there. Both my father and mother died there. It was April 1, 1903, that my father contracted malaria and typhoid fever and was in the hospital from April 6 until June 3. He then went to his brother's farm in McGregor, Iowa, to recuperate. That was the only illness that we recalled him having until his death. And at that time, he had a foot injury, which occurred at work, and he laid off and became very ill. And it worsened daily, and he died early on Monday. A week later, Dr. Seitz termed it pleurisy, but it was just at the beginning of 1980, influenza epidemic was spread through the country and caused thousands of people to lose their lives. It was likely that that was what happened. Yes, I'm sitting together with Bernice Wilson, Moline, Illinois. She was born 1909, 7th of February in Moline. Today? Today, 16th of April, 1986. So you have gathered some material about your father. So let me start off from the beginning. Did he tell you anything about his years? He was seven when he came in 1869 to the United States with his parents. Have they been farmers in Sweden? Yeah, I got this information, if you want that, too. This is my great-grandfather and great-grandmother, and this is their name. Johannes Anderson. Last name not certain, I guess. Born 1798. That was Sweden. On his farm, and his readers here. So they were... No, you read that. That's interesting. It is? Okay. It says, he was called, and you, whatever it was. This meant that he was a tailor who followed the trade besides farming. He taught two sons and a daughter the tailored trade. He was born on a torp, a rented government property, then called Sockerbo. Is that what it is? Sockerbo. Sockerbo. Sockerbo, yeah. And the name meant sugar lump, it says. But when we visited there in 1950, not me but my brother, the name of the torp had been changed to Christianberg. When his father died, Johannes took over farming on the torp. He was a man with a great character. He was remarkable in this, that by self-study, for there were no schools available at his time, he had made himself really educated and people came to him for help in many connections, such as inventories, auctions, legal questions, and so forth. He was a local wise man. Confidence in him was general. In disposition, he was likable and people naturally turned to him in difficulties. He bought himself a good-sized farm named, whatever that is. Amphisried. It's probably spelled wrong, though, but it's Amphisried. But the land was bouldery and timber covered and therefore not valuable. On this farm, he placed a house obtained elsewhere, which was still standing in 1950 when we were there, but it was then used as a shed. We were told it was then 200 years old. He died in 1857 of dysentery, which then swept away thousands. Anna, his wife, was born on January 1, 1799. She was a short, stout woman and quarrelsome. She died of dropsy in March 14, 1861 on the farm. So did he also continue to be a tailor in this country when he came, Grandfather, you think? Because they were with your father when he came then. This was a great-grandfather. He didn't come over here. He stayed in Sweden? Yes. Yes. That was the old, that was his grandfather then, and your great-greatfather. My great. And how about the father now? What was he doing? Was he a farmer? Who? Your grandfather. Your father's father. No, he came over here and he wasn't a farmer. And I had another article about him, but I don't know just where it's at. But anyhow, he just worked here. And I don't know if he worked for John Deere or what. You don't know what he was working out in New York, though? No. No. I don't know what he did there because, you know, they all come over here as unable to speak, you know. But they stayed there a few years, though. Yes. And they stayed there and apparently his father had a job there to support the family. What was the reason they came to Moline, you think? Any vacation, friends? Probably, you know, because of hearing about John Deere and having friends here that they moved here. So they came directly then from New York to Moline? Mm-hmm. And then he met your mother here in Moline? Mm-hmm. And she was born here. So on your mother's side now, her parents came from Sweden. And they came here– How early? Well I have that information here, too. They must be very early because she was born 1872. So they must have come in late 60s. Let's see. Now this is about Frank W. Bingson. That's on your mother's side. On my mother's side. And this is– his name at that time was spelled B-E-N-G-T-S-O-N. But when he came here he spelled it Benson. And he was born in June 21, 1845 in Varmland, Sweden. And he married in either 1870 or 1871 in Moline, it says. So they weren't married until he got here. He was a– or he modified it to Benson after his arrival in the United States. He had two brothers and a sister. He arrived in U.S. in 1869, locating in Moline, Illinois, and married Grandma in 71. Like most of the Swedes who were migrating at that time, he found work at Deere and Company. He continued there as a grinder and polisher of plows for 26 years. Then he became sick with what was then called grinder's consumption, as factories then had no safety facilities such as suction systems as are now required. He was sick for over three years and in bed for about ten months. Aged 56 years, four and a half months, he died November 6, 1901 in Moline. The only picture we saw of him was a group picture of the shop department workmen. He was a strong-looking, medium-sized man. He was a member of the Swedish Lutheran Church of Moline. It's the first Lutheran– In Moline, yeah. In Moline. And this is on my mother's side. My grandparents belonged to the Swedish Methodist Church. Your grandparents on your father's side, you mean? Yes. They belonged to the Swedish Methodist Church, which was then changed to the Bethel Methodist Church, where we belonged. I see. So he died very young then, your– 56 years old. 56. And– Did they say if he got some compensation from there for this– No, they didn't say. –not a disease, but I mean, sickness? I don't think so. I never heard that he did. No insurance? No. My grandmother had that. My grandmother then took in boarders to support her family. She had– I got that information too. She had four– no, five girls, I think it was. Five girls outside your mother, or with your mother? With my mother. I read this about the– about the torp and about him. Yeah. Oh, that's– this is– the– I read that. Oh, this is about my mother, and then it says how her name was written like that in the Bible. You got that? Yeah. And then it was Jenny Sarah Benson. Yeah. And you got this information when she was born? Yeah, yes. 1872, December 12th. Yeah. And they were married the 13th– December 13th, and– when she died, you got that. And then she was a member of the Swedish Lutheran Church, and she belonged to the Bell-Cant Royal Neighbors Association. She completed a training course and followed dressmaking until married. That art was useful and necessary for any sewing that the family required, because you didn't go and buy dresses at a store then. Occasionally, she also did a bit of sewing for outside of the family needs after she was married. She did that all the time before. She was slender and always dressed nicely, especially while young. She had four sons and three daughters. The first, Howard, born in a rented house. The rest of the children were all born in a newly built home, which there was then at the edge of town where Howard lives today, my brother. The new house was built next door to Otto's brother, Nicholas, my father's brother. They faced each other, and the water pump was a mutual utility between the houses. The Nicholas Johnson family were older, about twelve years, and there were several children there. They attended the Swedish Methodist Church downtown, so it was obvious that our family's children, as soon as they become old enough for Sunday school, would join them with their guidance walk, the two miles down and two miles back from the Methodist Church. In spite of a large family, my mother was a hard worker, a good cook, and kept a clean house. My mother was a fine mother and knew what principles were right, laid them clearly to us and brought us up that way. She however still claimed the Lutheran Church as her church and sometimes attended there. She also had contact with the Methodist Church and with a new structure that was built on the bluff, and the children were attending Sunday school there. And she died of cancer of the stomach when a bit over forty-nine years of age. And what year was it now she died? On April 15th, 1922. 1922, yeah. And she had eight children then? She had seven children. Seven children. Yeah. And how many boys? Four boys and three girls. And you are one of them? And I'm the last one. Last one, I see. So they married in the first Lutheran and then transferred over to the Methodist? Yeah. Actually my father was from the Methodist Church and then the people next door were from the Methodist and so then they would be next door and then they started going down there. But in 1910 this new church was built up on the hill which was near. 12th and 13th. Yeah. And that's where we all went and were confirmed from there. It was closer than to? Yes, because before it was way downtown and the Lutheran Church was way downtown. So you never attended a Lutheran Church? Never, no. No, I was confirmed. Because you were already up here. Yeah. And I didn't, my mother as she got older didn't attend the Lutheran Church that I remember. Whenever she went, she went with us to the Methodist Church. But as far as I know, she didn't transfer her membership to the Methodist Church. She was a member of the? I don't know if they keep members like that or not. I mean, I'm not sure that they would. So they married and what was she working with before she married your mother? She was a seamstress. Seamstress. Yeah. That was her job then too. And then you said that your father? He was a moulder. A moulder, yeah. She took in borders after that? My grandmother did. That was your grandmother that did that? My grandfather died, I think it said at 56. And then she took in borders and then, you know, they all came there to eat for breakfast and she'd fix their lunch if they didn't live near enough to walk there. And then she would, they'd come back for supper. Get about 25 cents for dinner, you know. That was a lot of work. Yes. A lot of work. I remember when she still had borders and I was just a little girl because we'd walk down there and see her on Sunday. I always went and visited her and they had an old fashioned, or you know, just a heat stove and in the summer to can everything for all those, you know, she'd serve about 16 people. 16 people? Yeah. At the time? A lot of times. And they slept somewhere in there too? No, not at her place. They ate there. They ate there, but not, but everybody that come from Sweden stayed with my grandmother. You know, all the family that come over here after, she had so many people stay with her until they got jobs and then they, place to live. Yeah, everybody would stay with my grandmother. So you heard a lot of Swedish spoken then? Yeah, but I never learned it. My mother spoke Swedish of course, and my grandmother lived with my mother's youngest sister. When my mother's youngest sister, Delia Olson, got married, well it was Benson, then she married Isadora Olson, then my, they, because this, her, my mother's sister helped my grandmother. As she got older, she helped run the boarding house. And then when Delia got married to this guy that used to board with them, but then he went into the service in 1917, you know, he went in the service. And after the war, then when he come home, they got married. And then my grandmother moved with them up into a government house on 27th Street. So she must have a big house on there to accommodate so many. She did, yeah. But not when, as I remember, that was when I was younger and I don't remember this bigger house, but I had been pointed out. One house they lived in was right downtown where it's a great big furniture store now. And they lived there at one time on Fifth Avenue. And then another time they lived on Seventh Street and Fifth Avenue, between Fifth and Sixth. And they were going up the hill there. But then they were bigger houses. But when I remember her, she lived in a small house, but the whole table was in the living room, you know, because she served boarders there. So they came there for breakfast early in the morning. And then she probably had to pack lunches. Yeah, and then take lunches with them. And then they'd come back at night. So there was a never-ending stream of people coming in eating. Always, yeah. And she was a good cook. And everybody stuck there, I guess. They didn't go. They knew when they had it good. So she was able then to break even and also make a few cents on it. Well, they were always poor. But you know, that's all. They just made ends meet by working like dogs. And she also wove beautiful rugs in her spare time if she had any. And she ragged rugs. And she'd do that. And I just regret that I didn't keep one of them without using them, you know. So I still had one that was pretty and nice. But I didn't. I used the rugs that I had that I got from my aunt. And I regret it because she had her weaving loom in the basement. And she'd go down there and they'd can bushels and bushels of peaches and pears and tomatoes and everything to feed all these people. She didn't have any garden down there, though? No. There was no facility? Not that. In my time, she never had a garden because it was a small place that she lived. It's still there. So your mother, she had a big family all alone, so she couldn't have very much either, I suppose. No, no. And then my another aunt, my mother's sister, her husband, I don't know, he got sick and he lost his mind and she had to support them. They come to live with her. So until he died. And then they had a daughter that lived there, too. So it was really rough. She had everything on horse ships. But she never complained, ever. She was real easy going and never complained. And she, her, oh, I've got a lot of other information. She's had all these daughters. And my mother lived until she was forty-nine. And my mother's younger sister that married and my grandmother lived with, lived to be, oh, I don't know, about eighty-six or seven. But the others died real young. Her one sister got married and when they were in their twenties, she died, her husband died, and their little girl died. And in the write-ups in this crazy book, or, you know, they had a lot of, my aunt kept all clippings from the newspaper, and most of them said they died from consumption. Most all of them said they died from consumption. What was the cause, you think? I don't know. I don't know. But why, and then the other two daughters died in their twenties, too. I just, uh. These are your aunts, now then? Mm-hmm. And how many were they? Well, she had five, let's see, was it five daughters? I got that information on here. I got, um. Esther and Adelia and Hilma. Let's see. Well, it was, um, Adelia was the youngest, and I think, my mother might have been the oldest, I'm not sure. And it was Hilma and Hulda, and Esther and Adelia. And they all stayed here in Moline? Mm-hmm. And married here also? Mm-hmm. And the one daughter that died never got married, but the one that did die, and I don't know which one it was that, let's see, in here. I guess I haven't copied all of my, this is just about relatives to my grandmother and her sister, and I don't think they, well, evidently they came over here too because they had children. Here it says, yeah, that just says it. Yeah, and see, I quit copying then because, you know, I was really, really young, and I didn't want anybody to look at it, but this is the first part of all the relatives that were on my mother's side. So, Consumption was one of the causes, they said in the paper, though? All the write-ups, I read so many of them. I don't have that book now. Another, someone in my family got it when my aunt died, but almost the majority of them said they died of consumption, they died of consumption. And I don't know if that's true. You know, they wouldn't have any autopsies or anything, so that's all you had to go with. Although my mother died from cancer, but she was, you know, in a different age than those others that died when they were so young. Like your grandfather, when he died, did he say then that it was the grinder's, what do you call it? Grinders, yeah, I think that it said that. Yeah. But it actually said that in the news clipping, then. Oh, I don't know. Like I say, I don't have that news clipping. This is, and this was my, Carl Petter Johansen, it was called when he was over there. This is my maternal grandfather and grandmother. That was the one that died, the one from John Deere. No, this is the one that was born in Sweden, that lived there. And he was a tailor, but he never came over here. That's the one that I, yeah. This is, oh, this is about my grandmother, too. I don't know if I read this to you. In Augusta Freeman, Anders Bakker, Benson. Did I tell you that? No, who is that? Now, this is my grandmother. This is my grandmother, on my mother's side. On your mother's side. Yeah. She was born in 49 in Svaland, Sweden, and she married then. My mother's, her mother's name was Anna Stina Gustafson. What's that? Frustensdotter. Father's name was Gustafson. That was the one that had borders. Yes. She had two sisters and a brother, let's see, and she was a member of Sweden. Here it says, as her and her grandpas' relatives, mostly males, would emigrate from Sweden to come to settle in Moline, they all stayed at their house. This was for room and board until they got married and moved on. When Grandpa got ill so he could no longer work, it was logical that Grandma took in boarders and some roomers. This was for the local workmen. When Delia, her youngest, was thirteen years old, her sister Esther helped Grandma at that task for many years until they were married. Side two, continuation with Bernice Wilson, Moline, Illinois. Side two. So your other grandpa here now, Carl Peter Johansen, and Johnson, he was also a street commissioner under Mayor Svensson. So he's responsible for the streets now in Moline? Way back when he was in Moline, they didn't have First Street and Second Street, they were all names. Do you remember that time? No, no. It was long after you remember the street signs then. Yeah. Long before, I mean. Before, but there was all just Swedish names to the streets and that then. And I did have a map that told all of that. Were there any Swedish names on those streets, do you remember? I can't remember that there was. But you never saw any? I never, they didn't have those names when they all started First Street, Second Street, First Avenue, Second Avenue, you know, since I was born. So your grandpa now, Charles Peter Johansen, he was for Mayor Svensson, that was before 1900 and sometime in the 1890s perhaps? Yeah, because I think it says there probably that he died. My grandfather died I think just about the time I was born, on my father's side. 1909. Yeah, yeah. And I think he died 1910. No, he died 1911. 1911, see. So I was only a baby. You don't remember him? No. But it says that Grandma Johansen was just over four, five feet tall and a rather severe person. That's what I understand. I don't remember her. You don't remember her? No. She was never a lucky child. Well, she probably had a hard work day, so it was hard to... Right, right. Work, work, work. I remember where they lived, but that house has been torn down where they lived. The house they owned was torn down. But... Your father, he was a socialist. He voted for the socialist at that time. I don't remember anything. He wasn't... And since I was born, he didn't have... I never knew that he had any... Was he a Democrat later on or... I have no idea because I don't know what his interest was because I was only about nine But it seems he had very strong convictions of whatever he was doing, running for office without fellows and... Yeah. And I know he was about 10 years older than my mother. And he was 32 when they got married and she was 22, so... He was active after they were married, too, that he went. I mean, in this organization, because it was after they were married, he went to all these meetings, wherever they were held. I don't know if it was in Chicago or wherever. Springfield, I think it was mentioned. So he was not active in the local politics in Moline? No, never that I know of, never. He was never running for alderman? No. City council? No. And that was the only organization he belonged to, the Outfellows, the Swedish? The Swedish, all of them in... How about Viking? Moose. Oh, Moose. Yeah, I think the Moose, too, because we always used to go to those Christmas parties when we were little kids. They always had Christmas parties where they gave out oranges and candy and that. I remember that. But he, you know, he worked many, many hours, you know, naturally, no cars or anything. And he'd take a streetcar. The place he worked is out in East Moline, which was a long way. And he used to leave about six o'clock in the morning and not be home till at least six o'clock or later at night, because he worked ten hours, worked on Saturday. You know, just Sunday was the only day he had off. So there wasn't much spare time, too. But he read. My sister used to pick up books for him, and he'd read. And we didn't have electric lights until I, a year before he died. And he used to read at least three books a week by lamplight. From the library? Yeah. What kind of books was he reading? I don't know what kind. She got all kinds of books. Every week she'd have to go and get at least three or more books. And he'd lay and read those books at night by lamplight. Now, I can't see how he could read now when I think back by just having a lamp and reading like that. I don't know. And then to get up so early in the morning and go to work and take the streetcar, because you know, it'd take a long time to get there and a long time to get back home again. So he's gone about twelve hours a day. So I didn't see that much of him. He took the streetcar, though, because it was too far to... Well, that was the only transportation. And at that time they didn't have buses, they had streetcars here. And the streetcar was right about a block from our house. And this man, his brother that lived next door, and then next door to us was a Carlson family that bought in this street. And they had two brothers and an uncle that lived in three houses next door to us. And then across the street there was a Berggren family, Swedish family, who lived, the two brothers bought next door. So it was always, well, like friends and family. We always... You were tied together then? Yes, yes, because of that. So you visited each other's house? Yes, yeah. Because, you know, all being with the three families there. But they talked a lot of Swedish, though. How could you avoid not picking up what they were saying? I don't know. So your parents, now, did they talk... They talked English together. All the time? Yeah. But my grandmother that lived with my aunt, my mother's youngest sister, she talked English too, of course, but everyone should, well, she'd start talking Swedish and I'd just look at her and, I can't understand you, and then she'd talk English. But I don't know, and my mother'd see these old Swedish friends and she'd talk Swedish. I regret it that I didn't learn to. So your parents, they, your mother was born here and your father was only seven when he came. Yeah. So they had no trouble with English then whatsoever? No. They didn't speak broken or anything, you know, they just... They were born into it. Yeah. I mean, so young, especially your father. But now, could they converse in Swedish then with Swedish people? Oh, yes. They could? My mother, oh, yes. Yeah. She, I remember being a little girl walking with her and, because I was only 13 when she died and my father, I was only nine. But when she'd meet these Swedish friends, I remember she'd just, they'd jabber in Swedish. Were they over for coffee? Yes. In the daytime or, they took time off then? She had some friends, we called them Sweet Mary, and that was one group that they would have coffee class, but they'd have a dinner. They didn't just come for coffee. They would have a dinner and each one of them would serve about once a year, you know. And that was just for ladies then? Yes, yes. Lady friends. Mm-hmm. They never went together to stitch and saw things at home? To sew? Yeah, to sew. No. They was always down at church. Oh, these coffee classes they'd have at home. Yeah. Yeah. Did they saw anything? I don't remember that they ever did. No? But I know as I got a little bit, I was just a real tiny kid then, and as I got a little older then they didn't have that, you know, get together so much. Maybe they didn't have time to. Right. Mm-hmm. How was the schedule in your home with your mother? She had the washing on Monday and ironing on Tuesday. Right, right. It was a schedule? Yes. It was followed every day? Yes. And she sewed, like I say, for our family. She'd make their clothes, all of them, and even the underwear and everything like that. She always made everything. Everything was produced at home? Yeah. And then my brother, my brothers all worked down at John Deere, and they even walked home at noon and she'd get their dinner for them at noon. They didn't take lunches. They would come home and eat at noon. They worked in Molina? Mm-hmm. My brother, oldest brother, worked there 50 years before he retired, because he started when he was real young, 15 I guess. And then my sister worked at John Deere, and my, another brother worked at John Deere Harvester. That was in East Moline, where my father worked was part of, called Union Malibu, but that was at John Deere, under John Deere too. And I worked at John Deere. And then during the Depression, my one brother was laid off, and then he got into International Harvester, and he worked for them in Moline until, oh, he worked quite a few years. And then he was transferred to Chicago at the Maine office. And my one brother, my second oldest brother, had a real good job with International Harvester. In fact, he was a superintendent of several companies, and then they sent him to England, and he was there and set up a company there. And I was there for six years. That's when he went to Sweden, where my father was born and then the International Harvester sent him to Australia, and he set up a company there and was there about six years. And he's the only one that's still living, and he has Alzheimer's now and doesn't remember things. So he traveled extensively all over the world then too? Then when he was there, yes, they went all over, every vacation he would go through Europe and Sweden. Then their children at that time were just through with college, but the company would furnish them to visit their family. So then in the summer when he took his vacation, the kids would go with him to Sweden they went one time, and to Europe another time when they went to visit him. So they saw a lot of Europe too. I don't think they ever went to Australia. My aunt, my mother's youngest sister, they were lonesome when they were in Australia, and they invited her to come because her husband had just died, and she went over to visit him for three months in Australia. But I didn't visit them. My daughter now lives in Germany, and I've been over to visit her. We have a couple of times. So of you seven children now, four boys and three girls, you all went through high school? No, no, no, no. I did. My youngest brother and this Cal that was the superintendent is the only ones that went through high school. The rest of them just went through eighth grade. And direct to work then? Yes. And my brother Ellsworth, that he went, when he graduated from eighth grade, my father said he had to go on to high school or get a job, and he went out and got a job that day because he didn't want to go to school. And he got a job as a pattern maker, apprentice, and he went through all of that and did wonderful and learned it after a few years. And when he finished learning that apprenticeship, he decided that that wasn't going to get him far enough in life, so he started another apprenticeship and went through, so he'd become an engineer. But he went through and learned all that at work, you know. And then he was on the John Deere Harvester, the Harvester, and he was one of the, in the engineering department at Harvester, and he often went where they had problems with the machines, you know. He went to Texas and Kansas and different places. Trouble shooters. Yes. So he was still trained then by the company? Yes, completely. And your other brother now working for the International, they also trained the— They did, and he took—my brother that went so far and got to be superintendent of Harvester and different—oh, he was superintendent at Chicago. No, I think he was assistant superintendent at East Moline, and then he went up Chicago and was superintendent, and then they sent him to Rock Falls. He was superintendent there, and then they sent him to Richmond, Indiana, and from there they asked him to go to England, and that's where he was for six years. So he had a real good job there. So you went through high school? Yes, and my youngest brother did, and then Miss Cal did, but he also took many engineering courses, what do they call when they send it, you know, through the mail. Oh, correspondence. Correspondence. And he took many courses like that, because he was real smart and he just kept on. But he didn't go to college. So did you went into a secretarial school afterwards, a business college? Me? Yes. No, I just got into Deere and Company when I graduated. I was in the cost department. I see. In the credit department, I should say. Credit. So there was like, there was office? Yeah. Office for typing and book work in that department. And you stayed on there then? Until I got married, and then when I got married, at that time it was during the Depression, and they wouldn't let anybody work when you were married. Everybody as soon as they got married was out. So I... And there was a rule? Rule. Nobody... Only at John Deere, you think, or other companies who were the same? I think they were the same around here. But at John Deere, there were two ladies there who were married, and they let them stay during the Depression because they were already there. But anybody that got married had to leave, and I got married in 34, and I had to leave then. So there was a difference of the day. Yeah. Yeah. They even stay working now when they have babies there. They don't... Now the situation reversed. Right, right. So the unions, like your father now, was he for the unions or against them? I don't know if they even had a union then. Did they have any... He retired probably before. Oh, he didn't ever retire. My father... He died... Oh, yes. While he was working. He was a moulder, and how they could stand the heat, you know, being a moulder in 100-degree weather around here, and then being with that and working as a moulder. He did make a real cute little doll bed that he designed it and made it. He molded it for my sister, and her sister... or I mean her daughter has a bed now, and it was a little angel on top of it and everything, but he did that. But how they worked when it was so hot in that molding department, I don't know. Did he complain at any time about the heat down there? No, they just... They had to accept it, I guess, and they just... I can't see how he could stand it in this hot... when it was that, and then having all those hot furnaces going for molding, you know, just blaring all those furnaces, and then to have it so hot. I don't know how he could stand it, but never... I never heard him complain, but then I was just a little kid, so I can't remember if he did or not. How did he contract this malaria? Was that the... It was... I don't know, because they never said if he had pneumonia or if he had that pleurisy or if the doctors... or if he died of influenza. It never even said on his death certificate that he... It didn't say a thing? Well, I mean, it didn't say what he died from, I guess, because we never knew. But they never had an autopsy or anything, and he was only sick a couple weeks or so at the most, maybe not even that long. But he had the... got hit by malaria, though, wasn't it, in 19... Well, that's... That was earlier, 1903. Yes, yeah. That was before Europe. Yes, yeah. So, and typhoid fever. So, he had a brother in McGregor, Iowa, up the river. Did he continue the farm there, or... No, that's the reason all of them left over there, because, you know, they owned this farm, the father, and then divided it up, and it was... would get so small that they weren't able to make a living on it. That's what my brother said, that they just... But one of the brothers became a farmer up in McGregor. Yes. Did he continue it there all his life? As far as I know, mm-hmm. But it was, I think, a very funny thing, my brother... my father had... there were four in the family, all Johnsons, and now I don't think there's any left to carry on the Johnson name. No? Because they had girls, and the girls remarried, and everyone that had boys, something happened. Now, this Nicholas that lived next door, his son had a son, and he was killed in an auto... or in an airplane accident when I was just... or, you know, when they first come out with airplanes, he was killed in that. And another brother's... was this brother's grandson, I guess, and he died from infantile paralysis, I believe it was. And then my brother Howard's son had a son, but they've never had any children. So as far as I know, he's about 40... 39 now, and I just doubt if they'll have any children, and that will be... The end of the line. The end of the Johnson line, which is surprising when there were so many brothers. How did they marry now, the boys? Did they... Who? The Johnson... They married Swedish girls, or...? Yes. And yeah, I think they were all Swedish. The three that lived in Moline, or... was my father and the other two lived in Moline, and they were... they stayed in Moline. It was the only other one in McGregor. Of course, I never knew him. I mean... You never went up there or...? No, no. Saw the farm at any time? No. People didn't travel like that. They didn't have cars and they didn't travel. So your father, now, did he buy a car? No. We didn't have a car until after my father died and... after my mother died, we didn't have a car. 1922? And it was around 1925, probably, that my brother... See, after my mother and father died, my oldest brother Howard, who was 14 years older than me, bought their home, and he lived in their family home then from the time he was born until he died in that home. And so when my parents were both dead, then my brothers kept me until I was married, and then they settled the estate after I was of age. So the estate wasn't settled until I was of age. And then you moved out, then? Well, I stayed there, even though I was 18, I stayed with my brother until I was married. But the estate was settled so he could buy the house when I was 18. How did you meet your husband? Oh, through school and basketball games and through friends. Is he all Swedish back now? His mother was Swedish. And his grandfather was born in Sweden, but not his mother. She was... Swanson, her name was. And his other side then, are they English or...? They were, yeah, a lot English and whatever. His dad called himself a Yankee, because he had a little bit of everything, I guess, in him. If you go back now to your early years, Christmas, you had a regular Christmas tree at home? With candles on it. With candles? And I can't see how they ever had nerve enough to light it, but they did. So you had a big spruce or a fir tree, do you remember what kind of tree? No, I don't remember what kind of tree, but it was a short, not these long... Short needles. Short needles. It was decorated with more than lights? It had decorations on it, yeah, but the candles were in clips that they clipped onto it, and I don't know how they ever had nerve enough to light them, but they'd only light them on occasion, you know. It wouldn't be very often they'd light them. And Christmas Eve, do you receive the Christmas gifts then on Christmas Eve? Yes, and we still, in our family, we kept on having stockfish and rice pudding and brown beans and all of that. So you were able to prepare those foods? And veals and that, and I still make jelly pig's feet. So your mother taught you to do that? My mother didn't so much, my brother who bought the house, and I lived with my brother and his wife, when my mother died, they got married. My mother was operated on in August, and they said she had cancer and that she would just live until how they fixed it would deteriorate, you know, because they didn't have bypass or anything that they can do now to have the colostomies and everything. So then, that was August, so then my brother and his wife, or his girlfriend, got married in November, and they kept my mother, or you know, my mother and all of us lived there. And what did you ask me I was going to tell you? And then this girl, he married, her mother was Swedish and dad, they were born in Sweden, and she never did learn to talk English even. Her dad did because he had to work, but she never did, so she carried on this Swedish, and then she'd always make these Swedish things, so that's how I... You got another tail end there. And always it used to be, I'd have my brother and his wife until he got too sick, this one that's still living, they lived down here in a beautiful home in Greenacres, and then I'd always have them here on Christmas Eve with my children, my daughter, my one daughter lives in Germany now. So how many children do you have? I just have two girls, and one lives here and I have two grandchildren, and the other one has been teaching on American base in Bad Kroschnach in Germany for about 12 years. And we plan to go over and see her this summer, I don't know how good traveling's going to be, but we're hoping to go over and see her. Have to hope for the best. Yeah. So your husband's name is? Oscar. Oscar Wilson. Nye Wilson, N-E-Y. He was named after his two grandfathers. When you married your husband, you rented a house then first, or you bought the house? No, this aunt of mine, my mother's youngest sister, we were real close to them, and they were going to go on a trip around the United States, was when the little trailers first come out, or mobile homes, well they pulled it with their car, but it was so they could sleep in it and cook and everything. Well they came out in 1930s. Huh? 1934. 1934. And they had this mobile home or whatever you called it then, and they were going to go on a trip, so we couldn't afford to get married because my husband was only making eighteen dollars a week. And so anyhow, they said that if we wanted to get married, we could live in their house. So we got married and lived in their house for thirteen months when they traveled all around the United States in this trailer of theirs. I see. And so then we, after that we lived in an apartment, which another Swedish, it was down Rock Island on 44th Street, and a girl that, a woman that used to, a girl that lived next door to us and her mother, she and her mother lived upstairs of my aunt and uncle's place there. And anyhow, she got me, it was hard to get apartments then because it was during the Depression, and she found out that these people moved out upstairs and she got me this place, and it was a real nice brick house and it was a real nice apartment. And we moved in there then, and after we were married in May, and we moved in there in about June, I think it was of the next year, and bought furniture that we have now, and then we lived there for four years and then we built this house. So you never went back to work then after you married? My husband was a jeweler and he had a shop over in Davenport, and when the person that he was in business with, they were partners, when they, when he died, I used to go over and help him. I see. But I never, it wasn't working for a salary or anything, I worked part time over there until he retired actually. You belong now to the Vättern, do you belong to any other organizations of Swedish? No. No? He was in, this girl that got us that apartment down there, her husband was selling insurance for the Svidsfot club, and we did get some insurance through that, we still have, but I think it's only a thousand, I don't know, five hundred or a thousand or something. But anyhow, they changed a few years ago to bankers.