 What about your parents, Hans? Were they born in the same place as you? My mother, yes. But my father was... I don't even remember him. He died when I was just a baby. I think that he had a store, some kind of... I think possibly a grocery store, something like that. How many women is your family? How many sisters and brothers? I only got... I'm the only one. You're the only one? Yeah. Uh-huh. So when he died, then your mother had to try to make... Yeah, oh yeah, yeah. I grew up with my mother and my... well, my granddad and... part of the time and... So you went to school there and... In Danes, yeah. So, confirmed for the pastor. Oh yeah. So, and then you had to go into the military service. No. I came here before I had to go see. So you were more or less drafted then, but then you had to... Yeah, I had to get permission from the king. And it was granted. Oh yeah. No trouble. No. What kind of work were you doing when you... I was out of mechanic and machine shop in Sweden. That's where I worked there for four years before I left. Oh, I see. So you had some... Apprenticeship, oh yeah. So you were more or less like a machinist or tomb maker or... Well, mostly automotive was my... I mean, but we also had a machine shop, so we was doing a little of everything there. Made the parts if we had to. What was the reason why you left? Oh, I don't know. I used to get out and go someplace. My granddad lived here in town at one time. My uncle and another uncle and my aunt had three children all three of them born in this country and went back to Sweden. So you had a lot of connection with United States and in other words... Yeah. And there was a family from here that was home two or three years before. My uncle was home in 1923, I think. I see. So, in fact, when I came here, my mother had about eight cousins right here in town. In St. Petersburg? Mm-hmm. But now there, I don't think there's anyone alive anymore. But you went alone, though? You didn't take your mother with you? No, no. I was alone. So who helped you with the ticket? Did you write to anybody over here to get information? The only ones that signed some of the papers, some paper was by George Nilsen that was at the bank downtown here. He signed it. And I came to a family here by the name of Hallberg, which they both passed away by now. So, I mean, I came there first. So you bought your own ticket to Sweden? Yeah. You and Chippy? No, at Youngby. See, I was working in Youngby when I got a little older. I went to Youngby and I worked there. So you came alone, though? There was no company with you? Not more than the ones that we met on the... On the boat? On the boat and on the train, and there was several, see, which at that time was quite a few. How about the pastor now when you took off the Utrecht Nysbytiget? Did he say anything to you that you... No, no....took a bold step over? No. No? There was no assistance from anybody? No, no. Which I probably didn't intend to stay that long. What kind of intentions did you have, though, to just go and look at it and then come back again? Well, probably go there for a while, and no doubt it was easier to get work here, which I had to work right there when I... In fact, I started to work on the second day of Easter, on Ananda påsk. Ananda påsk. And did somebody help you to get that job, or did you go out on your own to... Well, actually I had that before I came here with some friends, see, which... He was also from the same area in Sweden that had the shop right up two, three blocks from here only. And what kind of shop was that, an automobile? An automobile, yeah. So there you started then? So I worked there for about probably three years or so. How was the pay then compared to what you got in Sweden? Was it better, or...? It was good comparison to, I mean, some... Well, not now, we can't... No, but I mean at that time. At that time, well, I got started out with 50 cents an hour. But we worked 10 hours a day, six days a week. And $30 a week at that time was pretty good. And you had no trouble to get going in the job? You had learned all that in Sweden? No, no, no, I had no problem. I did live with some people that just lived across the alley from the shop over there for a while. So you were able to save up a little bit then, four or five years there? Oh, I probably did a little out. What happened then during the Depression? Were you laid off then, or...? It was a part of time, and some time I was working. I was off a little while. Not an awful long time. But then I got a job. I worked for a truck time during the Depression years. But you had no indication of going home to Sweden, or...? No, not until... I went home in 1937. 1937. With the intention to stay, or...? No. No, I came back. I lived in California then. Went to California in 1935. So you took off on your own, or you went somewhere...? Well, it was more or less like a tour. And there was a lot... We went from Los Angeles to San Francisco, and there was some more. So there was two or three railroad carloads of Swedes that was going to Sweden. Kind of like Jaar, which we could set our time whenever we wanted to come back and so on. There were no... Like they have now. You have to be back on certain days and give up. I was home there for about four months. I see. So on this trip to California, did you look for a job out there, then, or...? Oh, I was working there all the time out there. You did? Automotive? I mean automobile. Automotive. I worked for the Lumberton Dodge Distributor in Los Angeles. So how did you like it there, then, compared to...? Nice. At that time. Now it's a different story. But you couldn't beat it. In fact, I didn't intend to. I came back here with the intention to go back there. I used to come here for a while, you know. So I got married and never got out of town after that. Never got out of town? So what year did you marry? 19... what? 1941? And on your visit to Sweden, did you go home? You were not married at that time, of course. No. So how long did you stay home, then? 1937. I stayed home for four months. And your mother was still living there? Oh, yeah. She wanted you to stay, or...? Oh, well, probably one of us still at the same time. I didn't insist. It was a hard to get a job? No, my aunt was different. She always had a scare for anybody going to this country. She didn't... well, a lot of hard work for some other people that used to come home, and the way things were at the time. But... Do you remember if anybody came home, then, during the Depression, and stayed for good? Oh, yeah. There was quite a lot of them from Ljungby. All the boys that had gone through in Chicago, the person I met when I came home, they didn't want no part of coming back. Oh, no, they never came back. So they spread some bad rumors, then? Oh, yeah, that they were in Chicago, and they had no jobs, and a lot of them slept in basements, and they had some friend that was a kind of a... took care of the heating and so on for the place, maintenance of the buildings, and they let them go down in the basement and sleep, and they had no place to... So they had a... So they stayed home? Bad taste, yeah, a lot of them. They didn't go home when I did, but they came home. They had gone home before, you know, during the Depression years. So your aunt, she reminded you about that part of her, then? Yeah, she... she always had a... she had... I don't know why, but she used to have that in her mind, that it was terrible for people. Some people, friends of hers that she grew up with, had come here and they came back home, and they had to work hard and worked on farms. So it was pretty rough at that time. In your field of work now, you had no trouble to pick up jobs, then? No, not really. No problem at that time. No? So you went back after four months? Oh, yeah, I came back here, and there were some people that... Came back the same time, in fact. We didn't know it, but we met in Gothenburg and went back the same time, and they were on the ship going over. Mm-hmm. And then after coming back from Sweden, you went right into auto mechanics again and started... Yeah, I quit when I left there, because I said I should take a leave of absence, but they said, no, I figured I'd probably do something else. So I just quit the double, and when I came back, I went down there and told them I was back. If they hadn't seen me, it was kind of slow at the time. But they went a couple of days, and they called me, and I went down and back to work, same place. And then you got married in 1941? Yeah, the night that I came back here. I came back here in 1938. And then during the war, did you do the same kind of...? During the war, I worked in an ordnance plant out there, ammunition plant. Oh, I see. So they could select you with the automotive business? Well, no, that tried to get everybody to get in. I was still working for the International Harvester Company at that time. Mm-hmm. But then I quit there and went out there on the... out to Kingsbury. It's only probably 30 miles from here, big ordnance plant there. So International Harvester, they had a plant here in Southend? No, that was the company. I mean, they have places all over, but they have retail outlets, see. And that was in Benton Harbor at that time. We lived up there, Benton Harbor. And they had a company-owned place there. How did you meet your wife now? She was not of... In Benton Harbor, yeah. Benton Harbor. Yeah. Did you belong to any church at that time? Yeah, I have always more or less belonged to the Swedish Luton. Here in Southend? No, here, when I was here the first few years, I went more to the Covenant Church than I did to the... I did go to the Luton Church, too, a few times, but not so often at that time. In count of being working 10 hours a day, 6 days a week, and then twice a week going down to night school. So that took pretty much all the time. In night school, now, was there English... Yeah. Only English? Yeah. How long did you... And a little of everything. I mean, you could keep on going there, you could get a high school education if you wanted to keep on. How many Swedes were there in Southend when you were here? Oh, God, there was quite a lot of young fellows that came, about the same time, over 3 or 4 years, probably, before. But just in that area, there was a lot of them. And what kind of work did they get, in the Benton Harbor? Oh, they had all kinds. I worked with one fellow, and I started in the garage over there when I first started. He was working there, and then we went to Benton Harbor. And he went up there first, and then I went up there later on to work with him. He came from the same part of Sweden, too, only. Oh, probably a mile and a half, Swedish miles. So there were more people from Småland here? Yeah, there was quite a few of them. You didn't have a Smålandsklubb, though, or a special association? No, the only thing that was here was Vasa. Did you join there also? Join Vasa, that would be, that was 60 years ago, the 14th of June this year, when I joined here in South Bend. Then I left Vasa here, when I was in California with the Intensa. I have never been able to find out when I really left Vasa, but I think it was in 1937, after I came back from Sweden, I believe, because I had my Intensa dental joined Mayflower in Inglewood. Yeah. Then I joined the Joe Harbor in Benton Harbor when I came back. Still there. You're still a member of that? Oh, yeah. That's 46 years now since I joined that last. So there was also a little group of Swedes in Benton Harbor? Oh, yeah, there was quite a few of them at that time. What kind of work were they doing most of the time? Oh, there was all kinds. Some of them were working on the boats. They used to have the boats going on Lake Michigan, big boats. Some were working there. In fact, they had a captain and a couple of the wheelsmen. And they had different types of work, tool makers and pattern makers, and a little of everything. Most of them had a trade of some kind. Carpenters? Carpenters, yeah. And they had a kind of woodworking and carpenter shop where they made truck bodies. There were three Swedes that owned that. And there was quite a number of them, and builders, and construction, and masons. A little of everything. During the war, then, you stayed at this factory for four or five years? I was there for five years, and then I was called back during the Korean War and had to go back there for another five years in the Korean War. So I spent about almost ten years there altogether. Did you come away from the automotive? Oh, yeah. I was working in the laboratory, in the chemical laboratory, mostly on weights and scales and calibration of weights. We did calibration for almost all the plants in the country. So it was a pretty good job, then? Yeah, it was nice. And in the air conditioning room, we had to have a special air conditioning. Humidity had to be the same all the time for calibration. So you measured metal? Yeah, well, metal chains, see. And there was real highly sensitive work. And there should be security, too, but for some reason they didn't check on that. I don't know. I must have forgot that. They had a lot of them. They had weights that were made out. Nobody knew what the weights were. We only had an identification on the weight, and we knew what it was, see, and certain ingredients in the explosives and so on. But I had to have all the information before I made up the weights. So I didn't think of that, which the chief chemist, he had highly security that he had to have. Did you continue with that kind of work after the war? After the war? No. You must have spent it on it. After the war, I went back with International Harvest again for a while. And then I went with the dealer that was a— used to be a dealer. This was his own business, but he was a dealer for the harvester and Chrysler product. And I went on for a few years in the automotive again until— when did I go to work for Curtis Wright? 1946? No, 1956. 1956, I think. Yeah, yeah. I went—Curtis Wright was here in town for a while. For about five years I worked there until they closed up, which they came in with it. They moved the factory from up in Michigan and moved it here for the West Indian parts. And they closed up. I was lucky. They always closed up the places. In fact, I helped close up Kingsbury twice and over here at Curtis Wright. There was another time, there were three of them that were closed up. The left town then was completely shut up? That used to be closed up. Were there any unions involved then during that time? Yeah. There was a union. Well, the first time at Kingsbury there was no union, but the second time we had to belong to a union, well, they had no place to put us because there was no such thing as the type of work we were doing. So we were in the Tool and Die Makers Union at that time. And at Curtis Wright they also, after a while, they started a union there, which didn't mean an awful lot. That's when I—when they first started to lay out, it must have been in, what, 62? I asked the personnel man that I wanted to go take a trip to Sweden, so I asked him if it was safe for me to go, if they would call him back or something, whatever happened. So he finally told me, he says, go ahead and I'll take care of it. So if they would call back, he still would keep the place for me. So I went up—when I came back, I went up there and told him I was back, and he didn't know. He was going to check and see. So I think the next day he came to the house and told me to go back to work. So then I was there until they closed the door. So you went back to Sweden again in 19—? Oh, I've been there how many times? About six times? In 69, and I think 73, 77, and 80. That's the last time I've been there was in 80. I don't know. In 55 we went. 55? 65 and 69. Well, no, not 65. So you have many friends and aunts to visit there all the time? In Sweden, well, not too many more. My mother passed away in 1980. Oh, 1980? Yeah. She lived that long? She was 97. So she was happy to see you back then? Oh, yeah. She died just about probably a couple of months after we were home. You had your children with you too then, at some of the trips? You had your family with you then? Yeah, she was with me, yeah. My daughter was with us in 69. And Vincent, my son, he was there a couple of times because he was in Paris for a year with the Army, with the headquarters over in Paris at the time. So they have visited your... No, my uncles and my aunts, they all... Well, I have an aunt by marriage that's still there, and I have about probably five, six cousins over. Did your aunts that were here in Svalbjørn, did they go back to Sweden? Yeah, they went back. They did? Yeah. But their children was born in this country, three of them, two boys and a girl. But they all passed away now. And he was later, he was the barnmester for Kalmar Næsjøjärnväg. So your aunt's husbands, what kind of work were they doing? Were they married to Swedes? Yeah, the one that, he was the barnmester for the railroad in Sweden. I think he was here and helped build this New York Central at the time. Oh, I see. So he went back then? Oh yeah, they went back. And the children there, which were my cousins, they were... One was the chef for the glass factory in Målros, that's also in Småland. What was his name? Björklund. Björklund. Mm-hmm. So he became a glasmester? Yeah. Yeah, and his brother was working there too. I don't know exactly what type of a job he had, but he was working at the glass factory too. When you came here in 1927, was it easy for the Swedes to get a job? Or did they really have to know somebody to... Well, that would help them a lot. I mean, that was not too hard in 1927. Back in 1929, then it started to slack off. And within 1929, that's when the depression came on. You didn't think about going to Chicago, for instance, to work? Did you have any reports from there, for instance? Oh yeah, we used to go to Chicago quite often. You met people there? Oh yeah. And it was much tougher to be located there, I suppose, than here in South Bend? Yeah, well... Competition of more workers, more... That all depends. You would have to have some kind of a... Trade? Little pull or something, you know. But there was... Well, in 1929, then they started to kind of slow down in Chicago. How did you go into Chicago? You took the train? No, we always drove. We have, I think, one time, only one time we took the children on a train to Chicago at Christmas time once. Otherwise you had a... So you got your own car then quite soon after you came here? No, it was quite a little while, but the people I lived with, in fact, they bought a new car in 28. And I went to Detroit to pick it up, a new Studebaker for them. And I used to drive that most of the time. Was there a Studebaker in Detroit? Well, at that time, the commanders were made in Detroit. So I went there to pick it up for them, drove it home. And I used to drive it most of the time. Which there were... the lady there, that was a cousin to my mother, that I stayed with them. It was a little bit better car than the Ford then? Oh, yeah. That was a Studebaker commander. It was the big... with the big six engine in it at that time. It was a nice, nice big car. What was most of the problem you had with the cars at that time? Well, you didn't have too much problem. The mostly was possibly Indian work. You had to grind valves a little more often. You had to... and rings and so on. But there was no real trouble. I wish they had that today. Got more trouble with the cars today than they had at that time, really. So it was easier to fix it then at that time? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Now they got electronic everything and computerized. So they drive you nuts? That's all troubles. Nobody can do nothing. Unless you want to spend two, three hundred dollars for a new part. No, that part is... bad. So they were quite dependable then if they... Oh, yeah. Yeah....replaced them regularly and... They gave you good service. And plain. I mean, you didn't have to spend a lot of money for maintenance, which nobody got a lot of money at that time. When I worked for the harvester company, the regular price that we had on trucks, the customer only paid a dollar and a half an hour. I was figured on that, on the basis of a dollar and a half an hour. And a dollar and a quarter an hour for farm machinery. It was different times. Oh, yeah. But still, I think people were better off. There's no need... I mean, there's no... Don't make any difference. Don't make a lot of money and have nothing left anyway when you get your living. You have less control of the money today than years ago. You could control it better. Oh, yeah. And you got more for, I mean... Well, at the time, there used to be about seven and eight dollars a week for room and board. Now you don't get much. You get one meal for that. You got a chance to live a bit. Yeah. Yeah. And didn't have to really pay any income taxes. Did you pay when you first came in? Not for the first few years, no. I don't even know if I knew what that was, even. How about politics now? Were you a Republican or a Democrat when you first started to discuss with people here? I used to think that was terrible because they had, let's see, the election between... Was it Els? No. Smith? Yeah, I think. Smith and Hoover. That was in 1928. And people was just... Most of the Swedes were Republicans. And they thought the country was just going to pieces if the Smith would get in. They were real diehard people. And I said I couldn't figure out what's the difference if they're Catholic or what they are. If they're the type of man that should have that job, there shouldn't be no difference. So did the newspapers blow it up then? Oh, yeah. That was somehow a twosy at the time. That was let out because they had never had, I guess, a Catholic presidency. Which he didn't get in, but... The way the people felt then, some of the older people especially, they figured that was just... country was going to pot. There was as bad as electing a communist today for president. Yeah, it's bad. But isn't it strange though that the Swedes, they came now, they were usually for the farms. How could they be Republicans though in their thinking? Well... Were they... There was no doubt both ways. I mean, a lot of what I knew more or less kind of leaned towards the Republican side, I think, at that time. Which, for my own part, I didn't bother much with politics, so... But the church never pushed anything one way or the other? Oh, no. No. Like today, for instance, you take... No. Yeah, no. Up to that time. I never heard anything from the church that I can ever remember. So I too... And on the election day, which... It's supposed to be on the Republican side, but... It's not saying I can't vote whatever I want to when it comes to the... You could be a non-partisan then. I don't see the idea of voting for one party or the other one. That's the man that counts. But this is a democratic town, not all. Oh, yeah. This is... South Bend is a democratic, yeah. It's hard for a Republican to get in. Because... I think they're going to have a better chance this year and... I mean, next year, than they have had in a long time. Maybe in as far as local politics. Do you remember if South Bend... pulled for Smith then because of all the Catholics around here? No, I don't... Maybe you were scared to vote. I think that... You didn't hear as much as you do today, really. The west part of the city, which is a lot of Polish and over there, they have always been on the Democratic side. What about Irish? Were they strong here in South Bend? Well, there are some, but I don't think there was an awful lot of Irish people. There are some, I mean, that... probably second generation that's born here is from Irish descent. But there was a lot of Polish, Hungarians, Italians, Belgians in Mississauga. Oh, they're Belgians in the... Oh, Mississauga, yeah. Oh, I see. Why did they settle there? I don't know what... What kind of work are they doing? Oh, there's all kinds of it, definitely. So there's no Mississauga Belgians. That's Belgian countries, Mississauga. You have a lot of pigeons raising there, though. They're very spacious. Yeah. Yeah, in fact, Miss Walker has done, I say, a lot better than South Bend is doing. We had a mayor that's not too good, to my estimation. So they are all kind of... We just had a friend of ours that just passed away. In fact, him and his wife was buried at the same time they both passed away. He was a Republican county councilman. Oh, I see. He was active then in politics. Oh, yeah, and he was a retired captain in the Navy. Was he a Swede? He's a Dane, Danish. So they died only a few hours in between. Two days in between. In fact, I was up there and I took him to the doctor just a week before he died. And I said he should... He had been in the hospital and I led him home. And I took him to the doctor and I said, there's no way that he should be at home. He should be in the hospital right now the way he was. So then finally they had to take him to the hospital and he was there a couple of days and died and passed away. Yeah, that's the first time I've ever been to a double funeral with a man and wife at the same time. How did you manage your hospitalization when you came here? Well, you were young and healthy and of course you didn't have to worry about it. No. But there was no insurance at your work? Yeah, they had when I worked for the harvester company. When I first came at Dover, I never heard of insurance. Only what... but you didn't need any. Nobody had insurance at the time? Not too many. She was in the hospital at 19 what? Around 1940, I guess, for surgery for appendix. Three dollars and a half a day. Three dollars and a half? In the hospital. But you didn't have insurance then? No, I had... You had to pay that? I never paid any insurance and I still don't. Who takes care of it then? I'm better off to take care of my own. So far. Instead of giving it to the insurance companies when they... that's just a racket to start with. No, it probably is. Sure. What boys scare you with? I've been taking care of an elderly lady up here. It was a shirt... her husband was a kind of shirt tail relation to me. And she's 92 years old. And she has... well, she got two insurance besides the Medicare. I usually have... I take care of all that stuff for her. It stinks, what I pay according to what you have to pay for them. And so far, it cost me less for paying my own difference from the Medicare than if I had bought insurance. So you set off... setting off a little bit of money every year? Well, a little bit. I should have done that years ago, too. But, I mean, there was a time when I was working, see, there was insurance there. We had... I used to... Harvester Company, I think, was $1.95 a month that you paid into your insurance. That paid for everything. There was no Medicare or anything like that, see. And that paid for everything that you would have to go to a hospital for doctors. Never used it. When I worked in Kingsborough, we had 28 days a year. Sick benefit, I never took any of that either. So you've been lucky then? Yeah, well... one way, but in 1964, 1965, I had a heart attack. Two years in a row. 66, I had the appendix out. 67, I had the gallbladder out. So that's four years in a row. That's the only time that I... You were still working, though? Yeah. So you didn't have to worry about the health cost? The first... Yeah, the first time... I didn't have insurance, but the second time I did. And then they added two times with the appendix and the gallbladder that I had insurance. So you gambled a little bit about insurance? Yeah, I can't say that. I mean, I like to... And these supplements they talk about... So what do they do? You pay a pretty good price for a supplement, but then you've got to have... You have to have A and B in the Medicare before you get these supplements. And they cost you a lot of money. They cost you, well, say, from $20 to $50 a month. What do they pay? This lady had Blue Cross. We're supposed to be good. She paid $46.70 a month for the Blue Cross. And one bill came that they paid $2.50 a month. And one bill came that they paid $0.93 on it. Then they only pay the 20% that Medicare deduct from what they approve, but only from what they approve. If you have a bill from the doctor for $50, Medicare say they approve $40. Then they take 20% off of that $40. And that 20% is all the supplement will pay for. And some pay now they have a deductible for $520 to the hospital, the first $520 you have to pay. Some insurance companies will pay it and some don't. So I had her change it lately. She was paying $46.70 a month and getting really nothing. A new policy Blue Cross came out with, more or less competitive, that cost her $28 a month and pay more, and the $46.60. So you have to be a lawyer almost to read the policies. But 99% of the old people get stuck with it all. They over-insure themselves. One company will pay it and one don't. You got to be real careful what you get when you do buy them. So, well, the trouble is it don't pay out. There's no use to be screaming. I was in Sweden one time and I went to the hospital there and they checked me up in the hospital and then gave me a shot, one shot a day for three days, and then checked me again after they had given that to me. And they cost me less than $5. And they apologized because they had to charge me for the B-12 shot they gave me, and that was 16 cents in American money. And a Kleenex cost you a fortune if you need it. Cost you a fortune if you need it. It should work if we had honest people running it. At one time, Medicare had more money than they know what to do with. And why is it now? Or Medicare and Social Security was all in one anyway. I remember a fellow, he had a business up in town, he told me one time he got a publication from the government every month. And they were telling me, he said, they had so much money at that time that they could pay the Social Security and pay all that, what I was supposed to pay out, for 50 years after never taking the dime. Now they're broke. What happened to it? Most likely the same place as the extra money got in this investigation they have. That is the biggest problem. They got a way of getting by with it. But you don't get by with the dime for taxes. A lot of them do, but I mean... They'll spend a thousand dollars to collect five. But it's strange to all those retired people. You would think there would be a strong group of people among them, because they are executives and all kinds of different... There is now, what, 36 million people that's on retirement? They will find out what they're really getting paid or what they have to pay. That, which... Say it to pepper. As so many people that thinks that it's fine, that's good, see. Because it makes a big rip-off. Oh, sure. And it has come to that point where everything is today, no matter where you go. You remember when you joined the Warsaw? You probably joined as a beneficiary member. Oh, yeah. Still am. Yes, a few hundred benefits, $125, $100 a day if you get sick. $100 a day for sick benefits. $100 a day for sick benefits. Well, I think they could have. In fact, today, you have insurance, which I got insurance with the Warsaw too, that you pay so much for. And there's no place where you can get the benefit that you get from them. It's not enough, I mean, today. But for the money you pay for it, you can't get it anyplace. For what money you pay into it, you wouldn't get nothing. You pay only probably a year, what would cost you one month for a little insurance. But if they have started to raise the premium a little bit, instead of paying in $12 a year, paying in, for instance, let's say $50 after 10, 15 years. Were there still too many old Swedes in the Warsaw? No. They wouldn't pay all five cents if they didn't. Not at that time. At that time, there were young people in the Warsaw. And there were a lot of them that didn't stop working at 65. A lot of them that worked long after that sometimes, if they could. Because they had quite a bit of money now, you know, after all those years with the small input. But if they had made it bigger, they would have done something for it. See, they have a, I only pay what, $20? $22 a year. $22 a year for the A and B. Then they came out with the C policy, which pays a little more. Yes. Well, very few joined that one, though. Well, probably not too many at the time. I know I was thinking about it, but I know some people that have it. I have all three of them. And a lot of them don't even collect it. I never have collected from the Warsaw, I mean, from the local, what I pay a dollar a day or something. But I think I did from the insurance at one time, I got something. Just once, as far as I remember. Just once, yeah, when I was in the hospital. But do you think the Swedes were harder to convince to get the benefit of it? It seems to me when you go to a meeting, they always sit there and let them do it. Well, they're conservative. You know, five cents, you know, they would never think about raising the dues. No, they didn't want to raise it, I mean, which. So how should that have been done? Because insurance companies are trying, there's no question about it. Oh, sure. It's not right. You know, they don't even know where to invest their money. They got money surplus and they don't know what to do with it. And they're whipping people out more and more. Then you got to fight to collect anything from them to start with. So, like I say, that's everything you do today. You go to a drugstore, the sad part is we had to find that out in Sweden. That they have all different prices for the same kind of medication. And I checked the other day, and that's as much as $7 difference in the price on the same thing. So you have to check on them. In fact, when we came back from Sweden, because she worked in the drugstore at the time, so she said, no, that's all the same prices. The doctor in Sweden said, no, no, you check when you come back. You see, that's all different. So she did. And for one medication, it was as much difference as from $1.25 to $12. In different drugstores. Which, the $1.25 was little, that's what she was working, they probably got a little discount on that and something. And the one that people need most is never generic. Yeah. They know they hooked them on that one. And there's places where you pay more for generic than you do for the regular. In AARP, I say they advertise a lot, say the AARP, buy the drugs from them. I got a price list from them at one time. I can buy it cheaper in town than I can buy it from AARP. Were they supposed to help you? Yeah, oh, sure. Supposed to save you money. But I think they're getting a little on the greedy side, too. When they see there's some money coming in for something, the leaders always say, that's kind of easy money. We've got to get more of that. And they sought the control. Yeah. And I think we would be much better off if they would have cut down on everything, I mean prices. Just get it down. Some level, say there was like in 1940 or 45 or something, I'll get the prices, we would be better off. And the country is in such a big debt now that it's, never pay for it. A lot of inflation is needed to pay for it. Yeah, and less people working. And papers is full of ads for help wanted. And a lot of unemployment. Something is wrong someplace. It looks strange. Yeah, which I can see. We have right here in our neighborhood, just several young guys roaming the street. Quit school. 17, 18, 19-year-olds. Don't do nothing. Well, how are you going to give them jobs? Usually you have to earn your money, whatever you work at. I'm used to it anyway, I don't know today.