 Now we have 12th of March 1987 and I'm sitting together with Margaret Johnson in Rockford, Illinois. She was born 1910, 18th of March in Chicago. And your parents, they came from Sweden. Yeah. And there's Sandell Street in the town where your father was born. In Rosenfors. Rosenfors in Småland. Mm-hmm. Is that close to Mölunda? Yes. It's about seven Swedish miles or something like that. So, do you know anything about the background of your father and your mother? Did they know each other in Sweden? Were they what? Did they know each other in Sweden? Yes, they were married in Sweden. Oh, I see. My mother was only 17 years old when she got married. She was born in 1885. Her folks, her father, they were smith. They had a blacksmith shop. Blacksmith shop in Mölunda. Now, I don't know what my grandfather and my father's side did. I don't know about that. And your father, what was he doing then in Sweden when he married? He must have been a tailor. Maybe his father was a tailor, too, because when he came over to this country, he did tailoring. What was the reason that he left Sweden? Oh, I guess the same as everybody back then, you know. My mother said she never wanted to leave because she was young, but he wanted to leave. But people at that time, you know, left because of economics. So, they had a relation that came to in Chicago then? My mother had a sister that lived in Indianapolis, and so they went to Indianapolis first, and then they came to Chicago. What year did they come over? When did they come over? Well, I imagine it was shortly after they were married, but it must have been 19... Well, if she was 17, that would make it 1902. It must have been 1902 or 1903 or something like that. So, they settled in Indianapolis for how long? No, I don't know. And then they came to Chicago? Yeah, and they ran a... did tailoring at home, you know, like they... On the south side of Chicago? No, north side, near Belmont, yeah, Lakeview, Newport Avenue. So, then they founded a bunch of Swedes? Yeah, you bet. Then did they join the church there in Lakeview? Well, I don't know if we actually belonged, but we belonged... attended the Lakeview Swedish Free Church. Oh, the Free Church in Lakeview, huh? So, then you were born 1910, in the month of March. And so, you went to school then in Chicago? Yeah, graduated from high school, moved to Rockford in 1929. So, and your father was a tailor then? But your mother also ran a boarding house? She had a boarding house. In Lakeview? No, that was 5300 north we had moved. There it comes. On Belmont? No, that's 3200. 5300, you know where Sun High School is? Well, you know where Andersonville is in Chicago? Yes, but that's north of Foster though. Yes. It was below Foster. Yeah, our grade school was on Foster and Ashland, and we lived on Ashland, about two blocks north of that. So, this close to Ebenezer Lutheran Church? Oh, yeah. So, you went to school there then? Yeah. So, when you went to school, there were a lot of Swedes that you could identify with? Of course. All Swedes? All Swedes. At one time, we had about 32 boarders. 32? Uh-huh. Was there a humongous house then? No, she lived in a five-room apartment, and she had a table made up, like with these wooden horses that you have for carpentry, and then a big board. Oh, you mean she fed them? She fed them. Breakfast? Three meals a day? Well, they came for breakfast, and she made their lunch, because they all were carpentering and bricklaying, and they were all outside workers, you know, and then they all had supper there. But they didn't have any sleeping quarters though? No, no, no. Only for? Only for eating. So, there was like a restaurant more like and a boarding house then? It was just a plain boarding house. Big one. She had over 20 of them, didn't she? Oh, we had over 32 at one time. 32? Uh-huh. Did she get old then? Did all of them. She had some help? No. Not you when you got old enough? Well, yeah. How old were you then when you had to pinch in there? Well, I went going to high school. I graduated in 1926, so. And I think all the Swedes, a lot of these, you know, came around in 1924. That was a big exodus. And in 1928, we went to Sweden. Mother sold it and we went, the three of us went to Sweden for two months. To Petersborg, that was the name of the home, the picture that you saw. And then when she came back. In Mölunda? Uh-huh. And when she came back, she didn't know what to do. Oh, she didn't want to stay in Sweden? Oh, no. We just went for a visit. We rented a furnished apartment on Montrose and Ashland. And then friends of ours in Rockford, there was a restaurant here called Svea Café that was empty. And so she bought that and she started the restaurant and ran Svea Café then for about three or four years. I see. So she had it in her blood. Yeah, and then there were a lot of newcomer Swedes here then, too, you know. And then, of course, the Depression hit. Did you help out there, too, then, at the Svea? Well, I worked in an office, but I waited on tables on Sundays and evenings. That's how I met my husband. So we met my husband. The Virginians. So Sunday, we went there, and I asked her to come over and we had plenty. And she went to what was it, a show. We went together, and then we were married in 1934. But you met before the Depression, though. Did you hold off the marriage plans then because of the Depression, you think? No. Because you met in the early 30s. Yeah. Well, we met about... yeah, it had to be. It seems to me most of the people... Well, they went together longer back then. Pulled it off, put it on the back burner. Probably the economics, yeah. But you had work in the school, though. You had a secure job. He was teaching, but he went to... So your mother must have been very happy then. He was not a Swede, though. No. What did she say when you... Well, at that time... When you took him off to your table? Teachers in Sweden, they're tops, you know. Did she say that? No, I don't know. No, but there was a... Looked up to. But wasn't the feeling at that time... Honey, I'm from Svensk. Well, most of the mothers reacted to that if it was not Swedish. I mean, you come up with an Irish and an Italian, for instance. Yeah, that's right. She wouldn't approve of it. Oh, no. They didn't approve of that at all. But he had a good job. Yeah. And good looking. Yeah. Live well, though. So, but in Chicago, now, with so many aborters, 32 of them, there must have been a tremendous job, though, to get... Oh, yes. Did they have money to pay, though? But this was 26, now, you left in Chicago. I left Chicago in 29. 29. There was pretty good times then during the 20s when she had to... Oh, yes, when they first came over, you know, the times until the crash in 28, all these guys made good money. So they paid every week, then... And Mother financed many of them. Or helped them on the way to... For the union, you know, they had to go into the union. And my uncle, who lived in Merlanda, was a bachelor. And after Mother's father died, he died in about 24, she was planning to go to visit, she had never been back. And she had gone down to get her ticket, and when she came home, she had word that her father had died. So then she did not want to go. So this other brother of hers had taken care of him all the years, so then she financed a trip for him to come here. So he was here for 14 months in Chicago with my mother. And he helped out then at the boarding house. And when she went down to the station to meet him, he was a cripple, he had a short leg. And so, oh, he was shunted aside and had to go to Philadelphia. And she didn't know that, and she'd gone down to the station, and there was one Swede, he had no one meet him. He just stood there around, didn't know what to do. So Mother took him home with her. And then she financed him to get into the union. There was the carpenters' union, or bricklayers? Yeah, and bricklayers. Most of them were bricklayers. Some of them carpenters. So they needed a bit of cash to be accepted. Yeah, and she charged $8 a week for the breakfast, and their lunch with them, and then their evening meal. And she had to pack a lunch then in a bag? Yes, she packed the lunch. What did it consist of, the lunch now? Limpa bread with lunch meat. And you had three slices, four, five? Four, six? Two full sandwiches, so it would be four slices of bread. There was limpa, but there was no kaka? No, usually limpa, which is what they like. Did she bake it herself? No, there was a Swedish bakery on Foster and Poyle. Signe Carlson? Yeah, Signe Carlson. And both my sister and I worked there too on Saturdays. So she was in full swing then? 25 cents an hour. Yes, she was very, very good, the Signe Carlson. And that place was a beehive. People came from Wilnetka all over on Saturday to buy her bakery goods. Was that located right opposite Ebenezer? Right kitty corner. And Mother bought all her bakery goods from her. Was it paying off then for her? Oh, sure. But then she lost, had her money invested in insults, lost it like insults, it was utility. Insult? I-N-S-U-L-L. A lot of Swedes lost, a lot of people lost money in that. And she lost it? Yeah. What did she say then? She just won. But it must have been an heartbreak. Oh, of course it was. But you know, lots of people lost lots of money back then. People lost their houses for mortgages of $5,000, if you can believe that. You had your own house then? No. You rented? Always rented, uh-huh. So that was after the trip to Sweden, then she lost this money? Yes, uh-huh. It was the crash came in 28. It was right after. We went in 28, in May of 28, and then the crash came right after. There were a lot of Swedes coming over on that boat when we came too, came back. So your father now, did he still have his tater business then? No, they separated. I think I was only two. Oh, I see. He was a religious fanatic. He was? He was a holy rover type. Han skulle ut och frälsa världen. Ut och frälsa världen. Yeah, was his reasoning. It didn't bother him that maybe we didn't have anything to eat, but he was going to go out and save the world. I don't know where he went. He went to Cincinnati and Wheeling. Did he work with the Assembly of God or Philadelphia? No, no. Well, maybe Philadelphia. But he had belonged to a lot of goofy religions. So you didn't grow up with him then? No, I have not known him very much. He did come to visit once, many years later. And then he came to Rockford and lived for a while and did tailoring down at the Nelson Hotel, but he did not live with us. They never divorced. It was just a separation. But he was, everything was sin. He couldn't read the funny papers on Sunday. Oh, that was very odd. Well, you know, some people go off the deep end on religion. But your mother, she didn't take you on the real? No, mother was religious in her way, but open-minded. She helped one close at Harvard. We were raised in the free church. We were confirmed and we even were married in the free church. But it is now on the north side of Chicago, farther north. Next to the Cubs. So you had an instance you could be married in Lakeview and see the Cubs game the day after? Right around the corner. He probably would have liked to have. Why didn't you marry here in Rockford? Well, I didn't belong to any church. When I first came to Rockford, we went to the free church, of course. That would be natural for us. But, you know, they were very, very strict. You couldn't go to shows and you couldn't dance. I was no hypocrite. We did go to the movies and we danced. We didn't drink, but we did do that. So I never really got into the free church that much. So that's why you went to Chicago? We got married in Chicago. And what year was that, 1935? 34? 34, July 21st. So you had a good position then at Rockford? If you call a good position, you know. As a science teacher. Yeah. And you were working then? I worked down in the courthouse. Why? As secretary? Mm-hmm. So after high school, you went to business school then? No, I didn't go to business school. I went right to work in Chicago. In an office? For an insurance company in Washington and Clark. So did you get practical training with typing and so on in high school? Oh, yes. We took a business course. In high school? Mm-hmm. That's what everybody did back then, you know. Did you join any other organizations in Chicago, like Vasa, Switch, or Vibe? No, we never belonged to any lodges. All our boarders did. They all belonged to Verdandi Hall and those, you know. But we never belonged to any lodges. So you had to talk Swedish then almost 24 hours a day? Well, we... Because at the boarding house, the mother's house, they were Swedish-spoken all the time, I think. Oh, sure. Because they were newcomers. But then they learned fast, you know. They were out in the business world. And they stayed in the boarding house as long as they were unmarried. And when they married... Yeah, they'd take off. Then they'd disobeyed as customers. Or if they moved, you know. Sure. But 32 of them... Yeah. That's a lot. It was a lot of them. And we didn't have a rotten one in the bunch. Oh, all... They were all nice. No one fooled... Yes. One and one. No one fooled mother on any money until she came to Rockford. They paid off in Chicago? All paid off whatever she financed them and paid their bills. They were just all wonderful fellows. When she gave them a loan off, for instance, to join the carpenters or bricklayers or painters, did they have to sign a note then or was it just a handshake? No, just a handshake. No, they didn't. But they paid back? They paid back everyone. But when we came to Rockford, then there was a depression here. She had money cashed into a technically Swedish restaurant. Yeah. That was down where Välkommen Plaza is. That was what? Where Välkommen Plaza is. Yeah, that's right. It's the same site. Yeah. You know that, huh? Yes, I heard it before. Oh. There had been a restaurant before then she came? Yes, it had been. And it was closed up. And then it was closed. And you came here into Rockford what year? I came in 29, she came right after in Sweden. We'd been to Sweden in 28 and opened it up. Wow, and there was still good time then. Yeah. It looked pretty good. Yeah, they got a supper for 40 cents, you know, two pork chops, two balls of potatoes and vegetables and your bread and your coffee and your dessert. At that time, people didn't go for salads, you know, it wasn't that fancy. Oh, they didn't have that at that time? No, it was just schyttepatatis and vegetables, you know. Ordentlig mat. Yeah. I don't know. No rabbit food. No, no rabbit food. That's what they called it. They did that? Yeah. Because the Swedes were very stubborn with that, you know. Yeah, he said, jag inge ingen kanin heller, you know. What does that mean? I'm no rabbit. You mean you haven't taught him Swedish? No. He can say, takk så mycket. Language is my hardship. Our children like it. I do well to speak Swedish. So you grew up with Swedish in your home, your mother talked Swedish all the time? Oh, yes, and all her friends, you know. But she was 17 when she came, she learned English very fast. Yes, from the funny papers. Funny papers. That's the way they learned. And that was completely against your father's religion, of course. That's right. And since she was married, many of her friends, when they came over, they worked as maids, you know. And then on their day off, then they all assembled at mother's house. That was on Thursdays? Yes. And we have many hand-painted plates, you know, they had given mother over the years. So they had a cup of coffee or lunch or something? Then they just had a good time, you know, and talked. Like you see on top? Uh-huh, yeah. Was it in the afternoon or? Afternoon. Afternoon. And then later, mother and a friend, they started evening school and took English in the evening school. So she came into the business. Yeah. She was in the business mind then? Oh, yes. She was a good businesswoman. Yes. She was a real good businesswoman. And a good woman. And a hard worker. Let me ask now a little bit, breakfast, for instance, what time in the morning was that? Oh, she'd get up before 5 because they would start coming 5.30 or even before because they'd, you know, in Chicago, they'd have to probably travel an hour in the streetcar to get to their jobs. And there was a lot of building going on at that time. And by that time, you should have the lunch packed in a bag? No, while they were eating breakfast, she packed their lunch. She was real fast. Did they have it in a bag or? No, newspaper. In a newspaper? Uh-huh, wax paper and then newspaper and tied with string. I see. What did they have to drink? Did they have to furnish themselves or anything? Yeah, she didn't furnish any drink. You didn't have any coffee with them? No. No Turner's bottles at that time? No. And then at lunch, you got the money for it? No, nothing at lunch. See, they were all working. So then it would be just supper. And they came back then about 6 o'clock? 5, 6. 5, 6 o'clock and had supper. And they had a good time. I mean, they were... So there was a long day then for you to stay awake, I mean, maybe 4 or 5 o'clock in the morning. Oh, yeah. Well, she worked hard. Oh, sure. It was hard work, but it paid off. And of course, then you didn't have to pay income tax and stuff, you know, like you would now. So you mentioned she came to Rockford and I would think the people were more slick in Chicago though. She lost money here or what happened? You said she couldn't trust investors. No, it was insole utility. Was it in Rockford? No, it was Chicago. In Chicago? Uh-huh. It was on the New York Stock Exchange, yeah. And she had everything placed in there? $50,000. A lot of people lost money. They didn't tell her to divest them into different things? No. All eggs in one basket. Yep. But then she came to Rockford and you said they were honest people that she dealt with and they paid off the... The ones in Chicago, yeah. What happened in Rockford? Oh, um... You would think this would be a more honest place. Yeah. This was this Bert Carlson. I can't remember where he... He went back to Sweden. I don't know where... I can't remember where he was from. But he, um... You know, there wasn't any work. And there was a gas station for sale on 7th Street near Broadway for $195. The whole price? $195? Yeah, to buy the business, you know. So Mother let him have the $195. Well, I guess he didn't seem to make any money, so then he sold it. Well, then when he was going to come and pay Mother, he said he lost it on the way to the house. Which, of course, he didn't. But, uh... So they was to full pay. And he was sort of a religious... nice boy. If he wanted, he had enough of religion. Yeah. But, you know, it takes all kinds. But that's the only time she ever got fooled. She learned by experience. By the Swedes. Oh, we've been... I got a picture. And I... And she kept the Swinga Restaurant then for about three, four years? Yeah. I think it's about 32 or 33. What happened then? Was it too... See, in 32. I think she sold it in 32. You were still helping her then? Yeah. I was working, but then I would... All I did was to wait tables. Wait tables, yeah. She had all the kit, all the other help. And it was a good business down there. A lot of people... Yeah. Until the Depression hit. So then people couldn't even pay for the 25 cents a day? No. Those Swedes were all out of work, you know. But she'd feed them. How did she do then? She'd feed them anyway. She'd sell them a meal for 30 cents. You know. She just happens to be a very good-hearted person. She'd cry when she heard a kid being punished or abused. She'd cry. But then she went to Sweden in 33. Her brother died, and she was named executor or what. She had no... So she went to Sweden in 33 to help settle up the place. Now, when I get through, I will show you. I have Swedish dishes that she brought back with her at that time. And there was a Swedish boy, you said? Yeah. Why was it named Petersborg? I don't know. Don't they always put names on their houses? Yes. It was called Pettersborg. I don't know why. Pettersborg. Mm-hmm. So you've been there in... Yeah. We were there in 28, and then we were back in 79 in a very small house, you know, no bathroom. And we understand that the person who bought it later put in a little bathroom. And so when we were there in 79, we went there hoping we could get in, but she wasn't home. I wanted to know where she put the bathroom. I don't know where she could have put it. But she had no desire to stay in Sweden in 33? Oh, no. Oh, no. She was a true American by that time. Did she retire then for good in 33? Oh, yeah. Well... She never remarried? No. Retired, you know, there wasn't any work. Well, then when the war came... No, she... When did she go to work at Clark's? Yeah. She got a job as a cook at J.L. Clark. So she cooked there for a good many years. She got me a job there when the schools closed. Well, the schools closed for six weeks because they didn't have any... Did they? No. They closed them for six weeks because they didn't have any money. People wouldn't vote any increases. So they closed the schools then? Yeah. During the Depression? In Rockford, yeah. Six weeks. So then he went to work at Clark's for 75 cents an hour or whatever it was. Nineteen. We rewired the whole factory. But... But how could she survive now? I mean, she lost the savings, $50,000. Well, both my... No security. Well, I'll tell you. No insurance? No, of course not. My sister and I both worked, and we didn't make much money. Everybody's salaries were cut. But Mother was used to making do. You stayed, lived at home then? Yes, we both lived at home. You bought a house in Rockford? No, no. We just lived in an apartment on 7th Street across the street from the American Bank. No, the Amcor Bank. And then we lived there until... Well, we were married. We lived there. And she still lived there, and she worked, went to Clark's. And then I guess... Well, you had... She had a... You had a living quarters on 7th Street, second story up. Yeah, an apartment, a furnished apartment. Did you join any Swedish organization in Rockford? No. No... We were no Lodz people. I don't know why. Not that we didn't believe in them or anything. We just weren't Lodz people. You had nothing to do with the restaurant, I suppose. Yeah. Well, all the boys, you know, and... And it was always like one big happy family, they all... Your brother, now, was he younger than you? Oh, yeah. No, he was older. Oh, he was older. He died when he was eight, so... So he was born in Sweden then? No, he was born in... He was born in... Uh-huh, in Chicago, and died when he was eight years old. What kind of... Hmm? What kind of... Oh, scarlet fever and diphtheria. At that time, they had... You get scarlet fever and diphtheria. They didn't have anything to combat. So your mother, she stayed away from sicknesses and... Yeah, she was healthy. She was never in the hospital. Great, wonderful woman. Well, she... It isn't like what they... Everybody now, they got the relief to get on and everything, but when those Swedes came over there, they had nothing like that. They had to go to work and that was it. They didn't make very much, but they... But they roamed around for 70 years without any pain. You bet. And you worked. They... Well, a lot of mothers' friends. We lived on Somerdale. Do you know where that is? Just north of Foster. Yeah, and friends of ours lived in Kitty Corner. He was married and he had three children, and I think he made $13 a week. This is way, way, way, way back, you know, and people could buy their coal in the summertime at a discount, and Mother would... At that time, she didn't have... I think she just had two or three boarders come in, and we had a couple of roomers, and she'd help this friend out so he could buy his coal at a discount, and then he would pay it back as he could pay it. You know, people just did that. They trusted each other. They won't go on today. No, I should say not. Discount or not. I should say not. Did she talk about those times later on in life? Oh, not especially. She didn't dwell on the past. She lived for the present and the future and her children and then her grandchildren. I mean, that was... Did she live... You got married, and did you buy a house then? No, we rented an apartment on Crosby Street in 1934, and then we bought a house in 1941 on Shaw Street. If you know where that is, it's where the old Highland School was. And we lived there until 19... Close. So you... The first house. You were a teacher in that school. Yes, and then we bought this house in 1956. That's the only houses we've had. So you had your mother with you then at any time? No, when we moved here, she was with us. So what year did she die? She died in 1966. 1966? Mm-hmm, 20 years ago. So she had a long... Long life and hard work behind her. And your father now, what happened to him? Did he die in the war? Well, it happened that he died the same year Mother did. In 1966? In 1966 in December. I thought it was before. In December of 1966. One of the... One of the... Grew up here to use it for money or something for... Yeah. When he was sick. No, it wasn't... No, he died before, yeah. Your sister sent someone. I don't remember just what year, but... Your sister sent someone. He did correspond with my sister once in a while. And when they... She was with her mother. We always had Christmas Eve here, and when they got home one Christmas Eve, and I don't remember what year that was, they shared a telegram that he had died. Yeah, they had... But he never visited you or anything? No. Yeah, he stopped, yeah. Well, he was here some years ago, but that was a long, long time ago. He stopped coming, but I met him. That was before we were married. So your mother, she read the funny paper, and then he left. Yeah, yeah. That's... Yeah, well, he was a religious fanatic. And he kept her all his life? He didn't change his ideas about that? No, no. And once in a while he'd send Mother a check, but just once in a while. So he was able to contain on himself a little bit of the pain for what he was doing? Oh, yes, yeah. He belonged to... My sister was more of a religious person than I was, and she kept more track of the different churches and stuff. Well, let's see, because I didn't know. Now, Paul's sister lives down in... Out of Fort Myers, there's a shell point village. In Florida? Yeah. That's sponsored by the Southern Christian Alliance or something like that. He had a sister that came here. She was married to a Lutheran minister, but they went back. And he was on, what's that island now out of... Gotland, Ulan. Ulan, mm-hmm. So you and your husband visited Sweden? Yeah, in 79. 79. How was it now to marry a Swede? I mean, did you have any connection with them before you met Margaret there, or was it the first one? He thinks that he was able, you know, back then, everything. Are you Swedish, you know, or are you Italian? You know how everybody sticks together. And he thinks he got a school teaching job because he had a Swedish name. You think so? Were they particularly rough for that time? Yeah, sure. Narrow, you know. If you had been Cosentino, you wouldn't think it would... No. How long did it last, though? The Second World War probably turned it over. Oh, yes, yes. Oh, I think so. During that war, Mother worked at National Lock. They had a ran a nursery for their employees. National Lock? Uh-huh, and they had a house next to the factory. And the women brought their children there. And dropped them off in the morning. And Mother fed them. And then they had a couple of young girls helping, and they took care of the kids until the parents picked them up. That was during the war. Oh, I see. Because, you know, people had to work that. So there was more women working at National Lock than men? Oh, yeah. And there was assembly work? Yeah, I guess. So how many babies did she... or small ones did she care for then? I don't know how many they had. Oh, they must have had better than ten, yes. And then they took naps in there and took care of them. So that was the first daycare center in Rockford? Yeah, she had rooms upstairs. And then later she came to live with us here. So there was a turnover then of all kinds of people that came into Rockford. Oh, I should say. They needed it from the South, of course. Did a lot of people came from the South during the war? Black-collar people, for instance, did they take in? Yeah, Gunite Factory in Rockford, they say. Brought up soldiers? A lot of the blacks. What kind of production line do they have? I can't remember what Gunites made, did you? That's where Anderson worked. It's a factory? Yeah. It was a foundry. A foundry. So it was the hot kind of work, you know, it's probably why they had the blacks. I see. So and then during that time, the Irish and Italian started to move over to the East side. But the Swedes very seldom go to the West side. No, they stayed on the East side. It's just like another city over there. And that was the same in Chicago, you know. Swedes kept moving north and north and north. They always had that story that the Swedes would go in and settle it, and then the Jews would come in with their business. And then other groups came in after that. Yeah, and then the Irish ran the city. Have you been back in Chicago to see the trenches on the lake? Oh, yeah. Lake doesn't look the same. Oh, my. Andersonville is terrible. Reunion, didn't it? Huh? Reunion. Yeah, our free church had a reunion about four or five years ago. The Lakeview Church now is owned by Japanese, but they opened the church to us for that weekend. It was nice. It was the 90th reunion of the church since the church had started. So you went to Sunday school there? Yeah, confirmation. And the wallpaper there was the same. Yeah, well, the mural in the choir loft was the same one that was put in there 90 years ago. Still the same? Mm-hmm. And now it's serving the Japanese. Yeah, and that's Japanese. The free church is up on Tuey Avenue. You know where that is, up north? They built quite a few years ago. And the pastor wasn't living at that time then? No. Len Bloom was our pastor. Do you know any of the headstrooms in Chicago? No, I don't think I know. Oh, they had a shoe store? Yeah. They were brothers, weren't they? Yeah, well... They had a shoe store on Bell Mountain, Sheffield? Yeah, and they had one on Chicago and Clark Street and near Foster at one time. Oh, yes, yeah. Yeah, well, Cliff now is out at the Fairhaven. But his father sort of ran the free church, the Lakefield Free Church. He was choir director and everything. So this one at the Fairhaven, is he the son of that... CB headstroom. The owner of the shoe store? Mm-hmm, and they had the shoe store. The boys had the shoe store afterwards. Out from Chicago to stay at Fairhaven. But he didn't work here in Rockford, though? No, no. He retired at Rockford? Mm-hmm, he just retired to one of those nice... And he also was a shoe business man? Yeah, they did. They sold them. They were always in the shoe business. Nice, awfully nice people, too, good people. His father was awfully good. So there were the Swedes shot themselves? Yep. We also had a Greek restaurant on the corner. Greek? Yes, Clark and Foster. At that time, back in the 20s? Yes. At that time, there were a lot of little Greek restaurants. And the Swedes catered to them, too? Well, the guys are walking the streets, you know, and they'd go in there for coffee. And there was one right on Foster and Clark there for many, many, many years. We were talking about that the other day, that there used to be a lot of Greek restaurants. That's about probably the only thing they knew what to do when they came over, too, you know. They used to set it right in the Swedish neighborhood. Yeah, it's funny. But now, I don't know what it is up there. Indians and Puerto Ricans and everything else. It certainly has changed. You know Rose Hill Cemetery? Yes. I was wondering if you'd been in there. Yes. Well, my brother is buried there, see? And so we went in there to look up his grave. And you never saw such huge monuments in all your life. They're way high, you know. They have monuments here, but they're nothing. But if you have a chance, drive through it sometime. We just couldn't believe it. Did you have a marker done for your mother? No, just on the ground. A stone. A stone. With his name then on it? Uh-huh, Arthur. And we found it. Not this time, or is it? No, but the second time we did. But we were looking in the wrong place. But, I mean, it's an interesting cemetery with all their... Yeah, they had the idea, yes, Roy. Oh, they were huge. Yeah. Oh, we just couldn't believe it. And the Franks boy is in there, you know. Leopold and Loeb, you know, that killed... Of course, you're too young for that. Two Jewish boys that lived on the south side, they killed another Jewish boy, a young boy. And they were buried up there? He's in a mausoleum type, this Franks boy. Of course, Leopold and Loeb are both died, I guess. But that was the big, big, big murder in the 20s. In the 20s? Uh-huh. Why did they hit the news so fast? I don't know. Was it because of suspension? They were just young people and didn't know what to do. Yeah, just have to do, the rich. Just like they do now, yeah. Go and write graffiti all over everything, you know. Yeah. So, you of course had the Swedish traditions at Christmas and everything. Oh, yes, we still have. And you learned the cooking of everything. Well, yeah. We don't have the lutefisk because we don't care about the lutefisk. What did you bring with you now and what did he bring from his culture background? Coming from Williamsburg. I mean, there's some status involved there. Yeah. Oh, I don't know. Plum pudding? No, I don't. We don't. He's never. We don't have plum pudding. You're having all Swedish Christmas. Yeah. We've always stuck with all the Swedish food. And he's liked it. But you don't have lutefisk. No. And my son-in-law is not Swedish. He just loves brunabär and all that junk, you know. Sylt. Yeah, we get it. I don't make it, but. You can get it locally. Yeah, but you know, that's not going to be long before they're not going to be able to get it anymore. So your children, are they able to fix a Christmas table? Oh, yes. They love it. In Swedish? So they can cook the dishes and prepare them. And then we make glögg. Glögg, too? Now, he'd be interested in my kids now are 50 years old and 48. And they learned to say, Gudsom, Have a Bonn, and Tjern. Oh, you taught them that? Yeah, mother. Grandma. And then their children. My daughter has two children. The boy is 24 and the girl is 20, 21. They say it. And my son, he married late. His children are 10 and 8. And they say, Gudsom, Have a Bonn, and Tjern. So that's being carried right on down to the age. And I think they will probably teach their kids to say it, you know. It's just something that we've just done. So do they also belong to the Frischuch? No. Well, my son now is divorced. He's been divorced for a little over a year. And he has custody of the boys. She went through thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars. He let her take care of the checkbook and stuff, and she never paid the bills. Finally, he found out about it. She was taking a beauty course, and he said, Well, we want no more money for the beauty course until we get caught up. But then she didn't like that, so she sued for divorce. But he has the children and has the house. So the kids are here quite a bit, then. So they live in Rockford? Yeah, they live down by Harrison and Mulford. And how about on your side now? Have you searched back your ancestry? No. Yes. What about? Well, the genealogy of the Johnson family. British, British. Is it easy to do it for you to find your roots? I mean, there are records that can... Yeah, he's got a lot of... I'm sorry we don't have the book. He has a cousin living down near El Paso, Illinois. That's where the family originated. My father's folks was out of... El Paso. You grew up in Eureka later on. Yeah. You were born in Eureka. How come you were born in Williamsburg then? He was. They moved out there, and your parents? Yes. My father was a sportsman, and he liked... You know, he had a couple of hounds, and he hunted and everything. And he had a horse? Yeah, we had one. He sold his... The family, the Johnson, had about, oh, I don't know how many acres, out of El Paso. In Illinois? Yeah, in Illinois. And your dad moved then to Williamsburg? Yes, then my dad... Your mother. When they tried to sell the estate, the girls' fellows won the money, so they had to sell the whole thing. And dad, he took money, and he went down to... To Williamsburg. Williamsburg, Virginia. And you already had sisters? Yeah. Ada, Arpa, and Mabel. They had three sisters. And then Paul was born down there. Yeah, born there. And then his father... And then five, my father was killed. He took over the job for some fellow, when they were extending a spur line, it was high, and he went down and put something on something, and they dumped a whole carload of dirt or ashes on it. So he was killed. So there we were. And then they moved back to Eureka. Then mother came back where she was born, see, in Eureka. So you had your school in Eureka College? Yes, that's right. You must be a classmate of Ronald Reagan. Sure, fraternal brother. Same fraternity. Same fraternity. But not the same year. Not the same year. Reagan is old enough, but he's not as old as Paul. Seven years after I was out. Oh. Yeah. So there you had your education. Yeah. And why did you come up north into Rockford? There was an opening in the high school here? Yes, my first job was hot in the Alamo. That's outside the? Just near. About nine miles north of Elgin. And I was there for about three years, I think it was. And I disciplined a kid with about, I was wrong, and he was the, he'd take care of the depot, you see, and he got the, he went to the, the father running the school and said I had to go. So that was the best thing I ever did because I came up to here and I got a job. At Lincoln Junior High. Lincoln Junior High School. It was just a new school then. And I developed a good program there and everything. Were you told then that this was a Swedish town? No. Were you told by someone? Everybody knew it. Yeah, but you probably wondered when you came in, though. What did you notice when you came from outside? Well, I had to get out, so I came up here and, no. Well, it was the closest larger city. The father ran the system, school system. Superintendent of school. He came down to Hartley. He was asked to come down and I asked him, did you have insurance, did you come up? Lincoln, I was there when Lincoln opened. So I got a job there and I developed a good course. What year was that, 1928? 28. 28. So here you had Herman Hallstrom, Woody Schiff, Bargrain, Constable Lindstrom. Yeah. You met them all. You met them all. You know them all. What did you notice? I mean, you were not a Swede, now, was you? No, I don't. Life is hard sometimes. I never thought of it. When you walked on 7th Street, you couldn't say an English word because everything was Swedish there on 7th Street. Nah, it wasn't that bad. They used to call it. Yeah, but they said that everything was in Swedish. Well, years ago, yeah. Yeah, I mean, 20s when it came. Yeah, well, yeah, in the 20s, there was a lot of Swedes there. They called it snuskot then. Yeah. Well, I— Well, you know a lot of the Rockford history. A bronze plaque tells me a lot of the history. They planted a ginkgo tree, one of the oldest trees from centuries back. Yes. Yeah, and it's planted there. At Lincoln High School. At Lincoln High School. And it's still there? Sure. Yeah, they have a marker. In fact, I have. Bronze plaque. So you remember when that tree was planted there? Sure. Yeah, they planted it for him when he retired. Oh, I see. Then when you retired, I thought it was planted there. 20 years ago. I see. So apparently you did a good job. Sure. You went through the test with the Swedes? I'll say. Well, they laughed. A fellow from up in Michigan had the idea he was going to find out why kids like science. And so he came down here and they brought all their science teachers who were in charge in the city, hostesses. And no one wanted to. I said I would. I'd take it up. He wanted to do a lot of research. And he did. And he'd come down and he'd have all tests of all different kinds. What nationality the teachers was and so on, and everything. And he'd go back, what was it? Well, anyway. And Glemsk. Yeah. But anyway, he would have kids take tests. And then he'd come back every time. He'd say, Josh, I don't know what you're doing. Your kids were high, as the professor's kids, school kids, he said. He said, I don't know what you're doing. So you had a good bunch of kids? I knew what I was doing. I had got out teachers, I had about eight or ten, twelve teachers at one time, twelve. So you had gifted students that already had. Well, some were. Yeah. Some were. Well, back then. But there must have been a market in the city of Iraq where you see all those factories started by you. Yeah. But most of those people that came, they had no education at all. No. No, like Amarok, those guys had third and fourth grade. Swan Hillman. Yeah. Hugh Anderson. All those guys, yeah. But their children, how did they develop all those good students? Well, I don't know about Hillman's kids. He had one boy and one daughter. Yeah, and he had a boy, I think, that was a little feminine. I see. But I really don't know what has happened to them. But the Aldine boys, they're active in the pre-church stuff. Yes. From Amarok, as far as I know. Very much active. But, you know, back then the teachers were dedicated and the kids told the mark. Of course, now the kids don't have to mind or anything. You mentioned during the Depression they had to close the schools for seven weeks because they didn't want to get a referendum through. Yeah. Had they been very stingy, the Swedes, I mean, to support the schools and the teachers? Rockford has been very conservative. Because the teachers have always been, yeah, a lot conservative. Very, very conservative. Blum was the mayor at one time and the school board. Well, it was that they wanted to hold the teachers down or something. Why did they do that? I don't know. Because there was the leadership. Oh, and they tried to get the – at that time the schools were running in the black. I mean, they were just wanting more money so they could continue to run in the black. Of course, now they run in the red, you know, and it's all right. But they would try several referendums, and finally this one they said, well, if the people didn't vote for it, they would close the schools. Well, they didn't believe they would do it. They did. But they did. They were closed for six weeks. That's the only time – Yeah. That's a black mark on Rockford. They don't like to talk about it. But that's what they did. How was Herman Hallstrom? He was a socialist. I mean, he was a voted in as a socialist. Yeah. I don't know, really. How was he for schools? I don't know. Well, you see, they– Well, I suppose how he was. I mean, they have advisors and so on. Yeah, the school board. But the city council, now at that time, when you came in as a teacher, they were stacked with Swedes. Not too many Italians or Irish or Lithuanians. No, of course there are. But they were conservative then. Oh, well, Rockford's always been– They make fun of Rockford because it's been such a conservative town. But you never thought of moving out of Rockford because of a low salary or anything like that? No, no. I had a good job. You had a dedication to do a job? Yeah. If I could have taught two more years, my pension would have been double. Teachers, salaries, double. Well, see, they– I had a retirement. I was– Mandatory. You had 65. 65. Oh. If I could have taught two more– But now the teachers, they're still not satisfied. I mean, I think you could pay the teachers $100,000 a year and they would still complain. Every person is taught like that. They never get enough. But it seems to me the teachers had a very bad representation or a loyal among themselves. Why didn't they– Well, they did unionize. They did. They did? When did it happen? In the 40s? Oh, no, no. Before? Oh, no. No. Way later. Were you afraid to talk about unions then during the 30s? I don't think that they unionized until about the late 50s. This is strange, though. But, you know, Paul went to one of the meetings and he gets– You know, the unions, they get too pushy. Like the workers now, they were afraid to unionize because if they talked union, they were off immediately. Yeah, that's right. But the teachers, were they afraid also to talk about union because the school work could be hard? I don't think so. I don't know. Well, of course, they're protected by tenure. They have tenure. If they've taught two years, they can't be fired, which is not right either because then the teacher that isn't any good keeps his job. It's like a union. That's a bad thing. So it's protected. Then there's a faction. There was a union and then a teacher's organization, and they were fighting each other. One of them tried to be the power. But Paul went to one of the union meetings, and he didn't like the way they acted. You never went back to those meetings? No. You never? But that's the way they operate. I mean, they want you to come once in a while, then you stay away. Yeah. But we've never been union people. But I'm becoming more and more now, one day, because I think that people... You've become union? No, I'm not. But I mean, in thinking, because I'm thinking they're getting the short end of the stick with all these huge corporate salaries and pensions, and then they're asking the union people to make concessions all the time, you know. But don't you think it was necessary to have a union? Oh, absolutely. To make it better for the people. Absolutely. Oh, management took advantage of them. And now they're trying to do the same thing again. They can't be a happy medium, you know. They can manipulate them in one way or another. No, it has to be one push the other, which is too bad. Now, you know, the CBS has fired a lot of people. And do you know how much money Dan Rather makes? Well, it's over a million and a half. Two million. A year. But there's not enough to arm you. That's a pretty good salary, isn't it? No. Well, they probably have a rough time to visualize what others make. I mean, they don't compare themselves with anybody. No, but they think they're God, you know. They think they're the... Know everything. And Ayakoka, of course, he did a wonderful job. But, boy, look at the money he's pulling down. He makes $12, $13 million. Oh, yeah. So after your mother had this bad experience with her stocks, did you trust her to make a stock investment, for instance, money in a stock investment? Well, I think with... How did you feel about that? Well, no, we didn't have any. No one had any money to invest way back then. But I think with Insoles, if they put a little more in, they did get some money back. But they had to put some money in, but I don't know just exactly how much that was. But then later she bought Commonwealth Edison Company stock, and that has done very well. So she had quite a few shares of that when she died. She had some friends then to tell her what to do? She lost $50,000. She came back and raised it up to $50,000. So she... Well, the company... After that, she lost $50,000. She worked, and she got... Well, you're still living frugally. You didn't just go out and blow it. Now everybody is doing everything and then paying for it afterwards. There were no plastic cards at that time. No, I'll say that. Yeah, that's a lot of changes in the world. I should say so. And... Do you remember anything about the socialist group in Rockford that was here in 1928, 29, and 30? The socialist group that was on Sweden? Well, everybody called them communists. They called them communists? Yeah. You see, they were out of work, and the banks were closing, so they had no savings. And then they were left with their mortgages, and at that time most of the mortgages were around $5,000, which is absolutely nothing. And people lost their homes for that, you know. And then they... I can remember when we lived on 7th Street, they marched down 7th Street, and everybody called them communists, which of course they weren't. How many were there in that parade? How many do you think? A couple of hundred? Oh, yeah, I'm sure. So you remember that parade? Oh, yeah, I worked out at the courthouse, and people were out of work, and they just came in and stood in the courthouse to keep warm. And then I can remember we had a big snowfall, so they asked these guys to go out and shovel snow. You know, people wanted them to shovel snow, but they wouldn't go. So, you know, that was about the start of all this business. So this parade, was it in the summertime? Oh, yeah. In the summertime. They had plaques then asking for... Just people that didn't, yeah, they just didn't have any money, and the banks, they couldn't get any of their money out of the banks. But there were not too many joining that group, so they disappeared? Oh, no, it wasn't that organized, you know. Was there anything in the press in Rockford? Oh, I'm sure. I don't remember, but I'm sure there was. Because Mother had several friends, and they didn't know what they were going to do. They couldn't keep up their mortgage payments, lost their houses. Do you remember if anybody went back to Sweden? Yeah, I don't recall any particular ones, but there were people that did go back. But then a lot of them came back again. The guy that lived over on the corner there, oh, this is about ten years ago, he was going to go back to Sweden and live. He was a widower, and his wife had died quite some time ago, so he thought, well, he'd go back to Sweden. So he sold his house. No, he didn't sell it. Yeah, he sold his house. He came back in three weeks. All his relatives, they had their hands out, you know. Oh, he's a miserable fuck. And he thought, to heck with this noise, so he came back. And so he went into the P.A. Peterson home. But, you know, the Swedes aren't this way. They think that everybody is millionaires here. Because when the Americans go over there, the Swedish Americans go over there and visit, they expect to pay and pay and pay. And when the Swedes come over here to visit, they expect to be taken care of the whole time they're here. We were in Sweden in 1979. And my cousin Sven had been here in June with his wife and 16-year-old daughter. And he said, now you'll be sure you come because I want to take you around. So we were on a tour. It was a done right tour. We had a wonderful trip. We were in Norway and went up the fjords and to Stalheim. Really a very wonderful trip. And then it ended in Stockholm. And then from Stockholm we went to... Upplöja? No, where Ruby lives. Oh. Take this off and maybe... There were four of us. There were two... Västerås. Yeah. Women and Paula and I. And we went to Västerås then to see the cousin of hers.