 Yes, we have today a 987, together with John Victor Larsson, now guard in Norrjärn. He was born on 15th of July 1909 in Kili, Värmland, and came to Lämrika in 1928. And he also has a wife, Elden Victoria Fyll-Persson. So, he was born on 15th of July 1908 in Mellodosa, Manitoba, Canada, and came to Lämrika in 1941. So, we'll start with you now, John. You came to your brother Albert in 1928. Yes, I did. You came to Gryffsholm. How did it happen that you became a migrant? Was it the letter from Albert that told you? Yes, I had three brothers here, Albert, Arvid and Karl. And then there was the bad times in Sweden. We were five boys, and my father said that it was best that I travel to Lämrika as well. He asked me to travel to Lämrika as well, so that I might have a better future. So, I took him up on that. And then I had three brothers here, so it was easy to travel here. So, Albert was one of the older ones? Albert and Arvid came at the same time, in 1923. They were two brothers. Albert is 14 years older than me, and Arvid is 10 years older than me. Arvid and I lived in Rakva together for over 40 years. The other one lived in Moline? I had a sister in Moline as well, Elsa. She lives in Florkanst, can you meet her? She's 80 years old now. She lived in Piresburg. Werner Svansson. Do you know Hurtzigis Moline? Yes. Hurtzigis is Werner's cousin. Martin Hurtzig. I know that Albert and Martin were often together. Yes. Did Albert write anything? He's easy to write, as you know. Did he often write letters to you? Yes, my brothers often wrote letters. He helped me a lot. It was so easy to get through to the consulate. If you had a letter from a farmer in America, and my brother in Moline had written a letter to Albert, which I had with me to the consulate, that there was so much farm work in America, and I could get what I wanted, and I showed it to the consulate, and it was easy to get through. So it wasn't difficult? No, it wasn't difficult. Because that's what it was like in America. If you said you were going to work in factories, you'd be sent back to the consulate. So Albert had told you about that. Was it Albert you wrote letters to, or the others? Yes, I wrote letters to everyone. Did everyone... My brother Carl, he was here for seven years, and then he went back to Sweden, because he didn't like the factories. He liked having property and horses, so he went home and got property in Sweden. He lived there until he died in 1981. So he didn't go back? He lived in Glava in Värmland when he died. He had several properties in Sweden. But you came here as a farm worker, or a farmhand. But that wasn't the point, was it? No, but it was just to get through. So how did you get through? Ellis Island was closed at that time. It was closed already. Did Albert or any of the other brothers ask you to do it? My brother Carl sent me a ticket. He sent me a ticket when he went home. He was the one who sent me the ticket. So I came here and got a job in Molin. Did he work in Molin too? He was right on it. He had a truck and he drove cement on it. He drove cement and he worked in factories. But he never liked the factories. He didn't want to work indoors, he wanted to work outdoors. So he enjoyed his time with his father in Sweden. What did you do when you moved to Sweden in 1928? Did you do any forestry work? Yes, I did. In the summer I worked as a ploughman for the farmers. Did you like that? Yes, at that time it was going well. I didn't know anything else. So I was happy. Did you get a job? No, I just moved away from there. I stayed a little longer. It took a year to get a job. So I moved away from there. And you didn't have any girlfriends? No. You only had a suitcase. What did you put in the suitcase when you left? I didn't have anything with me, just a little extra. It wasn't much, a shirt or something. I had it in the suitcase. Didn't they tell you to bring work clothes? No, they said I shouldn't bring anything. There was nothing to take with you? No. My mother wanted to send me wool socks, but they said no. It was so hot in America and in the factories, you couldn't use them. So you came with... When I went on the boat, I only had a small bag in my hand. That's all you had. There was no farewell party in Chile? You went away with friends? No, there was... I went to a good temple, Loste. They had a big... I was there. It happened that I arrived just before I left that week. So they had a farewell party for me. Everyone from Eden was there. No one from the people who had been to America waved goodbye to you, who had been here before. No one. No one wanted to go with you or wish to be on the trip? No. What happened? I left home. But there were a lot of immigrants who came. At that time it was terrible to emigrate. When you came on the train, you met immigrants everywhere. In Gothenburg? Yes. And you came to Moline? I came to Moline at night. Did anyone new meet you? Yes, there was a customer. I think it was when I went to Chicago. It was like a forest and the train was from New York. They forced us into the Junior Station in Chicago. The last station? Yes, the Junior Station. I think it's demolished now. I came with my bag and went. I hit my bag on another boy's bag. I had to apologize. I asked him where he was going. He said he was going to Moline. I said I was going to Moline too. It was nice to meet you. He lives in Moline. His name is Nils Karlsson. Yes. And then I remember. On Sunday when we got out of the station, there were buses. The drivers drove to the different railroad lines in Chicago. They pushed me in and threw my bag in the bus. I sat there and looked. I didn't see the guy who said he was going to Moline. I looked around and saw that he wasn't the guy. I thought he was a phil. We had notes on the train that the railroad drivers had put on. All the stations in Chicago, Rock Island and all the other lines, went to Chicago. I noticed that I was going to Rock Island. I came to the Rock Island line in Chicago. There was a line there. I looked at the other people in the line. The line was not the same. It was a column further down. I realized that I was in the wrong place. There was a driver standing outside the bus window. I knocked on the window. He noticed me and came to the window. I held up the note against the window and showed it to him. He looked at it and came and opened the door. He took my bag and came running. We ran a long way through the alley. There was another bus. He pushed me in. There was a guy in the line. I was scared. I wondered where I had ended up. It was 11 o'clock in the evening in Chicago. That's strange. I wondered where I had ended up. Your heart was in your chest. It was a bad feeling that you would knock on his door. It was strange. If I hadn't knocked on his door, I would have ended up in the wrong place. You could sit with him and speak Swedish. There were three people in Moline. I was the fourth. When we arrived in Moline, it was late. It was around 2 a.m. Nils Karlsson, his brother, was at the station. I told him where my brother lived. He said, I can take you home. I got in his car and he drove me. When we got to the house, Albert came with his car. He backed out and picked me up. Was that the house you lived in? Yes, it was the same house. What did Albert say when he saw you? He was surprised that I was there. You lived with him for a few days. I lived there for a year. So he hired you today? Yes, I got a job at Jan Deers. He recommended that you go to Jan Deers. He works at the International Harvester. Yes, he works at the International Harvester. There were no Swedes there. We went to Moline and Jan Deers hired Swedes. There was an old man called Karlström. He was a Swedish interpreter for us. You got a job there? Yes, I got a job there. What kind of job was it? We got a job at the carpentry workshop. They repaired the roof. So you became a carpenter? Yes, we helped the carpenters. We were like helpers. They put in old carpenters who knew everything. We helped them during the summer. We did all kinds of work. We put up beams and stuff. What did you think of the work? Well, it was over in the summer. So I sent them to the other departments. I got a job at a place called Pundspresset. An old man called Falk was the boss there. He was Swedish. I worked there in the spring. I worked at Rock Island, a tractor company. I came there in the spring. I was a real worker. I worked there a bit. In the summer, in June, I went to Rockford. My brother Arvindan was working at the paint company. So I went to Rockford. I stayed there until the Depression came. In 19... What was it? 1929. So you were here? I was working at the paint company. I liked it there, so I started working there. That evening, they announced that they would close down. The Depression came. Just like that. Oh my gosh. I didn't work there anymore. Then I left Rockford and went to Moline. I was around there in the winter. Did Albert work there? Yes, Albert. He was fired too. It was the same. But Albert moved to Sweden in 1930. Albert moved home for the first time. Then the Depression came. So he didn't work. He stayed in Sweden and we stayed in Moline. But then we had to do what we could. It was a terrible Depression. There was no work. I helped a shoemaker in Moline. He was a ring-clinker. He worked in a shoe repair shop in Besment. I helped him and gave him credit. He worked as a ring-clinker for a while. Then in 1932 I left for Farm. There was nothing to do. I left for Farm in Moline, outside Ofim. On the way to Årien. You know that place. Yes, on the way to Gelfry. Ofim. There was a road up to Farm. I worked at a farmer. Bodtalen, Galvan. There were all those places. Was he Swedish? He was born from the Swedish ancestors. He could talk Swedish. So you lived with him? I worked for him. But you didn't get much pay? No, I got 20, I think he gave me 25 a month. I worked all summer and autumn. He had a lot of cows. I worked until after Christmas. So you became a farmer? Yes, I was a farmer. So you're not lying about the consulate in Gothenburg today? No, I became a farmer. What did you like about the job? I would have liked it if I had my own farm. But I didn't want to be a hired man. But it would have been interesting to have a farm. I liked that. So you were interested? Yes. So I stopped there next year. In the winter I went to Moline again. In the spring of 1933 I went to Asko. To another farmer. To the Andover? Yes, Asko. Not far from Andover? Not far from Andover. I worked there. A guy had a big tractor. He used to work on the farm. He bought a special tractor. He had it on fire and I had to drive it. I plowed and harvested. It was interesting. Three plows. I liked it. It was interesting. And you didn't have a fever? No, I didn't have a fever. I felt good. It went well. He rented land. He planted corn and wheat. He had a lot of work. But then, in July, my brother came back to Moline. One Sunday. In Rakborn. He said that he had started to pick up in Rakborn. Maybe if I go back, I'll get a job. I said yes. I quit. I had an old Mali-10 Ford. You drove a car? 1925 Mali-10 Ford. I drove between the farms on Saturdays and Sundays. A guy from Moline helped me fix the car. He put new rings in the car. It went well. He didn't take much gasoline. Gasoline was only 10 cents a gallon. So it was cheap to live on? Yes, it was cheap. But you didn't have much money. Then I moved to Rakborn. I went to Rakborn to work. The Rakborn product had started. In 1929, Svan Hildman started the factory. We went to the factory and started our own. He started in 1929. I came back in 1933. I had asked for a job. They had taken my name and my brother was working there. I went to a company and asked for a job. There was a factory there. They hired people to work there. I asked the boss if I could get a job. He said he would help me. He said I could get a job at the Puntpress. I came back here the next morning. When I came home, my brother came home from the Rakborn product. He said I could start there tomorrow. I never went back to that company. I waited for my brother to start. I stayed there 41 years. 41 years? What company was that? Rakborn product company. Svan Hildman? Svan Hildman. You knew him well? I knew Svan Hildman. He was a good guy. He didn't like unions. No, he didn't like unions. But he paid the union fee. He did? Yes. He didn't like unions. He wanted to be independent. But he wanted to be paid. He paid the union fee. We had a union fee. He never had any problems with unions? No, they voted twice in June. But he never joined. How many workers were there when you started? I had 90 when I started. 90? On the map. When I finished in 1974, there were 1,700. It's growing. In 1974, we had the most employees ever. And from there on, they went and sold the company. The company went bankrupt and they ruined the whole business. Rexnor. They didn't know what to do. And they drained the company. And that's bad. Now, I think that with the office and everything, I think there's only 800 left. So, Hildman, how old were you? 1960? He was 77 years old. He died? Yes. Can you remember what year it was now? I remember. It was quite a long time ago. Oh, yeah. That's a long time ago. Do you want a cup of coffee now? A guy that, you know, nobody met for him. You know, like, workers, they cannot sneer at the big shot. They never was like that. Everybody respect one. When he come to walk to the shop, the guys respect one. So, he walked every day to the shop? He come and looked and a machine and he wasn't like other guy. He had work a machine himself and, you know, all of a sudden, I know one guy there, he had a new machine and he tried to put on different cams and cam. And Svon Hildman come there and had started working with him and helped him. And that was so funny to see. He was not, when he come to the workers like that, he wasn't try to be big then. So, he was not stuck up then? No, then he wasn't stuck up. But you were in Moline, you didn't join any church or organization of any kind? In Moline, no. I only belong to Vasa in Moline. Oh, you joined Vasa? Yeah, I joined Vasa in Moline. Oh. Yeah. But then when I come to Rockford, I never joined Vasa here. No, I joined... How about the church though? Yeah, First Covenant Church. I joined, afterwards I joined First Covenant Church. Here in Rockford? Here in Rockford, yeah. Yeah. That's where Carlson goes, you know. Yeah. John Carlson. So, when you came here to Rockford, or if you compare... 1929 I come here. So, if you compare Rockford at that time with Moline, there was many more Swedes here, of course, in Rockford. Yeah, there was more Swedes there. But you also found them in Moline though, at that time? There was many Moline too, at that time. But there was more, bigger countries. And you know, here in Broadbent was just full. And mostly in Broadbent, Seven States, there is Swedes walking up and down. There was a central... Yeah, and you saw them every day. Oh. Yeah. So, you had more trouble then to communicate with the people there? No, no. How did you learn English now though? Well, I went to night school a little bit in the winter time. But I guess, I never learned English very good. I still can't speak English very good. Was it hard, you think, because there were so many Swedes here? It was hard because they talked Swedish. And there was a mixed up. Half Swedish and half English all the time. Like the old timers now, they like to speak Swedish also. Yeah, they did. So, you met some of the old ones here. You didn't join the temperance here, of the IODT? No. No? Here in Radford? Yeah. Because you were a member in Sweden though. You belonged to Sweden. Yeah, in Sweden I belonged there. Not here? Not here, no. They had a club there, a gym club. A Swedish gym club. And my brother was president there, Arvid, for that gym club. Oh, you was? So, I joined that little while there. I was with there a little bit. And we used to go to gym club and he was a weightlifter. He was a tremendous weightlifter. He was in Radford, he lifted the heaviest weight of anybody. Yeah, tremendous. He trained in lifting weights. Yeah, we used to hang around there a lot, that gym club. So, did you participate actively also then with gymnastics? No, we used to sit and play chess and in the gym club and things. But then they had a football team, you know. Soccer? Yeah, a soccer team. Did you play that? No, I didn't play soccer, but they had a team there. And then the weightlifting and they had boxing once in a while there too. So, your brother Arvid, did he participate in any meets with weightlifting? Yeah. In Chicago or? He had been, he was there sometime there. He took part in some. How much older was he? Ten years older than me. Ten years older. But he was still lifting weights when you came here? Oh yeah, he was in top shape then. What kind of work was he doing? He worked in Radford Park too. He started a lock company. And then when Svan Hilman started that new factory, then afterwards he went with them and afterwards he was running bolt makers. Svan Hilman, they started to buy these bolt makers. There was a tremendous big machine where the wire went in one end and come out completely the other one. Threaded and everything. Dropped down in a pen, then it was complete. Oh boy, there was some machines. And he used to run one like that. And then afterwards he became foreman there and was foreman over those machines for some time. Your brother? Yeah. He did a good job there. Yeah, good job. And he was married there? Yeah, he was married there. But he died when he was 69. He wasn't too old when he died. He started 70th year. He had his 69th birthday. In December he had his birthday and then he died the following February. So he was not too old then? No. Was he the only one that was athletic minded? Albert, he was not a weightlifter? No, no. No, he was the only one that was interested in training. So he was the president of the gym club? Yeah. How long did the gym club stay in business now? Well, quite a while, but it isn't here now. It went out of business. They moved from there and down to Fort Avenue and it disappeared eventually. It peered out. I don't know what happened. Was it because of the war, you think, the guys went out to war? Yeah. Swedish guys disappeared more and more. And then they gradually died out. You see, you've got to have a lot of members to keep it up. So it was impossible to keep it going. So you had to do some moving then during the Depression? Moline and Asko and Hofheim and Victor Wackford? I was on a farm. Two summers I was on a farm then, 1932 and 1933. So there was no way that you could have borrowed money from someone and rented a farm, for instance, on your own? No. You didn't see your way through there? No, I couldn't see my way through. Everybody was broke then, you know, at that time. I started Rakepraderk August 3rd, 1933. And there was still a bad Depression then? Yeah, there was still a Depression. And many companies were poorly, but that chapter, Svante Hillman started, they were going good. And it improved all the time. They expanded all the time. Citizenship now, did you take out there after five years or did you wait? I got my citizenship in 1939. 1939? You had to go to school then? Yeah, I studied. I didn't go to school, but I studied myself. Oh, I see. And you went on to the judge? Yeah, and it went fine. You went to the Swedish king and the royal house in Sweden? Yeah. We had to swear allegiance that we had nothing to do with King Gustav V of Sweden. You remember that? Yeah, I remember that. How many were you taking there? There was a big bunch that got citizenship at that time. In those days, there were many Swedes there, you know, and there was a bunch. There were many Italians too. You know, there were many Italian immigrants in Rockport. So there were Swedes and Italians, but the same amount, I would say. When you came here in 1933, starting for Rockport Products, were there any Italians in the factory at that time? Yeah, there were some. Quite a few? Yeah, they came. How were they to work with? Was there any friction between the Swedes and Italians? No, there was not. Years back, they said there was friction between them. Far back, they used to fight across east-west. The Italians lived on the west side, and then there was the east side. But not when I came here, there was nothing like that. You couldn't see anything? No, no. But there were no Italian foremen, though? There were all Swedes? There were all Swedes. Running the foreman's places on the floor? No, there was no... How about colored people? Were they in the factories at that time? Not then. I didn't see any colored people until later on they came. And like in Rockport Products where I was, sometimes there was no color. But then, during the war, they came. Then they started to hire black people. And then they hired more and more. So then they had to be friendly with the black, you know. So they had to send for them then from the south? No, they came, they lived there. But there were many factories that found always black people working. But there were some factories where you never saw no black. Like when we started there, they didn't hire no black to begin with. But then, during the war, they started hiring them. No, it's there. I voted for Roosevelt and Truman. And then I voted for... Eisenhower? I don't know, I can't remember. But I voted for Nixon one time only. You did? The second time I voted for him. What did you get from him then? You know, when he ran again, I didn't vote for Nixon, I didn't vote for Mikhailov, neither. I didn't vote for the president. Because I had understood that Nixon was going to happen sometime. And now I voted for... Kennedy. I think I did. And then there was... I voted once for Reagan. But the second time I didn't vote for him. Because he promised that he would balance the budget and he didn't do it. And he ran a terrible deficit. And that said goodbye to him. And I heard John Chancellor said that Reagan... It's all words, no substance with them. All words are there. Wonderful words are there. And there was a reporter from the New York Times, I think it was. And he said that Reagan is an actor and a television man. He can echo it on television. He said that was all. But then they thought that the Democrats would never win again. And Reagan again, the Democratic Party was dead. No, sir, they came from New York. When they get a man that can act on television, they get back in again, sir. So you are voting independently and you don't go by the parties? No, I'm an independent voter. How... Your brother Albert, he's been very active in writing and poems and reading and everything. Do you have the same? No, no, I can't. He has a tremendous memory and remembers things he read and learned. And you know, that's why he's like that. And he remembers way back in history what happened. When he writes in the Swedish American Tribune, do you have the tribune? Yeah, I get it from a lady. Her husband died, so she gave it to me. So I've been reading it. So when he comes here now, he goes way, way back, like you said, Albert, when he writes about the memory from his childhood. Do you recall any of those happenings? Yeah, I recall some of those that he had read before. Because I had been to those places. You know the people he's talking about also? Yeah. But there's some things, like stories he tells that I just faintly heard about. Like there was an accident that happened in 1907 and I wasn't born yet then. You weren't even born then? No. But he was telling about things like that. And 19, see, when he was 10 years old, there was a Christmas he wrote about home. Then he was 10 years old, he was born in 95, so that would be 1905. Oh, that's a long time ago. I wasn't born. I wasn't born yet. He was far ahead of you. Yeah. I think I go over to the house. How about homesickness now, if I compare yours with Albert's? He always goes back to his home and his childhood memories and everything. You know, Albert now is in his eights. I know that, with Albert. I followed him. His memory now goes back to his childhood. And he doesn't think so much about things now. He stays back there. He stays back there and he thinks about it. And whenever he comes here to Rockford, all he wants to talk to me about is Sweden. Back with history there. And old people, and he repeats, and he goes over and he remembers everything, just like if it was the same day he was living there. So he doesn't talk too much about Maureen then? No, not so much. When he comes back, he will talk about relatives and always. And things that were happening, different guys and so forth, and what happened there and there and so, and what times it was. He sure remembers a lot of things now. Yeah. So, well, you're not old yet. You haven't come into the States. Maybe I'll get that way too. But I try not to look back. Have you ever been homesick? I've never been homesick. No? No. I've never been homesick in my life. Even during the Depression, I tried to make it go away. And people, I know many boys that didn't have no money, and they applied for the government to give them a trip back home. I know many guys that went back. They never returned? There was one from our neighborhood there. That was here in Rockford. And he went to Chicago during the winter, and there was snow, there was Depression, and he applied for a free trip home. What was his name? He's dead now. His name was Gunnar Nordin. But he stayed in Sweden. He died. I went back to Sweden. I saw him when I was in there. I was in Sweden in 1952 and 1936 the first time, and 1952 and 1971. So when you went back in 1936, was there only for a visit, and you didn't intend to stay? No, I didn't intend to stay. I just went home to see how it was. But I did it like that. I prepared myself. I had everything fixed up in case I should like to stay in Sweden. Then I would stay. So you cleared your way? I cleared my way here and there so that I wouldn't need to come back for anything. That way I had it fixed. So how did you find your home place then? In other words, had it changed much? Your parents were still living? My parents were still living. They had the same little farm that I was on. My brother went back. He was already home then, Carl. He was here in seven years. But then he was home there and he was helping my dad and mother. He was on the home farm there and he stayed there. But I realized I wanted to go back to America. So in the fall I went back. They told me when I come that Rockport Products, if I come back I'll get the job back. So I came there and I got the job back. And I stayed there for one year. Your brother Carl, was he married when he was home in Sweden? No, he married in Sweden after. Why? He bought many farms and sold them. And he made money on them. Did he take over your parents' farm then? No. No, he didn't take it over. He sold it to somebody else. So he became a big farmer then? Yeah, he sold farms and he had them a little bit. And when he saw he made them, he sold it. So he kept on. So he made a little bit of money. And then he... And at the end, he rented the Prästgården. You know where that is? Västra Antevik. Oh, that's nice there, Västra Antevik. And it happened so that the old... There was an old minister there. And there were so many that applied to come there to take care of all the... Prästgården had a farm there. And then he was going to take care of it. He could rent it. And there were so many that applied. And some had a reed house. And the old minister, he didn't want that. He wanted reed houses. So when they had a meeting there, to decide who was going to have it, then the old minister stood up and told those guys that Larsson, Karl Larsson is going to have it, he said, because he is born on a farm here in Sweden and he had been in America and worked on a farm. And he knows it, he said. He's going to have it. And they decided on him, they gave it to him. So he said, and they were... He liked it there, Västra Antevik. That was nice, he said. So he stayed there until he died? He stayed there until he retired. Did he marry the pretty wealthy girl then, or how? No, he married the girl from... She was not too far from Västra Antevik. And I think she had a little bit... She inherited a little bit of money, I think. And they had two girls, and those are still living in Sweden. One is a teacher and one works as a nurse on a... a college, or something like that. And his wife is still living in Glava, in the house there. I see. Yeah. But he never returned to the United States? He came here on visit. On visit? No, he came two times on visit. Oh. Yeah. Did he remember any English then by... Yeah, he spoke good English when he came back. And he could write... He said everything he could speak, he could write, he said. So he could write and spell everything right. He was good that way. Yeah. And he had a good memory too, my brother Karl. He had a better memory then. He was like I was, but a little bit there, he had a good memory. Your parents, no? Did they want you to stay at that time, 1936? No, they didn't ask me. They didn't ask you? No. No, my dad said, you are still young, you can go to America and work a long time, and you maybe can come back again, he said. He didn't want to stop you if you had... No, no, he didn't want to stop me. So when you left the United States again, you didn't have any quarrels about that you were going to stay there or not? No, no, no. And I had never been lonesome to go back to Sweden. I never. So when you came back then, you started at Rockford Products again? Again. And then in 1941, you met Ellen Victoria Pearson? Yeah. From Bindendorsa in Minnetoba, Canada. Then I married her. How did you meet her? She came to Rockford on a visit here before... I think she was here in 1940. She came on a visit, she had relatives here. So I met her in Rockford. I see. And then afterwards... You met her at the church? Yeah, I think I met her in church one time. And then afterwards, I took her out a little bit, and when she went back home, I took her to the bus, and she went back and we rode a little bit. And then afterwards, 1941 we got married. It was during the war then. You worked at Rockford Products? I worked at Rockford Products. You were too old then to be drafted, or what happened? No, the company helped me. Oh, I see, you were deferment then. Yeah, I got deferred. Otherwise, they would have taken me. You were in the prime minister. Oh, yeah, I was in there and had blood tests, and we were called up too. But then after they heard that I had been called up and in there, then they sent in, and so they kept me. There was a company, I was... Had I been in that line of work, had I been in something else that was important, they would have taken me in the war. So you stayed in? They had the company there. Svan Hilman, Solstivarsdalen, he got in with the government and the Navy and all this army and made stuff for them. The most special bolt for the army, navy and airplane. During that war, they were on a war footing. They turned over to different bolts. And then after the war, those bolts disappeared again. I remember those special bolts they made for airplanes and tanks and stuff. What happened with that? Did they scrap it? I don't know. They didn't need so much of it. I suppose you had some stockpile of it. Could they use it for peacetime work? They probably had... They didn't stock much of that. They usually stock standard stuff, but the special stuff, they didn't stock. So did you buy a house then when you married? Or did you rent a place first? No, I rented a place first. Then I built two houses. I built one house and sold it. Yourself? No, I hired contractors. I hired different ones. I hired the one to put the basement, and then I hired a carpenter and so forth. I let it out, see? It's job. And then I sold it out. Then I built this one here. So this is from the 1950s then? This one we built in 1949. And this is your home? Yeah, we stay here. We stay here as long as we live now. It's no use tomorrow. And you have two boys? Yeah. And they are both working here in Rockford? Did they go to college then, both of your boys? No, the youngest one has gone to college. He has gone to... He went to Wheaton College two years, then he went to Northern Illinois two years, and he graduated in psychology from Northern Illinois, but he didn't like that psychology work. He didn't like it afterwards, so he went to Rock Valley College and Rockford College, and he worked at night, night class, and he went sometimes in daytime too, so that he got a degree in accounting. CPA? No, he hasn't got that CPA yet. But he works for the state of Illinois? Yeah, he has an accounting degree. And then when he got the accounting degree, then he got a job from the state. And it was hard to get in the state too. It was hard to get in. You know, which job you can ever pull, somebody else to pull. And I remember, he by chance had sat in there, Governor Thompson had said in Springfield that he was going to hire a bunch of accountants. Accountants to become revenue auditors. And he took the test. He was always good on the test, he got an A on his test. So, A, he got an A on his test. And then they said that there was an opening now. And he came from Springfield, and he could go to Chicago. And there was going to be an interview in Chicago. So I went with him to Chicago, and we drove in there. And there was a man there from Morton Grove, Illinois. He did the interviewing. And then he heard, and he said, and he kind of said to him, you know, he said, I'm going to recommend you, sir, to hire you in Winnebago County. I'm going to recommend that to him, he said. Because he had been working a little bit with the public aid, and he had been in court, you know. And he had a little experience that way. And then he said, so, I'm going to do that, sir. And that's what he did. So then, right after we came, he said, you've been hired by Winnebago County. Just go and report to the office in Rockwell. So that's it. Then he was in. And he travels then for the state, where companies have some offices. Wherever they send them, wherever they want them to go. But mostly, it's Minneapolis now, and he likes to go there because it's not too far to go. And he's well, he's been in Minneapolis so much, he knows the whole city. And there are companies that have out-of-state subsidiaries. Yeah. He had been to San Francisco, too, and Denver, and Omaha, Phoenix one time. So he has it much easier than you had then. Oh, yeah, he has it easy. It's heavily easy. At the same age? Oh, he has it easy. He has his own bars. Yeah. And it gets good. And you know, they get the airplane ticket paid, and they rent a car, and the state pays for the car when they come there. And then they get paid for the food. Yeah, they get paid for the food for that week. And the hotel room. Yeah, it's all paid for by the state. I don't know, we're telling them that you can never get no better. It's nothing like being your own boss. It was different when you were a farmhand in Osco. Oh, boy, oh, boy. $20 a month. You had the food, too, though. Huh? You had the food, too. Yeah. When you were out on the farm. Oh, that was rough, for fun. Oh, boy. You were not your own boss. No, I was my own boss. And you know, I tell you one time, the first place I was in O'Feem there, they had so terribly many hogs. And hogs go through the fence or something. The farmer woke me up at four o'clock in the morning and said, Go out and get the hogs. Yeah, four o'clock in the morning. I had to go up and haul down the hogs to come back. Can you tell your son this, what you went through when you were there? Oh, sure. What did he say then? Oh, what he left. I remember when there was a little pig I tell you. There was a wagon there where we fed them, a big box wagon. And it had wheels on, big wheels, you know. And there was a little pig, put its head in the wheel, and it got stuck. You know, at the top? Sure. And it got stuck, and it started screaming. And I tried to get the little hog out, and then the saws come. Ooh, and they were going to jump on me. They come, ooh, ooh. I had to jump up in the wagon and save myself. So I got up in the wagon. There was a two-by-four in the wagon. It was a good thing. So I took that, pressed on the neck of that little pig, and it got down, and it got up that way. So they got mad, the saws? The saws got mad because they heard the little pig scream. And they would have bitten me, you know. Ooh, they were wild. And it was a better home in Sweden, you know, when you only had two or three pigs. Different size of farms. Your wife now, Ellen, her parents, they were homesteading up in Minnedosa. Yeah, they bought a little place there, and then they broke up more land. So they had quite a big farm. They were both born in Sweden? They were both born in Sweden. Were they in the same place? Yeah, in that area. Were they married in Sweden when they came? I think they were. I'm not sure. I think so. So they came there in the early 1900s then? Yeah. They came there early. They took a homestead? They came there early because all the kids were born there. You have visited that place? Many, many times. How many Swedes do you think are around there, the farmers now? Yeah, there is, the only left now are descendants, children from these immigrants. They are not able to speak Swedish? A few can speak good Swedish. A few? Yeah, there's a few. Like, some are not so good, and some are really good. Do their children stay on the farm, take over when the old timers give them? Some have done, and some have not. Like, on her farm, one youngest brother took over the farm, and had it for a long time, until he got a heart trouble, and then he sold it off. How many brothers and sisters does she have, your wife? Well, she had three sisters and four brothers. They were eight children. There were four girls and four boys in the family. So some of them stayed up around there and became farmers? Yeah, yes, they became farmers. The oldest one became a farmer, and the youngest one became a farmer, but the one became a barber. And then there was one other one, he was kind of a salesman. He moved on to Brenton and Calgary, he lived in Calgary now, he's still there. He sold, went on and sold stuff for baby food and things for factories like that. But your father-in-law, now, he increased his land? Yeah, they broke up. They had past the land, you know, and they cut down the wood and burned it and broke up. So there was no, the whole farm was open land. They didn't have one little place where there was wood. Was it a good farm land up there? Yeah, it was a good farm land. There's quite a bit of stone in the ground, but... Yeah, it looks like stone. Yeah, that comes up with the frost. So they had to pick stone? They picked stone and they raked, they raked it with some, they had some equipment to rake it. They had to retract it, you know. But there was an everlasting job, every spring, picking stones. Sure. So when you saw that territory up there, you never got a liking for it, I mean, to tell your wife? No, no, I never thought that I'd go and farm. You were already... I set, yeah, I set. I thought I'd stick it out up to 65. The job I had, I'd stick it out to 65. It was pretty good. I made good money. Rock for Private Pickwood, Swan Hillman was a nice guy. He wanted, he thought he should have good pay, and he wanted them to have... He come up with pension, vacation, and he improved all the time. We got more vacation than the unions. Yeah, we got longer time. Did you get there without asking for it or requesting it? No, they gave it, without requesting it. So you never had any quarrels with them? After they had the first union election. Then, when they defeated that thing, then they come up with vacation pay and things like that. And Swan Hillman worked it up more and more and more. And then, I remember that I got paid for six weeks vacation. They didn't want us to take more than one month. But we got paid for six weeks. Pay, extra. See? That was good. And then, we got... What year was that? I don't know what that was. After the war, they had the election. When the war was over. Then they had the first union. But you didn't have a month vacation after the war. Huh? You had a month vacation after the war? No, that came later on. That came later on. I can't remember what year it was. But then we also got this here hospitalization. They come in. So we got that by and by. And then we got... If somebody died, you got three days off for funeral. You got the day before, the day after, and the funeral day. And that was Hillman's idea? Yeah. It was good that Swan Hillman... He didn't want the union in there, so he had all the things. Because when you get the union in the shop, it slows the production. And you get this here... The stewards, they go wrong. And don't do nothing. And they say, I don't know, we were better off without the union. So there was a good feeling among the workers then? Yeah. There was no grudge against you? No, no. There was no grudge. And we felt like we worked for the company. We worked for the company and did all we could. Because we... It was like that. Like I said, everybody had respect for Swan Hillman. When he came in, nobody would ever make fun of him. He was respected when he came. What happened when he... Was he still in the leadership when he died? Yeah, he was president when he died. What happened then? Well, he had an assistant. His name was Ward Lidbette. So then the directors voted him in for president. And he was president after. Until he retired. He was 65, then retired. You were still working with him? Yeah, I was still working with him. What happened then? Did you see any changes happen in the corporation? No, they used the same rules as he has wanted. They run it under the same principles. When he was... I'll tell you, Swan Hillman. I'll tell you he was a good guy. Because he was in Florida on vacation in the winter. And then they got a little bit slack there during the time. And the ones that were having control of the shop while he was gone, they took and laid off 20 women. They laid them off. And then when they'd been laid off one week, Swan came back home. And when he heard that they had laid them off, then Swan said, that wasn't necessary, so I told him, call them back and pay them for the week they'd been off. And they had to do that. You see, he was not a stingy guy. So he was apparently liked by all the workers? He was well liked, Swan Hillman. But then, the Rockford products today, you know, wasn't the workers taking over the whole thing? They were going to be run by the workers? No. You see, you know now they stole the company, the stockholders. The Rexnord. The Rexnord. And they come in there and they start to strip the company. And they knew how to run the screw company. And they wouldn't take small orders. They refused to take small orders, because then they'd lose the big orders. That was the problem. And then they had a problem. The Rockford Airplane, the Rockford Screw Company, the Roan Airplane, they took that away. And stripped them. And it started to go down, and they laid off people, and laid off, and laid off, and laid off. Finally, finally, there was some guys that left from the old time, and they decided they were going to buy the company from Rexnord. So they bought them. The workers. They bought it, and they said that the workers are in with them now. I don't know how it really operates. But not too long ago they had a strike. How can they have a strike against themselves? If they have a say in it, in other words, the workers? No, no, no. There was a one-day strike here a few weeks ago. Yeah, yeah. It happened this way. The president, they fired the president for some reason. He was an outsider, he came from somewhere, and they got rid of him. And then they were going to organize, they were trying to save three million dollars. They said, those that had taken over the shop, because they have, you know, to buy a company like that, they have to hold out on money. They had to borrow money. Yeah, borrow money. And they were going to try to save three million, so they were going to cut out the... We had free lunch, you know. So we had it for, like, twenty minutes. We had free. We got paid for that. So they took twenty minutes, and then there was paid for. So they always had that. And they were going to take that away from them now. They said. And they were going to cut them a certain percent. I think there was seven percent. They were going to cut them. And then they were going to cut a vacation. See? And many things. And so then, now the workers, they had them and walked off. That's what you say, in that one day. They didn't like it. They thought it was too much cut at once. But they went back to... Then they had to organize. So the guys got together, so they formed a little committee to speak for them. So they had a meeting down there in Conerty. And then they went. They had to kind of be compromised some way. So they come out. They went back. Everybody went back and worked. Are they manufacturing the same product as they did twenty-five years ago? Yeah, I think. They have lost much. This Rex, all I tell you, was dumb people. I know that because I went on the shop. And during that time, to just make a visit back. And we... Svan Hilman invented a boy.