 It was either when he went into the service or when he joined the union, the Pattermaker's Union. In Sweden? Yeah. One of the two, I don't know which. No? He was here two years before we came. Your dad? Yeah. So you came with your mother in 1923? I came with my mother, two brothers, two sisters, and my grandfather. Oh, he came also? Yeah. On your mother's side or...? That was my mother's dad, yes. Moorfolk? Moorfolk. We have April 24, 1987, and I'm sitting together with Martin Palmer in Rockford, Illinois. And he was born the 1st of February, 1919, in Jönköping, Sweden, and came together with his mother and the sisters and brothers in 1923 with Rottingholm. So your father now, John Palmer, what kind of work was he doing in Jönköping? He was a patternmaker. Modellsnäckare. Modellsnäckare. Yeah. So he had this job then for, it was the only job he had, beginning to work? I really can't say. I think so. So he set sail for the United States in 1920. I mean, what did he, did he hear some rumors of a good country or what made him...? No, I really don't know. He came over here to establish a home for us. Did he have any sisters and brothers over here or...? No, my mother had some sisters over here. And he came to? Yeah. He first came, the way I understand it, to Ironwood, Michigan, and then he came down to Rockford later on, in 21, I think it was. So he left alone and then to get the, did he get a job up in Ironwood or...? I think he was working for my uncle up there who had a door and sash factory there for a while. But then he came down here and he worked as a patternmaker for the rest of his life, yeah. So you came three years later? And you don't remember...? We came two years later. Two years later? Yeah. So you don't remember too much of that traveling? Three and a half, you couldn't remember it? No. Only remember on the boat? That's all, just a little. So when you came here then with your mother, he already had an apartment there or a house or...? Yeah, he had a house over here, yeah. He bought a house? He hadn't bought it, no, he hadn't. We were renting. He worked, started in during the 20s, there was a good... No, there was a, in fact there was a depression in 20, 21, 22. So he was laid off then? No, but he had written, the work was scarce, he probably was laid off at times, but he had written home and said that he was going to come back home. My mother's mother had just died and she wrote back and said, no, you stay there, we are going to come. So it was that close of still being in Sweden or being over here. So there was nick and tuck? Yeah. So you didn't see any future in the first years there in Rockford? No, not with no work. And then we came over and then afterwards things picked up. So you went to school here in Rockford, where were you living then at the time? Well, when we first came here we lived on Prospect Street and then later on we moved down to Barmy Street and then over at 11th Street when I started going to school I went to White School and then Lincoln Junior High School and then the old Central High School. And after high school did you look for a job then or did you... I started to work out of high school at Rockford Rock Forge in 1936 and I worked there for 45 years until I retired in 1981. I see. So the depression didn't affect you, your work schedule so to speak, but... It never affected mine and my dad. But you remember the tough times? Oh, very much so. My dad was laid off of work during the depression in 29 and 30 and lost our home that he had bought in the meantime and lost that. That was in the 30s. But he got back on his feet. How about savings? Did he have any savings in the security bank on Broadway or the one that folded? No, no. And the house was lost? The house was lost, yeah. Had he bought it a few years earlier? Yeah, he had bought it I think 1927 or something like that. So he had paid it in a few dollars on the way he left. How about your older brothers now? Did they start to work before you though? Yeah, my oldest brother, he worked in a furniture factory for quite a few years, Rockford Furniture. And then he came to work at Rockford Drop Forge for about 25 years. So he went with you in your employment? Yeah, yeah. And the other sisters and brothers? Oh, my other brother, he worked for many years for Olsen Linden, which is a grocery store that all the Swedes traded with on Broadway. He worked there for many years and then he worked at Ekström Carlsen. He is still alive. My oldest brother died last year. I've got my two sisters. My oldest sister married a Sven Lindquist. They had a paint store on 7th Street. And my other sister married a Ben Olsen in Moline. She died there about five years ago, six years ago and buried there in Moline. So no one went back to Sweden? Nobody went back to Sweden. Well, you got old enough now, especially during the Depression, because that's the years you remember. Did your dad talk about going back then to pick up and leave? He was not... I didn't have any money to go back. Was he depressed? He was all happening, the house was taken and... No, not really, not really. He was just trying hard to find another job, get back on his feet and work. So he could still see a silver lining coming up somewhere. What church did they join when they came here? Salvation Army. They were, as I mean, in Sweden? Yes. Active in the band and... Band and string band. Both your mother and your father? Yeah. So the whole family grew up in the Salvation Army? Right. So when we got here, we joined the Salvation Army here in Rockford. And you are still active with the Army? Yeah. Frälsingsarmin. And at that time it was Swedish, do you remember that time? It was Swedish most of the time, most of the services were Swedish. And I think that's one of the reasons I was able to keep on with my Swedish, because all of our church services was Swedish. Up until probably 20 years ago. So they kept Swedish longer than the rest of the churches? I think they kept Swedish longer than any of them in Rockford, yes. Until after a while they couldn't get any Salvation Army officers that would speak Swedish. So then of course it had to start changing. And then of course young people were growing up and they weren't interested in Swedish all the time. But how about the singing? Are the Americans able to follow along with the Swedish? Well, we have a string band now and every once in a while we do sing some Swedish songs. They manage to pick up the words phonetically mostly. So they do a pretty good job of it. During that time it was down close to D'Antonio? No, it was down on 4th Avenue and 7th Street. 4th Avenue and 7th Street, that was the real Swedish area? Yes. That whole southeast end was Swedish. That's all there was down there was Swedes. And there were meetings then on Wednesdays? Well, we had Sunday services three times a day. Sunday school and morning service and evening service. At that time we had Swedish service on Saturday night also. Saturday night? Yes. Then there was one in the middle of the week. Was that on Thursday? Do you remember that? I don't remember if it was Wednesday or Thursday. I was saying that the Swedish girls that worked in Homs, they were off on Thursday. And they were able to go to the Army, is that true or not? I don't know. Because they had to accommodate when they came home. We did have a lot of the Swedish girls, yes. Sunday school now, did you have that in Swedish also? No, no. It was English? That was English. All was English? All was English. We did have, no, our confirmation was in English too. Because my brothers and sisters were confirmed in Zion Lutheran Church because they had it in Swedish. Your parents wanted to have it in... Yes. I see. But you had it in English? Yes. So they felt attached to the Swedish language. Did they speak much Swedish in your home? Well, in my home it was Swedish all the time. All the time? Yes. Except when it got to be kind of 7th Street Swedish. But you brought home a lot of English to your parents. Did you answer back in Swedish most of the time? As I remember, I think I answered them in English. But we had a lot of Swedish in there. But they talked to you in Swedish? Right. And you had no trouble understanding what they meant? No. No way. They wanted you to do something, then Swedish command. Yeah. During the Depression, the Salvation Army, they did a lot of Samaritan jobs of serving soup. Yeah, they fed every single noon. Was they the only organization that did that during that time? You never hear of Batali Church. There may have been some down in the west side, down in the Italian district or something like that. But the Swedish Church didn't do it? Not to my knowledge. The Salvation Army was doing it, and they took care of that whole area around 7th Street. So they were feeding, the way I understand it, a couple hundred every day. Every day. And all the help was volunteered. And then they had to rely on offerings and donations. Yeah. Because they were not supplied by the state or the city. Not in those days, they weren't. So there was the home for the destitute and the hard ones couldn't get a job. A lot of them were the older single Swedes that only had a rooming house somewhere. They were the ones that suffered. They had no work and no place to eat. In fact, during that depression, we got quite a few of the fellows that joined the Army, became converted and changed their ways, and they joined the Army. And became officers? Yes. A couple of them went on as officers. And we had also, about that time, I think it was Colonel Stig Franssen moved to Rockford, and he was pretty much in our home most of the time. So he came during that time, during the Depression years? It was right towards the end of the Depression years. And he and my brothers were chums, so he was in our home most of the time, you might say. But he was a young guy. He came from Sweden then? Yeah. I think he was 17 or 18, something like that. So he got his training over in Rockford then? Yeah. Well, his training was taken then in Chicago. But he was not from Sweden because he was too young to have had any schooling in Sweden on that first disarming. Oh, no, no, no. He had his regular schooling came from Sweden, but the training college was all here. Kriegsskolan in Chicago? Kriegsskolan. By those things I mean Kriegsskolan. So how long did he stay then in Rockford? Oh, he must have, yeah, five years, six years, something like that. And then he moved on to Chicago and other places? Yeah, all over. Michigan. He's living up in Minneapolis now. So you know him very well then? Yeah. So when they were not able to give the people any jobs, or how did they? No, there was no work given to them. They didn't have any place or anything to do that with. They only fed the people in clothes. They had an old barn next to the Corps that was stocked with old clothes and stuff like that that they passed out when they needed them. Figures, I suppose they were born out. Some of them went without a job for two or three years. Yeah, that's for sure. Yeah, it started in 29, kept on up through 32, 33, and then it started to pick up a little bit. But then it went down again. 37 was a bad year for some reason. Yeah, just before the war it went back down again. You never went out to those CCC camps? No, no. I started working at Draft Forge in 36, and there between 37 and 38 we had some slow weeks, things like that, but never laid off. Were you able to work the whole week in 36? No, three days sometimes, four days. And they continued like that up to 38? About 38, and then it started to pick up. So something went wrong there in 37, the unemployment shot right up. I don't know if it was a forerunner of the war coming on or what. Something was brewing there, isn't it? Yeah, it was. What did people say about the CCC camps now that the Roosevelt or the government is gated? I think you had all kinds of opinions about it, but many were very much in favor because it took these younger fellows off the street corners and gave them something to do. And taught a lot of them discipline and things like that, which if they'd been hanging around you don't know what it would have been. So I think a lot of them were very much in favor of it. But it was phased out, though, or was it more something else? It was phased out, yeah. They'd done a lot of work in building up campgrounds and parks and road work and things in the sectors that they didn't hire contractors for. And they were sent away to other communities? They didn't stay in Rockford? No, no, they went up all over the country, yeah, all over the country. Most of the time they were out in a great big campground somewhere, an area that they worked on. Do you think the reason the people were opposed to it, or the people that were opposed, it was too much like the military service? Because they were living in camps and they had some restrictions to go by? Yeah, they had their restrictions. So maybe it was too much like the military? You know, there's always some people who don't want any restrictions. They want to do as they please. But that's what I say, it taught them, you know, respect. It seems to me that it was a good idea to get them, like you said, the people off the street. And then some of the money was sent home to the parents. Yeah, a portion of it. And they could keep a little bit. But it was phased out because there was opposition to it. Well, I think the need for it kind of disappeared, too. And when everybody was able to get jobs and start working and earning their own money, well, then, of course, it kind of phased out. So I don't think it was opposition as much as it was the need just disappearing. It was fulfilled at the time, and then they had to look for other jobs. And there were new ones for getting into the job market, too. Right. So you came to Rockford with the Rock Forge. Right. And you had a big, heavy machinery. Well, that was in Smedge. Smedge, yeah. So what did you start off with? I started out in engineering. Engineering. Yeah. Had you gone to college before that? No, I had taken a correspondence school, ICS correspondence schools, for my engineering. And then I studied in high school all the time, the engineering and pattern works, pattern making. I wanted to be a pattern maker. So you followed your father's footsteps, then? Well, I was going to, but then the pattern business fell down. Why did it do that? In 1936, they had a long strike. The pattern makers? Yeah. Well, they had an established union. They had an established union, yeah. And they had a long strike, and with the result of that, why, pattern shops would close up, we moved out of town, and the pattern making wasn't good. So I got this job at Rockford Drop Forge in the engineering department. And so that was—that's been my whole life, is engineering. I was—went up to superintendent, plant superintendent, and vice president of manufacturing. So— So when you retired, then, you had to— Well, no, I had previously, too, that I had resigned as vice president of manufacturing because my health was getting a little tough on me, on my high blood pressure. And so I decided to take it easier, but I stayed with them for a few more years until I retired. But I was vice president, I think, for about ten years. For manufacturing? Yeah. But the pattern makers, now, they were needed, though, for all the different jobs that are on here. Yeah, they were needed. There was a lot of foundries in Rockford at that time. What did they do then? They go outside? They went outside, but then a lot of them started filtering back, but then the pattern makers' union kind of fell out of favor. What did your dad know? How was he affected by this? No, he kept on working as a pattern maker for years. Without the unions? No, he was out on strike when the union was, but then when they came back, he maintained his membership. So the union was not busted up then, though, you still? No, just that more non-union shops would spring up, you know. But he managed until he died. How come they were able to unionize? Because the rest of the factories, like Rockford Products and the early, for instance, the John S. Barnes, they were opposed to unions like a flag. That's true. How come the union, the pattern makers, were they small? They were small. They were more or less of a guild, pattern makers. In fact, they called themselves pattern makers' guild, is really what they called it. And they held together there pretty well. Do you know when the year they organized? No. But they were organized before the Depression? Oh, yes, yes. So the law that was coming into effect in 1935, 1936, that everybody could unionize, they were far ahead of that. They were ahead of that. But the rest of the factories, they didn't like the unions? No. What was the reason, do you think? Well, I suppose some of these old-timers, some of these hard-nosed Swedes didn't want to be told by anybody else that this is the way we're going to run the plant, this is the way it's going to be. Even the workers, though, some of the old Swedes, they didn't care too much about unions at first. No, no. Do you think they were scared? I don't know. I don't know. The single man, of course, he didn't have anything to do much more than his job. But the family man, now that was up in the 40s and 50s, and the four or five kids at home, he was probably afraid to be stamped. See, there wasn't that many unions in Rockford for years and years. We had a lot of furniture factories, machine tools, and foundries. It started around the wartime area. Because I dropped forage, we didn't have any union for years either. I think it started in 1942. In the wartime, then? Yeah, that would have been in the wartime. They organized. But could they organize during the wartime? Were they scared to be addressed? No, they could organize, but they had restrictions on striking. They couldn't strike. They couldn't strike. But they could negotiate and work along that line. Then, of course, afterwards, then that fell off, and they could do whatever they... So after the war, they came back heavy on the management to give them more... Yeah. What was the first demand now? Was it more pay or less work? The first demand all the time is more pay, and they want more holidays, and then they want more fringe benefits, and one thing after the other. But vacation, though, seems to me... Vacation was very important, yeah. But they didn't press too hard at first, because they'd been off so many years during the Depression. No, not the first part. They didn't. They came over in the late 50s, though, with the vacation. Yeah, yeah. And holidays, of course. That's very true. But what about outsiders not coming in? Because there's always been a sore point, I know, in Jamestown and Omaha and Booster. Why is the reason they always have an outsider coming in for the union and do the bickering? Are the local people too soft? Well, of course, most of the unions, I mean, they're part of a large organization, whether central office or with a district office or somewhere, you know, most of their organizers and negotiators all work out of these offices, because they can't afford to have it just for one town. There's so many different unions, you know. So they usually come from the outside, and they're usually some hard-nosed guys. Because they don't care about the... No, they get their wages. If you're walking the street and getting probably $20 a week, they were still getting their pay. So there seems to be one opposing factor against the management. In other words, they see more or less red. Well, yeah, and they see that somebody else is trying to take over the operation of their plant. And that's got to be some of the demands. They have more voice in how the plant is being run and what they can and can't do. So quite a few of the shops now in the factories, they are non-unionized in Lockport. Now again, it started going that way, yes. But there was Ingersoll. Ingersoll, I don't think it was ever a union. No, and not Barbara Coleman either. Barbara Coleman, yes, they had a union. They had a sheet metal union in there. But there was a more local one, though. They were not nationalized, were they? Yeah, that was a national. It was? Yeah. And then Sunstrands, there was UAW later on. Sunstrands and National Lock. Finally got a union. It was a union. And Mechanics, Universal Joint. They were a union. Rockwell Products, were not? Not for quite a few years, but they finally went automotive. Were they able to keep up with the... because I suppose the union wages in some sort led the way? Yes, they escalate, yeah. Because that forces a... non-union wants to pay higher wages or they can't find the help. And that was pretty prevalent too. And a lot of the companies did pay a little more because they wanted to stay away from the unions. So they had to be one step ahead then. Yeah, but you didn't know which way. Well, it worked all right during the 60s and 70s. Everything was going up, up, up. But don't you think the management were too lenient against the union pressure? You see that now in the 80s? Well, see in those days, management wanted to keep their plan going. They wanted to... They had the business and they wanted to keep working. Like Rockford, is it a family affair or is it a stock... No, it's not a family. It's locally held. It's not owned by... By investors? By local investors, yeah. Did they care about the factories staying open? If they had to pay all of the notes, I mean, to keep the workers... Well, not for some years. We tried to keep up with what was going on in the industry. Not just here in Rockford, but I mean the forging industry throughout the country. We tried to, you know... But then, of course, when pressure started to get later on, say in the later part of the 70s and the early part of the 80s, where now the companies wanted them to get their parts for less, and then foreign competition started entering into it. And then, of course, they all tried to pull their horns in. And that's when they started to have labor problems. So then it's hard to explain for every concerned worker... Yeah, well, everybody's not concerned about the other guy. He's concerned what he's going to get. Or if the other guy's got more, he wants that. And you couldn't tell them, listen, we can go out of business here if we keep on going this way. I mean, they don't listen to that. I know, because I negotiated about 12 contracts for the company. Oh, I see. So you had to sit there and mangle the truth. Yeah. And it was rough. So they never believed then that you were going out of business? Never. Never. It's like one union president one time says, right, I know Drop Forge made $250,000 last year. And I almost bust out laughing, because that was a drop in a bucket. If we only made $250,000 in profits, we were not in business. But to him, of course, that was a lot of money. So that was his argument. Yeah. So, but how now the union demands now, are they backed up by what you call educated people that know the ips and buts and the different ends of running a factory? Because you have to modernize all the time to keep up with the times. Sure. To keep up the snuff. Well, they have educated people, especially accountants and that who has all kinds of ways to figure out what the costs are going to be per hour for this contract or that contract. They know they're pretty good then when they come in. But they are never able to see your books, though. No, we never. No reason to. No. We never pleaded poverty. If you pleaded poverty, in other words, say, well, we're just not making any money, then they would make a demand to see your books and you would have a hard time to stop it. So you can have the right to take a look at it? They could do it. I know. Yeah, but we never pleaded poverty. We were too smart for that. But they still, they got a job, and their job depends on them making a good impression on the guys who are paying their union dues to them, so they are always pushing for more and more. I think that outside of, I think, one fellow, he wouldn't go back and tell his people, listen, these demands are too high. They can't stay in business if you're going to demand that kind. I think it was only one that really stood up and announced the same thing to his people. And he was a fellow we had a pretty good relationship with. But the guy like that, he won't last long, though. No. How does their back stand from other directions? Well, you know, like in our business, forging industry, it's a muscle job. It's not really a job that requires a lot of mentality to operate the steam hammers and run the upsetters. But it's a demanding job. It's a physically demanding job, and most of the......Sytoo, but the name of the driver was in Palmer, Rockford, Illinois, Sytoo. You had one man down there at the Rockford Forge a lot of people mentioned about, Bruce Albin. Didn't he work at the Rock Forge? Bruce? Bruce Albin. He stopped the awful strong fellow. I might have not known him by that name. And he worked the long-runs to beat hammers. We had a lot of Swedes. The Rockford Drop Forge was mostly Swedes when I first started there. In fact, that was one of my... along with my engineering job was when some of these Swedes wouldn't show up because I was able to talk Swedish. I would have to go visit them at home to find out, and usually the wife would answer the door, and I'd have to talk Swedish to her, and she'd have to explain why they weren't at work. Was it usually on Mondays then? Yeah, a lot of Mondays. Blue Monday. How would they risk a thing like that, to lose their job? Was it just a bad habit everybody was going to... It was just......do it on the weekends? Yeah, it was just... A lot of those guys were heavy drinkers. But they were good workers, though. They were good workers, that's right. Absolutely, they were good workers. We... I don't think we had anybody else but Swedes back there in 1936. No, we had... In the dye room, we had an Italian, but he spoke Swedish as good as it does. So the poor men on the job, were they Swedish then? So they preferred the Swedish guys? Outside of a couple of them, they were practically... But were the Swedes better workers than Italians or Irish, and the Italians and Polish? I don't think so. They never would give them the chance, I mean, to work. They couldn't compete. I don't think there were any better workers. It was just an idea to have it. Yeah. But I suppose the job life on those hammers, it was hot? Hot in the summertime and cold in the wintertime. You'd be hot in front when you're standing by a furnace, and then you'd be freezing on the back. And, you know, because the forge job was not heated just from the furnaces themselves, and that roof was about almost 50 feet up to the very top. So all the heat would go up there and gather in, but down at ground level, where we have doors going in and out all the time... It was cold, yeah, in the wintertime. So there was a pressing job on the body, though, for those people? Oh, yes. But there was no extra pay, though, for this kind of heavy work at that time? Well, they were on incentive. They were on incentive so they could earn... Oh, peaceful, too? Yeah. They could earn what they could make until the unions got in there. Then they started to put a, Hey, you can't make more than that. Not the company, but the unions themselves put restrictions on what they could... Because if you would make any higher than that, they're going to come back there and cut the prices on it, you see? Which wasn't true, because we didn't do that, but this is the hand they held on, you see? But if you started out on the hammer level, so to speak, in the tundra, when you were in the 20s, I mean, you were strong and ready to go, you could do so many pieces a day. But the older you got now, for instance, you come out to 45 and 50, the muscles are not all the way the way they were in the 20s. How does that affect the piecework? Was that guy taking off the... No. Could he continue on until he was 60? He could continue on. We had some of them older than that. But was he able to perform the same as he was in the 20s? Yeah. In other words, he has the routine in his body, I'm sorry. He's got the tempo and the routine, and he knows all the moves, you know. In fact, he knows... It didn't bother him. He knows moves, you know, so that he has less work. You know, you can work as hard as you do and not accomplish much, and somebody else goes in there and he knows all the moves and he can accomplish more than you can in less time. And that was the way some of them old-timers worked. So there was an old... I mean, there was a tough job to come in to be beside an old-timer there. Yeah, you didn't step right in to work on a hammer. You started out blowing the furnaces or feeding the... Working your way up....cleaning the hot steel out and worked your way up. And then as openings opened up for a hammerman, well, you could bid on the job and take it and learn. Was it the highest paid job, I mean, below the management? Yeah. On the hammers? That's right. Then a heater and a trimmer, they got a percentage less than that. But we mentioned education, you know. Isn't that kind of education, you know, you stay there on the job for five years before you can get to the hammer job? You had to really prove yourself. Oh, sure, absolutely. There was a... Yeah, that's a learning period. That's a learning period is what it is. It's specialized to that. Yeah. Were they paid well then compared to office work, for instance? Oh, yeah, very well. But were they able to get that pay without the union dressing off? I would say that when the union joined in there and we got contracts, I would say their earnings went up and up. But if it was all earned, I don't know. Years ago, there is a saying that the Swedes were good at one thing because they never tolerated a man on a job that didn't do his job. In other words, they pushed him out. You got to be on the same level. Right. Other groups seemed to, you know, protect each other more. The Swedes didn't do that. Is that true, you think? I saw many times when we'd have a man on there and goofing off and he would almost get a hot bar up his back if he didn't move. And he'd get somebody hollering at him from his own crews, not necessarily from the foreman, that too, but from his own crew. Because when he didn't do his job, the other hammerman wasn't making his money either. And, boy, they had to move. So they saw to it then there was an attempt, but it just hit the whole gang. And sometimes one of these guys on the heaters, if you didn't think the hammerman was working fast enough, he'd be flooding in with steel and he'd burn them up. Did it happen, a lot of accidents during that time, before the 40s and during the war? Oh, yeah, accidents always happened in that. Was it more Russia during the wartime? Yeah, and it was more crowded because usually our complement of people would be probably 450 to 500 people. And during the war we was running like 700. Were you able to get manpower then? Because you couldn't use any women in your department. No, we had our help. We got our help pretty well. They would defer them from going into the objective? Yeah, yeah. Because you needed the very best. And it was what they called a critical industry. Did you have to retool then for the wartime, or could you use the same kind of— We didn't have to retool our machines, but we had to, of course, make different dyes. And then the automotive work disappeared, and just the government work was in. And we—one time we got the E for effort. If you remember the Battle of the Bulge, when the armies were going through the Belgian and Holland and that area, they had all these hedgerows. And their tanks were getting shot up because every time they hit a hedgerow, the front end would go up in the air and it would be exposed on their bottom side where they weren't armored, and they'd be knocked out of commission. So we got a call to produce some pistons. They went into some big cylinders. And we had to have them there within X number of days. And we made them—got them out, and what they did is they mounted an armored shield on the front so when the bulldozer went over the hedgerow, that shield would drop down and cover their exposed bottom and then go back up again when they came down to ground level. And they say that defeated that Battle of the Bulge, and they were able to break through because of that. And the result, the drop force got the government, what they call E for excellence. So we had a lot of critical jobs. So then you had to work around the clock to produce? Yeah. During the war, we were able to work three shifts. Normally we were restricted by city laws, working past 10 o'clock at night. You couldn't do that? No. Why? Because of the noise. There was so much noise there. See, we were right in a neighborhood that had a lot of homes, a residential neighborhood. So they shook the whole city block and more and more— Well, you felt their vibration around there. But you would think during the war time, though, there would be some— Yeah, then they lifted it, and we worked three shifts. So we were able to get around that. And you were able to get in the raw material to— Yeah. I'd say there was times when we did have some difficulty getting exact materials, but we managed. So you stayed with the factory all the time. You were deferred also? I was deferred. Because you had to be in the crucial line of business. In fact, the final time, I went in Chicago for my physical. But they sent me back, so I was needed where I was. You had the paper with you from the— Yeah, because I was a dye designer at that time, which was the important part of doing it. So then there was no strikes during the war years? Not during the war years. But then after, when the D-Day was over, I mean the peace time came in— Yeah, we went through a period of quite a few— Then we started to get a little bit— A little edgy. Then we were going to get the management. Yeah. But the owner of the factories. So what happened then? Do you have any outbreaks of violence or— Not any real violence. There was one 1938, before the war, here in Rockford. A strike? Yeah, there was a strike. They had a police call out, and the city government had to step in and everything. You don't remember that one. Yeah, but I think that was, if I remember right, it was a J.I. Case company. It was just one factory. Yeah, I believe that was J.I. Case. Oh. But they were settled and— Yeah, J.I. Case isn't here anymore. They moved out. They went down to Devonport, Iowa, I believe it was. Well, they moved their work around to the different—because they had quite a few. The unions pushed them around. And J.I. Case, I don't think there's anything right now to speak of. Very little. So there were not too many problems then with the unions, I think. Oh, there were strikes. Barbara Coleman had a strike there for quite a while. Sunstrand had strikes. We had strikes. You see, violence, we had some violence. There's always somebody that's throwing rocks or smashing a windshield. How long is the time then before they lose? In other words, you can go on strike for a few weeks. It doesn't hurt anybody. But if they go off for months, it must be a tremendous loss even to the union, I mean, to make the up. Yeah. The last strike we had was just not too long ago. It was for two years. Two years' strike? Yeah. The whole thing was shut down? Well, no. We were working with the office personnel and people we had around the plant, and then we hired people to come in and work. We had police protection to bring them in. But two years of office management, that means that you got pretty good at it. You didn't need the workers again. Yeah, at that time I was running the forge shop. It was my job to see that they had the jobs out there and the people to staff it. Were they able to do that? I mean, were they fit for it? Well, they got physical pretty good after a while, after the aches and pains disappeared. So they couldn't stop anybody that worked in the management? No. They didn't hire anybody? Oh, yeah, we brought in people. We hired people. So they could cross the picket line then? Yeah. But then I imagine you had some… We had police protection. …scooters. Yeah, some small ones. So there's always trials and tribulations. That's why I like being retired. Yeah. So they affected you after a while then? I mean, you had to… Well, finally they broke the union, actually, what happened. Well, they went out of business then? The union went broke. They didn't have the money to pay the guys, and then they had an election, but the election was only amongst the people that were working. Was it UAW? EMLCIO? EMLCIO. So two years, that's what it took to… Yeah, and now just recently they had an election again, forming the same union that was in, to get back in, and they were defeated. Nowadays it seems to go the other way. The union seems to be on the losing balance of the scale. Yeah, for two reasons. Some of them, the people get disgusted with them, and other things is that the factors they represented have gone out of business or been absorbed by somebody else. What do you think about all those merger businesses? There should be a law against that. It's for the birds. But it's not a law. It's still lawful, and I think it should be illegal, because they go in. Well, we've seen it here in Rockford. Conglomerations buy it, the company, and pretty soon they pull everything out of here. Your Rockford products, were they absorbed by Rexnode? Yeah, but then now the employees bought it back. But, I mean, the first thing they do is they start pulling people out, equipment out, and pretty soon here you've got a dead building sitting there. So that's the bad side of all those taking over other businesses. And they're looking for almighty dollars. How about Rockford, the city of Rockford? Were they favorable to the management or to the workers? What side did they take, the police, for instance? They had to be neutralized. Well, I'd say that the city of Rockford, the management, from the mayor on down, was much in favor of the company because the orders were to the police to give us the protection that we needed. And so we had no trouble having protection. How about the people on the picket lines, or if they went over other lines, for instance? Did the police strike down on them? Well, they didn't get too physical on them. They usually moved after they got a nightstick shoved in their ribs. But Rockford, it's a big town, of course, but it's small enough so everybody knows each other from the different factories. But it doesn't mean much. Not anymore. Not anymore. The Swedish side of it is gone. The Swedes are not running Rockford anymore. No, we've been absorbed. What happened here? In the 20s and 30s, they were all Swedes. The police chief, the fire chief. You had your districts. All the men and everything, they were Swedish. Yeah, most of them. But the first generation are born here, the second one. They don't seem to care too much about politics. Other groups come in, the Italians, the Irish. No, but years ago, the southeast side was all Swedish. Norwegian or Danish. On this side of the river? On this side of the river, and most of the southeast end was heavily, and then some up here on the northeast end. Basically, Scandinavian extraction. Italians, Negroes, Polish, they were all over on the other side of the river. But now, it's pretty well integrated. So nobody thinks about going over to the west side or vice versa anymore? You go to the shopping centers. But when you were growing up, there was a distinct line there. Oh, yes, absolutely. You noticed when you came over to the other side. Yeah. In fact, I still get lost if I go over there. And then it was always fighting, you know, who was going to have the best building on this side or there. I think some of that goes on yet. But I don't think that's whether they're Swedish or Italian. I think that's a neighborhood pride, you might say, that's taken over on there. But years ago, you know, the Irish and the Swedes used to meet down on the bridges down there over the river, and they have free-for-alls. You don't remember that? No, I don't remember. That's before my time. But I read the history of Rockford a little bit. So the Swedes, they didn't want to budge then. But then there were a greater number of them. But it seems the generation born here, they didn't seem to care too much about that. No, they didn't. Of course, they met other kids in school. I never heard, you know, we never heard really a lot of fighting or anything wrong because we had Negroes in the school. I mean, the kids didn't bother us in the least. So when you went to school, you never had the expression that you were a Swede? No. It was more in a fun way that expression was. Yeah. You might get a nickname, a Swede, or something like that, but it was nothing. But things, you know, people have intermarried. Of course, back in those days, the city of Rockford was only, like, say, 50,000 or 60,000 people too. So if you had 25,000 Swedes here, that was 50-50. But now when you're 150,000, now you're getting to be a minority. That's right. And at that time, back in the 20s, a Swede married a Swede. Usually, yeah. An Irish married an Irish and an Italian. Yeah. That was bad if you did that. And then you had a bad conscience, I suppose, if you went out and had a date with an Italian. Yeah. I'm sure your parents spoke Swedish to you then. Ma and Pa would get on your tail. Did they warn you for Italians or Irish? Not my folks, no. I found a Swedish girl, and that was good enough for me. You had the Salvation Army, though. That was your, so to speak, gathering place. Most of our everyday life was around there. But other people, you know, that belonged to different lodges and groups and clubs. They were in Irish and Italians and Polish. Yeah, but there's still Swedish clubs, and I think a lot of these Swedish clubs and Norwegian clubs, they've still got other people in them. I know some of the Italian clubs have got Swedes in them. Intermarriage, then? Yeah, a lot of intermarriage, sure. So like the Salvation Army, you didn't get any Italians or Irish? We have. We have. Oh, no, but I mean not back then, no. Not back then, no. They were strictly Swedish. Yeah, they wouldn't understand us if they did. So, but, well, I suppose the Irish Church, they didn't have any members of? No, we had the Free Church just a half a block down from us, and that was all Swedish. Zion Lutheran was all Swedish. Emmanuel Lutheran was all Swedish. And then there was Temple Baptist down there at that time, too, and that was all Swedish. So we were surrounded. But Salvation Army is a little bit different, though, than the other groups, I mean, not the church denominations, no, because to Salvation Army, you can be a Lutheran, a Free Church person, Baptist, Methodist, and Covenant, and you can go there. But the Baptist, you don't find him in the Lutheran Church and the Free Church in the? Oh, yes, you do. Not that often, though, because they all seem to gather at the same time. And they can go to the services. Oh, yeah, the Army had a lot of outsiders. I am sure that the Free Church member will feel different when he goes into a Lutheran church, though, so I sit and listen to what they have to say. Well, I go into Lutheran churches every once in a while. Well, I believe you, Salvation... You've got a daughter that married a Lutheran. Well, this is one thing you feel a little bit better. But the Salvation Army seems to be a neutral point where they can all gather for different programs, senior programs. We always say that we don't care what nationality you are, red, yellow, black, or white, or what. You're always welcome. And down here, we have Irish in there. We have Swedes, Norwegians, Danes, English, Italian. Everybody seems to enjoy being there. But I mean that our members. Our members, yes. So, but the other denominations, though, they have that, you know, they are Lutherans and they are Covenants and they are Baptists. They don't seem to practice visiting often as they do with the Salvation Army. No, I guess they're more or less loyal to their home church. In fact, I mean, we are too as far as that goes, but that doesn't stop us if we want to go hear something in one of the other churches, we go. Yes. In fact, we're going up to Free Church here next Saturday. Well, that's the one church that's growing, though. The Pentecostal, I suppose. Yeah, that's... Assembly of God. Yeah. That's the one that's growing. Leap and bounces, you say. But that's the melting pot. And Rockford always has been a melting pot, you know, always. So how many years did it take then for non-Swedes to come into Rockford Fort, for instance, to come into the management side? Or how did they hire that guy? Was that through a piece of paper that he was an educated man? A lot of them came, a lot of them at Rockford Drive Fort, because we were originally formed by Levin Fost. And who's the other one? One of the Nelsons and Peters, P.A. Peterson. P.A. Peterson. And they were all old Swede goobs. And a lot of them come right off, I was going to say off the boat, but off the train down here on 7th Street. There used to be a train station down there right by 6th Avenue and 7th Street. That's where we got off. And by the end of next week, they were working at Rockford Drive Fort. They were there? Yep. Two hands ready to work. Yeah, and the best part was there was a lot of people that were Swedish and were able to talk Swedish and they could help them out. There was no misunderstanding? No. So you can talk to a lot of the old Swedes around here that are still alive, and I bet you 25, 30 percent of them will say that they worked sometime or other at Rockford Drive Fort. And it was the same way with National Lock because of the management, we were all Swedes. Frank Coughlin and Stan Quiston. Yeah, yeah. Carlson. So they took care of their own, and then all the furniture factories, you know, they were all practically all Swedish. But how about the other groups now? Did they stay on the west side and the Italians and the Irish? What did they work with? Did they have their own factories just like the Swedes? No. They worked in most of the other factories, and they were working at factories on this side of the river too. What kind of big factories were there on the west side that could compete with them? Well, there was Emerson, Branningham, which was a forerunner, I think, of J.I. Case, if I remember right. They were on the west side? Yeah, and Ebbeloy Foundry was another big one. And of course Barbara Coleman, Greenlee, I. Ingersoll. And then there was several furniture factories over there too. But most of the furniture factories were run by Swedes. Even on the west side? Even on the west side. Did they live on the west side then, or did they come back to live here on the... A lot of people lived around the area where they worked. So they could walk easily. But there were no Swedish stores down on the west side? Like delicatessen, restaurants? There were no Swedish bakeries over there. They were all down on 7th Street. Every block had a Swedish bakery. If you settled down there, you were safe. And grocery stores, everything. But you can go down there today and you'll find that almost all of them are Italian. A lot of the proprietors on 7th Street are Italian. Swedish store. They finally got them. How about the Jewish people though? Do you remember any Jewish store owners on 7th Street? Swedish Jews. How can you tell? That you do some business with them? No, I can't recall. But there must have been some tailors or clothing manufacturers or dry goods store. There were some dry goods stores, but whether they were Jewish owned or not... There were a couple of dry goods stores on Broadway, but they were Swedes. And then there was Eckbergs on 7th Street. They were Swedes. And the old Larsen Furniture, that was a Swedes. So... The Undertakers were all Swedes down here. Olsson's store. Fred Olsson's, yeah, and Christensen's. Sundberg. He came later though. He came later. He was on Broadway. He started on Broadway and he came later. And they all seemed to have a furniture store and the Undertaker parlor together. I don't know why, but that's the way it was. It was hand in hand. Yeah. Well, I suppose there was a lot of house building going on then during the 20s. So the furniture store needed to sell the furniture. Yeah, and then there was a lot of the old carpenters were Swedish. But there must be some good Italian carpenters too or Irish. Oh, I'm sure there is. I'm sure there is. They always say, you know, they got to be... Every Swedish is a carpenter. You never tried it though? Well, I built my family room on myself. So your father, now he continued the pattern maker business or trade all his life? Yeah. Except during the depression, of course. Did they go back to Sweden, your parents, at any time? They never got back. My dad had... Yeah, he had his tickets bought and was going to go just before he died. What year was that? Forty-six, I think it was, 1946. I've been back twice. My wife has been with me once. Did they leave any sisters and brothers over there? So you have cousins? My mother had a brother over there. And I think my dad had a couple of brothers over there too. And you became a citizen then when your father became a citizen? Yep. What year was that, in the 30s? Hmm, they must have been in the 30s. Well, let's see. Well, they could have been before too, I suppose. Yeah, but... How about your other brothers now, your sisters? They stayed on here. Have they gone back to Sweden? Oh, they've been back and visited, yeah. Oh, except my youngest brother, who's older than me, but he's my youngest brother. He has never been back. Do you have any contacts with Sweden now? Are you writing? I don't write. My sister does. She writes to my cousins over there. Have they been here visiting you? Yeah, some of them have. So your brother now, you said he had an accent. Yeah. Because he had all his schooling in Sweden. Yeah, he was 16 when we came over. And he never got out of that role? No, not until the day he died he hadn't lost it. So a few years schooling here will do the difference then, or make the difference? Oh, it makes a lot of difference. But he got so... his Swedish was so mixed up. His brother-in-law was over here one time a few years ago, and I was talking with him in Swedish. He was a Skåning, and he looked at me and he said, You know, and he said it in Swedish, I would rather speak to you.