 So I'm going to advise him not to become involved in the legal profession. He says, there's just hundreds of them that are just starving to death. And then I thought, oh, hell with it. By then I had become involved in sales and I could see that, hell, I was making more money than 90% of the lawyers. Did you see any future at that time, though? In the legal profession. You were completely turned off? I couldn't see any. I couldn't see any future. There were too many lawyers then and most of them were starving to death. And they discouraged you to... Well, not all of them. No, no, no. I discouraged myself more than anything else. But Alan was a good friend and he wouldn't steer me wrong. So, well, anyhow, I forgot that. I forgot the legal... But you had some legal courses then, though. Which have really always come in good stead. You can pretty well do what you... You know what you can do and what you can't do. And that's important. Isn't that, do you think, a major factor of people sitting in meetings, committee meetings, that they are afraid to take a stand because they don't know their rights and their capabilities? Absolutely. They're scared to death and the ones that aren't scared to death are dumb enough so that they make some silly statements. They make statements about people that are so inflammatory that they could be sued for everything they own. But they don't know any better. And the ones that know better, they shut up. Well, anyhow, so we had then, we had Chief Justice. And, of course, that was a big thing. I don't know if they'd have ever had a Chief Justice come to Minnesota. And here he came to the Swedish annual celebration. Well, then, of course, Kennedy. I invited Kennedy. How many attended that session? Oh, 25,000 or more. Oh, yeah, a lot of people. So after you came in, then there was a tremendous increase. Because we had outstanding people. What they used to get... There was a guy, to give you an example, a governor of Montana, an immigrant. Orr Anderson, Galloping Swede. The Galloping Swede, right, all right. So you know what I'm talking about. You invited him. Well, we had him here twice. Salin invited him the first time. Well, who the hell knew anything about the Galloping Swede in Minnesota? They barely knew about him in Montana. Well, a nice fellow, nice person. But I always say you've got to get people that will draw people. You can't get somebody that won't draw a corporal's guard. That's not going to help. We can do that without having anybody. So, well, then, we've had some outstanding people, really, besides the presidents. We've had ambassadors. We've had several senators, outstanding senators. I remember then, well, then, of course, we had... Well, a thought came to me, geez, we've got to get Kennedy. That was before Johnson. So I talked to Humphrey, and I said, look, this was in August of the same year that he was killed. Well, my son went to Harvard. So, oh, it must have been about mid-August, we drove out there. I had a month's vacation for a long, long time. So anyhow, we drove out there, and we were there a few days in Boston. We were in the Boston area, you know. But then I had arranged with Humphrey, so he had an appointment for me to see Kennedy. And it was all taken care of, and so then we went down there. I remember we had an appointment for August 26th. The reason it sticks in my mind is because, see, that's way over 23 years ago. Well, so we then first went through what they call the private tour of the White House. Well, it isn't private, but there's only about 20 people. So Humphrey was with you then? Oh, yeah, well, he wasn't with on the tour of the White House, but he was with when we talked to Kennedy. Well, anyhow, so see, what they call the private tour of the White House is a couple dozen people. But, you know, and then they have the other one where Christ is probably 300, 400 people go through. Well, anyhow, then I had instructions that when you get through with the tour, you go and see a man that's by a certain office. He'll be standing there waiting for you. So I went and introduced myself. He said, oh, yes, I'm supposed to take you into the president's office. So he did. And we sat there a few minutes, and then there was nothing but colored people in the office. Everybody was a colored person. So one guy, I went and reported to the head colored man at the desk and told him where I was. And that I had an appointment. Oh, yes, he said, I know you've got an appointment with the president. He said, you know, the whole cabinet is meeting right now because that was the day that they passed a law to stop the national railroad strike. So they were meeting right that very moment. And, well, then the guy, he got the high sign, I guess, somehow. And so he was going to take us into the president's private office. Well, instead, he ushered us into the cabinet room. And, hell, there's a great big long oval table, and all of these people were there, Humphrey and everybody. There was anybody. And, of course, we made a hasty exit out of there because the other door that we should have taken was right next door. So we went in there. How I got started on that, I read an article in the, about the idea of inviting Kennedy. I read an article in one of the national magazines. I think it was either Time or Life, and I really don't, I think probably Life. And it told about the woman who was the private secretary of the president. It had told about her background. Oh, Mrs. Lincoln. That's right. Okay. Evelyn Lincoln. That's right. Evelyn Norton Lincoln. Well, so I see you read something about it. Well, the background of Evelyn Norton, her grandfather was a Swedish immigrant. And he had a hell of a time. That's a neighborly. Oh, yeah, I'm sorry. I read that article, and it said about her grandfather that he came from Sweden. And immediately he got inducted into the Army. And they did that with a lot of newcomers, you know. Right or wrong, but that happened by the tens of thousands. Well, anyhow, but for his service, he became a citizen, and he had a chance to buy, I think it was 160 acres for virtually nothing in Nebraska. Well, he did that. He homesteaded in Nebraska. And, of course, then her father, and, well, anyhow, she, as I remember, went to Washington and worked as a secretary, and she married a fellow by the name of Lincoln. And I remember the name of the article was, A Second Lincoln in the White House. So I thought, God damn it, here's a Swede, someone who has ties, you know, with the Swedish background. So I wrote her a letter right away after I read that article and told her all about Svenskenisdag, you know, and that we were just very interested in having the president come for next Svenskenisdag. Now, mind you, this was a whole year before. So, and then, of course, I wrote to, oh, I wrote not only to Humphrey, but I wrote to the Chief Justice, and I wrote to Eugene McCarthy, Congressman Blatnik. I knew all of these people personally. And so I wrote to them and said, look, here's, and I sent them a copy of the letter that I was going to send to the president so that they knew ahead of time by two weeks. And I said, I'm asking for your support. I want you to communicate with either him or with his office and urge him to accept our invitation, which they did. So Humphrey arranged for the appointment for me, and Eugene McCarthy was very good about things like that too. But Humphrey was the mainstay. He was the power, you know. But anyhow, so we had the appointment, and then we went through this thing of going into the cabinet meeting, but then we were steered into Evelyn Lincoln's office, which is right next to the president, of course. And so we sat there and had a nice conversation with her. Well, to make a long story short, anyhow, Hubert Humphrey came in with the president and Eugene McCarthy. And there was someone else, but I really don't, not from Minnesota, but some other person. I don't remember who the hell it was because I didn't know him. So he said, well, he said, gosh, he says, it seems like I've known you a long time. I've heard so much about you and about the organization, and we're, and he said, you know, a favorite statement of politicians is to say that, well, I'm sorry I can't come because I have a prior commitment. But he said, you're here eight, nine months ahead of time. He says, I can hardly tell you that I've got a prior commitment. So, oh, and he said this, which was really turned out to be quite prophetic. He said, he said, we'll come, no question about it. He says, I just cannot at this time see what could possibly keep us from coming. Of course, we know what happened. But because we then had already arranged with some, well, pretty well-to-do, I mean real well-to-do, multimillionaire people that have just fine homes on Lake Minnetonka where they were going to stay a whole week. So everything was really, really laid out and planned. Well, and of course, when he got killed, I waited a couple of weeks, and then, well, right away I contacted again Humphrey and Eugene McCarthy and the rest of them that I knew real well locally, local congressmen. And I said, look, I'm going to invite Johnson now to the picnic, and I would appreciate the same support that I had from you before when I invited Kennedy, and we want Johnson here. Because, you see, by then, well, it was just four months closer, really, to the celebration, and it always gets tougher. Now this year I'm going to invite, or for next year I'm going to invite Claude Pepper, the congressman from Florida. And I saw him, I saw Claude Pepper in St. Petersburg when I was in the last winter, or not last winter, really last spring, end of March I think it was. And he said, well, he said, you know, this year is an election. And he said, well, while I don't anticipate any problems of re-election, he said, I really have to kind of devote all my time. Yeah, I said, look, I can understand that, but I said, I want to invite you for next year. Then you've got no election. And so he and Johnson came, and we had just a fantastic amount of, we had 100,000 people. They not only filled Minnehaha Park, but there's a park, really an athletic field that's across the street, and it's, God, I believe it's six square blocks. It's big. That thing was just jammed, in addition to the whole park. They shut off the boulevards. You know, we'd had very, very little rain that whole spring. So Minnehaha Creek was virtually dry. The falls, you could stand underneath and drink every drop that went over the falls. And so the park board, I contacted the park board and asked, God, isn't there something you can do, dam up what little water is coming ahead of time for a couple of months, and then that Sunday morning open up the valves so that we can have water running over the falls when the president comes? Well, they did. I remember it cost them a lot of money, but anyhow. So you think about those details yourself? Do you have any input? No, no, no. This is why we never did anything. Because nobody probably would think about that. That's right. That's about the story. And it isn't that I was so God damn smart. It was just that this was the sensible thing to do, and we did it. But it was pretty tragic because, and I just, as a precaution, I had the name of the guy who was in charge of opening the floodgates. I had his home number. You know when a park board says, yep, we'll do it, they save up the water for a couple, three months ahead of time. The last thing you would think, somebody would forget to open up the gates. So when the time came, and the FBI, and they had a little office right by the platform, right, well, about as close to my garage from where I was. And so the guy came up to me and he says, the president just left the church. Then right away somebody comes up and says, they're in that drop of water coming over the falls. I thought, holy Christ, here we go, you know. And I happened to have that telephone number in my pocketbook. And there was a telephone in the FBI office there that they had set up, secret service reading. So I says, look, I said, they're in a drop of water coming. Let me use your phone so I can call this guy. I hope I can catch him. The phone rang and rang and rang and rang. I was just about to hit him in absolute desperation. What the hell are you going to do? The guy that opens the gates, can't find him. Then he had been outside just leaving, and he heard his phone ring. So by the time he got back, he had had one many times. And I said, I don't know if it's by design or if somebody's forgotten, but I said, there is in that drop of water coming over the falls. And the president is on the way from Mount Oliver Lutheran Church. And he said, and he swore, he said, God damn it, he said, you know, I gave orders to this fellow to take care of that, and you suppose he's forgotten? He says, I'll go over there myself. I don't live very far, and I'll go over and open it so the water comes. And when the president came from right, the falls were just roaring. But these are side things that who the hell ever hears about them. But it takes a lot of crudel to get this going. How about the money situation, to swing it? Because there are a lot of expenses involved here. Well, there really weren't. Well, there were. There are so many crazy little things. Unforeseen things. About the what? Unforeseen. Unforeseen things. And everybody, every little department, they have their own pride, and they have their own prejudices. They don't like to have their word or their toes stepped on. Well, about three weeks before, maybe it was four weeks, somebody from the, there was a fellow by the name of, an Italian from New York that worked, he was a front man for Johnson. What the hell is his name? I want to say Hugo, but that isn't it. It's something like that. I don't think of it. He came here, and of course, I don't know how much time you've spent around here, but there's a fellow by the name of Robert Short, Bob Short. I don't know if you've ever heard of his name. I've heard of his name. All right, very good. Very close friend of mine. He's owned the Leamington Hotel and just a lot of other things. I'd known him since he came out of the Navy, and I was in on every deal that he was involved in. Well, anyhow, to make a, so this guy stayed at the Leamington Hotel, this advanced man for Johnson, and so I got to know him right away, and he said, look, he said, I've got the plans for the platform, the press, television and radio and newspaper people to occupy, because there was a hundred of them from the different media branches. And he said, this is really what they want. I said, that's all right. That's no big problem. It was big, but I knew that we had to do it, which was fine. And of course, my dad was still active then, so he got a couple of other carpenter friends, and they built a nice platform for us according to the plans that they presented. Well, that was fine. And that did cost us some money. Well, about a week or ten days after we'd built that, then this guy had gone back to wherever he came from, Washington, I suppose. I don't remember. And somebody from the FBI came along. Oh, God, he says, we can't have that. Well, you know, you hate to tell the FBI to go to hell. But so I said, well, I said, look, we just built this according to plans presented to us by, I don't remember his name, who was the advanced man for the president. Yeah, he says, I know him, I know him, but this is what we want. So I told my dad, and he said, well, okay. So they built not much different, but somewhat different. Well, about a week before, a guy come from the, from the, not the FBI, but the security for the president, well, anyhow. And, you know, he was a big wheel, see. Well, of course, I dealt with big wheels before. And then he said, oh, he says, we can't have that. That's absolutely no good. We're just not acceptable. So then I really read him the riot act. I said, listen, I've had enough of you assholes coming here telling me what to do. This is according to the president's advanced man to start with. The FBI was here and said, no, you've got to change that. You built two of them, but we're not going to build a third one. I don't give a god damn how big you are. We've spent money, time, and it's a week before the man is here, and you think we're going to tear this down and build something else? You're just crazy. Well, he says, I just won't allow the president to come. I said, be my guest, but I'll guarantee you that your name is going to be dragged in a big god damn mud hole in this town, and the president is going to fire your ass. And I walked away from him. Well, then he talked to someone. Jesus Christ, is that guy tough to get along with? No, but it happened to be a very good friend of mine by the name of Robert Alexander that had been involved in all of this. He said, listen, we've taken so much horseshit from you people that if you think you've got power enough to keep the president from coming, Alexander told you, be his guest and do so, but you'll never live long enough to regret. Quit regretting what you're doing. Well, we left the thing just as it was, and of course he, and I felt kind of bad about it because I happened to have a real good friend. What the hell is that? He was with the same group. First he was with the FBI. Then he went with this, well, just as well known as the FBI, and they really have the protection of these presidents. That's their job. But everything really went very well. We had a few of these unforeseen hitches that make you mad, but you see, everybody has had their own little niche, and they've got to show their authority. Well, if they had never been read off before, brother, they got read off then, and I just went away from it. I said, the hell with it. I'm not even going to talk to you anymore. You can do just as you've been. How did your own people react now? Because what you have done here is something very, very extraordinary, in other words. How do you mean? I mean, to get people in, you know, you've heard of, and everybody's afraid. Did they, well, you got the president in. Now, with Nixon, there wasn't much. But there was a risky business. So here you're thinking the Republicans. Yeah, but no, no, no, no. We had to, listen. We have always lived. If we invite a Democrat as a main speaker, then the next year we move heaven and earth to get a Republican. Nobody can complain. Oh, no. We do the same thing today. So they can't come and say otherwise. No, no, no. They do anyhow. So when, like when, who the hell did we have? We had some other big Democrat here. Well, anyhow, there's a woman by the name of, on the city council, by the name of Johnson, Elsa Johnson, member of the city council. She was a big Republican. And she screamed long and loud because we had this Democrat. So I said to the newspapers, I said, you know, it's rather amazing. I never heard this woman scream very long and loud when we had Nixon here. Well, of course, that took the wind out of the whole thing, you know. And I said, we alter. We're very, we're very good about alternating. And even this year now, we had the governor here. You see, we're in this position. We always invite the governor. We always invite the mayor of Minneapolis. We always invite the mayor of St. Paul. Have always done so. Well, this year, of course, it was the mayor of St. Paul was running against the governor. But that was all right. He was invited as the mayor, and that's what it stood. And I had a few people say, oh, my God, what do you got to do? We invite them politicians. I said, listen, you never complained when we invite him as the governor and the mayor. That's what they're invited as now. What the hell are you complaining about? I said, if I told them they couldn't come because they're candidates, that would be prejudice. That would be wrong. Well, but then we'll also, then we invited Luterman, but he couldn't come. But Shulstead, the candidate for lieutenant governor, who was also a member of the city, and still today, member of the city council, I invited him. So nobody had anything to complain about. When we are very meticulous about staying while, I wouldn't vote for Luterman, for dog catcher, personally, but that means nothing. I just feel that if you're going to have a principle, you better stick to it. Because it's the only way that you can create confidence. Whoever comes now, do you have a stipulation that it should be keeping low profile? Well, we don't have, we don't have. There is no one that's going overboard, I mean, to speak for himself or? Oh, no, no, no, no, no. We don't, and I tell them beforehand. Because politicians usually take advantage of big crowd. Yes, but, but they, you know, I've been in charge of this thing for a long, long time. Now, I'm not chairman anymore. I'm not chairman anymore. But you're still elected, or? Well, I hate to even say this, because it sounds, if I quit, the thing would go down the drain in two years. I know it would. You think so? Oh, I know so, because there is nobody that has a 40-year background that's still alive. It often reminds me of this story. One year we were coming back from Florida, and we were going through Arkansas. I maybe shouldn't tell you this crap. Okay. We're coming up through Arkansas, because, well, the reason why is immaterial. And we were riding along in the hilly hill country there, and just in the south, just about every town has its own small radio station. So we came out to, on a program from some small little town. The fellow that was, well, running that show, particular show, he said that, you know, we've been trying for a long time to get an interview with Mr. So-and-so. I don't remember who he was. Some local fellow that, I think he was 100 years old, and saw this guy was interviewing him. And he said, and I don't remember the fellow's name at all, and it's immaterial. So he said, gee, he says, you know, you must have led an interesting life. Oh, yeah, yeah, the guy said, yeah, it's been very interesting. He said, now you've been mayor of your town, you've been on the school board, and county commissioner, and on and on. He had been everything. But now, of course, at that age, he was long retired. So the guy says, you must have, you must have some enemies, you know, that you've acquired because of all your activities. I can't be active in as many things as you have been, and for such a long time, without creating some enemies. You've stepped on a few toes. The guy says, no, I haven't got an enemy. Oh, boy, that's remarkable. You mean to tell me that you don't even have one enemy? And the guy said, no. He says, I've outlived all the sons of bitches. So. And you have one to do the same. But, you see, I was young enough. When I started, well, hell, I don't know if there's one left anymore. Really. So there's nobody that has a background. And I had this advantage. I had the kind of a job that I could do a lot of things on my own time, you know, any day. Just about any day I could do it. I could use the phone. I could write dictate letters. I could do a lot of things. Well. But there's other people out there and they never take advantage of you. Well, and I was going to. I said, see, that's all. Just to give you a little idea how busy I was all those years. I worked about 50 hours a week for Kraft. I owned and ran a sawdust and shaving business. I didn't do any of the deliveries, but I had an answering service. The orders came in. I always took them before they closed at night and I wrote up the orders. And the fellow delivered. He came and picked up the orders in the morning and did the delivery. And I took care of the billing. In addition to that, I built I don't know how many houses. Same time. And ran Svenskren's dog. And he won them was a full time job. But you learn to plan your time and not much monkey business. Do you think the nine years in Sweden gave you this incentive or your dad helped you along? No, I first of all, I've been always been very proud of being a Swede. Because I saw through him and his work that the Swedes were just very, basically very dependable people, hard workers. And I was just very proud of being a Swede. And I just and of course, the thing that the thing that really made me made me become determined to make this thing a success was the fact that several people told me in good faith. They were friends of mine that said, look, don't waste your time. It's dead. Well, hell, they were never as big as what they've been afterwards. Because I just made up my mind, God damn it, I'm going to prove that they're wrong. They hadn't done any of these things. And because of my other activities, first being on the council for one thing, being active politically, I knew so many people. Hell, I knew more people than the rest of the whole group put together. People that were in positions of influence and just like Bob. Sure. Yeah, we had the hotel there anytime we wanted it. I put up people there. Just a few years ago, I put up a whole choir from from Sundsvall. Were people eager in the later years to come to your rescue when you asked for hotel rooms and service and renting cars and lending the cars rather? People always, no matter, you observe this many times, I'm sure, people are anxious when something is successful. They watch you. Well, they want to be a part of it. Yeah, but they don't say that in the beginning, though. Oh, no, not the beginning. No, then they said, well, hell, Christ, you're wasting your time. You know, get the chief justice or get the president. Well, for Christ's sake, you're crazy. They're reaching for the moon. Yeah, that's right. And the seven suns, hell, you might as well try to get the moon, man the moon. You know, they actually said that. Well, so it, just yesterday, as I say, I went up to Wilmar. It's about 100 miles up here. And there's a Swede, the second, the first generation in this country. His, no, my God, yeah, I think his dad came from Skona. And this guy started with absolutely nothing. Now, have you heard of Genio Turkey Products? Yes, it is one of the biggest. He owns that. It's the biggest in the country. It is close to Wilmar. Oh, 100 miles from here. Right in Wilmar's office. He's got turkey pens 500 foot long, as long as you can see. And I kid you not, I couldn't even count them, there were that many. And not only that, it's one place. Just a hell of a nice guy. So I made up my mind yesterday, or I called him Monday or Tuesday, I guess. And I told him what, I didn't know him. I didn't know him. And I told him who I was, what my mission was, and so forth and so on. I always told these people, you know, people who got money, they get bothered by people coming begging for money all the time. All the time, all the time. And one of the first things I told him, how important it was that I had to see him, because I was leaving and I didn't want to wait until I come back next April, it's too late. And I said, I'm not looking for money. I don't want any of your money. So, and I don't know if that did it, but he was interested. He said, okay, well, yeah, it was Tuesday, I called him. So he said, well, let's see, tomorrow I'm going to be awfully busy. But he said, could you come at 10 o'clock on Thursday? I said, then I'll have, I've got another meeting at 11, but he said, if you can, if we can do our business in an hour, that'll be fine. I said, I'll be there. Well, I took another fellow with me, and so I found that it's more acceptable if you don't go alone, because some people get the idea that, well. And then I brought him this year's program book, last year's, and the 50th anniversary, which was in 63, and showed him what type of thing, and of course it's a beautiful program book, and so, you know, you just, family picnics don't put out program books like that. And of course he had heard of the Svenskones dog. He said, hell, he said, I can remember I've heard of the Svenskones dog. And he was highly, highly honored to be chosen, and so today or tomorrow I'm going to write a letter confirming our meeting, and so forth. But you've got to, I don't always succeed. I have to turn to something else, somebody else. I'm sure that you have some nagging your butt at certain times, and how do you, do you feel like an incentive to take another spit in your palm? Oh yeah, oh sure. I've always said this, that... It doesn't really hurt you. No, you've got to learn to be turned down, not very many times. In fact, there have been times when the people have said, I just can't do it this year. But how about next year? I'd love to come, and could you have me next year? So we've really never had any negative... Oh, there have been... Oh, people that... Well, really, really not. Nothing that mounted anything. I remember one guy said, oh God, he said, I get hit all the time for money. I said, look, I don't want any of your goddamn money. And if you think that that's all we do it for, I said, I'll tell you what, you see all these people I've got, and about every five years we print a book which shows every Midsummer, the picture of every Midsummer Queen we've had and the year, picture of every immigrant Swede of the year, picture of honorary Swedes, picture of the Swede of the year, and Christ, it's a hell of an end, from Kurt Carlson on down, you know, and a very impressive list of people. So when they see that, they pretty much... And this particular guy, well, he finally changed his mind too, in a way. Of course, first of all, he's a dummy. He just inherited this business from his father, who was just a whirlwind, built the business, and this guy just inherited it, and having a hell of a time just keeping it going. But it was suggested by a friend that I respected, and so I said, okay, well... But I would just assume, you know, when they think that they're so damn good, and they're so concerned, then I have a hell of a time. There's too many other people, nice people, and who aren't so suspicious. Because I usually break the ice. Do you know, by any chance, who Percy Ross is? Yes. Okay. Philanthropist. The what? The philanthropist. Right, right. Okay. I know Percy very, very well. So we were going, we were at just this time of the year, only a little later, because we used to go later, oh, after Thanksgiving, but anyhow. So I'd been trying to reach him, and he was a tough guy to get a hold of, because everybody wanted money. Everybody. So I called several times. Well, Mr. Ross says he's in conference, and, God, he's got appointments until 6, 6.30. Every day. And finally, it got to be, look, if I can't do it today, we're leaving tomorrow, you know. So I didn't tell them that, but I told him afterwards, when I met him. So I called and I told the girl, I said, Now, look, I've called you, and I knew exactly how many times, and he's always busy. Now, I'm willing to come at any time. If it's 8 o'clock in the morning, I'll come and I'll brush his teeth, if necessary. I said, I'll come at any time, because his office is just out here in the diner, you know. Well, she said, and she knew that I meant business, so, and I said, I know it's up to you, and I'm not after any money from him. I want to give him something. She said, Well, let's see, I'll talk to him and see how late he's going to be here. Well, anyhow, I got an appointment for 6.30 at night. And, of course, he's quite a character. So when I came in, he says, Well, Mr. Johnson, what can we do for you? I said, Mr. Ross, you can't do a goddamned thing for me, because I knew that he was this kind of a person that you could talk like that to him then, because I know people that know him real well. I said, You can't do a goddamned thing for me. I said, I'm here to do something for you. He said, You are? God, he says, everybody who comes in here wants money. Well, I said, I don't want any of your damn money. Well, you know, I knew ahead of time that his father came from Stockholm. His father? Yeah, and there's quite a story behind that. So I said, You know, I said, Any Jew, and I've always found that it doesn't hurt, most of them, 90% of them, if they're Jews, it doesn't hurt to call them a Hebrew or a Jew. It doesn't hurt. They love it. They know that's what they are. They are proud of that. They're proud of that, absolutely. So I said, Listen, I said, Any Jew whose forebears came from Stockholm has got to be good. Well, what happened was his father came, his father was left an orphan. I think at about, I don't quite remember, 12 or 14 years old, he left Poland, which is not very difficult to get to Sweden, you know, over from Poland, came to Stockholm because he had heard that people could make a living there. And he did. He was there, he grew up there, really, you know, to early manhood. And saving enough money, he always wanted to go to America. Of course, you know, it's that America fever, you know, they're all going. So he got to New York, but he didn't have any money to go any further than New York. He God damn near starved to death, to a point where he just gave up, and he got on a ship that was going to Sweden, and he got back to Sweden, and then stayed there several years. So he saved up enough money to go to America again, but way beyond New York City. So he landed out, well, in Chicago to start with, and that's a long story in itself. And of course then he got married, and of course Percy was born. I'm not sure, but I think he's an only child. Was his name Rost, then, you think, as well? Oh, sure. And then he took one oil away and asked. I suppose, I suppose. And this is true? They do this. Did he tell you this? No, not how his name was changed. No, but I mean that the story. Oh, the story? Oh, yes, absolutely. I said, I understand your father came from Stockholm. Yeah. How did you hear that? Oh, I said, hell, I got my spies out all the time. Nobody mentioned that, though. Well, no, that's true. I think you're right. Well, I think it's mentioned among, certain people know it. But it's not a big... No, no, no, no. Well, he's kind of a gadfly, you know. I don't know if you know what I mean by that, but... How did he emace his... Well, that's a long story. Christ, he went broke I don't know how many times. So his father, did he survive? Well... Apparently, he did, but I mean... Yes. Oh, yeah, but he, well, he was in all kinds of business. He was in the junk business. He was in hides, animal hides. And all kinds, he went broke several times. Finally, he got involved in this when Playafilm became popular. That's where he made his money. Oh, God, he is some character. You know, I had him in the Aquitaine parade. He threw away 18,000 silver dollars in the parade route. In the parade? Yeah. I think I read about that. Oh, sure. How did you get a hold of him? I mean, a personal friendship or... Ross? Yes. Well, I've always been on the lookout for people who are newsworthy. What the hell? It's no use to bring Joe Blow out there. Nobody knows him, you know. You've got to bring somebody that a lot of people know. Oh, yeah, Percy Ross. I've heard of him. By God, I'm going to go out there and see him, you know. Well, the only way we can make any money, the only way we can sell sandwiches, coffee, ice cream, bottom quarter and all these things is to have people out there. If you don't have people out there, you're not going to sell anything. If you don't sell anything, you're not going to make any money. It's that simple. But you try to bring Swedish real culture into the program because you're attracting people from Sweden. Oh, sure. We have a lot of people from Sweden. Singers and dancers. Yeah, all the time, every year. Hell, I've got a group of, even already, a group of 42 people coming from Växjö. The Dumkyrka. Tungkyrka? Yes. So you are looking for the best of Swedish folk culture to present it. Well, normally speaking, you get the best because they're the only people that can afford to come. Either because of personal financial condition or an organization that has the ability to gather money so they can come. But sometimes you have dance groups, folk dancers. They don't have any money, but still they are... Well, but they get support from the state. You'd be surprised. This group from Sundsvall, that was here, where the hell was it? Three years ago? They were a gymnastic group and they did dancing. There was about 25 of them. They worked for several years. It happened that the leader of that group was a friend of mine or the wife of a very close friend of mine. So I knew her quite well, too. But they paid their own way. And I put them up at the Lemington and they got, I think, $4 a piece a night or something, which was just ridiculous. You had to connect them, too. That's right. And we've had just all kinds of people. So this Svenskarnasdag then is entirely its own organization? Absolutely. We don't get a nickel from anybody. And the board of directors are representatives from each group in the... From various groups, yes. What do they get out of it then, in other words? Nothing. Money? No, no. You keep the money and for the next year... It costs them money. Well, we've only had one tragic year and that was, well, you see, for 27 consecutive years I was chairman. Well, it really, it's just a hell of a big job. Yeah, of course. Nobody probably wants it. Nobody probably wants to follow you. Nobody wants it. And they all say, oh, God, I couldn't do all that you do. Well, I said, what the hell are you talking about? I didn't know any more about it than you would, probably less when I started. But you had people during those 27 years to break in, more or less, so they know... Yeah, but you see, they were all old to start with. And they got older and older and older. And, of course, so did I, but at least I started 30 years earlier than they did, you see. I started in my late, well, late 20s, really, or about 30. And, hell, most of them were 60s to start with, so I had 30 years on all of them. Well, with the exception of maybe half a dozen. But even they are out now. You know, they, one, I think of one woman who was involved in the local Twin Cities, a Jewish senior folk dancer, and she was about my age and very active, but not much anymore. You see, 40 years go by and everybody is 40 years older. But I've always felt that I was an idea, an idea person. I had ideas, and I also found if you don't do anything with the ideas, they're never going to materialize. It's just like Earl Olsen. I had the idea for a couple of years, and a couple of years ago I really tried to reach the guy, but he was so busy and never seemed the right time, so I forgot about it for a while. But then I made up my mind, by God, we're going to have that guy. That's all there is to it. He is one of the best-known men in the second richest man in the state, next to Kurt Carlson. What were the successes, you said, when there was one year? Well, that was our 50th anniversary. I gave them, so I thought, oh, God, I've had more than my share, and I want to get out. So I saw to it that the year before that a guy who was really kind of promising, an immigrant Swede, worked for 3M, so I urged him to become vice chairman. Then the next year I made up my mind I'm not going to run. I'll help him all I can, but I'm not going to do it. Because, you see, I've been going away for five months, and that's a long time. Of course, I've done a lot of work down there. I've been corresponding with people, just like Claude Pepper. I do that from down there. But anyhow, this guy had a greater desire. I think that what he felt, he was going to use the chairmanship of Sonsky and his dog. He is what I have always called a climber. He likes to sit next to and rub shoulders with somebody that's a big wheel. Well, of course, that's just been the opposite for me. They don't mean a thinker's damn to me. The fact that they have a few million don't mean nothing, because I have a great deal, except the people who have started from nothing. I know quite a few of those, and I'm a millionaire now. You've got to give those people credit, who haven't inherited anything. I know one guy, well, several of them, Christ Almighty, he started with a borrowed wheelbarrow. He didn't even own a wheelbarrow. He borrowed a hole and built a sidewalk for somebody. Biggest masonry contractor around this area, multimillionaire. All the masonry worked for the IDS tower. Airport, big, big, big stuff. What is his name? Axel Omen. Now he is now, must be close to 80. Those people I admire, because came over here with 50 cents in his pocket. Worked hard. A man by the name of Gust Falden, he's now dead. Came over here with absolutely nothing. Worked in the woods, cutting railroad ties for five cents a piece. Now you know the size of railroad ties, and the amount of work of getting one into shape out of a log. Five cents. He's a multimillionaire. Worked like a dog, but all on his own. Hard worker, lots of smarts. So those kind of people I admire, these people that inherit something and then have a hell of a time hanging on to it. I don't have any truck for those people at all. They're nothing to me. They may think they are, but. So you stepped on them for the 50th? Then I stepped down. But it was an important year though. Well, I did it before. I told him, I said, look, I'll help you. I'll get the speakers. And I will, I said, I'm not going to leave you in the lurch. Well, now this was 49, this is really the 49th year. But then he was still on the 50th year. Well, I don't know, but you see all the time, and I know it because he spoke several times, oh gosh, he says, I have to, I really got to become a member of Svenska Salskarpet. I don't know if you know it. Oh, yeah, sure. Well, that was his goal, to go to those dinners, get snot-nosed drunk. That's all they do, you know. Now, I have nothing against drinking. I can't drink because I have a hiatus hernia. I've had it all my life. So if I drink, Christ, I suffer indigestion, something fierce. Maybe that's the reason I never do any drinking, but I have nothing against it. People like it, and as long as they're smart enough not to get drunk and drive, you know, and this sort of thing, well, that's their own business. I don't care about that. But that was big stuff to him. So he thought that by becoming chairman, he was then, that was going to be a passport to a membership in Svenska Salskarpet, as though it's something. I've been asked many times to, you know, join, but I said, no, I really can't. I don't have time. I said, if I belong to something, I want to be able to take part in it. I said, I just don't have time. You've never been a member? I've never been a member. Never wanted to be a member. And, you know, you turn them down enough times, and in fact nobody even asks me anymore because they know what I tell them. Is this supposed to be a snobby? Ah, well, they think they are. Well, you hear the people say that, you know. Yes, because it's the type of thing, there are people, I call them climbers. They want to get up and sit next to somebody that's got a million dollars, you know, this sort of thing. That just doesn't affect me. I could care less. Well, so then he got somebody involved who had never been in before, well, in fact a half a dozen people. And they were, well, they were not accustomed to operating with a complete lack of money that we've been doing. You know, when I took over, we didn't have a nickel. Ah, no stinking nickel. We didn't have any credit. The printer, he says, look, I can't print the book unless you're willing to stand, guarantee it personally. Cash up front. Yeah. Well, he said, well, I didn't have cash up front, but he said, you've got to be responsible for it. He says, I just can't do it otherwise. They're so slow in paying, he says, well, hell, so I said, well, that's no problem. He said, well, I know that we're going to increase the size of this book. Well, it used to be, take this off my suit, sir. We used to have a program book that consisted of three 8 1⁄2 by 11 sheets that we'd fold in the middle, and that included the cover plus a picture of the chairman and a little program on one sheet. That was it. Well, there was no money. There was no money made. Never paid for the book. No advertisement at all. Oh, they might have one or two ads, but hell, you don't pay for the book that way. So I thought right away, I said, my God, hell, I know enough people personally that will come out with a pretty good-sized book. And we've got information in there. These are the member organizations. I guess I think it's a wonderful idea that you have a presentation. Yeah, sure it is. They never used to do that. And only a dollar. Do most of the people, do they buy this with the entrance fee? No, there is no entrance fee. You see, a park in Minneapolis, you cannot charge a ticket price. But they can donate, or you can call a donation. Well, yes, they can donate, and this is why we call this a dollar donation. Then we don't have to pay any income tax on it. How many can you sell them on a day? We usually buy 5,000. Well, anyhow, I think I've got about six or seven left now, and I need those all for really to see some customers for next year. I personally sell just about half of the ads in this book, sometimes a little more than half, depending on how much the others do. So what happened over this? So then, and they got a couple of, well, they weren't a couple, it was about a half a dozen guys that, they wanted something so grandiose for the 50th anniversary. Well, I can't show you on this one, but, and so it was 50 years. Well, you see, that was in 63, or in 83. So then they figure, 50 years, well, that must have been 33. They didn't stop to think that if you have celebrations in 33, and in 83, that's 51 celebrations. The thing, this is how much they knew about the background. And, you see, they really started in 34. Well, 34 through 63 is 50 celebrations. Well, that was no, you know, that was no great big thing, but they went ahead and they spent, see, we had about $13,000. They went ahead, so we wound up the year anyhow. In the spring, in May of 83, we had about $13,000. In May of the following year, we had half of that money. So in one year, they went through half of the money we had. And I don't mean that they stole it. They just spent money like drunken sailors and made no effort to get people out there so they could recoup. I said, oh, God, it was a terrible year. The weather was bad. I said, don't give me that crap. I said, the weather wasn't that bad. I said, we had never, up to that point, we never had a celebration where we lost money. There was a couple years we lost money.