 It's today, June 17, 1986. I'm sitting here with Mrs. Frances Peterson, Moline, Illinois. She was born on July 22, 1916 in Moline, Illinois. So, can you tell us a little bit about your father, Frank Oscar Carlson? Yes, he was from Karlskoga, right in the city, like it is now. But at the time he was born, there was a big farm. There were eight or ten in the family. This is Howard's. I thought you were going to take me to Howard's. So his father owned the farm? Yes, a big farm. So that's where he grew up. Yes. So there was no work when your father grew up, but he helped out at the farm? Yes, there was. Was he one of the younger children? Not exactly, almost in the middle. But there was only one of the boys. I think there were eight boys and two girls in the family. And there was only one boy who stayed in Karlskoga. They all wanted to come to America. All of them? All of them, yes. What did they depend on? Did they have a mother or a father here in America? Yes, they had a mother and a father here. So they came to Olin here in Moline. William Olin, he was called. He was my grandmother's brother. So all of the boys came. But not all of them, because one died when he was little. So there was Ture who came, and Andrew, and my father. There were three boys who died, and Karl was still at home. Maybe there were only four who came. But maybe only eight together. So there were six boys and two girls. The girls were at home, and they never got married. But Ellen, the oldest girl, she was back and forth. To America? Yes. She came to visit? Yes, she came to work a little, and then she left for home. Then she came to America again, and worked a little, and then she left for home. Because my grandmother was still here, but my grandfather died when he was young. Quite young. So the farm was divided up a little. There were more brothers than he had, or my grandmother had. So I don't know how it all fits together. What was the farm called? Well, let's see. Just because you asked me, I can't say what it was. Maybe that will come up a little later. Yes, it will come to me. But did the boys take over the farm after my grandfather? Not exactly, no. He only had a small part of it, so they divided it up. So it was a big farm. Let me go and... Bregårdstorp. Bregårdstorp. That was in Karlskoga? Yes. Bregårdstorp. That was the name of the farm, yes. Yes, I think so. Olsen and Lovisa Magnus' daughter got married. They had five, ten children. 1824, so it goes back a long way. Yes. And then there was Erik. He had ten children. Eight boys and two girls. Yes. And it was... It seems that my father wasn't there. He wasn't that young. I think he was in the middle. Yes. There, he said that. Yes. What do I have? You want... Sommen Farmers, namnord Lovisa, och Farfars, var Karl Jansson, var Hans namn. Johan Anders Ellen Lisbeth Törr, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine shows here. But there are ten. Ivar, he was born, but he died. He died. And this one, he died when he was only one year old. So... So is your father's name Frank in Sweden too, or what was it? Yes, Franz. Franz. Franz. Franz Frank is in America. Yes. So that's why I had the name Francis. Oh, I see. Francis. Yes. So, yes. So your father, did he come together with a brother or...? Yes, he came with his brother, Andrew. But his name was Anders there. So he took Andrew here. He came here, yes. Yes. And what year did they come? It was 1902. 1902? Yes, April 18th, 1902. He was only 17 years old. And I have the note that was written up, that someone had to write it up for him. And it said on the paper that he was too young, but he was going to go with his brother, so he could go. Was he older? Yes. He was born in 1880, so he was four years old. So who paid for the tickets for these two boys? Could they do it themselves? They were quite young. Yes, I think their father did. The ticket seller? Yes, because he had money, and they wanted to go to America. But there wasn't much work at that time. Did your father tell you anything about the trip? Yes, not much. He didn't want to talk much about it. He said that it was just one thing. He said that he would never take him back, because if he did, he would probably stay. Sometimes he was very homesick. He was? Yes, sad that he had come over. There were many Karskoga boys here in Moline, who came to Moline. Really? Yes, many from Karskoga. They came together. He first came to Moline to his uncle. Then he went from here to another uncle, who was in Colorado. He was going to dig for gold and silver. My aunt's cousin was also there. They were digging in Colorado, far up in the mountains. It was in... Cripple Creek, it was called. It was up from Denver, I think. Far up in the mountains. My father was there for a few years. So he went alone, and Andrew didn't follow him? No. He stayed in Moline? Yes, he did. Both of the cousins died up there. My father used to come down, when they were still alive, of course. They would come down and dance on Saturday nights. In Cripple Creek, they would sometimes go to Denver, and to Pueblo. My mother had a brother there. They were acquaintances. When my mother came to America, she traveled to her brother's house. She worked there. My father and mother met there, through her brother. Before I was born, when they were first married, they came back to Moline. They wanted company with the other boys from Cripple Creek. There were many here. There was a brother to my father, who came later, but he never came to Moline. He moved to New York. He lived there all the time. He never came back. What year did your mother come? She came in 1910. She was 25 when she came. Was it easy to get a brother in Colorado? She had a brother in Boston, who she came to first. She moved to Colorado because she wanted to see her brother. He was the oldest brother. She was the oldest in the family, but she was the last to come. What did your brother do in Colorado? Was he there in Pueblo or in Cripple Creek? In Pueblo. I think it was Jernberg. I don't know the name. What did your mother do for a living? She was a girl. A girl to a lady who lived out there. A big family. Many people lived in big houses and were rich. Vander... It wasn't Vandervenet. But... Some name. She was the first girl to them. She... How long did she stay there? She was there for five or six years. Your father met her at that time. He decided to go to Moline. When his mother's brother died, he came down to Moline. When he arrived in Moline, I think he was with a man who was in concrete. I don't know what it was called. Cement work. When he arrived in Moline, he took up and did cement work. How did the gold mining in Cripple Creek go? There wasn't much. He didn't tell you? No, not much. There were so many out there. So they could live? Yes, that's all. Did he say anything about the climate? He didn't like it. It was too high up. It was too high up. Did he feel bad about it? Maybe. But he didn't like it. It was too low. There was no company with girls or anything. There were only two boys up there. Yes, two old men. He had a donkey. A horse. Yes, and a dog. He had company up there. He said that the old men didn't have much life. Were they unmarried? Yes. They had been for many years? Yes. They only had a small house to live in. I have a map of them. But the most fun was when they came down to Cripple Creek. It was a city. There was a lot of life there. Howie and I have been there. It's the same as it was when they were gold diggers. How far did the mother and brother live from Cripple Creek? It was up in the mountains. Yes. It wasn't far from there. But far enough that they could walk. But... There was no one to look after them. Only my father who could run a little. The others? No. He didn't like it. It wasn't much fun out there. What were their names? I don't know. I'm looking for them. I don't have their names. There was no church or anything? No. It was just a wilderness. Yes. Nothing. One of them could have been John Olsen. But we don't know exactly. We're looking for him. We have Erik Jonsson and Johan Goldminer. But I hope that we can explain it to them one day. What year did they come back? 1916. 1916? Yes. They came back right after I was born. Did they buy a house? No. They lived in a small... Only three rooms. Down in Molin? Down in Molin. On 6th Avenue and 12th Street. Down by the first street. That was my playground. So they came with you to the end? Not my father. He didn't want to go. But my mother and I did. He said that his mother had raised him well enough. So he didn't need to go to church. He was determined. Yes, he was. He said, I have mine and you have yours. But I don't want to go to church with you. Did he never go to church? Only when I was married. So he came. He didn't want to come. He didn't like the priest. He was very strict. I think my father would have come to church if he had felt a little welcome. The priests at that time said a little too much sometimes. They were too polite. Yes, exactly. So was your father politically interested? Yes, a little. But he did a lot of work for Molin. For the city of Molin. He was in a partnership with two others. So they did a lot of cement work with the streets and sidewalks. Trottoir. Trottoir. Trottoir. Trottoir, yes. Oh, you mean a sidewalk? Yes. It's French, we don't have it in Swedish. No, I've never heard of it. Trottoir. So he was a lot closer to the city hall with those who had control. All the men of city hall? Yes, so much. They had to be exactly like that, leg deep. So he had his own company? Yes. With two others. Yes, it was Frank Carlson that he had a name on. Then he came in with two others. It was just Molin Construction, not their name. So he had a lot to do in the city hall. Was there a lot to do in the 20's when you grew up? Yes, there was. He always had work. Only until we had the big... The delivery. Yes. In the meantime he had saved enough so we had built a house. He had moved again and was there for two years when he lost all his money in the bank with the big crash. He burned everything? Yes, exactly. There were many who came. Was it Uptown Bank? Yes. Commercial was the name. They didn't get any money back from that bank. So how did he take such a hit? It must have been terrible to lose all your savings. Yes, exactly. So all they had was their house. You could hardly sell a house then, just like now. So it wasn't fun. I grew up through it. My mother went to work and my father tried everything. A few years ago he buried a grave. Buried? Yes. At the hospital? Yes. On Riverside? Yes. Valhalla Memorial Park. That was called Valhalla when it first started out. Valhalla? Yes. And then it was changed over. It must have been a Swedish term. It was called Valhalla. No, it wasn't a church. It was just a grave. There was no church there. No, but there was a grave for people there. And they called it Valhalla. Yes, it was a big place. Many people went together and bought a big place. To bury their relatives. Yes. And they called it Valhalla. Valhalla. It's over here on 34th Avenue. Just ahead. Over there? Yes. When Moline took over it, they changed the name to Moline Memorial Park. I see. So it was outside the city limits at the time. Yes, exactly. It was interesting because when I was over there on Memorial Day to put flowers on the graves, a lady came and asked where is a place called Vardkomma? Vardkomma is a name I have. She was outside Moline and was looking for her people over there. There was another lady there and she said she hadn't heard that name before. I hadn't left my car yet, but I heard them talking. I called out to them and said, Valhalla? Is that what you're looking for? Yes, maybe, she said. They hadn't heard that name before. It was as far back as it was. There were many Swedes at the cemetery. There were also Belgians and other nationalities. It was open to the public. It wasn't just a Swedish cemetery. Not at all. It was open to everyone. My father bought it. My father, mother and Haui's older sister who was never married, are buried there. It was around ten or eleven years ago that we had to order who would have the other graves. There were six of us there. We had all the sisters together. Haui had gone and got a price for what it was worth. When we were together, the three brothers were carrying leaflets. Haui got it. He was buried there, so we had to pay the others. There were five left, two sisters and three brothers. The sisters didn't want a place there. Only three, Kenny, Elmer and Howard, carried the leaflets. We paid the others. I will be buried there, too. In Valhalla? Yes, in Valhalla. It's never used in the name anymore? No. It's gone. No one here in Moline knows where Valhalla is. How long did he keep this open to bury people during the Depression? Only a few years. So no cement work was allowed? No. He got some cement work then and then, but not too much. During that time, the men were allowed to move out of the house. They lived there for six or seven years. I went to high school, but I didn't live there with them. I had to work for a school teacher. We lived next door to each other when I was born. Her sister died, so she wanted a girl. She said that if I came to live with her and help her, she would raise me. She wanted me to go through school. I lived with her. My mother came and helped us keep the house clean and clean. She could do some work. It was not very fun. Did you have a child? Yes. My parents had to find something. They never told me, but I imagine that the bank took over the house, which they did to many. At that time, they had their own house that they had built. We had moved to. I moved back. The Second World War The Second World War They were able to get into a house of some man that belonged to our church. He was all alone. He had two daughters that lived away from here. His wife had died. He had a big house. He wanted them to come and live with him and take care of him. He was still working, however, but he kept two rooms for himself. Then he had the rest of the house. That's where my dad eventually died. He was only 62 when he died. It was at that time and during that period, going through high school, when many of my girlfriend's fathers committed suicide because there was not work. They couldn't take it. They were people who were in big business, bankers and businessmen. I can remember coming home one Sunday because Sunday was my only day off. After church, I would go home. I could be home until evening. My father was sitting down in the basement with a borrowed gun in his hand and crying and feeling so bad, so ashamed of himself, because he had come from a good family, a wealthy family, I mean well taken care of, where they had no bashim, to come here and he was ashamed for me, I know, and for my mother too, because she came from a home that didn't know want either. Although he always kidded her because he told her she was a small inning, she knew how to save. She was thrifty. Yes, she was. So he felt so despondent, but he didn't. He just didn't. He didn't commit suicide, but as I say, there were many that did. I was so thankful that he didn't. But those were really hard times. Nobody knows really, you know, unless you lived through it. And it continued for so many years too. Yes, it just really did. But then, you know, things started to pick up a little bit again, and so he was able to work, you know, before he died, and they were able to get into a little house, and for four or five years they lived, you know, that way. But after my father died, then Howard built our big house over on 7th Street and 25th Avenue Court. And when he built that house, it was a time when his mother was very ill, and she said to Howard, Well, I want you to be sure and be good to Mrs. Carlson now, and you be sure you take care of her. And so when we built the house, he made plans that there should be a room set, a bedroom upstairs that was big enough and set aside, you know, for her. For your mother. For my mother. And so when my father died, then she came to live with us over there. And so she lived with us 18 years. I think it was all through the time that we were raising our children. And it was because of the kind of a room and the kind of a house we had, it was nice to have her there. So your kids were raised there with a grandma. Yes. Do you think your mother was able to cope better with this depression than your father, for instance? Yes, much. Was she more calm and relaxed? Yes, and she had always been brought up to work, you know. So she didn't worry as much then as your father, perhaps? No, perhaps not. And she was able to... Because we think it would be harder for a woman to face the next day because food on the table, that was her responsibility. Yes, but she was always able to... To manage. Yes, and she sewed beautifully. And there was a lady down near church there where we lived, and she was a dressmaker. And also Mrs. Butterworth's daughter, the one daughter, had a governess for her children. And so she was extra tall and slim. And when she found out that my mother could sew, she used to have my mother do some sewing for her. And the neighbors around, they were all unmarried, the women, you know, and they were schoolteachers and so forth, so they had money and clothes. And so I was always well-dressed because my mother could make those things over for me, and for herself, too. And as I say, she was very, very thrifty and could make things do. And I think the fact that she had me, too, and the neighbors around there were very kind and very good. So did they go together often, the neighbors and the talking about things? No, my mother was always beneath them, you know. They were the aristocrats around there. But Mother never cared, you know. So they didn't bother her or anything? No, they always were so good. If they had a party, they'd hand across the fence, you know, would you like to have a taste of what we had? Mostly they'd give it to me, you know, little party things and so forth and so on. And Mother was never proud. She was never too proud to take and make do. And you were living at that time at what address then? At 1214 6th Avenue, right down. We just had three rooms down there. You owned the house then? No, we just rented. It was a big house with a little addition to it. And there was a downstairs and an upstairs, three rooms in each. But the next house your dad owned, though? No, that house I said he saved until things were going pretty good, just about two years before the Depression. Then we moved up on to 24th Street and 9th Avenue in Moline, and that was getting away from the downtown, you know. You were up in the hill then? Yes, uh-huh. And it was a new area where they were building lots of little bungalows. And that's where, in fact, he was doing a lot of concrete work for a builder, for a house builder. And so that's how the fellow said, Well, if you'd like a little house, why, you buy a lot and I'll build it, see? So that's how they came to have a house. And I remember where we lived before, of course, we had never had a bathroom. The facilities were out by the alley. And you took baths in a wash tub. And I remember the first time I took a bath in a bath tub, I can remember that I offered to get in there and clean out that bath tub from all the plaster, you know, that the plaster just had left and everything. And Mother said, Well, if you get in and clean that out, you can take the first bath. And I remember how luxurious I felt sitting in that bath tub. So that was the inauguration day. That's right. That's right. So there were lots of things that I remember about that. So there were many houses then at that time that didn't have any facilities. No. No. How long did they continue, up in the 30s, too, in some houses? Well, let's see, downtown, then, of course, they eventually had to put in, you know, bathrooms or inside facilities. The big houses had them. Downtown was actually behind them, the rest of the new additions, the facilities. Yes. Well, now, the house that belonged, that our little park belonged to, it had a bathroom in it. But ours, they just apparently didn't have to put one in, you know, when they built the addition. But then within a few years, then, of course, they decided that they'd better have inside plumbing. And so I would say that, see, this had to be 1932. I'd say 1932 would be from there on that they would have to have inside plumbing. So there was a city ordinance then? Yes. I suppose you had to. So then they had to add that on. How about the garden? Or a chicken coop behind your house? No, not behind our house. We couldn't, well, old Mr. Anderson had some pigeons, you know, that he used to kill once in a while and eat. But that's about it. But he had a vegetable garden. This weed? Yes. He had pigeons? Yeah, he had some pigeons. Not the kind that the Belgians had, though? No, not racing pigeons, no. Because that must be the first weed I ever heard that had pigeons. No, but they were kind of like squabs, they called them. Oh, I see. He used them for eating. For eating. They were refined pigeons. I see. So that was his hobby, you know. Yeah. And at one time I had a couple of little chickens, but, you know, they were just from Easter time on up. And when my mother killed them, I couldn't eat them. They were my pets. So that was the end of the chicken coop? That was the end of that. Oh. But we did, when we lived in our house up on the hill, we did have a big garden and we did, we had chickens. Everybody had chickens. They had to have raised chickens for food. So eggs and the milk that you bought from the farmers directly? Yes. You had a milkman coming along at the time? Yes. A milkman? Yes. And an ice man? Yes, and an ice man. So when you moved into the house up on the hill, that was before 1928, 29? I would say it was 1931 we moved up there. And the ice man was still coming along then? There was no refrigerators in the house, is there? No, because on our house there was a special place built out for the ice box. On the porch? On the back porch, uh-huh, for the ice box. But then I'd say within a few years, you know, then there were refrigerators. But I know at the time that I was going to high school, which was from 30 to 34, the ice man was still delivering ice to the house where I was down on 6th Avenue. So the refrigerator didn't make a fast entrance like the TV, for instance? No. It took a little bit of time then before everybody had it. Yeah, it sure did. How about the washing machine now? Was that a common thing? Well, no. I know that my mother washed by hand, you know, with a board. And the Andersons that owned the house, they had a little washing machine, one of these, you know, wooden ones that they had. I don't know if you've ever even seen one like that. But it was something that Mr. Anderson made, and I suppose there were a lot of them that were handmade. But they were like a little cradle. And you put your hot water in there, of course, and your soap, and then you stood there and pushed one side down and the other side down. With your feet? No, with your hands. With the hands. Yes, uh-huh. And then you had a ringer attached. They did have a ringer, hand ringer. And there was enough agitating them to make them clean. Oh, yes. Going back and forth. And then once in a while you punched them down, you know, with a stick. They always boiled water on the kitchen stove, that's all. Yes, or down in that, they washed down in the basement below the apartments where we lived, see? And so there was a little coal stove down there. It was a coal stove to heat the water. I see. Especially a stove for that. Yeah. But you had to heat it in a boiler. You know, they had these big copper boilers. Have you ever seen those? Yes, I've seen some of them. Yeah, uh-huh. And that's what you heated your water in, you know, and dipped it into your washing machine. Of course, we couldn't use the washing machine because that was Mrs. Anderson's. So my mother scrubbed on a scrub board. Didn't she believe in the washing machine, you think? My mother? Yeah. Oh, yes, but she wasn't allowed to use that. That was Mrs. Anderson's. She didn't let the— Hands off. She didn't let the renters use that. No, uh-uh. And was it a special wash day, Monday or Tuesday? Monday. Monday was always wash day. Every Monday then? Yeah, it was wash day. And everything was out on the line? That's right. Did you have—had you start early in the morning or—? Yes, we were early. On Monday? Yeah, but— Yeah. Oh, jeez. Your mother, now, did she do any American cooking or was it Swedish? Oh, I think she did some American cooking, too, because she—I know she used to make such delicious spaghetti and macaroni and all those. Yes, she was a good cook. But she also cooked Swedish, you know, because she belonged to the church down there in First Lutheran and belonged to the Veronica Society. And they used to have smörgåsbord, you know, and serve dinners and so forth. And my mother was always in the kitchen. Then actually when she retired from Deering Company, then she went to work at Camp Augustana and was one of the cooks up there in the summertime for about eight, seven— Out in Oregon? No, no. This was when it used to be up at Lake Geneva. Lake Geneva. With Lee Brisman. And Jane used to be the head of the cooks up there. And my mother worked with—there were about five or six Swedes in the kitchen then up there for about six or seven years. So she worked for John Deere, you said? Yes, she did for about ten years. Thereafter, my father died. She was—they started out down at the main office when it was down on Third Avenue and were going to serve coffee and rolls in the morning and then coffee and rolls in the afternoon. And it just happened my mother knew this lady that was head of that. And so she got a job, you know, doing that. And it just grew into more and more and finally they were serving hot meals at noon and so forth. And so she worked until she was 68. And then she retired, of course, at 68. She had to do that. And that's when—that was her first trip home to Sweden. So she worked for the office personnel then at the— Yes. In downtown Moline. Uh-huh. Yeah. So she came back to Sweden for the first time after she left. First time in 42 years. In 1968. No, no. That was when she was 68 years old. Oh, 68 years old. Yeah. It was in 19—my goodness, I don't know if I can even remember. Was it 1952? Let's see. It could have been in—I think that was about when she went back. No, wait a minute. See how old she was. She was 68 years. I'd have to figure out. So 1953 she went back. Uh-huh. And she had— Alone? Alone. She went back alone. And she had to go by boat because there hadn't been much air travel, you know, by that time. And I don't think we had any Telstar for telephone because you just didn't talk to anybody on the telephone. And, yes, she went back. She spent all summer and was there for a wedding and everything. They had such a wonderful time. And her sister, who was ten years younger than she, was only 15 when she left home, you see. And it was just remarkable how much those two sisters were alike. And here they'd been apart for so many years. And it was her sister who had had three boys then. And they were that much—they were ten to twelve years younger than I am, you see. And my mother always called them the triptrop trove because they all had the name of bees, Bacteric, Birtle, and Birrier. And they lived in Kalmar there. And it's just been a wonderful relationship, you know, all these years. And then when she came home, she stopped to see her brother out in Boston. And she came home here, and she'd gained about 15 pounds, you know, with all this traveling and all the good food. And so she said, Well, as long as I'm traveling, I might as well go see my other brother then in Colorado, and I will have seen the whole family. And it's a good thing she did. So she did that. What did she comment, though, about Sweden? Something special she noticed? Well, of course, everybody that she knew in Kalmar and her sister, too, they had it so good. There were good times then. And so she was just so, you know, happy about her whole trip and everything. And I remember I didn't read her diary until—well, it was about ten years ago. Howie and I were looking through her diary one day, and in this—it was the one that she kept going across and coming back. And in there she said, I'm halfway now on the ocean between my loved ones in America and my loved ones in Sweden. And she said, If I had to make a choice, I don't know which way I would go. She said, It was so wonderful to be at home, and yet I don't belong there anymore, you know. And I could feel what she meant, because—and Howie could, too. Because, you know, when we decided to go—and that was the year after she died. That was in 1967. That was our first trip. And Howie said, I'd like to go to Sweden, but I'd like to go by boat one way. Otherwise, I don't want to go. So we went over on the Gripsholm and flew home then. And as we sailed out of the harbor in New York and saw that Statue of Liberty getting smaller and smaller and nothing but water ahead of us, you know, and all around us, we thought how our folks must have felt when they left their fatherland. It must have been terribly hard. Just terribly hard. Even without all the hardships on the ship, you know, and not the conveniences that we had going across. It was a luxury trip that we had across. And we had trouble on the boat. One of the motors went out, so we had to go into dry dock when we got to Gothenburg. So it meant that we had a cruise the last few days, really. So we had to call from on board ship to our relatives in Sweden to let them know that we would be late in coming. And that brought to mind, too, just think, and just think now, how I call Sweden and have called Sweden ever since then, back and forth, maybe twice, three times a year. What if our folks that came here to America could have done that? How wonderful that would have been for them to have heard their folks' voices and so forth. This is a wonderful time that we're living in, you know. That's right. It's fast. Fast changes and fast speed all over. Yes. Or even to fly. Just think. Short distance. Yeah. But your father, no, he never, he was never able to. No. And he was not interested to make the trip either. No. He didn't want to go back. And he said, I came here, he said, I'm now an American citizen. This is when I started school. And he said, and I want you to teach me to speak the English language real good, he said. Were you talking Swedish most of the time in your home? In home. Yes. When I started school, of course I spoke English to some of my playmates, but some of them were Swedish too. Florence Wernberg, and I don't know if you knew the Frank Wernbergs. They were before your time, but they were related to the Thornblums and to Magnussons. Mrs. Wernberg was a sister to those two, to the Magnussons. And so there was a lot of Swedish going on, you know, in the whole neighborhood. And there were many times when I started school that I wanted to express myself, and I didn't know what it was in English, you know. But that's what my father gave me orders. He said, no, you're learning to speak the English language and you teach me. He said, I don't want you to speak Swedish to me anymore. He said, I want to be able to converse in my country's language. Was he more particular than you are, you think, to speak the English? Well, maybe so, yes, because she spoke Swedish to me, and my mother and her father corresponded every week. My father, my grandfather wrote to my mother every Sunday, and my mother wrote a letter to him every Sunday, or to them every Sunday. And when those letters came, then, and my grandmother kept that up too afterwards. When those letters came, then my mother had me read them out loud, and then she'd sit there and laugh at me, you know, my pronunciation, a lot of words. But that's how I learned to speak Swedish, and in later years, I didn't think I would ever, you know, ever get to Sweden. And so I was able to converse enough to get along and know how things should sound in a letter and everything. So when I went to school, I didn't take Swedish in high school like I should have. I took French and Latin. So you passed up Mrs. Graham then? Yes. Howard took with her, and he had a terrible time because he would think in English and then he'd translate it, you know. And I could have had the best grades in the world because I think Swedish, you know. And so when we went on our trips to Sweden, the first couple of weeks were awfully hard for him because he was always translating, you know, before he could speak. And, but after we had been there a while, you know, and then we usually stayed five to six weeks when we went to visit his folks and then my folks too. So that was, that made quite a trip. In your home now, did you have any Swedish-American newspaper, like Svenskavik? My mother took Svenskamarkanen. In Chicago? Mm-hmm. But your father, he was also interested in reading, like school? He would read, yes, but you know, he was pretty busy. At night he was figuring for jobs, you know, always lining up something, you know, after supper. Sometimes he'd have to go down and pick up some of these laborers in the taverns down on Third Avenue, you know, and come to work tomorrow morning. You'd be there at seven o'clock tomorrow morning. And I remember he used to take me along in the car so that he wouldn't, you know, stay too long. You know about the hangouts then, don't you? I do. Did your dad belong to any other Swedish-American organizations like Warsaw, Viking, Switzerland? It was just Warsaw then for a while, and then Oddfellows, like I say. I think I'll have one of these. So, see that's Carl Skugler's shirt, huh? Mm-hmm. So he belonged there for many years? Well, yes, as long as, see the Oddfellows, well, they got to the point where they weren't very active anymore. And of course that was about the time that my dad just wasn't active anymore either. But your mother didn't belong to any other groups? No, just a church. Paulina, Veronica, and the church? Yeah, just church groups. Yeah. And then you came out of high school and you went into Augustana, you said, for your continuation of your studies there? Yes, and I was there for two years. And then the things weren't very much better by that time, but I just didn't have any money. My folks couldn't help me, you know, really. I had my tuition was all paid and everything like that, but it was expensive to go back and forth, you know, and with clothes and everything and supplies. So you lived at home then? Yes, uh-huh. So there was no way I couldn't afford to live in the dormitory at that time. So at the end of my second year, I dropped out and found work. And of course I always did want to go into some auditing, but that was always my line of work anyway. And so I got work down at the Royal Neighbors, and that's what I did down there was auditing. And so then I never did go back to school because, well, and within, let's see, that was 20. I'd say almost four years, then I was married. And you met your husband? Well, we knew one another as children in church. I see. So you grew up in the same neighborhood, so to speak. Yes, we grew up together. No, no, his father lived up on top. I mean, they lived up on top of the hill up near 7th Street. You see, they lived on 9th Street and 19th Avenue where the boulevard was. And so they were up there right next to Belgium Town, and that's where Howie passed papers, you see, right up in there. Oh, I see. To the Swedes on the east side of 7th Street and to the Belgians on the west side of 7th Street.