 And of course that's what my sister did. This is she. Oh, sorry about that. OK, and that's what my sister did. She stayed in the local town and raised her six children and was very close to mother and father. And not always did everything that they agreed with, but did many more things than she did when she was a young girl. Did she? She did. She did. Is that what you think? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. They mended the fences in the town? Yeah. Maybe she felt the rent was too high. You see, her husband worked there, so that she was dependent on that. She couldn't have moved. No, she couldn't have moved as the time went along. Was that the reason or a rebellion? Yeah, it's interesting. Maybe she felt sore for it, as you make out for it. It's her guilt that she caused them so much. But you, on the other hand, you didn't do anything wrong, though. No. You told your mother what to do. Right. But you did this wrong. But I did one thing. So there was no discussion about it. No, no. You were wrong, and that's it. Right. Although, when the time came for me to get the divorce, they were very supportive. I mean, they didn't come back and say, well, we told you so. You know, we didn't approve of this to begin with. That's when they became much more supportive in my life. But I also had to pay the price and do the things that they thought I ought to do. You see, I still couldn't be rebellious. I could to a certain extent. I lived here. They wanted me to come up there. But I knew I had to keep my own self. So I stayed here, and they would come and see us. And we'd always go up there every summer and have. Did your mother visit you here then? Yes. Not a lot, but a certain amount of it. Do you feel a distance then when you're discussing certain things? Not so much now, because you see, since my sister's death, that was about four or five years ago. We have kind of mended fences. And she's, I hope, beginning to feel that I did not desert her and that I loved her as much as my sister did, but I just didn't stay that close. And I didn't always ask her which foot to put forward. There was some independence, but it wasn't because there was no love. How about your children, all your two boys? Yeah. Do they go off to Grand Haven? Not too often. Once in a while. Now, one of them is there's a Coast Guard Festival that's up in Grand Haven. And he's going up there with his two sons. They're little, and I don't know. After this experience, he may say, we should have gone out on the farm where they could have run. But they do not have strong ties there, but they do have certain ties. And we remember Mother's Day. We remember Grandma on Mother's Day. She holds the family together. And she mentioned this the last time, that the one thing that my sister wanted was to draw the family closer together. And while she was living, we weren't able to do that. But after her death, now we have drawn the family closer together. But they still, her six children, have very independent lives. So in a way, that's helped me. Can you see the differences, then, how they turned out? In other words, do some have Swedish traits, or some English? Oh, I never thought too much about that. You usually say that, you know, it's my grandma. Yeah, not as far as the looks are concerned. No, but I mean in the way things. The oldest boy is very much like his grandparents. And he carries the name, the James name. See, my brother was carrying that name. And then when he died, then her oldest son was given the name. And he's the English part. Now, there were three boys, and then there was a girl. And the girl is my namesake. And she carries more of the Swedish side. But the second boy is a veterinarian, and the third boy is a minister. And the- You know the Hospitality Insurance? Yes. But he's kind of the one that has broken away from the six, you know, that family, in a way to live his own life, to become more independent of his grandmother. Some of the children are looking at her as their mother now. Since their mother died, they are turning to her. But at 92, she just isn't able to fulfill too much of that. But she must have felt some respect for you. You were put on the board of directors. Yes, yes. Were you the only one? No, no, my sister was on to begin with. And she wanted to be on very badly, so that then she was on. Then my mother still was on. And so then she was thinking about going off. And we wanted to keep two family members. So first of all, I was not considered at all, because I live so far away. You know, it's like I was out in China. You know, I could never get up there for meetings. But then finally, the more we talked about it, I took my mother's place. So that was my sister and I for a while. And you still? And I'm still on the board. On the board, yes. And you're up there twice a year, maybe? Oh, no, nearly every month. Every month? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. I see. So then you have the business on the other time then. Yeah. And then you report to your mother about it? Some of it, because at 92, you see, she's backing off from it. She's allowing other people to. And this printing and lithographic business? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So that shows that you have some respect, anyway, of doing business. Yeah. And it's interesting, you know, being on the board to begin with. I was just another female. And I was part of the family and was not accepted particularly as anyone who had anything that they could contribute to the board. You know, I was kind of there to watch out for our interests, for the family interest. But in the, I guess it's been six years I've been on. They've been, each year, there is more and more respect for what I can give. And I always felt, when I was going to college, my dad said, and he said it to my sister, well, you could be, you know, we weren't boys. And my brother had died by then. And we kind of wanted to be in the company. And he said, well, you could become office manager. You know, no woman did any more than that. And so I backed off, because I wanted more than that. You had high aspirations. Not thinking that, you know, if I had prepared myself and gone into the business, that there was a possibility that, you know, I could have done more. That in many respects, I feel that I have the strength of the Englishman, but I have the strength of my mother's bulldog. Well, the English are bulldogs, and the Swedes are. We used to kid about that, you know, that we as children had both shots, you know, from the English and from the stubborn Swedes and the bulldog English. And I've always kind of felt that I was, you know, a good mixture of the two. And there weren't too many people that ran over me. So you were able to employ both tweets against the Dutch? Yes. Oh, yes. We had to do that. They were kind of running the incident. Oh, yes. Yeah, you see, when we were high school kids, there was a roller skating down by the river. And on Sunday night, we couldn't even walk past that, because the devil would come out and get us. We'd have to walk around it up a couple of blocks and then go on down by the lake. You mean even as a girl, they couldn't walk? Oh, yes. No, Sunday nights. You know, any other night we could. But Sunday nights, we weren't allowed to walk past the roller skating rink, because, but of course, we could drive out of town and do worse things than we would at the roller skating. So that it was, but they were very dominant in the town. So you never dated a Dutch boy then? Not particularly. I didn't date too many of the local boys. In fact, I didn't date an awful lot of people. You knew them enough. Yeah. They hurt you during the high school days. I guess maybe that was it. Your mother, now, she been in the church business, so to speak, in 70 years. Over 70 years. And that line has never been broken by any other family members. They all still belong to the Presbyterian Church. Well, yeah, some of my sister's children. You know, I mean, they've kind of. Most of them have stayed within their church. Yeah. Yeah, I see the one boy is a minister. The oldest boy is an elder and an active member in the local church. My sister, at one time, went into the congregational church. And that wasn't too well thought of. She should have come back to her Presbyterian Church. But then the other children, some of them are church members. Now, my son, Anis Moline, is a Methodist. But that's kind of because his wife kind of got it going. Was there an important thing in Gunhaven at that time when you were growing up to be a good church member? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. To get a job and a good standing reputation. Oh, yes. Oh, yes. So there was almost like a must to belong to a good church. Yeah. And most of the Presbyterians now, were they businessmen or local? A good deal. The hierarchy was the Episcopal Church had the top banker. They were one notch higher. Then the Presbyterian. And then the Dutch churches. So the Dutch could never raise above the Presbyterian? I don't think so. No. Although they might think so. I don't know. Their story might be different. You mentioned in the beginning here, Mrs. Rizzolo, that your mother made the sweet olive oil of your father, more or less. Maybe the cooking was a little bit Swedish. Yes. Yes. So you had meatballs then? Yeah, meatballs and the cream sauces. How about fish? Oh, yes. Every Christmas. Oh, yes. Every Christmas Eve. And your father, he? Oh, yes. Absolutely. How about herring? No. No, we never had herring. So at Christmas time, you had a Christmas tree. Did your dad bring that one into the house then? Yeah, he bought it. It was the buying, purchasing of it wasn't any big thing. He would just come with it and it was there. Was that brought up long before Christmas or shortly before? Oh, a week or two before Christmas. Never just that night. The presents were brought out just that night after we'd gone to bed. Christmas Eve? Christmas Eve. So Santa Claus didn't come then? No. He came Christmas Eve. And you had a stocking on the fireplace? But we didn't see any presents before then. And how about the Christmas tree? Was it dressed by your mother or you? The family. The family? Mm-hmm. We made popcorn strings and cranberry strings, things that we could make ourselves. To hang on the tree? Yeah. And you see, when I was 10 was the Depression. So that was a time when we did a lot of things ourselves for the decorations. And live candle? No. No, we never did. Now, down at the church, mother mentioned that, the church in Allegan, where she grew up, they had the candles on the tree. We never had any live candles. And then you had Lutefisk down on Christmas Eve? Mm-hmm. And she prepared it for many years. She soaked it in the lye and in the big tubs and in the garage and moved it. Changed it in the water. Yes. Yeah, she did all that preparation. Do you remember on Christmas at noon, if you dipped bread in it? No, because then the day we went to the English. See, Christmas Eve was the sweets. And then on Christmas Day. No, no, wait a minute. No, it wasn't. No, it wasn't. No, they came to us. But it was English then on Christmas Day. They came to us because we were the children. Now Thanksgiving Day, we went to the English. And New Year's Day, we went to the English aunt. But on Christmas Day, they came to us. But it was English. It wasn't Swedish. Were they able to eat Lutefisk? Not the English. I don't think they ever tried it. No, no, she didn't serve it on Christmas. That was our Christmas Eve. So you were Swedish then on one day and English. Yeah. She never commented about that? No. That they were fussy or anything like that? Could eat the same as we do? No, no, no. There was never. It was just accepted. She might have felt that way. I don't know. She didn't express many of those feelings to us. She held them to herself. She was too proud to do that. Yeah, she was very proud. She never showed any weaknesses? No, oh, no. No. Even if it hurt inside you? Oh, it could hurt awful hard. And that's one of her big problems. Now at 92, she still doesn't want to show it. But of course, those things come through as you get older. It's more difficult to keep them inside. But we don't seem to be able to help her on that. She's still very adamant about certain things. Still holding on. Oh, yes. So she is definitely more English now, though, in later years than the Swedish. Yeah, in that respect. She has a proud outlook on life. And she wants to show that again. And I think that kind of came from the community. Because she had to be an English person in the community. She had to be on the guard all the time. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. So the other ladies now in the community, they respected her and looked up to her? Oh, yes. And that's one of her problems. Now they still come to her for advice and for counsel and everything. And she's just too weak to give it. And then that is a terrific feeling for her, because she feels guilty, because she can't do it. That she doesn't have the physical strength to do it, but she doesn't want to give in. But she does, yes. You and your sister, now, she was the rebellious type, you said. When she was young. You were living probably under some kind of color. Because the rest of the community, the ladies, and maybe their daughters, they looked up to her as being just perfect. To do everything right. Yeah. And then your sister started to be rebellious. Yes. And then you came along. Yeah. She was probably afraid that she would see it as a failure. Well, yes. Oh, I think so. Oh, I think so, very definitely. Yeah. It didn't pan out the way she had planned it. Not always. Not always. In other words, she could guard herself, but not her offspring. That's right. That's right. And she did a lot with her offspring, but there were certain things that she just couldn't do. Those minute details were over the top. Yes. Did you go down to your elegant during the Christmas season to your Swedish grandparents? No, we'd go down there for midsummer. See, that would be the summer. Or never in the wintertime. Very seldom in the wintertime. I remember some cold trips in the back of the car. With foot warmers. Yes. We were all, and horse blankets, and things of that sort. But we didn't go much in the winter. The roads were sometimes impassable. I mean, they were gravel. And then the cars weren't very well heated, and we were afraid they'd break down. So it was the summertime that we spent at the farm. And at the midsummer time, did you have a midsummer in Maypole then? I don't remember anything of that particularly. There were not many enough to. I think there was in the community, but we didn't particularly participate. You went down to the farm. No, we kind of went to the farm, and there were enough of us there. We had our own midsummer. We didn't need anybody else. Actually, and mother never particularly went back to that. Now, this aunt that's going tomorrow, she just loves these sort of things. And she would go and be there. And then she spent I don't know how many years with my grandparents taking care of them. So she would participate in those things. But mother was not quite. Did you notice when your mother came down to her parents' home, did she loosen up then and use her way of upbringing instead of being so stiff and anxious? Yes, some. She was stiffer than the sisters, I think. She was? Uh-huh. Yeah, the rest of the family was much freer in my recollection. Did they remark to her about that she was a little bit stuck up? No. Uh-uh. They kind of accepted it. It just was the way of life. And they saw her in that respect. Because she had to talk very nice, of course, to her luck with your father. Yeah, I think so. Different kind of English and the right manners at the table, for instance. Right. Did you see any different table manners, though? From your home in Grand Haven to the farm home down there. Well, because there was a little more freedom. You know, and my grandfather always feeding the children the butter. And there was some of that, but not a whole lot. We still had to mind our manners. But we were doing it because my mother was saying it, not because my English grandfather was saying it. She was kind of conveying it. But still, it wasn't enough to bother us. But like your home in Grand Haven, it was a much different home than in Ellington. Yes. You had more conveniences. Oh, yes. Yeah. Refrigerator and bathtub and shower. So that when they put the electricity in on the farm board, that was a big thing. You know, it was a big celebration. Everybody came, and they all planned where it was going to be and what they were going to do. And that sort of thing. But you had that for many years. But we had that, yes. And central heating, I suppose. Yes. And they mention in that article about they built this home. Now, that's when I was about 10 on a street. And it was very luxurious. Went to school and bragged because we had four bathrooms. We were the only family in town that had four bathrooms. But one was just a little, tiny one in the basement. But there was a master bathroom upstairs, and then the regular one. And then there was one on the first floor. They had built that home on the basis that that one room with the bath might have to have the English grandfather in it at a time. But he married three times. He married, his second wife died, and then he married his former secretary. And they all died within six months. His sister died in Grand Rapids first, and then his third wife died. And then when they took him at 91, that's I kind of worried about mother, whether she was, you know, this 91 was going to be a. And when they took him in the ambulance, he says, I got work to do. You got to take me back home. I got work to do. So he never gave up. You're welcome. We can go to Stockholm. Oh, yes. Yes. Never give up. Never give up. Now, he said, and that was another thing with my mother. Now, I don't know whether this was Swedish or where it came from. And she didn't, I think she did it more with me than she did with the, I was her little soldier. I had to, you know, I didn't cry when I bumped my knee, because I was being a little soldier. And I was thinking that the other day. She didn't necessarily, you know, I was the one that she treated that way. My sister, you know, she gave them comfort, and you know, no more, no less. But of course, and then when we went to bed, we all sang Onward Christian Soldiers up that staircase, all three of us. We were going on to war. Going to bed. You were the soldier without comfort. Yeah, yeah. Mother said that she, and I was trying to think of any other stories, you know, except like the animals were more important. And if there was a choice between the animals and the family, the animals were favored. But it was a time, and I just remember that, you know, that maybe it happened, and then they told me, but I'm not too sure. But that when Grandpa was quite ill, and Grandma had to do the chores, and do the milking of the cows, he still, no matter how sick he was, he had to stand in the doorway to see whether a neighbor came by. If a neighbor came by, he had to rush out and do the milking, because it just, no matter if he was on his deathbed, it was not proper for his wife to do the chores. And she could feed the chickens, you know, but not milk the cows. So that I don't think he was ever caught, but I remember them telling me that story, that it was, that there were certain things that the mother did, and certain things that the father did. And you did not cross that line in any respect. It was shameful then if the. Oh yes, it was quite shameful. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. So they had to watch all the time for various things. Yeah, oh yeah. But when you think back now, it didn't really mean anything. Wasn't it unnecessary, a lot of. Oh, that's it. You know, who cares whether who's going to milk the cow. But that was, oh, Darren, I can't recall. It was, whew, something went right straight through. Something about mother in the town, that it was not proper, it was proper for the woman to do it or something. But if, oh, I can't think of what it was. But it was that same thing, that if she were caught doing it or caught not doing it or something, you see, it was the proper thing for the woman to do, but not for the man or the other way around. And I've forgotten what it was. Was it the Dutch community? I don't know if you want to talk about that. Do they have some rules like that too? Oh, yes. Yeah, they are, well, of course. Was the woman walking behind the man in the Dutch community? No, no, not that much. But they were, it was always the male was the dominant. And if the male said, you know, this, this, this, well, that was it. You know, there wasn't, you didn't have any. And the children, you know, we were allowed to do more things as English children than they were. And I'd say to my playmates, you know, why can't we, well, you know, like walking past the roller skating. So there was like an assentment then from the kids. Yeah. Yeah, there were some things there, particularly on Sundays, because they couldn't even stitch, you know, cross stitch on Sunday. That was the devil's work. All they could, and they couldn't even eat. They had to prepare their food on Saturday. They could eat, but they couldn't prepare their food. So that, you know, and going on picnics and things like that, that was the Dutch. You think they were at this kind of ruling? Yeah. So like, when your mother, now, stepped forward here and took over in many things, and the Presbyterian and the director of the company, and also Salvation Army and all kinds of different things, she was far ahead than the rest of the women in the community. Because they were still waiting a long, long way until they could do the same thing. Right. She might get a stone on there, if you want to raise her. Plagg. Plagg, yes, that's possible. You led her away. Yes, she should. She should. And of course, you know, I mean, this article in the paper was, the community accepted that. And really, you know, they put her on a pedestal. Well, I like this focus, though, in Greenhaven. Is that run by Dutch people, or? No, no, the paper is not Dutch anymore. It's just, you know, run by anybody who. Anybody. Yeah. But it shows that they have, wherever wrote, they had respect for her. Yes, definitely. Because everybody knew her, of course. And the writer goes, oh, here we go together. Be right. Yeah. So did she like this one? Oh, yes, yes. She liked that. She felt that it was, she's a little, you know, shy or a little bit, you know, well, you know, wasn't all those things. But she still, and like I said, I was glad they did it when she could, you know, feel good about it herself. So that it wasn't done as an obituary. Now, you know, and I think that article, I'll get that to you from my aunt. That that would give, you know, a lot of good background and about from Sweden and how, and you'll find quite a few interesting things in there. I just wish I could remember, but I can't. And I've scrounged. I can't find it. But I know my aunt has a copy, so I'll just make a copy. Do you have a shadow of light on two families? Mm-hmm. Because you have two very interesting backgrounds. I didn't realize how interesting. It is. Uh-huh. Yeah. You can see how they pair together. And there's always a collision course in some areas, of course. Yeah. Because there are some things that one generation will ever tolerate, and the next one just sees it naturally. Right. Right. And then with my mother and father, they were very, he was the dominant man at work. And when he came home, he allowed her to be dominant in her field and being the mother. And they just kind of accepted this between the two of them. There wasn't any particular, I don't even whether I ever remember them talking harshly to each other. There would be a difference of opinion, but they would respect each other when they presented it. And then if there was a big disagreement, we never heard it. It was made outside of the house. So. Your grandfather, now he gathered 340 acres farm during his lifetime. Uh-huh. And there was no bed in his house. No. No. And he was well thought of in his community. He had, and his brother and his brother's family, they were outside the city, but they were important people in their church. And was well thought of, was considered very successful farmer. And there is good farmland around there. Yeah, right there it is. There's no orchards or anything like that? No. Use for corn and wheat? See, the potatoes first that I didn't know too much about, but then the corn and the wheat. So you didn't have to pick any potatoes? No. No, I never picked potatoes. I shucked the corn for the pigs. And then we'd get popcorn. And then one year, I always remember they had the corn field came way up by the house. And it was just, it was huge that year. For some reason, it was six, seven feet tall and really tall. And then the railroad went along their property. And then there was also a stream there where after the day's work, where kids were kept away, the men would go down and wash themselves down there. But then the railroad would bring the tramps. And they always stopped at my grandmother's house. The word got along that she would feed them a meal. So they hopped off the train and went. Uh-huh, yeah. It's interesting how they could do that, because there could be many. Oh, yeah. When you start to have it. Did they have to help out with some shores on the farm? Have to what? Instead of getting the food and offerings, did they have to do something on the farm for that? For the meal? The tramps? Yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. They used to help out. Yeah, they helped out. And as I knew them older, why, they always had hired hands. You know, the farm was too large for him to. And I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I think that's it. I guess that's it. Thank you. During the Depression, I remember one year, we, and it was the Depression came right after we built the new house, which was really quite difficult. But we invited one of the families of the community in and made presents and presented a Christmas to them. And we ate tongue and things like that during the Depression times. And mother was very frugal. And she knew how to fix tuna fish, canned tuna fish, so it tasted like chicken. So she'd have her ladies luncheons and everything. And we'd know in the kitchen what had happened. But you know, she would present it as her chicken salad. And so that's. So she was a good cook then. Oh, yeah. She was an excellent cook. And a beautiful entertainer. She just, and you know, she had no background for this. But she learned how to entertain. And her dinners and everything were very quite elegant. There are like dinners in your home now, you invited, on your father's side, people. It was more formal than that. Oh, yes, very formal. Wine and. No, no, we never had wine. No whiskey or holly? No, uh-uh, uh-uh, no. They had, you know, at the holidays was the turkey and the man, you know, carvings and that. But you had the right table setting with. Oh, absolutely. Forks and spoons. Yeah, and as a teenager, we weren't allowed to come to the table in shorts. You know, our legs were under the table. No, sir. We had to wear dresses for dinner. You had to dress up then, did you? Mm-hmm. And you had the bowl for fingers to dip the food? No, no, we didn't do much of that. But and then my father always served. He would have the serving dishes in front of him. And of course, we had to empty those serving dishes, you know, if there was anything left. There was never allowed to be anything left over in the dish. And then, you know, we always had to eat our food before we got our dessert. So was that typical English luck for Thanksgiving? Now, they had plum ponding for dinner? Yeah, yeah. After the turkey. And pumpkin pie, too? Oh, yes. So, oh, yeah, that's, uh, you had the best of two. Yeah, right. I didn't realize it all this time. But it is the price to it. Oh, yes. Your aunt, Cecilia Crane, she is just a few years younger than your mother. How does she differ from her? Is she strong willed, just like your mother? Oh, yes, yes. And she was musical. And she was, and she has a lot more vitality. Mother has more reserve. And she has much more vitality. And she just, she always loves children. Whenever she gets close to them, you know, they just come to her. And she taught for a while. But now she's extremely interested in, you know, in this history and like with Bishop Hill and everything. Mother's a little more reserved about it. I don't know, I don't know what it is, whether because of the, you know, her living, you know, there in the English or what, that she's not, you just kind of have the feeling that she, she loved her life on the farm, but she'd like to put that in the past. So she's proud of her Swedish heritage, but still there's something different between the two. She doesn't want to go in detail. No, no, no. And when I took her to Bishop Hill, she didn't want to stay long. She just looked around a little bit, and then she was ready to go home. In other words, she's looking more for the future ahead of her. I guess. Doesn't dwell on the past. No, right. But you're going to end now, Mrs. Crane. Was she also business like your mother? No, no, she was the artist. And she has the artistic temperament, and she has the frivolity and the joy and the, you know, just dancing and that sort of thing. There was quite a difference there. Oldest daughter, the oldest sister, and she was very businesslike. She did not have the opportunities because of marriage that my mother had, but she ran, during the Depression, she ran a boarding house. And she ran it, you know. She had it all organized. She was a businesswoman about it. And she was an excellent cook, you know, pies and things of that sort. And then Aunt Matilda, I mean Aunt Ciel is more of the artist and the teacher and the action person. And Aunt Esther is more like mother and Aunt Matilda, but just a nice, lovely lady. And not making ripples, just, you know, kind of living and enjoying life. And of course, the one aunt had tuberculosis, and I only saw her just very seldom, and she was always ill. She died young. And she died from the tuberculosis. And then the baby sister, Aunt Alice, is kind of typically the youngest child. And she was married, and she raised a family, and life went along, and nothing exciting one way or the other. And then Ernest, one of the remaining son, had his farm with my grandfather. And then the one boy was killed. And it was after World War I, and they forced him to go out and play football. And they think it was an appendicitis sort of thing, and he never came back. And then the other boy was lightning in the field. And there's a story about that. But I remember just about Grandma. Of course, there was the storm, so that when she saw the wagons come in, she had this premonition and this feeling that something had happened. And it's about the most I can think of. But your mother and your aunt, they must have been very healthy. They haven't been stricken by any illness? Yes, they've all been. Now, Mother's had cancer, and she broke her right shoulder. She fell backwards and hit her shoulder. But she's a survivor. We've said she and Cecilia are very, very close. And we've said for maybe 10, 20 years, what would happen if one of them died and the other one didn't? And we just usually brush it off by saying they're both survivors. They've gone through a lot of problems. And see, my mother lost her son, and then lost her husband, and then lost her daughter. So she's really all alone now. But she'll survive. We don't know how long. We just figure that she'll survive forever because she's that type. They are very close now. Yes, those two. Those two have been very close for many years. And Cecilia, she's 87. 88, I think. 88. And she drives the 320 miles from there. Oh, no, no, no. She just drives in town. In town? Yeah. She takes the bus down there? Well, now, people, friends of her are taking her down to the farm. I thought so because they're missing her like a lot. Now, she used to drive out into the country, but not anymore. But they like to visit with each other and reminisce. Yeah, all right.