 18 February 1987, I'm sitting here with Hildur Larsson in Rockford, Illinois. She was born in 1903, March 6th, in Västra Torsås, and came to America in 1921. So, let's start with your parents, Hildur Erik Larsson and Anna Lovisa Aronsson. Your father was born in the same place as you, in Västra Torsås. Was it a farm? A small farm. How big was it? How many cows did you have? Mostly two. Two cows? So your father had another job on the other side? Yes, he had to work on the outside. What kind of work did he do? Well, sometimes they built houses or barns or whatever. What kind of ploughs? A little bit of everything. Sometimes they worked with stones. They had a mountain from where we lived. With stones? Yes, stones. Fine granite. That's what they called it. What did you use the stones for? For maintenance? Was it fine granite that you used for construction? I don't remember what it was for. I was so young, I didn't remember. I went in one ear and out the other. But your father worked there? Yes, sometimes. How many children did you have? Eight. How many girls? Six. Six girls? Two boys. So you had to help out in the farm? Everything. But you were many. Were you one of the older ones? No, I was the third one. From the end? Yes. So the older siblings, did they go out and look for work somewhere else? They were just like me. They went out as soon as they got confirmation and got a job somewhere. Was there anyone of them who went to America? Yes, but not my oldest sister. She stayed in Sweden and got married in 2007. We were home in 2006. Her husband died first. Then two of their daughters, the oldest and the youngest. And then my sister. There was one girl left in the family. I don't know where she is now. I haven't heard from her in many years. Is she in Sweden? She was. I don't know if she's been to any other country. Has she ever written? No. What does that depend on? I don't know. My youngest sister doesn't write either. I didn't even get to see her when I was home in 1974. A neighbor of mine went home and he told her that I would come home next month. She said, not here. That was strange. She got the whole place and everything. The furniture, the animals, everything. She got everything. And you didn't get anything? You didn't get anything from my other sisters? It was 200 or 300 dollars. I thought it was dollars. I can't say for sure. It's been so long. But she should be grateful to you. She was so good, so much better than us. She never had to do anything. She never had to go out and work. She came last? Oh yes. She was the one at the top. She came to a ducat board? Her father died first. Then she got married. He came over and they raised their children and mom helped them with everything. Then they got the place. I don't know why. She never did anything when I was home in 2006. We went out somewhere and she had to wear my clothes. We changed. She had one dress one time, the next time I had the same one. She had the one I had the first time or something else. So you had a lot of clothes from America? Yes. She wrote that I left a lot of my clothes with her when I went back. She wanted them? That's what she said. But then she said she wanted me to send her money, pay her to stay at home. Nothing to do with it. Instead of sending her clothes. I used to send shoes to both her and mom. They were never used. They took the same size as I did. So that they didn't have to pay too much toll at home, I went out on the sidewalk and scratched them a little bit. She wrote to me that she wanted money. That was it. She didn't want anything to do with it. Then I stopped sending her anything. She wanted money because she wanted to be with her parents? She wanted me to send her money. Because she took care of mom and dad? That's what she thought. That we were so stupid. We knew what was going on. What did the other sisters say? You were four girls. My oldest sister had died then. I think Selma, my other sister, had died when mom died. Now all the older sisters, Emilia, Oscar, Selma, Gjerde, they're all dead. The one next to me, her name is Hilma, I had a letter from her at Christmas time. I wrote to her last night asking what had happened to her. I haven't heard anything all year. And... My younger brother next to me is on tuberculosis. Have you heard about LAMNET? Yes. He's in Växjö. He's there. He was in the hospital for the same thing I was for a month before me. He was in the hospital October, November, December, January, February, and part of March. Was there any film before LUNGAN? Not mine. I had... he did too, had an aneurysm. You heard what that is? A blood clot in the main artery. And you had the same thing? Yes. And his... he had been smoking so much that his went to his lungs. I had five doctors working on me. Two surgeons, two doctors working on my lungs, and one doctor on my heart. And I was in the hospital for two weeks after surgery. I got... I had a surgery the 15th and I left the hospital the 30th. Then I went to stay with my daughter for two weeks. And I've been here ever since. And I went to see the young surgeon, Dr. Bellinger left, he retired. So he called me up to State Street, the other surgical unit. He said he wanted to talk to me and I went up there. He said, well, I'm going to retire. He called me first on the phone. He said he wanted me to come up because he wanted me to meet someone. And so then he had a young doctor in the program, Neal Brogren. A Swedish fellow, born here, of course. And so he said, I'm going to retire, he says. And I'm going out east. So he said, this is the young fellow that's going to take over. So then he checked me. So he said, well, your aneurysm has got so much bigger, he says, that you can't wait too long before you have it taken care of. And well, I said, why not do it right now? And he said, okay. So then he made arrangements at the hospital and all that. They let me know because he had five hospitals that he took care of, Bellinger. All the ones that are Swedish-American, St. Anthony, Rockford Memorial, and two in Belvedere. How about your brother in Sweden, though? He had the same thing, you said? He had the same kind of surgery. What did he have to go through? How long did it take for him? He was the one that he had his the 15th of October. It was the rest of October, November, December, January, February, and part of March. In the hospital? In the hospital in Växjö. He had some complications then, or what happened? Went to his lungs. He took them from the hospital to the tuberculosis sanatorium. And he's still there. So if we leave this now and go back to your childhood here, you were going to school and you were confirmed in... Västra Torsås. Västra Torsås kyrka. Yeah. How big of a confirmation class was it? Remember? There were a lot of boys and girls. Not a lot. No? No. There wasn't a whole... Västra Torsås. A whole county. But I'd say up somewhere around 20 maybe. Not the whole county. It was the whole parish. Yeah. So were you working at the time, or were you... No, no, I hadn't started working then. Helping out at home. I was just 14 and I got 15 in March. But at that time you had one brother in the United States. Yeah. What was his name? Oscar. Oscar Larsson. Oscar Larsson. Oscar Larsson. When did he leave for the United States? He left in 21, after we got home in 21. Then he came back and got married home there. He had a daughter. And came back here in 20... in 30. Our oldest daughter was born. She was born in 31. April of 31. In the fall of 31 it must have been. He came back to Sweden? Yeah. Came back and stayed with us for a month or better. He was married then? Yes. So he had his wife with him? Wife and daughter. So he came back then from Rockford? Came back to Rockford from Sweden. Oh, from Sweden. Yeah. So, but this brother Oscar, now when did he leave for the United States the first time? He left in 26. We left in April and he left later. Oh, I see. But I thought you had a brother here, visiting Sweden. I thought when you left that you already had a brother here in the United States. He was here before me. He was older. So he was here before me and came home in 1920. Yeah, okay. That's what I meant. Do you remember when he left the first time? No. 1920? Way before that. He came back. So he was much older than you? Yeah. Oh, yeah. How much older? That was... Maybe 10 years? Late 1800s or something. Oh, I see. So he was the first one to leave for the United States? No. Yeah, him and my sister that died here a year ago. What was her name? She was born 1897. What was her name? Gerda. Gerda. They left at the same time? They left at the same time. And they left for Rockford, Illinois? Yeah. They left for DeKalb, a neighbor of ours home. When my sister got baptized, that girl was a witness when my sister got baptized. And she decided she was going to... And my sister decided she was going to come over here. So she went and got her address and wrote to her. And she was out in the country, out around DeKalb. And she asked her if she would send her money for a ticket to come over here. So she did. Then she told my dad after that... And... No, she told him first that she had wrote for the tickets. We had been out in the woods picking berries, my mother and me, and we were coming home, so she came out running, and she had got that ticket for going to this country. You remember that? Yeah, I remember that. I remember seeing her coming and running and meeting us. And I was young. I was... Eleven, twelve? Oh, no. Younger? Oh, yes. Couldn't have been more than about... Five, six? Five, six, something like that. So this was before the war then? Oh, yeah. She left. So she received the ticket from DeKalb? Yeah. And she was ready to leave? So what happened? Then she wanted to wait till the following spring, she told my dad, because some of the other young people around the neighborhood was going to go in the spring. So she wanted to go with them. But dad told her, you wrote and asked for that ticket without telling us. Oh, she did? He said, so now you go. Alone? No, then my brother went with her, so she wouldn't have to go alone. I see. That was Oscar? That was Oscar, yeah. And then my sister Selma came over after that. So dad didn't like that, what she wrote after the ticket? No, he figured then she was smart enough that she'd go on her own and ask for the ticket, and then she was going to stick to that, what she had promised. So do you remember now what happened then, when she packed her suitcase and she was ready to leave? You were old enough to remember that. You took her to the railroad station? Oh, no, not me. No, but I mean, did you go with to say goodbye? No, no. You remember the day she left? That was late fall, it was in late November, something like that. I can't remember the date. And I was still in bed. Why did you leave early? She was only 15, and my sister next to me was three years older than me, and then this one was another three years or so older. She was only 15? Yeah. Do you think she wrote herself, not to ask for this ticket? Yeah, she did. She did? Mm-hmm. She didn't tell anyone, her mother or dad, until she got it. So you were actually very young then when you read the letters from America in your home, from this person in the jail? I don't remember if I read their letters or what. They were all in Swedish. Yeah, but did you remember if there were any discussions in your house or between your mother and father and the rest of the family about not going to the United States, it was a good country, or you should stay away from it? No, no, no. You don't remember anything about that? No, but they didn't say anything when the rest of us, when I left, my brother and sister came home, my sister Selma, she told me that I was going to go over here. She said she's not going to stay at home here and have to work like that. I'd been in the sugar beets then in the spring up in Västergötland. Well, you were sent away then to work outside the home. It was after confirmation. Right after confirmation I started working with other farmers close to the area. So you went up to Västergötland to work in a beet field? Yeah. How did you get that job? I don't know. There were some other neighbors that went and I was from the area so we went up there. Young people? Yeah. How did you go up there, by train? Yeah. From daylight to almost dark at night. Do you remember the place in Västergötland? I can't remember the name. And it was in the fall? I was only 15. That's a long time ago. I'm 84 now. So you stayed there all fall then in the beet? No, this was in the spring. In the spring, oh you were... We went digging and then I was with my sister. You were weeding? Yeah. Down in Skåne once and digging. That's true. My sister that's home in Sweden now, that's still alive. She's three years older than me. Born 1900. And we went down there, worked together and then she sconed her foot here on a fork that we had to dig. So that got infected. So there was a couple of weeks she couldn't go out. I had to lay out there all alone in that, in digging them. So you actually had to do the digging with the fork? Oh yes. The digging and laying down in a row. And then got down and crawled down with the knife and got the top off and threw them in the... In the wagon? No, not in the wagon. Just had piles on the dirt. How much were you paying now for this? Oh golly, I don't remember that. It wasn't much. I got enough that I could buy material for it, get a skirt and a blouse for when I started confirmation. But there was actually nothing left outside that? No savings account or pension? Oh no, no, no, no. Did you still pay money at home though to your parents? No. No, you didn't have to do that? No, I helped to work with everything. Even when I went home for a visit in 26, they butchered a pig. And my mother, she couldn't stand to see the blood. So I went out and stirred the blood. And then after, my mother and I went out and cleaned out all the intestines. And then I scalded them, scraped them. And then on Saturday, a whole day on Saturday, I stood grinding the meat and filling the sausages. And the kitchen table, and it was as big around as my table there. And about this high, the sausages piled up. So you were not home on vacation then? I helped mother with everything because I couldn't see mother at her age, so she was going to have to go and do it alone. And there was no other sisters home at that time? Yes, my younger sister was there, but she wouldn't help. How old was she? She was about 15, 16, the age that I was out working at that age. Well, she didn't have to. No, she didn't do nothing to help. But wasn't that your mother's fault for not telling her? Well, she was in with both my mother and dad, so nobody said anything to her about anything. She could do as she pleased. Did you tell her? Did you expect her to help out? That wouldn't have done any good. But you probably did, though. I felt that way. But you never did? No, not that I remember. But she wrote to me after I got back again that she wanted me to send her money. To come over here? No, for staying home, instead of sending her clothes that had been used. That's when I stopped. Wasn't that kind of unusual, though? You know, the people from Sweden, they usually wrote over here asking for money or a ticket. But she actually wrote for money to stay home. She didn't want to come over here and have to work. She wanted to stay home while she didn't have to do nothing for the money. So you figured it out. It was easier to be home. It was, certainly. She didn't have to do nothing there. She could get her food and room and board and everything for nothing. So she was pretty smart, then. I didn't want it that way. But anyway, going back now to your sister and brother, they left then, and she was only 15. And she received a ticket from the cab. That was the one that died, her last. That was not the one that's home. No, not the one that's home, but I mean the one that left when you were a little girl. Your brother, they left together. She was only 15. Did they receive two tickets then from the cab? No, he had to borrow money and buy his own ticket. In Sweden? Yeah. Because father didn't like your sister to go alone, so he helped her brother with money to go over here. No, no. My brother had to borrow it by himself and pay it back. But don't you think his father helped him a little bit, or he couldn't? He was not able to help him out with the ticket. He didn't have money that he could borrow or give anyone of us that we could... So he had to go to somebody else, then? Yeah. We had to get it from somebody else, from a banker. So you didn't have any uncles or aunts or other relations in the United States that you knew of at the time? I started working right away. Okay, but before you went to the N.O., then in 1921, what happened here? Did you write to your sister and back and forth? Were they telling you there was better conditions over here, so they wanted you to come over, or did you ask to come over? My sister and brother came home, and my sister came home then. 1921? Yeah. They came on a visit? Came home for a visit. My brother stayed, and my sister and I went here. So you decided right there, then? She told me I should come with. Oh, she told you? Yeah. And you didn't hesitate? No, no. But how did you get the money for the ticket? Borrowed the money from my brother. Oh, I see. Because he had saved some money then from you. Yeah. And did he stay home? I can't say why he stayed home, but then he met his wife and they got married. Or maybe it was his girlfriend that helped him. Not when we were home, because we didn't know her at the time. My sister that lives home in Sweden now knew her. But I didn't know her before she came over here when they were married. She was from the same area? Växjö. Oh, Växjö. So they were too far away at that time to know each other? Yeah, we were three miles outside of Växjö. And you were not too often in Växjö at that time? My sister that lives there now, she's three years older than me, she was there and that, but she wasn't married at that time, and I couldn't afford to go traveling in a train. It was too far to walk. When you got this idea to go with your sister back, what did your mother and father say then? Did they approve of it? Yeah, they didn't say anything. You know, I had to make my living anyway. And you were working outside of home then at that time? Oh, sure. On other farms. And so you were 18 then? Yeah. Did you have a boyfriend that you left? No. We went through Ellis Island on my 18th birthday, the 6th of March, 1921. So how did you get your ticket now, in Växjö? I borrowed money from my brother and we bought it. It was in Gothenburg, I guess. And you had no problems then to walk? No. Do you remember what the president said when you came out and asked for Fritids Betygilt? I can't remember what he said, but he knew before. My dad wanted him to give me permission to get confirmed a year before, when I was in the sugar beets in Skåne. So you were able to... they were being able to work a little bit more outside of home? Yeah. So the minister said no. He said no? He said, she is too young, she'll get out soon enough to take care of herself. Okay, what did he say? He knew that, that's what happened. But your dad wanted you to be out soon? Yeah, that I could get through sooner so I'd be away from home. But you confirmed at a regular age? I started when I was 14. I was 15 when I... just barely 15 when we got confirmed. And that confirmation dress you earned yourself in the beet fields in Skåne? Yep. Every penny of it? Did you make it yourself? Oh no, no. So you were not able at that time to saw yourself? No. I've not been much of a sawer, I never had time for that. When I got over here I started in a factory. So your mother never had time then to sit down with you to teach you? My mother didn't do much sawing either. But how did you learn how to butcher a pig for instance? They had... you stir the blood. Yeah, that's what you did, but then you had to crank out all the sausage and everything? Oh yeah, that I could do, that I've been helping with before. When you were younger? Oh yes. And there was still in your... You stand there with the meat grinder and grind the meat and then get the skin on and start filling it with the sausage. I had done that before, many years before when I was home. So you had the talent right built in? There wasn't much of a talent but... But it had to be done? Yeah. I didn't want mother to have to do it all. So she couldn't stand blood? No. And it was cold out. It was in the fall? Oh yeah, it was. November? Late November or early December. I forget which. So you got the ticket then and then you went to Gothenburg in the early spring or in the fall? Well, both times. But the first time in 26. Oh, 21? 21 we went in the fall and 26 we went in the fall. What month? In August, September? 26 was in the last part of January or first part of February. And it was in the wintertime that the first time too. And what boat the first time, the ship you went on? Stockholm? That was before that they started. I can't remember the name of the first boat. But in 26 there was... We went with both Stockholm and Drottningholm. One of them, I think it was Stockholm we went home and Drottningholm we came back. But the first boat you don't remember? I can't remember the name of that. That was before they started with Stockholm. So you had companionship then, your sister and... Neighbors. And the neighbors. How many? I can't remember how many we were. There were three of them. You must have had a meeting then before you left. How could you decide... Close neighbors. Close neighbors. Between Broadway and Eastgate. So when you decided your neighbors here, you must have had a little meeting to discuss... The prospects of going and why you were going and to whom you were going. Well, they had been here before. Your sister? Two of his sisters. Oh, this Eklund? Yeah. It was the first time for him just like for me. He's two weeks older than me so now the 22nd of February will be his birthday. He'll be 84. 6th of March I'll be 84. So what did you discuss now? I mean, what kind of prospects did you have now? This group of people in Västra Torsos deciding to go to the United States. What were you looking forward to? Well, we were going... They had been in Rockford before. Both his sisters and my sister. Do you remember what they said when they visited you? Did they say it was much better here? Oh yeah, it was easier to make money here. So there was no question about that? You were going to get it better? Yeah. You left something that was not too good behind and... Yeah. It was easier to make money here. And I started doing housework, but that was... Before we go into that though, how was the trip? Was it pretty good? We had a big storm. Big storm? And there was a lot of Russians on the boat. They took first, second class. We were lucky to be able to come on third class. Where were they boarding? In Gothenburg? They boarded in Gothenburg. The Russians? Yes. And they took the best cabins? Yes. And they were full of lice. Why did they go first class or second class though? And brought yellow fever. There were six crew members, young fellas, that died from yellow fever. From that trip? From the Russians. They caught the germ from them and we had to lay in New York Harbor for ten days on the ship. You must have a heck of a time to get to where is Ireland. And wait for them while they got cleaned out before we could go there. We spent about two hours there. We didn't have no... They did, not us. You didn't have trouble? No. We spent only a couple of hours there. Then we were on the train headed for Rockford. So maybe they were contained and the Russians were sent back? They kept them there. I don't know what they did with them. We had to stay on the boat while they sent them over to Ellis Island to get cleaned out. And some of the kids that used to go together there were sent down in the rooms that they had, the cabins on the ship. And they asked me one day to come down there and see. They showed me on the walls, they had walls something similar to this color. And here the lice were crawling on the walls. And they were the size of big ants. You mean on the boat? Yes. In the cabins that they had had. So they brought them with them? Yeah. With their luggage and the clothes that they had. How could they get rid of them? I mean, they had to burn the clothing and everything. I don't know what they did at Ellis Island with them. How did you find out about this on the boat? Because we were held back then. We were told. You were told then what happened? Yes. And the people that were sent down there, they called me and they showed me how the lice were crawling on the walls in those cabins. And those young crew members, four of them died while they were outside of the legal limit. And they threw them overboard on the water. And then the last two, the fellow that took care of our cabins, I'm third class, he was one of them. And then another one. And he died inside the 12-mile limit. They had to, I don't know what they did with them after. They were still on the ship when we left. Did you see the burial at sea? No, they did that at night while we were still asleep. Oh, at night? Oh, yeah. They wouldn't do it when we were up. So there was kind of unrest on the ship then? There was not too much dancing and... Not then, the last few days, no. We were just waiting for them to be able to get off the ship. But you don't remember the ship? There was either stock, or no. You remember you went to Gothenburg? We came from Gothenburg and over here. The first time? Yes. We had to go from Småland down to Gothenburg. And then we had to stay there a few days and got things ready before we got through papers and everything, and the ship was leaving. So you people now from Västra Torshavs, could you be together on the boat? Pretty close. You had cabins pretty close to each other? Yeah. So what happened then at Ellis Island? Your sister, now, she was able to help you out with the language and ordering food and so on? We didn't stay there. Only a couple of hours. There was no food there. At Ellis Island? No. And they went through the papers and you had to prove everything was true that was there, through your aids. And you had to prove what money you had, if you had enough that you could pay your way to get to the place where you were going. But she took care of that though? Yeah, well, we were together. But you didn't understand the language? No, but I had to show what I had, out of mine. I had my purse, she had hers in her purse, her papers and money. Was she able to speak pretty good English at that time, your sister? Well enough that she didn't mind. She had been working in a factory, she worked in National Lock before that. She came home. Was she married at that time? No, no, no, no. She never got married in this country. Was she never married? No, she went home to Sweden afterwards. What year? I don't remember what year it was she left and went home. She was in Chicago doing housework. And then she went home to Sweden and stayed home. And she got to know this fellow and his wife. I think he was with the railroad something. Which one, I can't remember now. And then his wife died. Then his son died. Then they got married, my sister and him. Then he died. And they had no children then? No. And then my sister died. They all gone. So she never came back to the United States then? No. But she brought you over? So what happened here? She had an apartment here in Rockford? We rented together. We lived together. Downtown? Downtown on the east side. On the east side. A little south of Broadway. So how long did it take for you not to secure a job here? Well, I started doing housework. Housework. How did you get that? My sister took me out first to some places. I can't remember where it was. It's a long ago. And this woman, she was waiting, always waiting for somebody to come over, either from Germany, from Norway, from Sweden, Denmark, any of those countries. Just came over green and didn't know anything. So that way she could get by with anything she wanted. She was going to pay me five dollars a week. Five dollars a week? And you were supposed to stay at your own apartment? At their place. And so when I first got there, she took me down to the basement. Nobody had electricity here at that time. No? No. Not in 21. What kind of lighting did they have in the house then? Oil lamps. Oil lamps? Kerosene? Yeah. Kerosene lamps. And so they had electric light all over the house and they had electric washing machine and ironing. So she took me down and showed me how to run the washing machine. She was running it. What kind of washing machine was that? Electric washing machine. Yeah, but they didn't have any electricity, you said? They had. They had? They had on the west side, not up on the east side. The poorer people. They were well to do so they could afford to have electricity. On the west side? Yeah. So they had the electric light then? Yes. And the washing machine? Yes. And so she stood there running the machine and she showed me how to put the clothes in and check through them and when they were done to get them out through the ring and that. And... Yeah? Then they... And the washing machine stopped. Well, she blamed that on me. It was my fault. She was running it. But that was my fault that it stopped. But you didn't understand what she said though. She didn't say it to me, but when I left there she didn't pay me what I was supposed to have. So my sister told her. And so then she said I had ruined so many things while I was there that I wasn't going to get anymore. Ruined the washing machine. And the electric iron. She showed me how to run the electric iron so I started running that and it wouldn't heat. And when the electricity went out, they do that ever so often now. And then one time I was running the vacuum cleaner downstairs and Mr. Page was home then. And he was a very nice fellow. He always came around. He always called me Gloria Swanson. She was a movie actor. What kind of people were they? English background or English? Yeah. And she always called me Gloria Swanson. And I was running the vacuum cleaner around. He was there and just watched me. All of a sudden it stopped. Well, that was my fault. I ruined that. It was just the electricity that stopped. So I gave up on doing housework then. But then I went to National Lock and got a job. And I worked there then the rest of the time until we went home to Sweden in 1926. On piecework. Piece by piece. How long did you work there? We went home in 1926. I got there in 1921. I must have worked there about... Three, four years? No, it must have been about five years or better. So you didn't stay in the housekeeping business? No, no, no. No more after that. And you didn't know any English at that time. So there was no way for you to communicate with this lady. Was this her way of doing things? I heard afterwards she did that to everybody. That's why she wanted those that came used green here and didn't know the language or anything. And she could get by with anything. She didn't pay them anything then? No. Well, a little bit. Not that she had what she had promised. So then I worked at Lack. I had enough money that I could buy my ticket, go home. So you were able to save up then to take it home? Yeah. And we lived together doing... With your sister? Yeah, my sister and I doing our own housework and cooking and everything. We worked ten hours a day and eight hours on Saturday at that time. So it was work and sleep, work and sleep. That's right. How about... Did you join the church when you came here? Yes. Which one? Sion Lutheran. Sion Lutheran. Who told you to do that? My sister had been there before. You went there together then? Yeah. Did you leave the dismissal letter or the Frittingsbeteige at the church then? You had a letter from your pastor in Sweden? Yeah, I think so. If I remember right. Did you join Vasa, Switzerland? Yeah. I belonged to Elvera Vasa. Viking? Elvera. Oh, Elvera Vasa, yeah. That's right. And Baltic Star, the Vikings. The Vikings. Yeah. I've been with Elvera since 1942. But you didn't join those lodges when you came, though? After I got there, I got to know a few. Did you join? 1942, I was married and had some... But I mean in 1920s. You didn't join the Viking Vasa at the time. I couldn't afford it. You couldn't afford it. How about... Did you go to any dances at that time? Once in a while, sure. Swedish dances or... We had built a pavilion out by... You know, have you been up on the east side, Broadway? Out by Colonial Village, almost. Yes. Oh, there was a dance. They had an open pavilion there that they danced. And they were all Swedes? Most of them. They had a fellow come down and play accordion and we danced. Changed the monotony. And how did you get out there? Did you have a streetcar running all the way down to the east there? There were streetcars going out there. You walked them? Some of the guys had cars and then they piled those for them. It wasn't like now. They work at National Lock. Did you like that kind of work? Yeah. It was pretty easy. Well, it was easy to learn. It was hinges and I worked on air hammers, assembled the hinges, put a pin through, and then put the hinge in and riveted on the other end so that... You did the riveting too? Yeah. On air hammer. Oh, I see. So there was... You didn't find it monotonous sitting there? No. No? They had different kinds of things. How much did you make an hour then at that time? Well, the day rate was, at that time, was a little over a dollar an hour. A dollar an hour? Yeah. It couldn't have been. This one's awful high. Well, maybe it wasn't quite that high at that time. Maybe you made $10 a day. Well, we had to turn out so much work for that. Piecework? Yeah. We made about a dollar an hour on piecework. The day rate maybe was only... I don't remember now, after all these years. Then you made about $50, $60 a week. Yeah, that's where I could save some money and put in the bank, and I could buy my ticket home to Sweden again and come back. So the reason for you going home 1926, why... You didn't intend to stay in Sweden? No, we just wanted to go home and see my mother and that before. So you took your sister with you? Well, she paid her way and I paid my way, but we went together. Then we came back together again. How long did you stay home then in 1926? The rest of 1926, and we came back the first part of 1927. So you stayed there 3 or 4 months then? A little over 6 months. 6 months? Yeah. Then when I got back, I had been back about a month, a little better, when I met my husband. He came from Canada and down here because he didn't like it on farm up in Canada. So he came down here. Then we started going together. On 28th of Christmas I got my diamond. Then on 28th, during vacation, we had both him and I at the same time. He worked at the Mechanics' Universal Joint. That's out in Love's Park out there now. It used to be on Harrison Avenue. On 18th Avenue and 9th Street first, when I first got here. Then he went out to Harrison Avenue and built a new building there. Now they're out in Love's Park, Klutz and them are together. So what did you marry now? Who married you? Yes, but I mean, what pastor? Zion Lutheran? No, we went to... This sounds silly maybe, but we went to Belvedere and got the marriage license here. Went down to City Hall and got the marriage license. Went out to Belvedere and got married because my sister was the one that died last December. She was going to give orders for everything. We had to have a big wedding, she says. My husband and I said no. He had nobody here. The only one I had was her family, her and her kids and husband. We said no, we weren't going to spend that kind of money on getting married when we didn't have anybody. And yes, she says, you've got to have a big wedding. We said no. So when we got the vacation, we just decided to go and get our license. Then we went out there and got married, Belvedere. Why wouldn't it have been easier with the Zion pastor to marry you? We had to... They would have got around here right away that we had got married. Belvedere did not get any... there was nobody around that didn't know us. A lot of people married out in Belvedere. Yeah, at that time. They could get rid of the friends here in Rockford. We had a little... yeah. Until it was over. That's what we did. You didn't want any party? No. So did you go on a honeymoon then? We went into Chicago for a weekend. And then right back to work? Yeah, we had vacation at the time. We stayed home and looked for some room. You had vacation? We had vacation at the time. We didn't take any extra. There was a regular vacation time in the summer, both his and mine. You were... did he have vacation at that time? Yeah, every summer you got vacation for a couple of weeks. Paid vacation? Yeah. You were not paid for it? No, we didn't get paid for it, no. But you didn't have to go back to work? No. So did you rent an apartment or... We had already rented a room. He stayed at his place where he lived, and I stayed at the place that I was before. For about a month or two. I forgot which was. Then we rented... went together and rented an apartment. Rented an apartment. You were not thinking about buying a house at that time? With what? In other words, there was no such a way to go to a bank and get a loan. You couldn't do that. So you lived there until 1929. What happened then when the... or 30, when the Depression hit? You were still working, both of you? We were... both of us out of work, 1930. Both of you? Yeah. You had any children then? I was carrying my oldest daughter, 1930. She was born in 1931. Oh. And... It was bad then. Were you able to keep the apartment? Yeah. To pay on it, or... I can't remember now how we did it, but we did. You didn't have any friends to help you out, because they had problems too, I suppose. No, we... I think we borrowed in the bank. If I remember right. That's been so long. My husband's been gone for 15 years now. That's a long, long time. The 8th of April, the 15 years since he dropped. We had a big snowstorm on the 6th. On the TV, or radio, they were telling you, you should not go out and shovel. And we... so I said, I'm not. My husband said, no, he was not. Then on Saturday, on the 8th, then my daughter called from Chopere, Wisconsin. That's a few miles up. And asked, she said, go and ask Dad if he wants to come up for dinner tomorrow. So I went and asked him. We had a little dog there, Chihuahua. He was sitting playing with that little dog, and that dog just loved when he was playing with it. He tied his socks together, then he'd hold it, and that little thing he'd get up on his hind legs, took a hold of that sock, and he lifted him up. And just a regular grin on his face like a human. And he wasn't completely dressed. He didn't have his socks on. He was just barefoot in his morning slippers. And he didn't have a shirt on. He just had a sweater on. And so then he went and completed dressing, put on a shirt, and his jacket and hat and socks and his shoes, and came out, and he said, I'm going out and take the car out and make tracks in the driveway for the paper boy. Went out, took the car out, drove back and forth a few times, put the car back in the garage, took a snow shovel, and went out to the front of the house and pushed it ahead of him from the front steps down about three, four feet. Dropped over, was gone. And the neighbor across the street seen him laying in the snow, so he came running over and tried to give him artificial respiration. And he ran home and called the ambulance. And then the fellow ambulance driver came over, and they got him in the ambulance, and then he came up with his hat and rang the doorbell. So I said, is he all right? No, he's gone. Just like that. There was no way for him to come under a condition like that. He could have used the rifle, pulled the gun and shot me. Never should have had a job like that. If we go back to the 30s now, how long did it take for you then to get another job? You didn't go back to work, though, after you were 30. I didn't go back to work. I lost the first two. Dr. Carroll, please return to the office. In 28, we got married in Atlanta during the vacation, in 28. In 20... last part of 28. And then I... all of a sudden I started getting cramps, and they rushed me to the hospital. And I had a little boy then. He was a tiny, only about that. Only a few inches, huh? He laid in the little pants. They had three-corner ones, but they vomited in them when they were in bed. He had them laying in there, and he didn't fill that up, no way. And his little tiny little fingers, they were about the size of flat mats, those paper ones that they have when you smoke. And he used to impute once, then he was gone. Then in 29, after... when I got pregnant and I lost the girl. And she wasn't... She was a little bigger, but she called the doctor, and the doctor came to the house, and she was born by the time he got there. So he just wrapped her in a blanket, put her in my husband's arm, he said, take her to the hospital, have them put her in an incubator. He said, I know she won't live. He said, but... so people won't have nothing to say. During those two first pregnancies, did you have any checkups then with your doctor? You didn't have a family doctor those days. You didn't go to doctors at any time? No. Not at that time. And you didn't have any special medicine or tablets? No, no. Did you get enough food then during the 20s? Yeah. You had worked as you were able to buy the necessities. Why was the reason that you lost... I don't know why. A lot of them lost their children then. And then you had... Four. Four after that. Thirty-one, the oldest one, 32, the second one. April 13th, the oldest daughter was born. But that was during a worse time, though, I mean, the Depression. You would think shortage of food and everything. How come you were able to keep those... He was back to work in 31. He was? Yeah. Were you more careful than going to doctor? Yeah, then I had... I didn't have a special doctor before, but then I had the same one that took care of me when I lost a girl. Ralph Randolph Osborne was his name. And he came to the house, and he was very nice. And after I lost the girl there, one Saturday night, they came, him and his wife, for a walk, drive down to South Main. They took 15 times over, came over to where we lived, and came over. And he came in the bedroom and sat on the foot of the bed and talked to me all the while they were there. You don't find a doctor doing that no more. So you didn't have to go to the doctor's office then? I usually did otherwise, but that time, he decided they were going to come and see how I was doing. Oh, I see. So they used to come over for a visit. So he took that time, too? Yeah, Saturday night. And his wife was with, sitting in the living room. He came in and sat on the foot of the bed. Osborne, was he a Swedish doctor? He must have been some Osborne, is a Swedish name. He must have been way back. I don't know. But you don't know if he was a... I never asked him. He didn't talk Swedish? No. I never asked him. But your husband came back to work then? Oh, as soon as they called him back, he got called back. He worked there for over 44 years. So he was not laid off then? At that time, he had to be out when it was real bad. But as soon as they started calling him back, he got called back. I forgot how long. But then in 1941, then they had trouble. He fell down. We were quarantined with scala fever. My youngest daughter got scala fever.