 A story about John Deere. Around the turn of the century, the majority of workers for John Deere were from Sweden or of Swedish parents. So the story goes that there were two workers, Nils and Fritz, Fritz being my father and Nils being my father-in-law. But they got into one big fight. But the reason they got into this big fight was that John Deere was trying to figure out what color would be best to paint all his farm equipment. And so he thought, well, he'd ask some of the guys in the shop what they thought. So he asked Fritz and Nils what they should paint the tractor he had out there. And so one of them thought that blue would be a good color, and the other thought that yellow would be a good color because those were the colors in the Swedish flag. So Fritz got a can of paint and Nils got a can of paint, and they went out and started painting on this tractor. And one was painting blue and the other was painting yellow. And they both thought that it should be the color that they were painting it. So they got into a big squabble and a big fight, and they started squabbling about what should be blue and what should be yellow, and they started splashing paint on each other. And first thing you know, all the blue paint and all the yellow paint got mixed up together, and when you mix blue and yellow, it turns out green. So that's why John Deere equipment's all painted green today. It's from the Swedish flag. It is still on them. Yeah. And that made the Swedes happy because they know that John Deere green is really Swedish colors. And the Irish that were here, they were happy because they thought it was Irish. The green was for the Irish. And John Deere, he thought it was happy because, or he was happy because green was the color of money, and they were making a lot of money. And the farmers were all happy because green was, a beautiful green field is a sign of prosperity and beauty. And so they were all happy with the green, so John Deere figured he had a winner, and everything is painted green to this day. So there was one happy family. You betcha. You bet. Yeah, that's Rune Aalborg in Maudine, Illinois. It's telling me this, and he was born 1930, 8th of August in Maudine, Illinois. And we have today, 22nd of April, 1986. Your father-in-law, Fritz Aalborg, he has been on the John Deere payroll probably more than anybody else over the years, including the pensions he received later on. Yeah, he started on St. Patrick's Day, March the 17th, 1916. And he was on the John Deere payroll for 40 years, and then he retired, and he passed away in July of 1985. So he get part of the cake, then, of the union demands later on in life. Yes. So pension and benefits. He got all the benefits, and during his retirement years, whenever there was an addition to the new contract, of course, he would get it. And he made considerably more money after he retired than when he worked. And his work was in the Smidjan. In the Smidjan, yeah. And you have pieces there. Yeah. What did he make? He was a blacksmith. His father was a blacksmith, his grandfather was a blacksmith, and as far back as we know, they were blacksmiths. So he was an experienced worker then when he came to Deere? Yes, yes. That's all he knew was that type of work and farming. And he stayed with it all his life then at the Smidjan. His grandparents in Sweden had a traveling blacksmith forge on a wagon, and they traveled throughout southern Sweden, Denmark, and northern Germany. They would go from farm to farm and do blacksmithing type work, horseshoes and whatever the farmer needed. Your dad was along on this? No, not my father. Oh, but your grandfather? My grandfather and his father. So he learned his family then? Yeah. At John Deere he was listed as a blacksmith. He worked in the forge shop, and his job was to roll landsides. That's the only job he had from the day he started to the day he retired, is that he was a landside roller. And a landside is a tip on the plow. It's about 12, 14 inches long and four inches wide at one end. It comes to a point. And he made every one that John Deere made for 40 years my father rolled. And of course when he rolled this metal it was white hot, and it was extremely noisy, dirty, hot work. How old were you when you got acquainted with John Deere work and your dad's position as a smith down there? Oh. You go down with him? No, I never, never. You went down there as a young boy? I didn't see him in the shop until I was probably 20 years old. Then I worked for John Deere plow for six months in the office. And sometimes I would be out in the shop and I would see him and his fellow workers. So there was no possibility to see the workers at that time? They had no other tours? Oh, they had tours. They had tours. But it just never dawned on me to ever go in and take a tour. Because in those days almost everyone who worked in the shops were very adamant about their children would never ever have to work in the shops because it was very hard work. It was very hot. And of course every immigrant looked for a better life for his children. He wanted something better for his children. He didn't want them working in the factories. Did your father stress this at any point, that you were interested to come down there and work? Or did he tell you not to? Well, he didn't really stress it too much except that he said I should go to college. Did he complain about his job? No, father never complained about anything. He never complained about a single thing in his entire life. Was there any hardship to come against him then or to get close? He always took it as a natural thing and he over it. He was a very strong scorning. And I only saw him cry one time in his life and that's when he got word that his mother had died. And he went out in the yard, sat under the tree and was very quiet for an hour. And that was the end of it. And then nothing else was ever said. So he was not one to show emotion. And he was not afraid and worked hard on there? No, he worked very hard. And as a youngster I thought he was one of the strongest men that ever lived. I could never punch him hard enough in the stomach to even make him flinch. And he was just a bull of a man because you really had to be to work in the Ford shop in those days. Was he on the piecework assignment? He was always piecework. And he worked at a position that nobody else wanted. It was a job that most men could not make their day's wages because it was so hard. And he worked at it but he had an agreement with the company that he would be paid the day rate or the top piece rate every day, irregardless of how many he made. So he didn't have to raise them for the pieces made? He always put in a full eight hours and worked hard for eight hours and put out as many pieces as possible. And the company was always very satisfied with his performance. So I always wonder about this, you know, when you have, he was in the Union the last few years. Yes, the Union came in toward the end of his work there. What did he say about the Union? Well he probably, we never talked too much about it because I was just growing up, but he must have been for it, he was a Union steward at the beginning. And the Union did bring in some reforms and health insurance and better wages. The old saying years ago was, John Deere would say, give a man a dollar a day and make him sweat for it. So the Union brought in a lot of reform that was needed and it distributed the income a little more evenly between the workers and the owners. And the owners still made millions of dollars, but the workers made a living wage also. Did he see this? In other words, he was one of the Swedes that came in, we worked in there for twenty-five, thirty years, and they were satisfied with what we were doing, but still they had this inside them that there could be something better done for them. Do you think they saw that light? Oh sure, sure. Most men that worked in the shops, they did not want their sons to work in the shops. But a lot of the old ones didn't sign up for the Unions either though in the early forties when they came. Well I don't know, that I don't know. How many, eventually the Union got in. Because they were afraid for the management, they kicked them off. Well there was a time when there were no rules or regulations, if you even looked like you favored a Union you'd be out on the street in a minute. And of course today that's illegal. It was a harsh living condition to be under. Oh yes. But you never mentioned that time in the twenties, that other day. No, he just was very, he worked every day, never missed a day. I think in forty years if he had, I doubt if he had five days that he was off, sick or whatever it might be, injured, he did receive a pretty good injury in his foot one time, he had some red hot metal fall into his boot. And he was off for several days because of that, but he never, never took a day off for being sick. So when the Union came in, then the piece work and the scale started to be more refined so to speak. I'm not saying a guy starts when he is twenty-two and after thirty-five he can work his butt off without feeling tired or anything, and you're on top of the scale. But then as you're getting older, forty-five and fifty, it's going to be slower movement. How does it work then? Do you get another position then or can you follow that trend? Well under the Union you have seniority rules and there are various jobs in the plant. Some jobs pay better than others, some are easier. Some jobs you can make your wages in a shorter period of time. Other jobs you can work a full eight hours and never make your total, your complete wages. So as the longer you're there, you can begin to bid on these other jobs and move around in the factory. And so if there's an easier job but you can still make your full wages, you will bid on that and of course with the seniority you will get that certain position. And the management have to oblige to that? Oh yes. All along? Yeah, you betcha. So the worker can phase out his life then as a worker in a pretty reasonable way? It's like with any other position. You start at the bottom and work up. And of course the new man gets the worst jobs, the dirtiest jobs, and the lowest paying jobs. And so after you've been there a few years, you begin to move up. So when you've been there a few years, you make good money. Do you think that this generation, like your father who came in 1916 and started, do you think the management had a feeling that the workers they had in the plant there had told their sons not to go in their footsteps? Oh, I'm... What would you do about it? Well, I don't think anything would be done about it. I think that there was always such a labor pool that I don't think management worried about that. They didn't worry about it? No, no. And Deere always, in those days, they would hire the sons of the workers. And there was many second, third, and fourth generation workers from the same family that worked for Deere. I mean, but there was the union that brought them in though, because the fathers that you said could have told them that you were... Well, it isn't every kid that does what his father wants him to do. You know, I've seen low paying or poor jobs down at the shop that the father had and the son came in and he took the same job, you know, because we're all different and we're not all the same. So you don't always follow what your father tells you to do. You have to be careful what you tell the kids. See your case though, you started, you worked for six months, you said, in the office. Just well, when I got out of high school in the 19, right in 1950, and then I went in the service. That was during the Korean War. So then I went in the service for four years. And I took a completely different field then. I went into photography. And so I was a photographer in the Navy for four years. I spent most of that out in Hawaii at the submarine base. And of course, that's entirely different than working for John Deere as a blacksmith. And so I kind of pursued that area for a few years. And we had some, well we had in Hawaii, we were there when the Swedish training ship, the Elsnabin, came through. And so I met quite a few of those sailors and took a lot of pictures of them. That was back in about 1955 or approximately then. And then, do you continue with the photography? And when I got out, I continued with the photography in process photography and more in photolithography with the Davenport Times Democrat. I was their process cameraman in the plant for four years. And I worked with Tri-State Aeroengineering. We did aerial photography and topographic engineering type work, topographic mapping for several years. And so then that gradually evolved into the photography, gradually evolved into advertising and the advertising field. And I was in that for several years, moved into Wisconsin, worked for a newspaper there and had a small public relations agency where we did advertising and radio commercials and printed brochures and photography and so on. And then in 1979, we moved, excuse me, 1976, we moved back to Moline. So you were married then? Yes, yes. I was married in 1953 while I was still in the Navy. So then we moved back to Moline. Were you a native Moline girl or? Yes, Carolyn is from Moline here. And she was a nurse. Her parents, her father came from Sweden. Her mother was born here, but her mother's parents both came from Sweden. And her maiden name was? Lindell. Lindell. So then in 1979, I had a chance to go to work for John Deere again. And so this time I worked at the John Deere Harvester Works in East Moline. And I was in production control, scheduling materials and expediting materials. And I planned, I certainly planned on staying there until I was 65. But then of course the bottom fell out of the farm economy. So then I was terminated in October of 1984 along with several thousand other employees. What brought you to John Deere at that time though, because you had a line of your own before that. Well, I guess what brought me to John Deere at that time was the high money, was the good money. And the good deal with the unions. Well it wasn't, I was not union then. I was in management. You didn't have to belong to a union. No. So I made very good money and the benefits were excellent and plenty of vacation time. And I thought, well this is a good deal. And I had planned on staying there the rest of my working days, but the farm recession has put a damper on that. So you started there in 1979? 79. In February until October of 84. So that was five and a half years. So what did your father say then when you went to John Deere at that time? Well he was happy for that. He thought, he really thought the world of John Deere. I guess the early hard days, you forget those and you look back at the good times, or the good days. And of course in all the years he was retired, he had excellent retirement wages. He had excellent health benefits. He had some very expensive operations and of course John Deere insurance paid for everything. He never had to pay a penny. So he was very happy for that. But in the early days it was a different story? Oh sure, in the early days it was tough. Do you think that the John Deere's workers could have gotten the same thing without the union? No. The management would never understand the need of a worker unless it's on to them? No. If you don't have a union, if you don't have someone speaking for you, they're not going to pay you more than they absolutely have to. What they feel like? That's just human nature. That's just human nature. If you can get someone to do work for you, if you get someone to clean up your yard for five dollars, you're not going to pay some guy twenty dollars to do it. And no, that's just human greed I guess. But you would think though, they say that they were mostly Swedes and Belgians employed by John Deere from 1900 and up, well even earlier of course. You would think they would agree then on a common union much, much earlier? Well, you can't look at that from our perspective today. You got to look at what these people were experiencing back then. They had never had unions. How about the Herod and DeCampo, the big steel factory there? They had unions back in 1910. And the painters' unions for instance, they started very early. Well when you're dealing with a lot of first generation immigrants, and many of them could barely speak English, the life, even that life they were living then without the union was so much better than what they had in the old country. So there was a fear of losing that, they didn't want to talk union? So they were happy with what they had, and they could not imagine, they couldn't begin to imagine the kind of wages and benefits that the employees would have in later years. Nobody could, really. But you would think the hardship to all the work that was pressed on them? Well life was hard, life was hard for everybody, and most people just figured that hardships and that was all part of life, and you just accepted that. And they were strong? They were strong and they were proud of doing a hard day's work. Today that isn't so. I know my father used to, he took pride in his job that he made so many thousand or so many million, they estimated he made about 15 million on those landsides in his 40 years there. 15 million? 15 million. 15 million? Yeah. This is a tremendous number. And of course he was very, very proud of that, and that work ethic they had in those days is entirely different than what you have today. You don't get that kind of work out of people today, not at all. That's all tested in a different way today. And they didn't have all the helps, the hydraulic lifts and the cooling fans, and it was backbreaking work. They'd have to lift things manually and push carts around. Today they don't do that at all. They have forklifts, they have forklift drivers, and that's their job is just to move material around. In those days, boy, if you wanted material, you just shoved it around yourself. How did they shove things around with the Belgians? I mean, on the opposite side, they're different kind of people. Did they work good together, or did your dad mention anything? Oh, he never mentioned that. There was a daily life, I suppose, that they did. I think like with any different type of ethnic groups, sometimes they probably fight against each other, and sometimes it's just a matter of kidding each other. I mean, today we kid our Belgium neighbors and they kid us for being Swedes, but it's all good natured. But back then there was a livelihood on the line there. Well in those days, that's right, it was more serious. It was survival, that's right. But then again, if you had troublemakers that would cause problems, just because they were Swedes they weren't perfect. There would be one or two out of a hundred that would be troublemakers and they'd pick a fight. I suppose that's the same we got today. But like the Swedes, no, the Belgians of course, they had this drawback of the language problem. They couldn't speak too much, they probably shut up in the first place, didn't say anything, and just kept going, working, and there was no discussion really going on, so they couldn't get in trouble. Because if you can't talk, you know, nobody's going to read you out what you mean. Yeah, most of those jobs were pretty, they were backbreaking, but they were simple. They'd show them what to do and you would do it over and over and over and over and you really didn't have to speak English to do the job. Just had a strong back, that's all you had to do. Because it seems to me, traveling to different areas, that the Irish were the outspoken ones because they could master the language. And you know, they had no trouble in that, they usually had them as a spokesman. The Irish didn't have any foothold in this Quad Cities though. I don't know what percentage the Irish were here. The Irish seemed to be more in Chicago and Boston and the bigger eastern cities. So when the unions came in, there were no union leaders being of Irish background, I think, as you know of? That I don't know, I have no idea. I don't know, Brian or McCormick or... In this area, I couldn't say. Because there were Belgians and the Swedes and Germans over in Davenport? Yes. For some reason, the Germans all settled over in the west end of Davenport. They had their beer gardens and their festivals and the Swedes settled here in Moline and the Belgians settled in Moline up on 7th Street and most of the old churches here in Moline all have Swedish cornerstones. So when the Belgians moved in, for instance, not to the Swedish section, was that through marriage or did he do it on his own? Like a Swede that never moved over to 7th Street though? Well, I wouldn't say never, but in those days, they tended to stick pretty close, you know. Where they had the church? The Swedes would hang together and they would socialize together and they would go to church together and of course most of the Belgians were Catholic and most of the Swedes were Lutheran or Baptist. So there was a line drawn between the two nations right there, you know, in which Belgians were different religiously. Yeah, they, I guess, if you lived next to a Belgian, you got to know him, but you didn't get to know the Belgian down the street or if you worked next to a Belgian, you got to know him, but I don't think there was a lot of intermarriage in the early days. Today it's a different story. It came after the Second World War. Those lines are gradually eroding and I suppose they'll continue to erode even more. So the churches kept people together more in the family years ago then, if you went to the Baptist, to the Covenants of Salvation Army or, then you find your... The churches and then there were some lodges here too. The Germans had their Turner Society, which at one time in Moline was very big. The church, there was a few Swedish lodges. And the Viking and Vasa, Switzerland. Yes, and then I think for a lot of people the church was the whole life of it, was the, not only for worship, but for picnics and parties and so on and so forth. Don't you think that the families way back, I know the Swedes, I'd like to find out who the guy is and who that person is. The church was that medium to reach, much closer, in other words you could trust the person. Oh, I suppose that's some truth in that. Being a neighbor, I mean, it doesn't really give you an impact if he's a good guy or not. But the church will be a dominating... Well, if you have a next door neighbor that you live by every day of your life, you may know him much better than someone you see in church once a week. Yeah, but there was more than once a week though, years ago, the church. Yes, yeah. And years ago, many of the churches had morning services on Sunday and evening services and weekday services. And a lot of the churches began to drop Sunday night services and midweek services. The more liberal, what we call liberal churches, tended to cut down their services. So you belong to the Salvation Army like your... No, no, I belong to the Baptist Church. I see. I belong to Edgewood Baptist Church. And after your wife then left? My wife belongs to Baptist Church. We never belonged to Salvation Army, although we went there as children. But we left there as... Your parents were... My parents. My parents were lifetime members. But the Salvation Army communicated over all kinds of denominations over the years, for Baptists and Covenants and Lutherans. Well here in Moline, we had the old Fredlstening's Army and the Salvation Army was set up in the United States in territories, eastern, central, southern, mountain, western. But within the central territory, which Moline is in, there were divisions. Within the Army there was the Scandinavian Division, which was basically corps that were Swedish. And those were found in Chicago, in Rockford, Moline, Boone, Iowa, St. Paul, Minneapolis, Old Ridge, Nebraska, and the old region of... Side two, continuation with Rita Oberg, Moline, Illinois. Side two. Your dad, was he involved with anything else than the Salvation Army activities of, well like sports for instance? No, my father was not. His only outside activities was the Salvation Army. And he was not extremely active except after he retired, then he became more active. Because his job was so hard and demanded so much physical strength that it was early to bed and early to rise. But after he retired, then he became more active in the Army and spent more time in all their activities. Of course when he did work, he still went to all their, most of their services. Friday nights they would have their home league services, and that was always a lot of fellowship and there was always coffee and cake and refreshments after. And of course the Scandinavian Salvation Armies were big on meals and activities and Midsummer Fest and Lucia and... The Swedish festivals. Yes, the Swedish festivals. And of course in the early days, in Moline, the services were in Swedish. And then they gradually went into English. Do you remember going to Swedish services? Oh yes, sure. I remember many Swedish services and then of course they gradually changed to English. Did you go to Swedish Sunday school down there? No, the Sunday schools were taught in English when I was there. And well, let me see here. I remember my mother, who came from Sweden, she was very upset when they began to change over to English. She couldn't understand why they couldn't keep Swedish services. Well when you have a lot of people coming in that don't understand Swedish, then you obviously can't keep that up. So there was a tradition she lost when English came in, where she didn't feel comfortable enough with it. No, no. And there was quite a difference in the army between the Scandinavian divisions and what my mother would call the American divisions. Your dad now, he has written some beautiful poems for different occasions. I saw that book. Was he a reader? Oh, he had a good sound education in Sweden, which was entirely different than what education in this country. And I think when he did come here, had he gone to school, had he gone to college rather than gone to John Deere and gone to work, it would have changed his life drastically. He did have a flair for writing. He always wrote poems and tributes for people for weddings or anniversaries, for presentations. He learned to write very beautifully in Sweden, calligraphy. And so he was constantly filling in and inscribing documents and diplomas, all those kind of things for years and years and years. Isn't it strange, Don? I mean, here is a guy producing 15 million plough shares and I still have a testy can. It's strange that a blacksmith with the hard, hard work that he had to do wrote hundreds of Swedish poems and did a lot of writing. Very soft writing. Very beautiful writing. He was not abusive in any way. I think he was. No. So he had the education, and although we never talked about this too much, he did have an opportunity when he first came here to go to Augustana College. And why he didn't go, I don't know. But had he gone to Augustana and been exposed to the curriculum and the instructors there, he would have had an entirely different life than what he did have. But he seemed to always be content with the life he had. I think, although we never talked about this, but I'm sure that when he got married and they had two sons immediately, he had no choice but to work. He didn't want to be a break in between his education and his family's well-being, I suppose. Well, I'm sure he couldn't afford to go on to college under those circumstances. So that was a choice he made. You were interested in sports, though. You came into a different life. You had more... Well, I had time for sports, and of course sports were starting to get more... People had more free time. So in high school I was involved in basketball. I played basketball for Moline High School and basketball for the church and basketball city leagues and played golf and softball in the summers and enjoyed it very much. So you had... Never was good enough to make a living at it, but good enough to just have a good time at it. And your work allowed that time, in other words, for you to have some exercise beside it. Well, in the early days, when you worked in the shops, you worked a 10-hour day, 12-hour day, six days a week. And so after working 12 hours in the shop, you didn't come home and go out and play softball because it was getting dark and you were tired. And my parents and a lot of people in those days never... Didn't own cars. My dad always took the bus to work or the streetcar. And of course as society became more affluent and you had more spare time, you started doing more of these extracurricular activities, which was sports and so on. How old were you when you bought your car then? First car I bought when I was 20 years old. I bought a 1950 Ford. And my father never had a car. He won a car one time. He won a brand new car and a drawing, but he never drove. In 1957, he won a 1957 Dodge and a drawing at a local department, a New York store here in Moline. But my sister and I drove the car. So he had a chauffeur and a brand new car. Yeah, brand new car. So did he approve of your sports activities? Like did he understand golf? Oh, he approved. I don't think he really understood the sports. And he was happy to be home and work in his garden and take care of his yard. I remember right now he did his military service up in North Sweden. Yes, he was in the... Ski patrol. He was in the ski patrol in the Swedish Army back 1911, 12. And of course, he skied up in the northern part of Sweden. And if I remember right, he was in the Army from September till May and home for the summer. And then he was in the Army again the following September through May. And then his universal military training was over with. I guess everyone was required to do that in those days. So I think he enjoyed that. He talked with fondness about his Army days in Sweden. In sports, you didn't play soccer. There was a Swedish soccer team. No, no one played soccer here. That was not... Not when you were growing up? No, no. They were dead then. Football, baseball, basketball. Soccer has not become popular till just the last few years. Why was that though? There were some Swedish immigrants that started the club here in 1929 and even earlier. Well, I don't know. It was a sport at that time that just never caught on. Just never caught on here until... And even now, it's still not the big sport, even in 1986. It's still football, basketball, and baseball. A few people, of course more people play soccer now, but... Never caught on. No, no. And the Belgians, they have their roly-polies. Yes, Belgians... Why do they keep that for themselves? The other nationality doesn't seem to be interested in that. Did you play it? Well, I played roly-poly because we had a neighbor next door who was Belgian. And he had a roly-poly, played roly-poly right here in the yard. And roly-poly is played with, you roll a ball, you roll a disc that has a beveled edge. So when you roll it, it doesn't roll straight, but it goes in an arc. And you have two posts about 40 feet apart. And you roll this disc, which is made out of hardwood or rubber. It weighs maybe 10 or 12 pounds, maybe the weight of a bowling ball. And the object is to see who gets closest to the pin. And so as kids, we played roly-poly a lot. Oh, you did? Oh, yes. Right here in the neighborhood. And we really enjoyed that. That was kind of a fun game. And they also have leagues and... They still have leagues. Within the city, then, or they don't go outside the core cities? Oh, yes, they... Peoria? Well, they have... A lot of Belgians live out in Anawon and Atkinson. They play roly-poly. It's a game that's played in leagues. And it's something that you always play at... They play at picnics. When the Belgians get together, they always set up and play roly-poly. So we have a big roly-poly court right across the street here. It's behind the house. And it's... They've got railroad ties around it. And they've got lights out there. And they play roly-poly all summer out there, even now. And you were trying to also, isn't it? Oh, yeah. It's just, you know, when you're kids, you just try anything. So I had a lot of fun. You didn't try pigeon racing, though? No, no. No pigeons. There are still a few coops around, though, isn't there? Oh, yeah. They still race those pigeons. But that's strictly 100% Belgium, I think. No sweet corn on that one? No, no. Regarding politics, if you went away from sports and religion... Your opinion, opinions, are they different than your father's? Well, I think so. I think so. Why are they different? They're different because they went through tough years of the Depression. And they looked on Roosevelt as being the savior. And so many of these people voted Democratic right down the line. They worked in the shops. They were union members. The union was Democratic. And to this day, the union is basically Democratic. And so I think my father always voted Democratic, although he didn't say too much about it. And basically, I guess I voted Republican most of the time. Although I don't like to vote strictly party. I still look at the man. But basically, I lean more toward what the Republicans stand for than the Democrats. And even today, with the difference between the Republican and Democrats, there's such a vast difference today that I have to lean toward what the Republicans stand for. Before Roosevelt, were there a lot of Swedes that were Republicans, though? Well, there were many Swedes. They wanted to vote with the management. Yes, but it depends on areas of the country. If you talk to farmers in Minnesota, they were national labor people, people that came out of Dwight Humphrey came from that background. Walter Mondale came from that background. The Grange was a big organization up in the Dakotas in Minnesota. And of course, the Socialists tried to move in on that. And you had your social labor parties in Minnesota. Populists? Populists. And they were basically, they evolved mostly into the Democratic Party. And so you find a lot of the Swedes in Minnesota that went through hard times lean toward the Democrats. And of course, I knew Swedes, too, in Minnesota that voted nothing but Republican. It didn't matter who ran. It was just straight Republican. And of course, you always have non-thinking voters on both sides that vote strictly for the party. So what did you get your convictions on about the Republicans? Can you consider you going through a rough time or riding on the crest of the First Depression or good times in the 40s and 50s? Not 40s much, but in the 50s and 60s? No. I never considered the times were bad. We always had a good outlook on everything. We never had a lot of money, but we were always happy in raising the kids. We always had money for what we needed. I never felt deprived, even when I grew up in the Depression time. Of course, my mother realized, my father realized that things were tough. But we didn't, the kids, we didn't realize it was tough. We ran around barefoot all summer and played. And of course, I realized what I had as a child and what kids have today is a world apart. But I never felt deprived or poor. How about the 50s? Was it really a good time then, or was it still a little bit slack from the war? It took some time before it got better. Things were starting to turn around in the 50s. And again, I always felt satisfied with my lot in life, and I think my parents did too. We were never strongly materialistic. We didn't have to have everything. I was always satisfied if the car ran and got me there, that was fine. I didn't need a brand new fancy car. With you being a Republican, did you discuss this with your father? No, no, we never discussed that. It's always interesting to know why is it that Roosevelt, I suppose, the Social Security, as there was actually a story during Hoover, he didn't get credit for it. Well Hoover got credit for things that he was not responsible for. Roosevelt got credit for things that he was not. I've always thought it's strange that Hoover was in office just a very short time when the Depression hit, and he got credit for it. And Roosevelt was in office for nine years when World War II hit, and he did not get credit for that. So I don't know how a man in just a few months can be credited for something, and another man after nine years is not credited for something that happens. But even to this day you hear about Hooverville and Hoover did this and Hoover did that. Hoover was a civil engineer, a very intelligent man, a humanitarian who worked with a Congress that was not sympathetic toward him. They would refuse to pass his legislation. And if I remember right, Hoover did propose Social Security, but the Congress did not do anything about it. And Roosevelt came in, and even after Roosevelt was in, the Depression got deeper and deeper and tougher and tougher. And it wasn't until we got into an artificial war economy that this country really turned around. And this country rode on the crest of an artificial war economy and an increasing deficit for until this day. So I think Roosevelt was not the savior that a lot of people said he was, but you'll never convince some of these old-timers of that. They'll go to their grave thinking Roosevelt was the greatest thing that ever happened. He was a good, smooth talker, I suppose. He was a very charismatic individual. During the war, of course, you backed the president 100 percent, but some of the decisions that were made by Roosevelt and Churchill and Stalin have haunted us to this day. And we still have major problems in Europe because of the decisions made by Roosevelt and Churchill and Stalin at Yalta and Tehran and the partitioning of Europe, which has caused us problems that will be with us probably forever. There's one thing I wonder about. Roosevelt, now he came from a banking family, very well-to-do. And he caught on as a man of the people. But here you have Hoover, he came from a very humble beginning out in the West Branch and he was a man of the people. That I never can understand. This is true of the Kennedys. The Kennedys were extremely wealthy. Much of the Kennedy fortune was made with haig and haig scotch that came in after Prohibition was over. And they're hailed as champions of the people. They're no more champions of the people than man and the moon. But they have a very charismatic type approach to people, and people overlook their faults. Kennedys in the White House, some of the things that they did, some of the liaisons with women in the White House, if Nixon or Reagan did that, this country would be up in arms over it. But for some reason, the liberal Democrats are forgiven and the Republicans are crucified for the same thing. Because now Roosevelt was a banking family man. You would think that the people would be scared of him because the banks were not too good during the Depression. Well in the depths of the Depression, Roosevelt offered hope and a lot of promises. And this is what people want. They want promises. And Churchill, in World War II, he offered the British people blood, sweat, and tears. And they got it. And they got it. And they loved him for it. So I don't know. You can't always understand the way people act. And most people are not political astute at all. They just follow what the newspapers... They follow what the... or they follow their party or they vote the way they've always voted and... So I don't know. What do you think about the unions now? You've seen them from the beginning in the 1940s and up. And there has been a turnaround now, there's no question about it. The unions went too far. Yeah, but why did the management go with them? Management went... Management didn't have to tell them to go ahead with... Management went with them, in my opinion, because the profits kept rolling in and rolling in and rolling in. I saw John Deere give in to many of the demands of the union because the profits were so large that it didn't matter. And people that have positions where they do little or nothing and draw good wages and the company goes along with it up until just the last few years now when the economy has turned around. But as long as things are working and they want a smooth running factory, they'll pay some of the extra benefits and extra wages to make the extra profits. As long as the profits are there, they'll go along with it. So there was no foresight that was going to happen ten years from that grievances? Okay, for instance, back in the 1970s. They never looked ahead, that was going to happen. Well, no, I think... Somebody's got to pay it. Somebody's got to pay it, but I think they just looked that things were getting better and better and better and better. And they never really thought that what has happened the last few years would happen. I mean, when I was with Deere, I started there in 79. I thought that this would last forever. And we all felt that way. This would just keep rolling on. But the day of erecting finally came. And it came fast. And the farmer can't, he can't afford to buy the combine for $125,000. He can't afford that. A farmer can buy a bushel of soybeans here cheaper from Brazil than he can from Cambridge. The farmer can buy an end loader cheaper from Korea than he can from Case Plant in Bettendorf. Delivered right to his place. A backhoe made in Korea can be delivered in Moline for $5,000 less than it can be delivered from across the river in Bettendorf. The same thing, same quality. So that might take another 10, 15 years before it's straightened out. We'll have, what we're going to have is a leveling out of wages and living conditions. The people around the world are working for less money. And they have the manufacturing techniques that we have today. And it's just going to be a leveling out. Our standard living is going to go down and theirs is going to go up until it evens out. So that's a bleak proposition for the Quad Cities though. Well, maybe. Maybe. Maybe it's a good thing. It went too fast, too far. Yeah, maybe so. Only time will tell. End of interview with Rune Ohlberg. End of interview.