 I was born at a hospital in Central Omaha, Lord Lister Hospital, which no longer exists. 26th and about Dewey is where it was located. No, my parents lived at Carter Lake Club. I was born at the hospital. Carter Lake Club is close to Iowa? No, I meant close to Missouri River. There was a community there. How many families lived there at the time? I don't know. I would guess perhaps 400 thereabouts. You had your own school system down there? We had a grade school only. We had a four-room country school. And we went to Omaha to high school. How did you get to Omaha? There was no school transportation, you would say? No, there was public transportation. Bus and streetcar. But I went to Benson High School and I rode to 17th and Cumming where my father's office was every morning and took the Benson streetcar from there and then reversed the procedure to come home after school. Did your father know of the Frederick Bloom? He was born in Omaha, but his father was born in Red Oak. And in turn, his father was born in Cristala. Can you tell me a little bit about his beginning? He was born in Cristala and left for the United States in 1873, wasn't it? I believe he came in 1871. He was born at a farm called Hook Holt in Cristala Parish in 1854. And in 1871, he and a friend left to come to the United States. They came to an older half-brothers of my grandfather who left Sweden as Johann Friedrich Nilsson. He came to his older half-brother who had acquired the army name Bloom. It was B-L-O-O-M, later anglicized to B-L-O-O-M. He very quickly took on this army name in the church record. Originally, he's entered as Johann Friedrich Nilsson, but the next entry says Johann Friedrich Nilsson Blom, and then the Nilsson was dropped. Have you checked the church records in Red Oak? Did he belong to any church there? He was born into the Fremont congregation at Nijmen, south of Red Oak. Yes, I have looked at those church records. I have looked at the originals down at the church, and I've also looked at the microfilm over at Swenson Center. So he is on the pages there with his family? Yeah. This is my father's birth that we're talking about. And your grandfather, now then, he had a father? No. When he came, he came to Burlington, Iowa to this half-brother, Carl Magnus Blom, and he and his friend worked shortly for a few months as lumberjacks in a logging camp, and then they both got work on the Burlington line, building culverts and bridges, doing construction-type work on the Burlington Railroad. And in Red Oak, Iowa, when he was working for the Burlington, he met Emma Frederica Anderson, whom he later married. She was from where? She was born in Odensvie Parish in Kalmarland, and her parents had come from Lofta Parish to Odensvie. And I often wondered why they went from the one to the other, but in some of the church records, I discovered that the landowners for whom they worked in Lofta also owned land in Odensvie. So I think perhaps they knew each other. They went from the one farm to just a different farm owned by the same wealthy people. But they left for America in 1874 in the spring because my grandmother's mother had been orphaned at a fairly young age, and the children all farmed out with different families. And when she married and had a family of her own, she insisted that they would come to America where their children would have a better future. My dad and my aunt both said that the grandmother said her husband would have stayed in Sweden, but she would not stay there. So they did come to America. The crossing was apparently rather rough. My grandmother said everyone was sick. It sounded like the film The Immigrants. People were dying everywhere, and it was very rough. The food and the water ran low, and it wasn't too good. And she promised herself that if her feet were ever lucky enough to see dry land again, they would never leave it. And even after airplanes were invented, she would not take a trip back to Sweden. The children wanted to send her back, and she wouldn't go. But that family settled on a rented farm south of Red Oak and lived there for about seven years. When they came to America, they came with five children. My grandmother at 13 was the eldest. The youngest one was three months, and they all survived the crossing. But several years later, I think about 1874, I believe it was a typhoid epidemic that took two of the children, and they were buried in what is now an abandoned cemetery just north of the Fremont Lutheran Church in the Nijmend community, six miles south from Red Oak. How far away is it from the cemetery they are using? The modern cemetery is, I would say, not more than probably a half mile south from the old one. But the old church burned about 1900 or 1901 or 1902, along in there. And they simply moved a little bit further south and built a new church and started a new cemetery. And eventually, even the road past the old church was closed off, and it is now farmland. A gentleman is farming all around the old cemetery completely. When they moved a half mile south, they also crossed the county line. When I was doing research in the counties down there, I didn't realize this at first. I was looking in the wrong county for information part of the time. You came into Montgomery County. They were in Montgomery, and they moved down into Page County, so I had to go down to Clarinda to the county records there, too. Then when my grandfather and my grandmother's family, then, after about seven years on this rented farm down there, bought railroad land in Saunders County, Nebraska, near Edensburg, outside of Malmo, which is a suburb of Oahu. And my grandfather and grandmother were married in 1883 at Edensburg Lutheran Church, outside of Oahu in Saunders County. And then they moved to Red Oak. In 1879, well, my grandfather was a stonemason by this time, and a friend of his died, and he had made a memorial stone for him, and it turned out pretty good, so people started asking him to make memorial stones, which he did. And he decided then he'd go into the business. So in 1879, he opened a little office on the square in the city of Red Oak. And he would go out. He put drawings under his arm and would ride his horse out during the day and show people the drawings where there'd been a death in the family, prospective customers, and try to get orders, and then at night he would go home and start chipping them out. So that's how he got his start in the monument business. And in 1897, he did move from Red Oak. By then, they had had five children. All of the children were born at Red Oak. But he decided there would be better business where there was a bigger city with more people, so he moved to Council Bluffs. And for three years, they lived there. In 1900, he moved into Omaha and had an office at 18th and Farnham, currently the location of the city county building but where the old Wellington Hotel used to stand. I do have a picture of that property. Then in 1917, they moved the office to 17th and Cumming Street. In 1927, they built a manufacturing plant at 20th and Ames, and then in 1941 moved the head office where the plant is, where it's still located, 20th and Ames Avenue in Omaha. So your old grandpa, now how long did he continue and your father came into the business there in 1912? Okay, in about, no, it was before then. In about 1900, in about 1899 or 1900, my grandfather was in business with a partner. And one day, the partner and all the money they had vanished, never to be seen or heard from again. Was he a Swede, the partner? I really do not know. I do not know. It was not one of your typical Swedish names, and I have no idea. I would assume perhaps he might have been Swedish because I don't know who else would go in business with my grandfather, you know, who was a Swedish immigrant. What Englishman is going to go into business with this fella, you know? But at that time, my father was in ninth grade and his next brother, Roy, was in seventh grade, and the boys, the father said they had to quit school and go to work because they had no money and they were in debt then. And so my uncle went directly into the monument business, Roy, with his father, and my dad did ask if his father thought there was any possibility that he could go take a secretarial course at a business college here in Omaha, and the father did manage to find money so he could do that. My father then went to work as a secretary for the Burlington Railroad and eventually asked for a raise because he thought he wasn't getting paid enough, and they told him, oh, no, you can't have a raise. So he talked to the Omaha B-News man who was a very well-known character about town in Omaha. Rosewater was his name, and dad went to work then as Rosewater's private secretary for several times the amount of money that he'd been making on the Burlington Railroad. And I think for four years my father was private secretary to this man who owned the Omaha B-News. And I know dad said the man was very demanding, very mercurial, and would oftentimes call him at 4 o'clock in the morning to come and take dictation. But anybody, any Omaha historian is very familiar with the name Rosewater because he was quite a vociferous type, and his newspaper printed what he wanted to print, so it was well-known. After that, my father then did go into business with his dad and his brother in the Monument Company, and they worked together until 1918 when my grandfather died. And then Roy and my father ran the business together until Roy died in 1960, and my father died in 1972 at the age of 87. So if we go back now a little bit, how many did your grandfather employ in 1910, for instance, when they came into Omaha, then left to be in constant loss? I think when he first came to Omaha in 1900, I really do not know. I have no way of knowing how many he employed. The picture of the shop that he owned was quite small, and I would guess that maybe he and his partner, or after the partner left, he and the boys were the employees. This was typical of the monument industry, and in many ways is still typical today. The typical monument shop is a one-man or a father-and-son operation even today. So it was not until in later years, in the teens on into the 20s, that they really began to increase the size of the operation. And when I was a child in the 1920s, I would say there were probably, I do not know, 15 employees. After they moved to the larger plant out on Ames Avenue in 1941, I guess by then they would have been, they built up to more like 25 maybe employees in the plant. There was a plant at Ames Avenue then? Yeah, but it was smaller. Was it an inside plant, enclosed? No, well, part of it was enclosed, but most of it was out on the docks. But it was a small operation, basically, not very big. But at first they started with the headstones, the simpler stuff, the 1900s, early. Well, they did not build any mausoleums? No mausoleums that early. They did not build mausoleums that early on, but they put up some pretty good-sized stones that they would load into the horse and wagon. And with primitive crane equipment, whatever they had, I do not know, go set those up in the cemetery. Mausoleums, well, monuments like architecture, styles come and go. And you can tell when you walk into a cemetery when you are in the old part of it. And I would say that mausoleums were probably at the height of their popularity in, oh, probably the teens into the 20s. Of course, when the Depression came, nobody was putting up mausoleums anymore. And there are a few go up nowadays, but not really very many. I think our company put one, the last one they put up was probably in about 1970 to 75 period, along in there. And that was not in Omaha. It was in a smaller town outstate. But they had, in addition to the men working in the plant, they had city salesmen who called on people here in town or in the suburban area, but they also had salesmen to whom they sold wholesale out around western Iowa and throughout Nebraska, some in Kansas, a little bit in Colorado, Arizona. So that I do not know. I suppose in 1960 we probably had 45 to 50 either full-time or part-time representatives out around the countryside. So according to one source I read, there were millions of headstones sold and a lot of mausoleums. 25 of them I saw a figure. Have you heard that? I do not know where I read it. I do not know where you read that. I do not recall having read that particular thing. And I do not know that we ever kept a record segregating the number of major headstones or mausoleums as opposed to individual marker-sized things. The company's records do go back to the beginning, their files. They have an alphabetical file of every sale they have made. But they were able to sell out with so many salesmen, so they were selling pretty good then. Did most of the families that could afford it have a headstone then? No. I think in working with, as a genealogist, in working with cemeteries, we figure that when we read every stone in a cemetery, it will vary from one cemetery to the next, of course. But we figure we are getting perhaps as little as 40 percent of the burials. 40 to 60 that have headstones. A headstone is an economic transaction, you know. And when times are bad, people tend not to buy, to put off buying or never get around to it at all. But where you have areas where the populace is not so well to do, of course, your percentage of headstone sales is going to be much lower. So when you are investigating cemeteries for genealogical purposes, is the 30s a low-selling period then? I would say not from investigating cemeteries, but from having lived through it, yes. It's a low period. Nobody was buying much of anything in the 30s. It was a standstill then? Well, it wasn't a standstill. Our family managed to eat, which some people had trouble doing. But they also manufactured stones for other building material? No, no. Blooms has never gotten into the building material end of it at all. No steps or anything like that? No. Well, they would put like a sill entrance to a lot in a cemetery. But as far as granite facings on buildings, for example, Methodist Hospital here in Omaha has this gorgeous, beautiful, what we call Swedish pearl on it. A very expensive granite faces a whole big section of that material. But that requires a different kind of handling. Those are very thin pieces of granite, simply a facing. Where you're dealing with a headstone, you've got a little different kind of material, a little different kind of equipment needed to produce it. So for the pillboxes, they're more like a veneer? Yes, right, right. So we just never did get into the construction industry at all. So what was the raw material now that your grandpa, what was he able to pick this up, the stone, the raw? The raw materials? Yeah. Oh, in the beginning? Well, typically, as the nation was built westward, memorials would be made of whatever was available locally. Sandstone? Yeah, a lot of those old ones that you see in cemeteries that you can no longer read are sandstone, or they may be marble, which was shipped in from back east someplace or whatever. They may be slate. Sometimes they would put out a wooden cross if they didn't have anything else, which does not last. But here in the Midwest, the marble and the sandstone, our weather is not kind to that kind of stone. It wears it off very badly. Even marble? Yes, oh yes. Marble is a much softer stone than granite is. Our machinery is built, we don't even handle marble. Our machinery is for granite. Oh, I see. Because it's two different softnesses, or hardness. So the marble was shipped in then from Vermont? Not the marble. I don't know where they got the marble from. But the granite comes, some of the really good granite does come from Barry, Vermont. Granite is a natural made product, which is mined, so to speak, out of the ground. They quarry it. And like wood, it has a grain. It has mars in it, or what would be the equivalent of a knot in wood. Discolorations from minerals in the soil in which it was formed, that kind of thing. Granite is also found, rather extensively, in Georgia, which is a softer grade of granite by and large. It's found in Oklahoma, Wisconsin, Minnesota. St. Cloud is well known. Wausau, Wisconsin is well known. There are Canadian granites. There is a black Canadian that's awfully pretty. There's a South African black that's pretty. There is this, what we call blue pearl from Sweden, which actually comes from the mountains between Sweden and Norway. Granite basically is found all over the world. But the bulk of it in the U.S. is those places that I mentioned. Did your company ship anything from Sweden? We handled the Swedish blue pearl. It's like anything else. A furniture company can handle furniture from any place they want, that they think they can sell it. You cannot handle every granite. There's too many. So you get a color range is what you do, from the light grays into the deeper grays and the light pinks into the deeper rose reds. So the mechanization of it was the beginning of the grandpa with the hammer and the chisel. Yeah. He did it. It was handwork, and when you go into a cemetery and see those old stones and realize that that was chipped out by hand, those people were artists. So you have research on his headstones or some of them? Oh, yeah. Sure. We have one of his early ones in our showroom at 20th and Eames that we went down to Red Oak and got out of the old cemetery down there. He made it in about 1885, but that is one that we know precisely that he did make, the earliest one that we know of. And what kind of stone is that? It is a granite. There was no pinthole in that? I do not know where, no, there is no local granite around Omaha. He had to ship it in under that time. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, the railroad came through. He had to do some buying then. Yes. First of all, go out and find the place. He did everything, yeah. I do not think he made buying trips. I think he ordered probably through catalogs or something of that nature, but it would be shipped in by rail. And when the office was at 17th and Cumming and again at 20th and Eames, granite came in on flat cars to both of those places. What year did he start to mechanize his own quarry or close by there? His own manufacturing plant? Yeah. I have a recollection of the men at 17th and Cumming doing handwork, but when they built the plant at 20th and Eames, the manufacturing plant there, it was almost a completely mechanized thing by that time. It was all brand new. They put in the latest equipment available. They always did try to have the latest safety equipment, the machines to remove sand from the air, from the sandblasting and all of this, because silicosis is the monument man's occupational disease in the past. And they tried to do the best they could with safety measures. And they had a big saw shed where they would—oh, I suppose that flywheel on that was probably ten feet across— where they would take the big pieces of granite from the quarries in and saw them up into there. Was that done with the wire type? No, this was done with a wheel, with a great big wheel with great big jagged, very large jagged teeth on it. And steam engines then? Did that run by steam? I don't recall that it did. I think it was electric, Leonard, by then. I mean, this is 1940s, electricity was— They did not have wire saws yet at that time, I do not believe. I think that came later, and we did put a wire saw in, which is a— actually is simply a piece of cable anywhere from a half mile to a mile or two long, which is strung like a Rube Goldberg all over the plant, because the longer it is, the longer it wears. Which is used to saw through the pieces of granite, and they mixed— Oil? Diamond dust with water to use with the saw as an abrasive. Oh, I see. It's quite an operation. It's a different thing for most people to see. But they still use—we have the one wire saw in the plant, which still operates, but we do no longer use the sawshed, because back in the quarries, they set up wire saws, and it's—they are such big operations that it is no longer economical for us to try to do that part of the operation. We hire it—I mean, we buy it all cut by them almost completely now. So AF Blom Monument never had a quarry by itself, then? No, J.F. Blum & Company never— J.F. Blum? Never J.F. John Frederick was the original. And it was used all the way up to the—at the present time, that name? Yes, that name is still the name of the company, although we sold it four years ago. But the name itself has value when you're selling monuments in this area, so of course they would want to keep it. It's all the way since the 1880s. Yeah, right. Story gets ran over. So, yeah, no, you don't remember your grandfather, because he was— No, he died before I was born. How about grandma? I remember her. When my grandfather died, they were living on South 33rd Street, and after his death, the house was closed down not too long after that. And my dad's sister, who was the third child, Inez—Inez Louise, for whom I was named, was living in California in Pasadena. She was a social worker out there, and she never did marry, spent her life working in youth work in the courts out there. And my grandmother went to live with her in, I think, about 1919 or 1920, and lived there until her death in 1933. But they did—she did come frequently and visited us in Omaha. And then in 1930, we had a family reunion in Waukegan, Illinois, where dad's other sister, Marie, lived for my grandmother's 70th birthday. And the whole—the entire family was there together at that time for a couple of weeks. So I do remember my grandmother quite well. And I didn't realize it at the time, but she still had a little bit of Sweden in her talk. Looking back on it, I realize that she did. I suppose as a child, I just thought that was the way she talked. And neither one of the Gramian parents came back—went back to Sweden? Never, never. I do not—I have a feeling that my grandfather probably didn't want to go back. He did not serve his army time, for one thing. And whether that was why he left Sweden, I don't know. But I have never—I never heard a word about him ever even thinking of making a return trip. So he is buried there in Omaha, then? Yes. And also grandma? Mm-hmm. And then your father and his brother, they became the sole owner of it? Yes. The monument? Mm-hmm. And your father also worked the different momentums of the plant? He knew what was going on? Well, he started as a—when he went into the company, yes. Yeah, they all worked in the plant. And in later years then, my grand—after my grandfather died, my uncle primarily managed the plant, and my dad primarily managed the office with sales and all of that. And then in about 1920, probably 23, 22 or 23, along in there, Martin Swery had come from Istad, Sweden, to America and stayed temporarily with my folks. Was he related? No, he was not related. And I don't know how come he happened to live with my folks. Now, Martin had a half-brother here in Omaha, too, John Swan. Whether that's why he came to Omaha, I assume it was, but I really—I actually don't know. Maybe Amelia Edquist could have told you that. I don't know. But he did live with us, and then he did go to work for the company at about that same period of time. And he became secretary treasurer of the company in later years then. The interview continues next site. Well, is there anything else you want to— Yeah, and this Swery from Istad, he married Emma Edquist. Right. She was half Mexican and half Swedish. Yes, uh-huh. And you remember her as a lovely lady. Yeah, she was a lovely lady, a lovely person, and the families were very close, always have been. So this Swery, though, he worked all his life then for— In the U.S., yeah, he did. And then he retired—when they retired, they moved to Sun City, Arizona, and lived there until Uncle Mark died. And then, oh, a couple of years—a few years later, Aunt Emma came to Omaha and lived until her death then. So I suppose there came in a lot of different requests for monuments to look in a different way. Was there an artist employed then by your company? Yeah, we have had a full-time artist almost ever since I can remember. We had a very, very fine, well-known artist at 17 and coming named Bradley Baalbeck, who then went on to other things. But in more recent years, we've had—oh, and let's see, he's been there probably, I would say, close to 20 years at this time, a youngish man by the name of Jack Somm, who is an excellent artist. I think they instituted the idea of a design department originally because they thought it would help to increase sales. If they could say to people, we can create any design that you might like, we will do it. And this is— Was it possible? Oh, yes, sure. The only thing—if you're designing a monument, you have to know what can be done in granite because of the process of manufacturing it and getting that design to show the way you want it to show. I don't know whether you're interested or not, but the process of that is they create a design and they cut out the parts that will be sandblasted into the granite. Then they put that design on a piece of rubber sheeting sort of material the size of the top of the stone. They cut out the parts they want sandblasted, and it adheres to the piece of stone. Then they run the sandblast over it, and it digs out where you cut holes and bounces off of where the rubberized material is. So then when you're done, you peel off the rubber, and here's your design in the stone. But it takes a certain amount of talent to create flowers, for example, with their varying depths. How can they figure the cost of that, I mean, if a customer comes with this custom-tainted idea? Well, in the olden days, they just kind of knew. Of course, when they were doing it by hand, they knew how long it would take them to do it themselves by hand. But after the age of machinery and electric equipment came along and all that, in the early years— my husband went to work there on the 1st of January in 1946. And basically, he ended up running the company after Roy died and Martin retired, and Dad was getting along in years. My husband instituted a system of unit pricing. He knew exactly the cost, or almost precisely, the cost of every operation that the plant did, so that he knew how to price. As designs got more complicated and more machinery came in and all that, they had to be cost-effective. And that was how they did it. So your husband came into the company in 1946? Right. And he had no previous experience? No, he didn't. He became an accountant, actually, is what he did, after he went to work for the company. But he also started working in the plant, just like everybody else. He did? Oh, yeah. And he worked over there for some period of time, and then he went into the office and started learning the procedures there, and then ran the company. Sandblasting was already in use then, 1946? Yes, indeed it was, yeah. Did they come to any deflection or shortly after? I think they had sandblasting even in the 20s. I think as a child, my recollection is that there was sandblasting even then. There was an awful lot of handwork still done, because I do remember the men standing there with a hammer and chisel working on things. I suppose, like the history of everything else, when mechanized sandblasting equipment came along, it didn't take over all at once. It took over gradually as more refined machinery was built. So the accidents of breaking a piece where you didn't want to break was less than with the sandblasting equipment. But they did it by hand, it was easier, I suppose, to slip and knock over. To slip, I suppose. Well, it would depend upon the ability of the artist more in that case. But granite has a grain like wood, you see, so you have to... And it was the job of the foreman in our plant, when we were still sawing quarry blocks, it was the job of the foreman to assess every piece of granite and to cut it according to where the grain ran. Because otherwise you're going to lose too much of your material, you can't afford to do that. So it was important to have a good foreman. And we did, we had a very good foreman for many, many years. So when they ordered a special design, there had to be the right kind of grain in the granite to accomplish what they wanted. Well, what the customer orders usually is a color of granite, because that's what they want, I mean, that's what they see. And they may say that they don't want a lot of grain running through it. They may want a nice, even overall piece. Well, it's up to us to select that piece and produce what they want. So they were custom made to facilitate the wish of the buyer. Yeah. And so did the mechanization change much during the 40s and 50s and 60s? Not a whole lot, except that wire saws did come in. And, oh, they keep refining, improving sandblast machinery and equipment and all this sort of thing. But in general, the wire saw was the big, I think, was the big development. Of course, they also bring in things like improved cranes. We have a traveling crane in the plant that will go anywhere in the plant. They improve the trucks with the cranes on them for cemetery setting purposes. I mean, you know. Well, sometimes it was up in the cemeteries and the hills and the gullies, it was hard to get the truck in there. Well, cemeteries are laid out so that setting equipment and maintenance equipment has access. You don't realize it. Some of the older ones seem to be hilly sometimes. Oh, they're hilly, yeah. They're hilly, but they're... And terraces and everything. Yeah, but they're always laid out with access. So most of the sales then were in the Omaha proper here? No, most of the sales were outside of Omaha. Our wholesale business, in other words, was actually was more than the... So they were shipped out on rail then? They were shipped out by truck. By truck? By truck. Most places? Yeah, yeah. So they didn't have to unload it, and it went right to the... It went from our factory onto a truck. Either a commercial trucking firm would handle it, or the men would come in themselves with their own... with a pickup truck, for example, to pick up the... Maybe some fella has four stones that are ready that he wants to take out 90 miles out into Kansas or Nebraska, wherever he's going, and he'll just load them in himself and unload them when he gets home. Direct to the cemetery then or to the wholesale? No, that is the... The salesman was the wholesaler. Oh, I see. He took the order out. We sold it to him. What he did was go to the customer and get an order, then order it from us, and either order it sent out or he'd come pick it up, take it to the cemetery, and set it. Was there any warranty on it? Well... How did that work? I mean, the weight of the cross and everything? Granite doesn't wear out, Leonard. Granite will be there forever. Who was responsible now for setting it on the foundation? It depends entirely upon the cemetery. Different cemeteries have different rules. Forest Lawn Cemetery here in the city of Omaha does all of their own setting. Other cemeteries, it's just on an individual basis. So the customer doesn't have any warranty then? It depends on each cemetery, what kind of rules they have. Well, the only warranty is if your customer... No, I mean, the correction of... from freezing up or anything like that, the foundation, and it turns over, you know what I mean? Oh, well, it doesn't turn... only after years is it going to do something like that. And then... I mean, it can sink and so on and... Well, if it sinks, then you go in and you jack it up and fill in under it. Who had to do that? Was there a... But it doesn't do that for years. It doesn't do that? No. And then it's up to the customer or the... they go to the cemetery or they go to the man they bought it from or... That's an individual situation. But I've seen the graves, you know, they... now they have a lot of cremation, of course, they used to... but they're all open grave. I've seen them in the cemeteries, they fill it in. And then the next... if it happens in this one summer, they have the burial or in the fall, and then the next... You mean a sunken over the grave area? That's right. And they can sink also the tombstones. Yeah, but, you know, well, the reason those graves sink, Leonard, is because people used to be buried in a pine box. Nowadays, you see, and eventually... In the cement now. Now they've got a metal coffin and a cement vault covering that. So there is no settlement in... The reason for that is to avoid the grave sinking. Now, whether that's in... going to be 200 years from now, whether that's good or bad, I don't know. But that's... So there's still more in most cemeteries than to have those vault-like cement boxes. Right, right. That is for maintenance purposes. Is that across the United States, you think? I really don't know. I do not know. It is not a law that this has to be done, but it's a cemetery rule. Because if every grave in your whole cemetery sinks, you can see what a problem you've got. I know. I've been to some up in Pennsylvania. Well, I've seen a lot of cemeteries, you know, mostly with churches. And there I've seen it. In other words, they've tilted the whole thing. Okay, well, if you have a grave and people are buried in a pine box, and ultimately nature takes its course and the grave sinks, and the monument that is sitting at the very edge of that is automatically going to tip. Sure, sure. So it's a maintenance thing. It's a maintenance thing, yeah. Yeah, yeah. So I suppose smaller communities, they can't... like down in Missouri, maybe they don't use them. I think it was down in Missouri I saw some of those caved in. Well, you will see a lot of them caved in, because it's really modern history that they began requiring the use of vaults. See, so the old cemetery I'm involved in, there's all kinds of old graves up there that sink. But those are old burials. Would they still cave in, some of them? Oh, yeah, sure. Sure. So there's a uniform rule then almost that there should be cement. Well, I can't really say uniform because I don't know, but that's the trend certainly across the nation. To make it more even. Yeah. In the cave. Yeah, right, right. So and then, yeah, you can, you are, you are three years, so you're the oldest or youngest? I'm in the middle. I have a sister four years older and a sister four years younger. So you went to school first down there on the... Went to the country school. And then to high school. And then to high school. And then I attended Doane College in Crete, Nebraska for two years. I went four quarters to Minnesota University. And I was married. I had two children. And then I went to Omaha U and graduated there. Had two more children. And I've been a housewife ever since, except when I worked at the company. So you were involved then with the company business? In later years, yeah. Right, right, yeah. And there was, and how did you meet your husband? At college. At college. At college, yeah. And your mother, she came from a French-German background, or was it... Well, her mother, her mother was German, Pennsylvania Dutch, and her father was half French and half Irish. And he was from Kenosha, Wisconsin. And he came to Omaha with the telegraph company and met my grandmother here. She had been born in Omaha City, Nebraska Territory in the early days. Her people came, let's see, Omaha was opened to settlement in 1854, and her people came in 1857 from Blair County, Pennsylvania, with a group of people from Zion Evangelical Lutheran in Hollidaysburg. The old German church. The old church there. And then some of those people were charter members of Kuntz Memorial, what is now Kuntz Memorial Church here in Omaha. Was it a bigger German settlement there in Omaha? Yes. Germans were the largest single group of immigrants into Omaha and Nebraska. And the Scandinavians were the second largest in the early days. And the Germans, they also, like the Swedes, became farmers in the beginning? Most of them, yeah. And peasants then? About the same. How about breweries? I haven't seen any in Omaha. Oh, well, they're all gone. There were a number of German breweries. There was the Krug Brewery in the early days. There was Metz Brewery in the early days. There was Storrs Brewery. There was Falstaff Brewery. There was, I think there were a couple or three others. Well, the first one in Omaha I think was the Columbia Brewery, which was very, very early in Omaha, which was run by Germans. These were all run by Germans. And they closed up then after? Well, they closed up for one reason or another, and across the country in more recent years, all the small breweries have been taken over by the big ones. So how did they meet, your parents? They met at Kuntz Memorial Church. When my father, when they moved into Kanselblas, they went to the Baptist church there. When they moved into Omaha, they lived near 25th and Parker and went to the closest church, which was St. Mark's, and that was a mission church of Kuntz Memorial. So when his family then moved over on South 33rd, Kuntz was close, so they went there. And, of course, my mother was born in the Kuntz Church. She'd always gone there. And your grandfather, now, he was instrumental in being one of the charter members of the Noonday Club, one of the founders. Yes, I understand that he was. So he was involved then with Swedish organizations in the beginning. To the best of my knowledge, Noonday Club was the only Swedish organization he was involved in. I do remember the old Swedish auditorium down near town. Chicago on 16th? 17th and down in there, yeah. But I don't remember ever hearing that my grandfather was involved in any of the other Swedish organizations of any kind. I don't know of any particular reason why he wasn't. He just wasn't. When he came to Omaha, he was terribly busy trying to get back on his feet because he was broke. So the years in Kuntz were not that... He didn't pay off too good then in Council Bluffs? Well, he was only there three years, and I suppose by the time he got to Council Bluffs and realized Omaha right next door was an even bigger city, there'd be even more customers, it was a logical move. Where was the bridge then from Council Bluffs? Was it down there south, or was it at Dock Street? It was at Douglas Street at that time. Douglas Street? The Douglas Street Bridge was the main thoroughfare. There was only one. How about the Mormon Bridge? There was no Mormon Bridge until the 1950s. There was a South Omaha Bridge, but the Douglas Street Bridge really was the main connection between Omaha and Iowa at that time. So they called it the Mormon Bridge, but did the Mormons cross the river without a bridge then in the 1840s? Oh, sure. There was no bridge then, no ferrymen? No. There were fur trappers before the Mormons came. Manuel Lisa had a place up here north in the hills, north of Florence, and at Florence, about where the Mormon Bridge was, they originally called the area Rock Bottom because there was a rock bottom in the river there, and it was a good crossing place. In 1846-47, the Mormons, who were then headquartered in Keynesville, which is now Council Bluffs, Iowa, got permission from the Indians to encamp on the Nebraska side of the river, up on the hill above Florence, and they did, and they planted fields in the area to grow food, etc., and it was a hard winter, and the Mormon historian says that the bishops kept absolutely accurate records, and I think there were some 60 to 70 people died that winter and were buried on a hill up above Florence at 33rd and State Street, which had been used as an Indian burial place previously. And then in the spring of that next, in the spring of 47, the Mormons had to go back to Iowa again. They no longer had permission to remain. So that was the only connection that they really had with that. That burial ground later became Florence, the cemetery for the village of Florence, and the village had the records on it, which have since disappeared. Nobody seems to know what happened to those cemetery records. But there were still burials going on in the early 1900s up to 1920, or whatever it was, in that cemetery there. And when State Street Hill was cut down and State Street was paved, they did remove some of the burials that they found over into what is now called Mormon Cemetery, but it's really Florence Cemetery. About, I don't know, maybe as many as 20 or 25 years ago, even now, the Mormon Church got the idea of going back across their trails and taking care of areas where Mormons were buried. At that time, Florence Cemetery had been pretty much abandoned. Florence was annexed into Omaha, I think it was 1917 or 18, and that cemetery gradually became a weed patch, and the Mormons came back and started cleaning it up and have made a showpiece out of it. And there is a very nice monument up there designed by Arvid Fairbanks, if you've seen it, with the pioneer couple looking down into the child's grave. A very touching statue up there. But they do have some stones up there, but nobody knows that those stones are in the right place. When they cleaned up, they just sort of set them up. One or two of them still had the old fences around, so they feel that those are in the right places. I got into this cemetery thing very heavily in the late 1970s through the Genealogy Society. I was the chairman of a committee that put out a history of the Douglas County cemeteries, both rural and urban. We read and recorded the stones in every rural Douglas County cemetery. I wrote a history of every cemetery, and we put a book together, and it was published by the Genealogical Society. So that's where I really got into it, with the cemetery. There seems to be this very steep hillside, though, crossing Missouri, but it was because there was a rock bottom further up, and it was too soft. It should be easy to land. How were they able to go up with those cranes? Well, if you go down to the Borman Bridge and look under the bridge, there's access to the river there, and that's just about where the crossing was. Yes, but then there was a tremendous hill area going up there, going west. Well, yeah, but there was everywhere along the Missouri River, but there was a flat landing area. There was a flat landing area. Yeah, yeah, and of course the original ferry crossing in downtown Omaha was a rope ferry. But it was not there 84 years. No, no, no, no, no. Omaha was not even mentioned. No. There was Cainesville. There was no Omaha yet then. It was just Florence and Cainesville. Cainesville. Cainesville, yeah. Where did they come from, Cainesville? There was a Colonel Caine who was a military man for whom it was named. I think he was a colonel. But no, there was no Florence yet then either, you see. But there were people back and forth, but they could not settle on this side of the river. And I think it was May 1 of 1854 when it was opened to legal settlement. Some of these men had been sitting over in Council Bluffs making trips back and forth. They already had the, they came over and immediately Omaha was platted. They chose their lots. They got a hold of that land. They were entrepreneurs. A lot of it was eastern money, which brothers or sons were sent to the frontier. Yankees. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, Yankees. They were not southerners. They were northerners for the most part. They were sent out here to invest that family's money to make more money. And that's really mostly what built the West was eastern money. And Creighton, of Creighton University, got his money from the telegraph. That's a Catholic? Yeah, Jesuit university. But as far as the Swedish background, I think my father was really more Swedish than his younger siblings were because as a child he was not very sturdy and was sent to the grandparents, to the maternal grandparents over in Saunders County to spend every summer with the Swedish grandparents for his health. And so he did spend a lot of time with those grandparents, and of course they were very Swedish. And he did grow up loving the farm. And I remember one time he said his grandmother always had him collecting eggs from the hen house, and she sent him into town walking, carrying his dozen eggs, and she told him that he must not sell them for less than ten cents, and then he could spend his ten cents on a straw hat to protect him from the sun. So that's the value of the time, ten cents for a dozen eggs. To protect from sunstroke. So when the Swedes came then, the Douglas Bridge was drivable through? Well, there were some Swedish people through fairly early because you know the Mormons recruited heavily. Oh yes, they went west, they didn't stop. Well, yeah, but there were a lot of people, a lot of people who were recruited by the Mormons, brought over here on the Mormon ships because the passage was free, it was a real good way to get to the New World. They didn't all stick with the Mormons after they got here. You mean they hopped off the bridge and drove in? Sure, somewhere along the way they would take off on their own. Is there any historical place now where they have any prairie schooners to show on the way west? The Mormons doesn't have a museum here? No, the Mormon, an Eagle Scout for his Eagle Rank project built a handcart, which is on display down here at the house east of the Mormon cemetery where the missionaries live. There is a Conestoga wagon at Jocelyn Memorial Art Museum, which used to be out in the main area there, and I don't know where they have put it now, it's no longer in the main area. But I think, my guess would be that there are some in the museums, perhaps at the Stur Museum in Grand Island or places like this have a prairie schooner, Conestoga wagon. But the Swedes, by the time, by 1854, the Golden Spike on the Union Pacific and Southern Pacific joined together, the cross country railroad was 49 I believe, 1849 was the Golden Spike. So trains were here, the Swedes did not come through by prairie schooner. They came either by train or they came, a lot of people came down the Ohio River and up the Missouri by boat. But they came by train, they didn't come by prairie schooner at that time. You think the prairie schooners were gone by 1850s? Yeah, yeah, trains were, see trains were old by the 1850s. The cross country railroad was completed in 1849. So if all they were doing was coming to Iowa or Nebraska, my father, my grandfather helped build the Burlington Line across Iowa in the 1870s. But the Union Pacific was long gone all the way across country already. These branch lines were built later. But they recalled when Phelps counted on the whole of Richland, Holland country that they saw big lines of prairie schooner in the 1860s. Well, yeah, but those, that's not Omaha. No, that's not, I know, but... Yeah, they did, well sure, there had to have been some go through Omaha, but how many of the Swedes went out state Nebraska that way, I don't know. They used prairie schooners though because the Bishop Hill in 1949, the Gold Rush, they packed mules and horses. Yeah, but that was 1849, the Gold Rush. Maybe, yeah. Was the Golden Spike 49? Let's see, the Gold Rush was 49, when was the Golden Spike? I think it was later. Maybe it was later. Oh, this one's awful early. Oh, they had Golden Spike days in Omaha. It was in the... Palmer, Utah, where was it? Promontory Point, Utah. Okay, it's the Gold Rush. I'm sure it was later, much later. I think you're right, Leonard, I think you're right on that. The Gold Rush was... I should know, it would have been 1867? Because there were people from Bishop Hill, there were a gang of people, and it was one Jonas Olsson, they set out in 49. They went down to Central and bought some supplies. Then they stayed in Keynesville and went west. I think that my grandfather landed in Montreal. My father said he did. And that he came then by train to Burlington from Montreal, Canada. And... That was in the 1870s. That was 1871. And I think that my grandmother's family went into New York, but I have not found the ship's passenger list yet because it's like looking for a needle in a haystack. Although I know when they left Sweden, but they gave their destination as... Burlington? No, that was my grandfather. He said he was going to Burlington, but my grandmother's people said Paxton, Illinois. But I believe they came into New York. But they came by train from whichever port they came in because my father said his mother talked about they rode in boxcars with a bench on either side. And all of these immigrant families with all of their kids in their bundles and all their worldly goods packed into these train cars with just a wooden bench on either side to sit on. And I've often thought those poor people, when they got to New York, didn't really realize how far they still had to go. What a terrible trip it must have been. And they had five children, one 3-months-old baby. I wouldn't want to do it. And I said, it's no wonder my grandmother didn't want to make the trip again. It's hard to leave without it, to survive. Yeah.