 We are 9th of August 1987 and I'm sitting together with Gustav Westerlund in Warren, Michigan. And he was born 1910, 6th of November in Uybyn, Piteå and came to the United States in 1917. So your parents now are with Johan Westerlund and his wife. What were they doing? Did they have a farm up there in Uybyn? No, my dad was a sailor from the time that he was 12 years old and then he was a lumberjack after he got married and we lived right across the river from the lumber mill and after lumberjack he worked at the lumber mill. My mother died in 14 and things were quite desperate with five children and he could not support our family the way we should be. Farming as you know up there isn't the best and so with his sister and brother-in-law he came to Sweden in 1910, to America in 1910 and after he had saved enough money he sent for us and we came over in 17. Did you stay with the grandparents then? No, my aunt, my dad's youngest sister took care of us. Do you remember that when your dad came back? He didn't come back. He stayed here? He didn't come back in time of the war. So he was stuck over here? He was stuck over here. Did he send money or tickets to you? He sent the tickets to us. To all of you? Yeah. My Mrs. Casman, now Mrs. Casman, not Mrs. Casman, Lundgren, that was the oldest sister of my dad and she came over and got us children. My dad's youngest sister was taking care of us over in Sweden. She also came over at that particular time with us and she stayed with us a few years. She went back to Sweden and then when she came back she died. So where was your father then at that time? Here in Detroit? Well, first of all he landed and he came to Alabaster, Michigan and with his brother he lived in Alabaster and he worked at the U.S. Chitim Company in the rock quarry and whatever anyone says, he used to, in those great big pits where they mined the plaster rock, they were huge pits, they're still there, they used to get ten cents a ton for loading the rock. By hand? By hand. Ten cents a ton? Ten cents a ton. And they had small dump trucks, cars on the tracks and they held approximately, I think it was one or two ton and they would load these and then they'd go up to the mill to be crushed and that's what they made the plaster out of. And he used to work there 12 hours a day. And this is where he saved the money. Then he finally came to Detroit and he got a job at the Ford Motor Company and that was just before, sometime before they started that five dollars a day and he worked at Ford's and he saved enough money to send for us kids. But this was during the war though, 1917, how were you able to get out through the minefields and all this? Well this... Slowly. It was a slow journey I assume. Yeah, it was very much so. I know during the time that we were on the boat, we had to get our life reserves on almost continuous almost every day because of the minefields. They didn't know if we were going to make it or not. You were not stopped by any German submarines? No, but we were stopped. We stopped, I guess orders from the captain or he had orders to stop and that was the thing. We were not boarded, to my knowledge, we were never boarded at any time. And of course it just like anything else, it took a little bit of time. Were there a lot of people on the boat at that time? Quite a number of people and we all landed at Ellis Island. Oh and how was that? Do you remember? It was a little bit rough because the only thing, each family was separated in rooms, was like chicken wire around it and you could see from one place to another and there you had to go through a complete physical examination. You had to undress completely and then... Yeah, at their station, not in that place, I mean they took you to different places and they would give you a complete physical examination to see if anything was wrong with you. I know my brother Bert, his eyes had become pink and they held up a day or two whether they were going to release him or not, but his eyes cleared up so everybody could go. So you had to stay overnight then? Oh we stayed overnight, I think we stayed there four nights. Four nights? Yeah. Because of his... Well, it was so many people and like anything else it takes time to process people, I don't care what anyone says. And they only had a certain amount of people, a certain amount of doctors and nurses and associates. Had you been vaccinated this week and previous for that? Yes, yes. Before we could leave we had to be vaccinated. How long before you remember that when you had this scar on your arm? Let's see. It's up there. We went to PTO, no we went to PTO and then we were vaccinated and then we continued on. I do not know what port we left, that I don't know. I never did ask and never inquired enough to find out. You probably left from Gothenburg though? Yeah, I'm quite sure that is right. So that was quite a long journey then, you stayed overnight. That's right. That's right. So you remember that very well. Yeah, I remember that very well. Being so far north, we never had fruit except at Christmas time, apples. I never saw an orange in my life, never saw a tomato. We come to New York, here are these beautiful red apples, what we thought. So we bought one and it took me 20 years to like a tomato. So they really put you off? Well, it was just one of those things. And none of you in the company could speak English or you were relying on? No, my aunt. She was able then to? She could comprehend and she could speak a little bit. She was the guide? That's right. So you were on a good surveillance then? And then you had a train coming out west? From New York to Detroit and we stayed at Lundgren's house. And was Lundgren, was there a relation to you? Yes, well it was my dad's oldest sister and her husband and their daughter. And Lundgren was a Swedish masseur and he worked at Ford Hospital at Highland Park Plant. He was the masseur there. And he was rated very, very highly. I know that he got a lot of accommodation from, what is that up in Minnesota? Mayo. Mayo Clinic. They sent in patients that couldn't walk. To him? Yeah. And he was able to and given him the time, he got him to walk again. He was very, very good. He was like a chiropractor also then? A Swedish masseur. He had a, from Sweden he had a degree and he was very good at it. Did he have a private practice? He did have, at his home he had a private practice. Did he work for the car companies also then? For the, only for the Ford Motor Company, that is all on his own. But at his home. And he had quite a number of patients that used to come to his house every day regularly. And that was your aunt's husband? That is correct. So you stayed in then for a few weeks? Well we stayed at the Kassmans for I think about no more than two weeks. Then my dad was able to rent a house. Kassman? Kassman. C-A-S-S-M-A-N. Well Lundgren was her name at that time. Her daughter married Kassman, I'm sorry. Was he later on a pastor? Who? This Kassman? No. He owned a tool shop. Oh I see. He owned a tool shop. He come from Sweden but I don't know, he come after we did. And he stayed at the Kassmans and then he married the daughter. And he was quite a tremendous individual. Your dad now, did he, had he rented a house then? Yeah, rented a house over on Lycaste. Close to where you worked? No, that was Lycaste on the east side of Detroit where Bauer-Roller-Bear, right across from Bauer-Roller-Bear and close to the Hudson Motor Car Company. And he worked in Highland Park, in Highland Park just outside of Detroit, in a suburb. He worked there. And he worked there until he was retired. So he had to travel a pretty good distance then? Yeah. By streetcar? By streetcar. He never owned a car so he rode the streetcar all the time. Of course we moved to different places but he still worked at Ford's. So he was able then to keep all your kids in the same house and raise you to? Until we all got married. Until we all got married. So you were seven then and you had to start school almost immediately? Immediately. And how was that? Did you get a little bit, well like everything else. I didn't realize it but of course we took a lot of ribbing and everything else. And of course I started with the Emanuel Lutheran Church when it was first built in 1918 actually. We used to go to the west side church and then when they decided to start an east side church we were the charter members. I'm still considered a charter member of Emanuel Lutheran Church. So your dad had become a member there before, previous then? Well when it opened, when it was dedicated, when it was made, when they built, dad helped dig the basement of the church. Oh I see. At the present site? No, no they were over on Beneteau between Charlevoix and Verner Highway. It was Waterloo at that time, Charlevoix and Waterloo. And like everything else they didn't have the money so the membership helped in building it. The contractors do it but it took a little bit of extra help also. And whoever could got out there and did what he could do the best. So you remember that one? Oh yes. Your dad helped also? Oh yes. We used to go down there, sit on the dirt and watch him. And the horses were dug by hand? Some of it or? Some of it was dug by hand. They used to have a team of horses with a scoop and they'd pull the dirt out and then when the dirt got loose, they'd take and shovel it out, whatever, so the scoop couldn't take it all, you know what I mean, the smaller parts up against the wall, why they didn't shovel that by hand. So there was no steam showers used at that time? No, no, none whatsoever. So and you went to Sunday school there and also summer school in teaching Swedish? No, no summer school. That's the one part that I regret that I did not keep the Swedish language. I wish I could speak, I can understand at times and I can answer at times but it takes a little bit of time for me to comprehend what they're talking about. So there was no Swedish service at the church at that time then? Oh yeah, every service was Swedish until a few later years then they had Swedish and English but it was all Swedish. I was confirmed in Swedish and the old time confirmation where the conferments sat up in front of the altar and the minister would this, this, this, a question and you had to pass it. Put you on the test. That's right. So but you had no trouble with the Swedish, I understand that. No, no, no, no. I could speak Swedish fluently at that time but as we grew older we get, at that particular time right after the war it was a little bit rough. Oh you're a square head, why don't you speak the American language you blockhead and everything else. You guard yourself. That's right. And you're ribbing. That's right. So. How about the neighborhood you lived in? Were there more Swedish families, there were young kids? There was not in that particular street but in that particular neighborhood where the church was there was a tremendous amount of Swedish family. This is what we were so close knit. We knew everybody, we could go to their house and which we did. And it was on walking distance from the church then? That is right. When we lived over in St. Gene I think nothing of walking to church, it was nothing, maybe three miles or better, it was no problem to walk to church and I used to have to go on Saturday for catechism class, there was nothing, we enjoyed it. So what you like to do you do, that's all. And you, were you one of the older kids in the family? I was the youngest. You were the youngest? I was the baby of the family. I see, and the oldest one was how old? Martin. Martin was ten years, ten years older than I was. So he didn't have to start school then? No, he finished school in Sweden, but he went to night school here because he wanted to learn and he got a degree working nights. This is how he got in the position that he was. What kind of degree, engineering degree? In the engineering degree, he was, he worked at the Hudson Motor Car Company. He started the Hudson Motor Car Company in the tool room and then he worked himself up where he got to where he was a little bit. Then Colonial Broach started. It was Lundell. Yeah, and they asked him to come with them and he worked for them. Then he worked for Michigan Tool for a while and then he went for Bulldog Electric and the various work that he did, from the schooling that he acquired, made him accessible to the work that they needed. And when you were together then, you spoke only English then, after a year or so? Well, not after a year or so. I, see I was confirmed in 1925 and I could speak Swedish fluently up until then. Did you, I mean, conversed in Swedish with other people too then? Yes, oh yes, oh yes, oh yes, oh yes. But it was after that, why, what I mean, I had my own friends. Nobody was a Swede where we lived. And of course, as you go to school, high school and everything else, why... Then you dropped it more and more. You dropped it more and more. How about your dad now? Did he like to keep... My dad, he could speak Swedish fluently. He had a little trouble with the English language. Because he was older when he came. That is right, that is right. Did he remarry or... No, I wish he would have, but he didn't. But you had to have a woman in the house? Housekeeper. Housekeeper. From Sweden? No, he maintained housekeepers and at that time, with five children, I don't think we were the best of kids. We fought with one another like everybody else does. So the housekeeper had a rough time then? That is right, that is right. That's for sure. You let her know you were alive. And you were ready then to... During the Depression, when the Depression started, you were ready to go out in the... Well, during the Depression, we all stayed together. We had a little rough time of it like so many people did. We were at the point where sometimes we had three meals and sometimes we didn't. So it was tough then? Yes, but we survived. We all did a little bit. We sold papers, we did this, we did that, and we all survived. And at that time, Ford wasn't paying that five dollars a day. It was before that. My dad worked and brought home what he could, but we existed, let's put it that way. So your dad came in on this five dollar a day though? Yeah, he came in. So he worked the whole time that was on until the Depression? That is right, after. It came after the five dollar a day came in. And it was a good wage compared to the rest? It was compared to two dollars and twenty cents, two dollars and thirty cents, and they jumped it to five dollars a day. So he was able to... At that time, things picked up just a little bit. But of course, then we were getting older and clothes were needed and everything else. And of course, like everything else, the older boys started to work a little more. So 1930, you were twenty then? That is right. What kind of work did you look for? Well, I had the benefit of going to Henry Ford Trade School. After high school? After high school. Well, before high school, during high school. And I went in the latter part of twenty-five, I was able to get an application in for the Henry Ford Trade School. And I went through the Henry Ford Trade School. I graduated in twenty-nine. And of course, like everything else, when you graduate from there, you think you know everything. Then you find out when you get out and work, you don't know anything. What did you learn at the State School? Tool making. Tool making? Yeah. And I went to work for different small tool shops. Did they pay the tuition for you? Where? At Ford's? Yeah. At Ford's, we had two weeks of shop and one week of school. You started in for, I think it was fifteen or sixteen cents an hour. And then depending upon how your grades were, from school and from shop, if you got good grades you got a raise. Your raise came through every, and the most you could get is nickel an hour raise. If you were real good in school and good in shop, you got a nickel an hour raise. And this is how your wages increased. By the time you graduated, you were making, oh I would say around forty, forty-five cents an hour. But you were still going to school. And didn't they check up on you? You couldn't skip any school subjects then? Oh no, that was just by school. It was very, very strict. And like the man told us, you're here to learn. And if you're not going to learn, don't waste our time. And it was a very good school, a very fair school, all boys. And it was very fair. There was no, it's just like he said, you're either going to be the best or you're going to be the worst. And if you're going to be the worst, I'm going to make you the best. That's the attitude they took. And those classes were filled with applicants all the time? Oh, all the time, all the time. It was a privilege even to go there. And the Ford Motor Company at that time took the attitude, we want a deserving boy. We want someone who needs it. Money didn't mean anything. You could have been the president of a company. You couldn't get your boy in there. They went strictly on the people that were deserving and needed it. That was it. So how long did you attend that school then? From 25 to 29. I see, for years. I graduated in 29. And then I could have stayed. I was very, very sorry. Some of you say, of course, hindsight is wonderful. I had a chance to go with Johansson Gage Block. And I met Mr. Johansson. He talked at our school quite often. And he said, why don't you come and work at our place, Johansson Gage? We asked you that. Oh, yes. And, oh, well, I can make more money going out here. Did he have a separate company? Yeah, they had Gage with the Ford Motor Company. Ford Motor Company had taken over. They bought the patent. That is right. And they were paying them a dollar an hour. Well, I could go out and work at a tool shop and get a dollar and a half, dollar sixty cents. And I couldn't see any sense working for a dollar an hour when I could make a dollar sixty. Of course, as I say, hindsight is wonderful. But I haven't missed any meals, let's put it that way. Johansson, now with his measuring block. Yeah. There was a revolution within the tool industry. I should say. I should say. Can you explain in a simple way what it really meant to the Ford industry at the time? Because they were the first ones to have it. You could take two pieces of steel and rub them together, and you could not pull them apart. It was impossible to pull them apart. That was how wonderfully they were lapped. Were they hand polished that way then? Yes. But how can a human... Well, by the instruments that they used, they were hand polished. Not by hand, but they're putting the block down on the lapping block. But you would think there would be different pressure when you do the... Yeah, but this is, they had to compensate it. The last, where they got the final thing, it was done by machine. But the first was done by hand. Then it was put down, and the machine would do it to the tolerance within a tenth of a tenth. What did they do for the Ford industry now, building cars? Were they better cars then when they first had it? I don't know, but the measurement was... More accurate. More precise. That is correct. Because they had a hold on it. That is right. For how long? Well, I still think that, oh, I don't know how many years they had Patton held, but I know he used to come to our place. He would take a punch, a center punch, and drive it through a regular piece of steel, and it would never dull the punch. It was really remarkable what they could do with it. And the steel come, the iron or the steel come from Sweden. For those measuring blocks. That's right. There was a special steel they had. And when he was here, Johansen, was he overseeing the whole operation then? What did he do? Let's put it... He was the supervisor. He was the man in charge. He would come down and look at the different things, but as far as doing any manual work, he did very little. But, I mean, he instructed, and he told them what had to be done, what could be done and couldn't be done. So he was pretty high up there with Henry Forden? Oh yes, very much so, very much so. He was very highly thought of. We respected him. Of course, being a Swede, I wouldn't mind. Did that make any difference? You had any preference? If you had started with him, you think they would have... I probably would have... I would have acquired a tremendous amount more knowledge than I have at the present time. And like anything else, when you're young, you look at that almighty dollar, it seems, and I can do this and I can do that. You think the Swedish immigrants looked for that dollar more than anybody else? Because they were not used to high wages? No, that is right. No, that didn't do that. But as we go along, we get Americanized, the dollar starts to look bigger. But you talk to any tool shop, if a Swede walks into the place that has the knowledge, he will get preference. If he's a tool maker, he will get preference over almost everybody else. Why is that though? Because of the knowledge that they've acquired, because of the type of people that they are. This is my conception of it. I don't say that that's true in every place, but I know they're highly thought of, highly skilled and the people that took the time and the patience to do it the way it should be done. So you had a good reputation for the Swedes? That is right. You could walk into any tool shop, if they needed someone you would... That is right, if they had the position open, you could, yes. They can see quite fast, or if you are a good mechanic or not? It takes about an hour at the most. All you got to do is let the man open up his toolbox, buy the machine and start. And of course now the machines have become so automated and everything else. I've been in the business a long time, I just wonder now how a person can prove himself with all these machines, you push buttons and everything is done. Of course the machine has to be set up, but it's still, there are a lot of shops that are still in this town that go by the old, older methods. They can't afford the newer machines. We're talking about a machine that costs a half a million dollars, quarter of a million dollars, and what small tool shop with two or three men can afford equipment like that? Now we have one man that you would be very interested in talking to, it's Gustav Stadler. Gustav Stadler is a Swiss, but he married a Swede. And he sells machinery from Sweden, and he's the most interesting individual that I've ever met. Because he goes for all precision instruments, and he sells them from Sweden. He also has this new machine that he sells in the country, has exclusive sales distribution of it for straightening. I don't know if you know about that piece of equipment or not, they can take a ring gear after it's been hardened, and within ten seconds they can make it absolutely round, the machine. And this is Swedish invention? That is right, and the Swedes have a complete patent on the thing. And Ford, General Motors, and Warner Gear, they all have the machines, but they're all crying for more, but they can't make them fast enough. So he is a good supplier, Mr. Stadler. Yeah, yeah. He married a Sweden, sent him good machines, he got the best. And he's, oh I'm telling you, yeah he owns Johansson Tool now. He took over after that. Yeah, well Johansson is now out of the picture. Well he's dead. And well, he's dead, yeah. But he went back to Sweden though after he left here, didn't he? Yeah, Johansson, yes. But I'm saying now Johansson is, it was up, the company could be bought, but there's no production in the machine, there's no machine, nothing. So he didn't sell the shop then to Henry Ford, only the patent. That is right. And he was continuing on his own. That is right. That's right. Ford supplied with the machinery and everything else he needed. But how about now with all those Swedes here, and some of them very ingenious, didn't they start to try to do something, a pirate measuring block? Did they all come here in Detroit? Yes, they did, and some of them were successful, some of them weren't, and they're like everything else. If you make something good, somebody's going to try to do just a little better. Were they successful or? Somewhere. Could they get away with it though? Yes, because a patent's only good for so long, unless you improve it. It's only good for so many years. Then you must have an improvement and patent that. That is right, there was no infringement. Now anyone can make them, anyone. But you need the Swedish steel to be... Well, from my little knowledge of it, I think so, but that isn't saying that they can't take a piece of steel and make it that way. You were talking about the mechanic coming with his toolbox. Everybody owned his own toolbox. He always done that? Always, always. How could you afford of starting out like an apprentice and buy your toolbox with the measuring blocks? One at a time. One at a time. See, they had me for a trade school. You need all the measuring blocks, you need the whole thing though. Not all the jobs, no. Not all the jobs you do not. But the thing is here, when I went to trade school, I'm speaking from my experience, we could buy mics and gauges and dolphin things and tools. Ford would sell it to us and take it out of our wages as we went along. They would keep track so you didn't get overboard where you owed more than what you were making. This is where I started from. And the first job I went to, there was a lot of tools that I was lacking, but if I needed them I had to work a little bit and buy one. But how were you, when you're talking about precision, crankshafts and different boards and heat and cold and everything is expanding and make it, how could you keep the tools up to snuff? Did you keep them in a cool box or in the same temperature? No, no. Because here, like everything else, as we progressed along these lines, our tools were sufficient. Now it's something different. What I mean, you have to have all different types of tools now, which are much more expensive. And the companies supply them because they want to know if the tools are accurate or not. And they keep a check on them. So the mechanic doesn't... He doesn't own all that. He has the basic tools, the mics, the gauges and things like that. But the other precision instruments are owned by the company. And the company is all the time checking those to make sure when they go back into the crib they are rechecked to make sure that nothing happened to them. Didn't they do it years ago? On some of the tools, but not all of them, no. We used to have to check our mics and gauges. Side two, continuation with Gustav Westerlund, Warren, Michigan. Side two. So you started for the Ford Motor Company, as a tool and dime maker? That's right. Well, I started in as an apprentice. And I wound up as an apprentice. Because Ford's, when you go to Ford Trade School, you had, besides your schooling every third week, then you had to go to night school afterwards. In other words, you worked out in the shop. I used to work out in the shop, out in the main tool room. But then we still had classes in the evening or on Saturday, which you had to continue on before you could get... Now when you've been there for quite a while, you went out and you worked and you got your card that you were a tool maker, or supposed to be a tool maker. So you had four years then, first from 1925 to 1929, at the Ford School. That is right. And then you continued as an apprentice. That is right. That is right. So you had about seven, eight years of schooling. That is right. Well, schooling, yes. Schooling was the most important thing. Ford stressed mathematics. And this is the one thing that they pressed upon all the time. And it was easy for you? You had no trouble with... I was struggling all the time, let's put it, be honest about it. I was struggling all the time. But like everything else, good Lord kept this, kept looking for me and I was able to squeeze through. So the Depression didn't hit you too hard and in other words, you had always something to do. Well... But no high wages at that time. No high wages, no. And I went to school and of course like everything else, the money that I got from trade school, I was like all the young fellows, oh boy, oh boy, I got to pay. It was much. But let's go out, you know what I mean, have a good time, you know. And I guess some of the fellows were very, very strict about that. Myself, I was a little... Well, I liked to have a good time also. Well, when you had good time, what were you doing then? What were you spending the money on? Well, I would go to a show, go to a show and we'd go to picnics and we'd contribute for this entertainment or that entertainment. And drinking, no, that wasn't the thing at that time. There was no temperance organization in Detroit. Oh, I'm sure there was temperance organization, but the group that I went with, we didn't, we just, fortunate we did not go for drinking and oh, we sometimes we thought we did, but depression and that prohibition was on for quite some time. And we'd sneak a bottle of beer, homemade beer or something like that and we thought we were really on top of the world, you know. But how about the rest of the people that came from Sweden in the 20s? They were, some of them, quite heavy drinkers. Well, and then most of the people that I know were very, very good in what they'd done. They started companies and they were very, one of the fellows that I know very well, Oscar Lundin, he got to be treasurer of General Motors and when he went to college, when he got through college, he didn't have a job. He went out selling soap from door to door and his dad was so mad. He said, I put you through college and here you are selling soap. But that was just one of the learning experiences, let's put it that way. So his father, he came from Sweden? Yes, Lundin, yeah. And was he working on the assembly line? No, no, he was, he was one of the men that started in real estate and he'd done very well in real estate. And I don't know all of what he did before that, but I know he was in real estate most of his life. When they started in real estate, when they started that, was the money necessary to start up something like that or was it just the idea to get started? A good idea to get started, that's right. That's right, have a lot over here. Somebody wanted to sell, so you come and see you and I got a lot over here I think you'd like and of course being with the Swedish church, people were always trying to better themselves just a little bit. Well, yes, I think that's going to be a nice piece of property and so. And then the commission. That's right, and that's how it started out. Was Lundin a member of the Emmanuel church? Oh yes, oh yes. Was he still a member, Oskar Lundin? Oskar Lundin, he's not a member of the church, but he contributes to the church in memory of his mother and his dad. He's very generous on it. He's retired now, isn't he? Oh yes, yes. He's retired now. So he went to college? Oh yes. So to go to college at that time. It was very expensive. It was expensive for the time. Very expensive. As far as we were concerned, right now it would be very, very cheap, but in those days it was very expensive. Under the circumstances, it was impossible. That is right. So none of your brothers and your sister were not able to go to college? My brother went. The oldest one? The oldest one, yes. But he went to night school and he went to night school faithfully and this is how he acquired his knowledge. And the rest of them, did they also? No, my second oldest brother, he worked for Hudson Motor Car Company for quite a number of years. He retired from there. My second brother, why, he was quite a, no, the third oldest, he was quite a brilliant individual, but he became sick and he became paralyzed. And Polio or? No, it wasn't polio. It was a disease of the hips. He was slowly turning to stone and they couldn't do anything for him. In later years, a doctor, a Peabody from Boston, said that he could operate on him and get him so he could walk again. And he was in Harper Hospital for quite some time. The doctor had operated on him and I got a telephone call and said that he better come because he passed away. He died of pneumonia in the hospital and Dr. Peabody, it's the first time I've ever seen a doctor cry. He says I could have had him on his feet within a year. But he was a very brilliant individual. So how old was he when he died? He must have been in his early 30s. And like everything else, time passes. During the Depression, did your father own a house? No, he never owned a house. So he kept working though? All the time. He was not laid off too long? No, he was laid off for a little while. And then when the Social Security came in, he was at that age where they couldn't keep him and they couldn't give him Social Security very well. It was one of those peculiarities. So he was laid off and he received nothing from the Ford Motor Company. Was there a union then when he was working? No. QAW? No, nothing. They were starting, but there was nothing there. I mean, he received absolutely nothing. I think he got around $25 or $50. It's remarkable how old people could survive. Some of them were alive 30, 40 years after they quit working and no pension, nothing. That's right. What was the kids' set up? Dad was not a man afraid of work. And he would work. If he could get work, he would do anything. He wasn't too proud to work. And it was one of those things that the boys, they were working at the time, and we all pitched in a little bit. I know I didn't pitch in too much, but the kids, the other kids did. And we got along. We existed. Did you stay home then until the Hull or you left your home? When I left my home, was it 19—I have to stop and think now—1930. 1932. I think it was 1932 when I left. This is when you met your fiancée? Yeah. Luella Moore. Was she of Swedish background? No. English. English. What did your dad say then when you brought home? My dad, anything we'd done was something to do. Dad was not one to criticize. It's your life. You do what you wish. I can't tell you what to do. If you need something, you come and tell me, and I'll see what I can do for you. So he was supportive of you? That is right. Anything we did, anything we did. He was never critical. How did you meet your future wife? Well, my future wife, it's like anything else. When you're younger, how do you meet your wife? I mean, like anything else. I mean... You had to dance, go to church. That is right. But she didn't go to your church, though. No, no, no, no. She joined our church after we were married, or when we were getting married. But you were out some day, and you just happened to... That's right. One thing leads to another. And she was born in Sheboygan. Yeah, Sheboygan. Working down in Detroit then. Yes. And Lutheran minister, he, Augustana minister married you. Oh, yes. Dr. Olsen. Why didn't you go to her church? Or you were not a member of a church down here, maybe? Oh, yes. She belonged to a different church, but I'm a stubborn, bullheaded Swede. And like now, I live quite a ways away from the church, but it's my church. That's the way I feel about it. I'm very, very close to the church. You are on the council also. I've been on the council, and right now, I was treasurer for a few years. Now I take care of the collection, and I see that it gets to the bank, and somebody else took my job over, which I'm happy for. I was hoping somebody would come along. We have a very intelligent individual now that takes care of the bookkeeping and everything. I used to do all of it, and I didn't know bookkeeping from cutting grass out there. But it's something that you just get into, and you do. And it was a struggle, but fortunately, I got through it. Why are you so connected with the church? You went in from the beginning as a children's member. That is right. And you saw it move up to Chandler's Park Drive. That is right. That's right. And so you've been very active then with the church. I've tried to be, yes. And then you've seen some changes over the years. Oh, quite a number of changes. That's right. Now, like everything else, I guess it's a good Christian attitude. We have quite a number of blacks in the church now, quite a number. So that means the neighborhood, it was also a Swedish neighborhood? It was all Swedish. When it moved up? Lundin's used to live just four doors away from where the church is now, Lundin family. And there was a lot of Swedes around there. But as the black element started to move in, they all moved away. But needless to say, the people that did move away, the majority of them, they still contribute very generously to the church. They're still members of the church, and their contributions are tremendous. It's unbelievable. So when they moved away, they went all kinds of directions? All directions. There was no way to relocate the church once more? No, no, no. And we have such a beautiful church now. What could you do? I mean, to build a church like that nowadays, it would cost a couple million dollars. And our biggest problem is now the parking facilities. That's our biggest problem. How about your children and the rest of the members, offspring? Do they contribute to the church, or do they join? No. My children, they all go to different churches. They marry into different nationalities? That is right. That is right. And I told my children, as long as you go to church, I don't care what church you go to, as long as you believe in the good Lord and God Almighty. That's my mainstay. And they go, and they bring their children up accordingly. That's all I ask of them. I never tell my children what to do. I go after my dad for that. You talk to that, though. That's right. Leave them independent of their decisions, only for advice. That is right. And you have had Pastor Truitt for many, many years. Twenty-five, twenty-six years. Twenty-six years, and he retired... Six years ago. Six years ago. Six years ago. And we didn't think we'd ever replace him. And of course, that was... We thought so. And the church would go downhill, but Pastor Heil came in, and like everything else, he grows on you. You start to like him. Let's put it that way. Although he's a German, and when he first came in, he said, you know, he says, I don't look at these things that you're doing now. I don't approve of them. But he says, I'm not going to raise an eyebrow until I know something about it. Well, now as the time has gone on, he says, I marvel at the way the congregation is, because it's a close-knit family. And the ladies, they're the backbone of the church, as far as I'm concerned. So your wife became a good Lutheran, and a hard worker also. That's right. Backing you up. That's for sure. But is it Swedish anymore? I mean, the Swedishness has disappeared. You cannot push that anymore. Not anymore, but we do. We try to have... Like the Lucia. We used to have the Lucia every year. And now... Last year was the first year not to have the Lucia. First year. Because we were concerned. How do we pick a young girl? We don't have the white, white young girls anymore to be a Lucia. Would you want to put a colored Lucia up there? No, nothing against the colored. But for the old-timers in church, if they saw a Swedish Lucia, how would they feel? And we have to look both ways on this thing. We have to be very diplomatic. So we just said, well, we won't have a Lucia. It's a terrible thing to say, but that's exactly the facts of it. So the percentage is more black than... Well, not more black, but quite a few. But they're not as active as the white members are. Although we try to encourage them, some of them in the council, and they're starting more and more. But it's a slow process. It's something you don't do overnight. Are they living in the neighborhood then? Yes. Are they professional people living in the neighborhood? Some are professional, school teachers and lawyers. Music? Music and... Good singers. Yeah, very, very good. Very good. So you see, what I mean, this is something you can't do. You can't walk into one door and into the other door and say, this is what we're going to do. You have to take it slow and easy so you don't offend anybody. And then we think of our old members and the members that are so generous in their contribution. You do not want to offend them in any way, shape, manner or form. Yet, they don't take offense at the colored people. They sit alongside them. We used to have our lutefisk dinner every year. But the colored people don't eat lutefisk. No, no. They don't. Not the white people. A lot of the white people don't eat it. But now we haven't got that anymore. But we do have Swedish at the end of the year. They have their Christmas. And that's... In Swedish? In Swedish, they say 90% Swedish. And all the... Do the colored people come then to attend? No, not today. Not... Well, they do a little bit. But they're coming more and more. It's more and more. But they go in for the Swedish thing from Sweden, the things that they sell from Sweden. They will buy that and they will support it in that way. And so... How about the food now? Do you put on any smörgåsbord on the church? Not anymore. We used to. The people that could prepare a smörgåsbord, I suppose they are all now in the young ones. I stood last Wednesday for Pastor Truett's wedding. You had in the church? Yeah. I ate in church. About 200 people for dinner. We have a wonderful lady over there, Anna Landstrom. I don't know if you had the film. Yeah, I met her today. Well, she is the cook. She is the boss of the kitchen. Yeah, she looks like it. And when she gets in the kitchen, you do what she says. And if you're in the kitchen doing anything and she isn't attending, you better leave everything the way it was and clean or she'll let you know about it. She don't mind. And she's the most wonderful individual. Everybody likes her just for that particular reason. She is the boss. She lets you know. And she's not within reason. Everything she says is absolutely so. So she is a good chef? She is very, very good. Very good. If you want something good to eat, you've got to see Anna Landstrom. She don't believe in all this newfangled stuff. It's all work done, I thought. That's right. But the Swedes are quite alike Anna Landstrom, though, in different ways. I mean, very stubborn. No, well. And they are set. That's right. And there's very, I don't know about this. She's laughing over there. I don't know. She's living with the Swedes, stubborn Swedes. She's been with the Swedes for so many years. And it's hard to bend their traditions. That is right. And church has always been a tradition with the Swedes, I think. That's right. Very much so. Very much so. But that's more so the religion. They've got to be the same. Don't change the singing. Don't change the ritual. Well, we've gone through that. And we don't. It's changed so tremendously, the songs. But not only in your church, though. I know that. All of them. It's all over in different churches. That's right. That's right. And we realize that because we go to churches up north when we go on our vacation. They used to be, I guess, Scandinavian, let's put it that way. But now they have to use the same hymnals as we do, and they sing the same songs as we do. And a lot of them we don't like because we don't understand them. We don't follow the music. We like to get to that old-fashioned song that we knew when we were kids. That's right. So. It's a tradition. You've got to be bent over. That is right. Changed over in one way. How did they like this week when the pastor started to do the cross and the sign? And the sign of the cross, I mean. No objections yet. There was no objection to that? No objection. No, not much when he makes the sign of the cross. They have. Not now. No. They've gotten used to it. And he'd done it in a very quiet way. And did he ask you about it, like the council, the permission to do it? No, no, no, no. It was just something that he started very slowly and not at every time. But now it's getting to be. It's just something that has grown on you. And the colored people, now, do they have the same fundamentals, believe, like the Lutherans? In other words, are they Lutherans or are they Baptists? I think they lean towards the Baptists because when they sing, they've got to get that beat going, you know. So I found we like it. We like it. You know what I mean? You can't help it when they – our choir director is black. He's very, very good. But he'll get some of those Baptist songs. No, you didn't hear him. He's on his vacation. But he'll get that in there and you can't help it. You look around at some of the people that are diehard Swedes and you can see their foot moving up and down. Well, whatever. They can't help it. They can't help it. That's right. So we enjoy their music. So who are we to say? That's a good blend then. That's right. How about the communion every Sunday? Has there offended some Swedes? Yes, quite a number of them. Because the custom in Sweden was just once a year. Oh, we had it once a month here at Emmanuel. You know, going every week to once a year. Well, we used to have it the first Sunday of every month. And that was – then he started it and there were a lot of complaints about it. But he just kept on. He kept on. He kept on. Now I would say that 80 percent of the Swedes accept it. There are a few that still will only go on the first Sunday of the month. I don't care what they do. And it's just something that takes time. If you have patience, you can do anything. I don't have the patience. But you are not surprised by any move. So it's always discussed at meetings and so on. I'm not surprised by anything anymore. Nothing surprises me. Nothing surprises me. No, but he takes it up to the council first before you do something. Yes, yes. He has to. That's right. And he says, we're going to try this. Well, I don't think it'll work. Well, we won't know until we try. Now let us try. We'll try it for so long. By the time that so long gets there, it's a matter of fact. But the Swedes, they have a tendency not to complain. They just leave or they don't say anything. They're very quiet. They're very quiet. They don't discuss anything in the open. No, very few do. But they'll discuss it to me. They'll discuss it to someone else, their friend. You can get the feel of it. You get the feel of it. And through that, it's the only way that it can be gotten. So you try to, well, now, let's try it and see. You might like it. Let's not fight it. Yes, it's not easy and the church is needed. Oh, that's for sure. So your father, then, he respected the church and was a faithful member? Oh, yes. Oh, yes, very much so. Dad used to look down his nose if we didn't go to church. Was he on the board? No. No. Dad never was on the board. No, never. Never. No. How about the rest of your other children or your brothers and your sisters? My oldest, what do you mean, as far as church? Yeah, I mean, were they on the council serving? My oldest brother was. But the other two, Alex, he never could because he couldn't get around. He was so crippled up. And my brother, Bert, why, he started to go to another church for quite a while. And then he got married and the wife and him, they went to a Lutheran church, but not to our church. It's like everything else. When you move, you get married, you move, why, you have to satisfy the wife also. Did the Emmanuel church cooperate with the Baptists, Swedish Baptists and the Methodists and the Covenants? Oh, we have them. The Chancellor pulpits, for instance? They've done that. They've done that on occasion, yes. Did they do it early, though, in the 20s and 30s, if you remember? In the 20s and 30s? Then they were divided. Then they were divided. Then they were divided, that's right. Absolutely. No. No visiting then? No, no visiting. No, no, no, no way. So what did you find out now about the Swedes, Mrs. Wesselund? Did you learn to live with them? Oh, they're fine people. Fine people. How about customs now, cooking, for instance? Do you cook English, plum pudding or lutefisk? I worked in the kitchen, but I worked, I washed dishes and did things on the side. I've learned to help, but never to take over in the kitchen. I never come up to their level in cooking. You mean Anna Lundström will not permit? I can work with Anna. Anna and I get along real well, but I'm very good at doing dishes. Well, she helps. And I help, but not my recipes. I do what Anna does. We have a dishwasher and everything else, but she helps. She helps in the kitchen. Yeah, I help, that's all. I can make some of the meatballs. She makes the recipe up, and I can turn them over in the pan very carefully, but I really don't do the cooking. I only help. But she really looks like a typical Swedish woman. She's the most gracious lady, though, and she's got the biggest heart. She's got a heart all bigger than herself. I'm not taking against her. If there's anything, anybody hurt or anybody sick? She has respect with her. Oh, I'm telling you. She goes around and visits everyone at their age and takes money from the church, a gift of money, I don't know, five dollars, whatever it is, on their birthdays, and she visits the sick people. And she goes down to Lutheran Haven every week and she sets the hair for the ladies down there, and then they have another, the Witten. No, they don't have that, honey, they have the post-op. They used to. That's what I'm saying, they used to. And she used to go down there to the other nursing home, and she'd go down there once a week and set their hair and everything else. She's doing a good job. That's what she does. Oh, yes. She's very, very good. I'm not taking against her. No. No, I was just talking about her. No, I'm just saying, she's just tremendous as far as we're concerned. She can probably set the foot down if it comes to cooking. Oh, yeah. Don't mess her kitchen up. Pots and pans have all different places. We've got them marked, that's where they go, and they better be clean. We respect her for it, though, because that's the only way you can have a clean place. Did you join any other organizations, like singing societies? No, I belong to the Swedish Club. I was president of the Swedish Engineers for three years. And like anything else, the Swedish Engineers, we've gone down. Our membership now is down to the low ebb. Like everything else, we are trying now, with the Swedish Club being built, we'll have a meeting place, and we're hoping that we will generate a little more interest in it. We never had a place of our own where we could meet. What did you do then when you had your meetings? Once a month or? We used to have them once a month. And we used to get different speakers from the Ford Motor Company, from Chrysler's, from General Motors, speakers on different things. We've had doctors in there speaking and trying to get some interest. But like everything else, people got so busy, we just had a tough time trying to get the people to come to the meetings. And so our membership declined. We got older, we didn't get too many new ones in, and the older fellows got to the point, like myself, we have a tough time getting around. And this was only for Swedish engineers? Well, we called it the Swedish Engineers, but we had Norwegians, we had Finns. Scandinavians? Scandinavians. But they had to be engineers or? No, they did not have to be engineers. As long as they worked in that type of trade. And we have people that are doctors that belong in dentists. And we were going for the Swedes, regardless of what their background was, as far as if they were someone that... Scandinavian? Scandinavian, and we were interested in their membership. So you didn't belong to Vasa? No. Swedish Council or Detroit? No. We belonged to the Fram Lodge, and that's about the extent of it. The Vasa Lodge? The Fram Lodge. Your dad did belong to that? No, no. My dad did not belong to anything. He didn't believe in that. Except the church. Did he go back to Sweden at any time? No, I wish he would have. How about you, now? Did you... I went back in 1975, the first time. You had your wife? Yeah. That's when we got to see the church that I was baptized in. Is your home still there? It is still there, to the best of my knowledge. The people that bought it from us were still living there back in 1975. I did not find a home because I wasn't... They've changed so much. And we lived outside on a farm. And my brother, oldest brother, found them. He got to talk to the people and he took pictures of the home. We have pictures of the home and everything else, but I wasn't able to find it. I hope to go back and be able to find the house. I'm quite sure that I can now that I know a little more about it. When I was over there, I thought, oh boy, all I got to do is go over there and find it. And there's the house. But they've changed things now. They've built up a few things around there. Were you able to see your home, I mean the landscape? Did it look the same as when you left? No, no, no, no. Because we lived on top of a hill and our property ran right down to the water. And that water, now I understand the state has built a... The Swedish state has built a big park on the property right by the water that used to be part of our property. Didn't the church look the same? Church is beautiful. I think it's more beautiful than I can remember it. Do you have any contacts with Sweden, cousins or any? No. You all left the United States? Yeah. The last one was my oldest brother, Martin, his wife. She passed away in Sweden. We went over to see her in 75, just before she passed away. I don't know, I just...