 This is cassette two, side one, a continuation with the Corbin Johnson. Oh, good. Now you all? Bettendorf, Iowa. Davenport, Iowa. Or, no, that was Bettendorf. Oh, Bettendorf. Yeah, there again. Your dad, now, did he have any political interest? Not especially so. No? Was he a Republican or? Oh, yes, he was a Republican. Oh, yes. Why was he a Republican? Well, I guess he didn't want to be a Democrat, that's all I can say. There must have been a reason, or did the rest of the Swedes? Well, we had Sandburg across the street, there were Republicans, but we had some up on the hill, there were one or two up there who were not. But he was Republican? Yeah. Did you continue in the same pattern, or? Oh, I stayed in the same pattern, yeah. I've been Republican all my life, sure. I don't think so. But he was a worker, your dad, though? Yeah, Pop was a wayman in the coal mine. At first, he mined coal. Then, afterwards, he became the wayman, what they called the company wayman. He kept track of, I've been down the mine when these coal cars would come through and they'd have numbers on it, 73 or 22 or whatever, he'd take those numbers, he'd weigh the car, and the car had on the side of it what the car weighed empty. Then he'd take the weight, less the weight of the car, and that's what the miner got paid for mining the coal. Dad, tell about the time the sirens went off at the mine, and you were so afraid. Oh, gosh, yeah. The smoke just poured up that. There was a, the elevator that hauled all this coal, one went up and one came down, alternating, you know. And the sirens blew, and I went down, and my God, the smoke was just pouring out of that elevator. But normally, the miners came to work and left from work in that elevator. And I was just frantic, because I knew Pop was down there in what they call the third vein, that was the lowest vein of coal there. So, I was there all afternoon, about 9 o'clock he came up, they had to climb up ladders, this ladder, this ladder, up to the top. And then finally Pop came, and it was a great relief to me, because I was scared. I was only about, oh, 10 years old, and Pop was down there, and I had that smoke billowing out of that mine, you know, I thought. And then some of these jackasses, the miners would come over and say, oh, your father's gone now, instead of saying a word of sympathy or something, oh, your father's gone, he can't live through this. He did, though. Pop was very active in Swedish circles, Skandia Society, he was president there for many years, and he led the Swedish choir himself. Was he a singer also, like you? Yeah, Pop sang, but he also played the organ, he was self-taught on the foot pedal organs, pump, you know, and play it, but he played in the church and he led the choir, he could read music and everything, he never had a lesson in his life. So he was interested in the church? Oh, yes, very much so. Mother, too? Oh, yeah, Mom, too. Mom sang in the choir, that's where she met Pop. And she belonged to Syteringen? Yes, she was a brother to Gjorde, you know. Brita Kaspina Edling, she came from southern Sweden, Pop came from northern Sweden. Northern, Gjorde. Yeah. So then when you moved to Davenport, did you join the Grey's Lutheran Church then? Presbyterian. Oh, Presbyterian. Why? Well, there was no Swedish Lutheran Church there that I know of, close by. Our mother was a Grey's Lutheran. Your mother, no, I didn't get her name. Thelma Pope Johnson. Thelma Pope Johnson. P-O-P-E. Pope, that's an unusual name. That's English. Her father was English and her mother was German. I see. Smiles. And her remaining name was? P-O-P-E, Thelma Pope. Thelma Smiles Pope. And she was born in? Davenport. In Davenport. So she belonged to the Presbyterians? Yes. Right. First Presbyterian Church on Kirkwood Boulevard. That's where we lived all our lives. There's still a member over there. We were both married there, Barbara and I were both married. So there you didn't have any need for your Swedish confirmation in Sunday school? No. No. My husband and I belong to the Lutheran Church here in Moline and our children have both been, both of our children have been confirmed Lutherans. The First Lutheran or? No, we're a Trinity Lutheran. Our daughter happened to be confirmed at First Lutheran. But we're Trinity Lutheran. Yes, the politics now, did you also? I've been a Republican all my life. All your life. Well, you've been a businessman, so you might have a cause to be a Republican. But your dad, now he worked for? He worked as a waitman at a coal mine. Yes, I know, but shouldn't he have been a Democrat? Well, he was a Republican. He was a Republican. It's funny because all of his children are Republicans. They are. No change, no discussion about it. Once in my life I voted for a Democrat and of all people it was Kennedy. That was a bad move. I just wonder, the reason they weren't Republican was because all the Swedish people were Republican. Grandpa Olson was a confirmed Democrat. Democrat, that's true. Because Dad and Grandpa used to argue up in that farmhouse. Yeah, and Roosevelt. And Grandma would not vote because if she voted Democrat, she was voting against her son. If she voted Republican, she was voting against her husband. So Grandma voted once in her life and outside of that Grandma never voted again. Because Grandpa and Dad used to have heated, heated conversations. Was he a populist then up in South Dakota? He was a Democrat. Gosh, I don't know what a populist is. No, but he was something close to the Democrats up there with the farmers. Well, he was a Democrat and I was a Republican, but we never fought about it. He was a Roosevelt man, is who he was, and my dad did not like Roosevelt. So there were some heated discussions. Very heated. But Grandma and Grandpa went to the Swedish... Well, heated between two dum-bums. They went to the Swedish Lutheran Church up in South Dakota. At Eton. Between Mitchell and there. Oh yes, it was out in the country. And we used to go and enjoy the ice cream socials. My Grandma made the world's most wonderful white cake. The best in the world. What did she say about the years up in South Dakota? Were they as dry in the... Oh, they were hard years. They were hard years. The drought and the dust storms and the... Grasshoppers. Grasshoppers. She went all through that in the 30s, and I remember myself... Oh, I remember you. When we would be up there. It was very desolate. But they stayed during the Depression up there. Yes. Sad. The truth. They came back here in the late 40s, wasn't it, Dad? Yes. Well, I brought the farm down. About the... Forty-six. Forty-five, forty-six, something like that. Because they were living in Bloomington when I... Well, Grandpa... Died in Bloomington. Grandpa died in Bloomington, and that was... Grandpa died in, what, 1946? Didn't I buy the farm to get them off the farm? It was after 42, because I graduated in 42. So, sometimes... So, they were living alone on this farm then, because his children was always grown up and flown over. Right. Year after year, they had nothing but drought up there. They never got a... That's why I wonder how they could survive. Well, they just survived because the son sent the money to pay the taxes and one thing or another on the farm. Grandpa Olson didn't want to leave the farm, and Mom wanted to leave the farm, because they did nothing but work up there and got no pay for it. Everything would be looking green and fine, and then the hot winds would come and destroy things there in two or three days, just burn up everything. And the grasshoppers. Oh, gosh, the grasshoppers. They've done egg money. Grandma would take the eggs in, and she'd buy her groceries. She'd take the eggs in to the little store in Ethan, and a crate or two of eggs, and the cream, you see, and milk. The cream, they sold the cream, too. They sold all that. I remember I paid the taxes on the farm. Once a week, we would go in and take in and get the little bit of groceries. We were young then, we didn't have the tax money. Everything was frugal, but Grandma did canning. There wasn't a lot to can, but everything they had was good. They had wonderful potatoes, marvelous potatoes, and Grandma canned pork. They always had pigs, and they had their cows for milk. And beef. She'd make chetful out of it and put it in can that and jars, and she would can meat, little chunks of meat. And her seasoning was marvelous meat cook. But do you think she was so stern and commandeering? Was Olsen stronger in his beliefs and to stay there than hers of leaving? No, Mom, I think Mom kind of dominated. Yeah, but why couldn't she move away then and tell him to quit? I don't know what the hell, but I mean, to go into the midst of it some way. Grandpa Olsen was domineering, too, dear. Is that what I mean? Maybe he was just leader. Yes, he was. They were both what's known as two stubborn Swedes. Two stubborn Swedes. But they stuck together, though. Oh, yeah, they loved each other. But I know Grandpa Olsen said something, boy, if he said, don't go near those cows, you didn't go near those cows. He was that way, too. I remember that. I think Mom kind of ruled him, though. Grandpa Olsen was a pussycat. He was a Swede. In some ways. I adore him. But I think that he was very stubborn, too. Yeah, he didn't want to leave the farm. He liked it. And even after he had left the farm, he said to my dad one day, oh, Carl, and of course my dad was a businessman. He was already in the hatchery business. Oh, he had been for years. But he said, Carl, let's go back up and live on the farm, didn't he, Dad? Did he really? Yes. He was homesick for the farm. Dad said, oh, no. Well, and his children were there. His daughters. But you were able to buy the very least of them. No, whatever he asked for the farm, I paid for it, because I had made money in the hatchery business, so I had some money. I had invested in land in Florida and land in Los Angeles. So I had money in. Oh, I see. You had already. Yeah, I was already self-sufficient. But did the land after the Depression in North Dakota or South Dakota, no, it was South Dakota, no. It was very reasonable at that price, because a lot of them had the money. Yeah, I think he paid only $5,000 for the farm. But that was in 1947 or so. That was bombing through there, wasn't it? It was, 45, 46. Grandma, Grandpa, did they live on the farm before I was born? I'll tell you when it is. Yeah, they lived on the farm before I was born. I think they got married, like, in 21 or 22. They weren't married until I was a couple years old when they were married. So it was about 22. Or 23. We're giving our ages away. But the last time we went up to the farm, I remember it so well, was Thanksgiving when I was a senior in college out at Iowa State. And Barb and you and Mother stopped and picked me up. We drove on up to South Dakota and spent Thanksgiving weekend on the farm, and that was the last time I was on it. And the following spring, probably, it was sold. So Olsen, how many years did he have the farm before your grandmother moved up there? I don't know. I have no idea. Oh, anyway. Grandpa Olsen? So he had it all his life? No, no. He was from Louisville. He was from Louisville. And he married and went up there. The first 70 years, I think, Lily Hothold was Lily. Lily was born on the farm. Lily was younger than you, I think, there. Oh, yes. She was, sure. He'd probably been up there since 1920, I'd say, maybe. Year after year, they'd have good crops coming up. The corn was doing fine, the oats and the wheat doing good, and then everything would stop, and the heat would come and just bake everything. And the grasshoppers would eat all the corn stalks. And the trees died. It was terrible. But then they got a row of government trees, the WPA or the Shelterville, it was called. The government put a row of trees up on Breckwell's Farm. Remember that? Sure. Those ground winds would hit those trees and push the air up and up so they didn't burn up the corn and the wheat and the oats. Everything would look fine until the summer came, and then everything blasted and burned up. About, oh, I'd say probably 15 or so years ago, I was driving out to California with my three children. We went by way of the farm. I wanted the kids to see the farm. So we drove up there and went into the farm. There was nobody home, unfortunately. We could just look in windows and look around the farm, and it was really fun. And from the house to the road, I thought, was real long. We used to walk down that to the road. It isn't long at all. It's pretty short. But all the old buildings were still there, and the house was there, and they had an old house on the farm too. Sod house. And it was a sod house. It was the original house. Is this still standing on it? Yes. It's still standing. And when we were there, our family, like, took over the new house, and Grandma and Grandpa always slept in the old house. They had a bedroom, and then they had the milk separator in the old house. I wonder if there are mice in there. Probably not because the cats lived under the old house. Grandpa Olson just would not leave that farm. Year after year, the crop would look good, and the hot winds would come and just sear everything. Years would go by before they got a crop, but Grandpa Olson was determined he was going to stay on that farm. The only way I got him off was to buy the darn farm and get him off the land and then do with the farm as I pleased. How old was he then when he left the farm? Oh, he was in his 60s. 65. Yeah, up in his 60s. He died at about 72, I think. Here comes Uncle Rub-Bub. This is my husband. I'd like to know what told him to come on over. Hi, Dad. Looks like a party. Your children are called here. They all went to high school in Davenport, then. Well, you can explain them, maybe. Yes, we all did. We were all born in Davenport, and we all graduated from high school in Davenport. Ellen is the oldest, and she graduated from Illinois State University in Normal. Yes. This is Mrs. Crawford. Mrs. Crawford, Ellen Crawford. I graduated from Iowa State University in Ames, Iowa. Your name, now, is? Virginia. Virginia. Halberd, H-E-L-L-B-E-R-D. I'll talk to you later. And Barbara Lehman, L-A-M-O-N, attended McMurray College and Augustana. She did not graduate. Augustana College. You all live locally, then, in this area? I live right over here. My husband just walked over from ours. Also, you, Mrs. Crawford, you live here. I live here. Who's here? Barb lives five minutes down the road. Almost straight through. See, Dad lived out in L.A. until 1980 or 81, was it? That was after he was retired, he went out to help. Yes. Oh, yeah. And he was out there all by himself, and my sister had lived out there, but she moved back here, and she and Lefty were married. This is Lefty, his second husband. And we convinced Dad he should come back here and be with us. At least he does. At least he does. And he did, then. Now we sing on this. What are we going to sing? The one that suits best. You were going to, what was it? My brother-in-law understands Swedish. He does? Yeah. He can. Can you sing a duet? We can sing together. That's the one you were going to sing. Now we're going to dance until the sun rises. Yeah. Go ahead and sing it. Now we're going to dance until the sun rises, until the school bell rings. Amanda's brother is a dog, until the dog starts snorting. Oh, dear, dear Amanda, it's such a pity, Amanda, that you're gone. Oh, dear, dear Amanda, it's such a pity, Amanda, that you're gone. Good. Very good. I haven't heard that for a while. End of interview with Carl Gunnar Johnson, Bettendorf, Iowa. And we have 24th of April, 1986. End of interview.